

Read My Lips

Read My Lips
A Complete Guide to
the Vagina and Vulva
Debby Herbenick, PhD
and
Vanessa Schick, PhD
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC.
Lanham • Boulder • New York • Toronto • Plymouth, UK

Published by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
http://www.rowmanlittlefield.com
Estover Road, Plymouth PL6 7PY, United Kingdom Distributed by NATIONAL BOOK NETWORK
Copyright © 2011 by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical
means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written permission from the publisher,
except by a reviewer who may quote passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available Library of Congress Cataloging-in-
Publication Data Herbenick, Debby.
Read my lips : a complete guide to the vagina and vulva / Debby Herbenick and Vanessa Schick.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4422-0800-1 (pbk.) — ISBN 978-1-4422-0802-5 (electronic) 1. Vulva—Popular works. 2.
Vagina—Popular works. 3. Women— Health and hygiene—Popular works. I. Schick, Vanessa, 1982– II.
Title.
RG268.H47 2011
612.6'28—dc23
2011019793
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standard
for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

This book is dedicated to the many men and women whose stories
have inspired us to think about vulvas and vaginas in complex and
intricate ways.
We hope that Read My Lips will do the same for some of you.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our editor, Suzanne Staszak-Silva, for helping to turn our
quirky book filled with crafts and puns into a reality. Thank you for your
patience and your confidence in our work. We are enormously grateful to our
fantastic agent, Kate Lee, whose advice and encouragement were instrumental.
Of course, no matter how many words we used, a description of a vulva can
never measure up to a picture of one. Thank you to everyone who filled this
book with images: Christopher M. Brown, Catherine Johnson-Roehr, Rachel
Liebert, Melissa Nannen, and Maleese N. Schick.
We feel fortunate to be surrounded by colleagues who inspire us daily. In
particular, we would like to thank Michael Reece, Brian Dodge, and everyone at
the Center for Sexual Health Promotion for their enthusiasm, their willingness to
listen to and give feedback on our ideas, and the way they embrace our vulva
puppets and other unique office decor. We would like to thank David Lohrmann
and Mohammad Torabi, who have established an academic work environment in
which our research and creative interests are able to thrive. We are also
appreciative of the support we have received from Jenny Bass, Dennis
Fortenberry, Carol McCord, Heather Rupp, Stephanie Sanders, and Shawn
Wilson, among others. We would be remiss not to thank Chelsea Heaven for her
careful, conscientious work.
This book would not have been possible without the many women and men
who have inspired us at different points in our personal and professional
development. Although not limited to the following, we like to acknowledge the
work and vision of (in alphabetical order) Joani Blank, Virginia Braun, Judy
Chicago, Betty Dodson, Eve Ensler, Nick and Sayaka Karras, Dorrie Lane,
Rachel Liebert, Carol Queen, Wrenna Robertson, Carlin Ross, Annie Sprinkle,
Elizabeth Stewart, Leonore Tiefer, and Chris Veasley.
We would like to express our heartfelt gratitude to everyone who took the
time to share personal stories about their thoughts, feelings, and experiences
with vulvas and vaginas, whether for Read My Lips or for the various research

projects we have conducted over the years.
Vanessa would like to thank everyone who has supported or inspired her
along this spectacular journey. First, she would like to thank her phenomenal co-
author, Debby Herbenick, who made this possible. There is only enough light for
everyone to share if you open your door and let others in. She is forever grateful
for Debby’s encouragement, guidance, humor, and perpetual kindness. She
would also like to thank her graduate advisor, Alyssa Zucker, who encouraged
her to follow her passion; Laina Bay-Cheng, who continuously challenged her to
think about things in new and complex ways; and Maria-Cecilia Zea, who urged
her to see the potential in herself. On a personal note, Vanessa would like to
thank her friends and family for all of their support, love, and friendship
throughout this process. She is particularly grateful to the following: Ashley,
Bindi, Geneva, Heather, Jenn, Kelly, and Marcela for their constant friendship,
encouragement, and quick feedback on the cover. Vanessa would also like to
thank Sarah, for being the amazing person she is both professionally and
personally. She makes quirky seem normal. Russell/Thaddeus, for always being
patient, proud, and the biggest bighead she has ever known. M. T. McGillicutty,
for (sometimes) holding it during long writing sessions and cuddling even when
she didn’t want to. Her many brothers and sisters, who inspire her in ways they
can only imagine. Her aunt Bobbie, who always says the right thing at the right
moment. Her belated grandmother and step-mother, for always being outspoken
and strong. Her father, for encouraging her to work hard at what she believed in.
Her mother, for believing in her and inspiring Vanessa to make her journey her
own.
Debby would like to thank the following individuals for their particular
support of her vulva and vagina outreach: Vanessa Schick, for bringing her
talent, brilliance, and spunk to Indiana University, and for being an amazing co-
author on this book; Stephanie Sanders, for being the first mentor to support her
interest in vulvovaginal research; June Reinisch, for pointing her in the direction
of positive vulva references in historical texts and for her enthusiastic
mentorship; the late Joe Miller, for his support of her initial research about
attitudes toward women’s genitals; Tyra Banks, for inviting Debby to share her
vulva puppet and vulvovaginal information with her television audience; Kareen
Gunning, for her commitment to educating the masses about women’s health and
sexual health; Patty Brisben, for her passionate support of research and
education related to women’s sexual health; Dan Savage, for enduring assorted
vulva-related conversations and puppetry; and Annie, Debbie, Joyce, Mary, and
Paulene, for their steadfast support, dependability, and good natures. In addition,

Debby would like to express her enormous gratitude to her mother and sister for
their consistent support during the past decade-plus of her vagina/vulva outreach
journey. She would like to acknowledge the memory of her maternal
grandmother who encouraged her in the study of women’s sexual health and
vulvovaginal perceptions, and her father who was one of her biggest sources of
support in all areas of life. She is grateful to Jezebel, who stayed up late with her
while writing, to those who have helped her to love her vulva and vagina
(including the dozens of women, such as Jada, Sarah, and Jessica, with whom
she worked on The Vagina Monologues), and her gynecologist, who has helped
her to care for it. Finally, Debby would like to thank Ariane, Brooke, Brandon,
Rachel, Kate, Tom, Ben, Susie, Erica, Roberta, and Jimmy, all of whom have
shown their support by listening to vulva/vagina stories, helping to select cover
designs, or making space for her to write this book. No one, however, has
listened to as many vulva stories or made as much space for this work (or for
vulva craft projects) as James, for whom she is eternally grateful.
With much vulva love to you all,
Debby & Vanessa

Introduction
It was a warm November evening as the sun set in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The
ocean crashed in the background as a light breeze swept through the air. If this
sounds like the makings of a magical night, it was indeed: this is the night that
we (Debby and Vanessa) first met. But this isn’t a love story—at least, not the
kind you might expect.
We were both in San Juan, Puerto Rico, attending the annual meeting of the
Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality. Although the field of sexuality
researchers is small, the number of people who study social and cultural issues
related to vaginas and vulvas is even smaller and was almost non-existent
several years ago. Therefore, we assumed that like other conferences, we would
probably be the only vulva researchers there. We were wrong. We had been at
the conference for just minutes when a colleague who was familiar with both of
our work introduced us. It took just one phrase to bond us instantaneously, and it
went something like this: “You two should meet— you both study vaginas.”
So yes, this is a love story about vulvas and vaginas.
Once we met, it wasn’t long before we realized how much we had in
common: we had both conducted our dissertation research on women’s genitals,
and we both have stuffed vulva puppets and books with titles like Cunt and The
V Book lining our office bookshelves. With these mutual interests, it was only a
matter of time—less than a year—before we found a way to work together,
thanks to Vanessa taking a position at the Center for Sexual Health Promotion at
Indiana University, where Debby had been working for several years. Shortly
thereafter, the idea for Read My Lips was born, and after much work,
brainstorming over lunches, and 2 a.m. email exchanges, it’s now in your hands.
This book is for anyone who has a vulva, loves someone with a vulva, has
come from a vagina, or is just plain curious about these parts. Through our
research and education efforts, we try to better understand the diverse ways in
which women’s genitals are talked about (or not), and we try to help women and
men learn about this important part of the female body in terms of health, sex,

pleasure, culture, and art. In addition to working as scientific researchers, we
also feel passionately about spreading the word to others, which is why we
decided to write a book to share with the world. We like to refer to this as vagina
and vulva “outreach.”
What does this mean for you? It means that your journey will be filled with
the unusual combination of empirical scientific research, quirky humor, and
vulva crafts. In addition to assembling some of the most interesting scientific
research we could find, we also turned to more than one thousand other experts
on the topic of vulvas and vaginas: YOU! These pages are filled with funny,
heartwarming, eye-opening, and sometimes challenging stories from women and
men who live all over the world, ages eighteen to eighty. We chose stories that
we felt best represent the complexity of what it means to live life with these
body parts: to take in what parents and friends say to young girls about their
bodies, to witness how lovers respond to vulvas and vaginas, and to experience
the ways in which these parts change during menstruation, after giving birth, or
as one ages.
We should note that even though women, vulvas, and vaginas almost always
go together, this isn’t always the case. Some women don’t have vulvas or
vaginas from the time they were formed in the womb (they may have what are
sometimes called a disorder of sex development or intersex condition) or
because they are male-to-female transgendered people who may identify as
women but who have not had surgery to change their genitals to female-typical
genitals. For similar reasons related to development or gender identity, some
people who have vulvas and vaginas are men, not women. Although we tried to
be sensitive to these issues in our book, we often use the phrases “women’s
genitals” and “female genitals” to refer to vulvas and vaginas even though these
are not always interchangeable. We did this for two reasons: (1) most of the time
they are interchangeable, and so this will make sense to most readers of our
book; and (2) to avoid overkill, we varied the terms we used. This is also why
we sometimes use genital slang such as “coochie,” “twat,” “snatch,” “v-parts,”
“down there,” “private parts,” “lady parts,” and other such words. Just because
we know the technical terms for the vulva and vagina doesn’t mean that we
always want to use them. Sometimes we like using fun words, too, just like the
one-thousand-plus women and men who completed our survey and told us about
the many words that they use for vulvas and vaginas.
We wrote Read My Lips because we wanted to write the kind of book that we
wish we had come across earlier in our lives. It has a little bit of everything,
including information about the parts of the vulva, health issues, sex, pubic

hairstyles, periods, smell, taste, appearance, GYN exams, genital self-image,
orgasms, feminine-hygiene products, and art. It also uses crafting, a traditionally
female form of expression, to engage in the somewhat subversive act of
celebrating and exploring issues related to the often contested territory of vulvas
and vaginas.
We hope that you will enjoy and embrace our labor of v-love for what it is: a
celebration of and an education about the vulva and vagina. We hope that you
laugh while you read this book and also that you walk away from each chapter
feeling as though you’ve learned something new. We hope, too, that your reading
inspires you to love and respect your vulva and vagina (or those of a partner or
friend) as the beautiful, powerful, and sometimes magical places that they can
be.

• 1 •
Meet the Vulva
Like love, the vulva is a many-splendored thing. In addition to quite literally
serving as the window to a baby’s world during vaginal birth, women’s genitals
are also often a source of pleasure, stimulation, and orgasmic release. Although
women who look at, touch, and appreciate their vulvas and vaginas may be
particularly well situated to experience genital pleasure, women who have never
seen or touched their genitals can start exploring at any time (well, almost any
time; it’s wise and considerate of others to wait until you’re alone or with a
partner rather than try this at work, on public transportation, or at the grocery
store).
That said, vulvas have a complicated history. There are reasons why some
women may feel uncomfortable or unfamiliar with this part of their own bodies.
Although some people in certain cultures have done or continue to do harmful
things to women’s genitals, the vulva has long been revered, adored, and even
worshipped by many people and in many societies.1, 2 We’re here to tell you
why, how, and in what interesting ways this has been done, including a story
about the time we took to the famous Las Vegas Strip with Vanessa dressed in a
self-made and way larger-than-life vulva costume while Debby conducted on-
camera interviews with adult women and men of all ages about vulvas.3
V-CRAFT: DIY VULVA COSTUME
In September 2009, when Vanessa and Debby walked up and down the Las
Vegas Strip with Vanessa dressed as a giant vulva,3 we got so many great
reactions to our experiment (check out our video podcasts on our web site
—readmylipsthebook.tumblr.com—to see how people responded to us).
We didn’t know what would happen: Would people look at us funny?
Would they laugh? Would we get arrested for a public vulva display? We
truly had no idea.
Although a few people thought Vanessa was dressed as a Star Wars
character, many people knew exactly what she was—and they were

thrilled. One man, a professional poker player from Japan—said that she
was dressed as “the best thing in the world,” which warmed our hearts.
Here’s how to create your own vulva costume:
What You’ll Need
two pairs of tights (can be any color)
four sheets (can be from the same set or different sets)
some scissors
a vulvariffic attitude
What to Do
1. Stuff the sheets into the legs of the two pairs of tights. One sheet goes
in each leg.
2. Knead the sheet-filled tights to bunch the labia any way you like.
Remember: labia can be any shape or size, and they are rarely ever
symmetrical.
3. If you would like to bring your hair through the tights (so as to
resemble pubic hair once it is on), use scissors to cut one or more
small holes in the crotch of the pantyhose. Cut the hole before the
tights are on your head, or you run the risk of accidentally cutting
yourself. Always be careful when holding scissors near real or fake
genitals!
4. Slip the crotch area of the tights over your head—almost so that it
looks like a bald wig—and slip your hair through the holes, if desired.
5. Once both pairs are on over your head, tie the toes of the tights down
around your waist or wherever they fall so that the labia stay together.
6. Your head is the clitoris, so smile and be proud!
For more specifics, check out our DIY Vulva Costume video on our web
site.
Vulva newbies will probably want to read this book two or three times, as
their new knowledge about women’s genitals soaks in. However, even the most
seasoned, well-versed vulvalucionaries will find new facts about women’s
genitals in these pages as they’re informed by the latest and greatest recent
discoveries about women’s vulvas and vaginas. And who doesn’t need a new

vulva craft project? (You’ll find at least one craft project nestled in each chapter.)
First, though, let’s get acquainted with the vulva so that we can begin our
adventure together with a shared sense of knowledge.
WHAT’S A VULVA?
If you guessed a car, we understand why; this is a common misperception given
how close “vulva” and “Volvo” sound. However, the term “vulva” actually refers
to the parts of a woman’s genitals that can be seen from the outside: the mons
pubis, clitoral hood, clitoris, labia majora, labia minora, and the introitus, also
called the vaginal opening (the gateway to the vagina). If you’re not sure what
all these parts are or what they do, don’t worry—you’ll soon find out. Many
women lack familiarity with their vulva parts. We certainly didn’t always know a
lot about vulvas, but we’re happy that we learned about them so that we can
spread the word to other women and men. Case in point: years ago, when Debby
was a graduate student at Indiana University (IU), she was tossing a Frisbee with
her teammates from the Calamity Janes (IU’s ultimate Frisbee club team) and
talking about her sex-education work and what it was like to teach human
sexuality classes to college students when one of her teammates asked her where
the clitoris is located. Because Debby was standing in the middle of a grassy
field without a textbook, diagram, or chalk-board in sight to use as a visual aid,
she was forced to improvise.
People should learn what the vulva is. In the common mind, the vulva is called
vagina. I spoke about this to an educated woman who was confused about the
distinction between vulva and vagina. I had to get out an anatomy book to
convince her. In another incident I had occasion to talk to a sex therapist. She
admitted being guilty of referring to the vulva as vagina. The word vagina is now
used freely. I heard Robin Williams on a TV show refer to ‘vagina’ meaning
vulva. I must say, this makes me angry. It is denial in the guise of freedom to
discuss sexuality in public.
—JOY, 82, New York
“Imagine my face is a vulva,” Debby said, dropping the Frisbee to the
ground. Pointing to her mouth, she said, “My mouth would be the vagina and my
lips would be the labia minora, which are the inner vaginal lips.” Next, she
pushed her cheeks closer to her lips and said, “My cheeks would be the labia

majora, the outer vaginal lips. That would make my nose—just above the vagina
but not inside of it—my clitoris.”
Not only did Debby’s Frisbee teammates learn about the vulva and clitoris
that day, but Debby also invented a new way to use her face as an educational
icebreaker at parties and a great get-to-know-each-other topic on first dates. Try
it sometime (well—maybe not on “first” dates).
Watch a video of Debby showing how her face can become a vulva on our web
site, www.readmylipsthebook.tumblr.com
Fortunately, we have diagrams available to us here in this book, so there’s no
need to rely on Debby’s face for our entire knowledge about women’s vulvas.
Check out our diagrams to see where the various vulva parts are located. Then, if
you’re a woman, find some time to check out your own vulva (if you’re a man
with a female sex partner, perhaps she will be kind enough to give you a guided
tour of her vulva). In San Francisco, at the Center for Sexuality and Culture, gay
men (mostly—but others are invited) have been able to sign up for and attend a
class called “Cunts for Fags.”4 This class teaches attendees everything they need
to know about vulvas and vaginas so that they can effectively teach about
women’s genitals alongside a wide range of sexual health topics. Those who
have never previously seen a woman’s vulva or vagina before are invited to view
and/or touch genitals for educational purposes. If you are interested in attending,
find more information from the Center for Sex and Culture (see Resources). We
highly recommend the class for everyone regardless of whether you choose to
have sex with a vulva-equipped woman.

As you review the diagrams, notice that, if you’re a woman, your genital
parts probably look a little or a lot different than the images here in this book.
This is to be expected. After all, there is no one “standard” vulva5–8—a message
that is worth repeating. Let’s try that: There is no one “standard” vulva. This is a
powerful message. It means that there is no need to compare the appearance of
your genitals to the genitals of any other woman on the planet. Like a
thumbprint, they are all a little different. Some women have a small glans clitoris
(the part of the clitoris that can be seen from the outside), while other women
have a glans clitoris that stretches out for an inch or two or more. Most of us are
somewhere in between. The size, color, and shape of the clitoral hood can vary,
too.5–8
Only a handful of researchers have measured women’s genital parts, but
those that have done so have found that vulva parts come in all sorts of shapes
and sizes (see sidebar). The labia minora (inner vaginal lips) are particularly
variable in size.8 Author, sex educator, and activist Betty Dodson used the name
of famous architectural designs (e.g., baroque, classical) to emphasize the
different, yet beautiful, variations in women’s inner labia.9 She, along with other
sex educators and artists, has also likened the shape of women’s labia to the
appearance of hearts, angel wings, sea shells, or flowers (particularly orchids).

Before we get too excited about the labia, though (and believe us, we definitely
get going talking about labia in chapter 4), let’s back up and go part by part
through the vulva. Even if you think you know all your vulva parts, read on, as
you may learn something new. Research scientists are learning new things about
vulvas and vaginas all the time. Has there ever been a better time in the history
of the world to have, or be curious about, a vulva?
VULVA DIMENSIONS
Several years ago, researchers measured the vulvas of fifty premenopausal
women in order to better understand how similar and different we all are
from one another.8 Here are some examples of what they found in terms of
female genital diversity.
Let’s start with the clitoris:
The length of the glans clitoris ranged from 3 to 35 mm.
The width of the glans clitoris ranged from 3 to 10 mm.
The distance from the clitoris to the urethra was as little as 14 mm and
as much as 45 mm.
Women’s labia also varied considerably:
The outer labia (labia majora) length ranged from 7 to 12 mm.
Women’s inner labia (labia minora) length ranged from 20 to 100 mm.
The width of the inner labia was as little as 7 and as much as 50 mm.
The size of the perineum ranged in length from 15 to 55 mm. The
researchers also noted the color of the genital area and how dark or light it
was compared with the color of women’s surrounding skin. Of the fifty
women they examined, they found that nine women (18 percent) had
genital skin that was the same color of the rest of their surrounding skin
and forty-one had genital skin that was darker than the skin around it.
VULVA INTRODUCTIONS

The mons pubis (a.k.a. “the mons”) is a term that refers to the triangular area
between a woman’s legs and is the genital part that women have most frequently
seen on other women, such as while changing in the locker room. Other terms
for this area include the mound of Venus and the pubic mound. Most women, if
they let nature take its course, will have pubic hair growing on their mons and
down the outer edges of their labia majora, which are women’s outer vaginal
lips, as well as a little or a lot of pubic hair on the inner thighs.10 For women
who choose to keep some or all of their pubic hair, it can feel sensuous to gently
tug on one’s pubic hair during masturbation or sex with a partner.
WHAT’S IN A NAME?
Debby used to prefer the term “labia minora” to describe a woman’s inner
vaginal lips. After all, labia minora was the correct clinical term so it must
be better, right? That’s what Debby thought, anyway. Then she met
Vanessa and the world as she knew it changed.
Vanessa had previously been at a conference talking about her labia
research when a person pointed out how problematic the language was that
she was using. Instead, he suggested that perhaps we should all use “inner
labia” and “outer labia” rather than “labia minora” and “labia majora.”
Why?
Well, labia can vary in size. And although the inner lips are sometimes
smaller than (and thus “minor” as compared to) the outer lips (the labia
majora), this is not always the case. This man, and then Vanessa, felt we
could be setting women up for misperceptions about their bodies if the
term “labia minora” suggests that inner lips should be small.
After thinking about it in this way, Debby and Vanessa have both tried
to use the terms “inner labia” or “inner lips” more often when referring to
the labia minora, though old habits can die hard. If you see us out and
about and using the term “labia minora,” give us a nudge in the right
direction, will you?
The outer labia encase the inner parts of the vulva, such as the clitoris,
clitoral hood, and the vaginal entrance. However, there is some variability in
terms of the size, shape, and color of women’s outer and inner labia.8 The labia

minora, which are also sometimes called the inner vaginal lips, are sometimes
smaller than the labia majora (or outer vaginal lips) and sometimes longer than
the labia majora. Not a lot of women and men know this because, as Vanessa
discovered in a research study that she and her colleagues at George Washington
University in Washington, DC, conducted, inner labia that hang down lower than
the outer labia are often missing from sexually explicit magazines such as
Playboy—probably thanks to digital editing or airbrushing techniques.11 If the
famous fictional detective Nancy Drew were more progressive and took on
vulva-related cases, there would perhaps be a story called The Case of the
Missing Labia.
As a result of inner labia that are mostly missing or airbrushed out of porn
and other sexual images, many people don’t know how creative nature has been
with women’s genitals and what a wide range of labia exist in the wild—and by
“the wild” we mean in women’s bedrooms, apartments, tents, and mud huts
around the world. Vulvas are incredibly diverse—just like faces. No wonder so
many artists have portrayed women’s genitals with such beauty and reverence.6,
12
VULVARIATIONS
The inner labia (labia minora) are perhaps the most diverse part of women’s
genitals. The color of women’s inner labia may vary greatly from one woman to
the next.8 They may be a shade of pink, red, brown, gray, black, or slightly
purple (particularly as women become sexually aroused and blood flow
increases to the genitals, as the inner labia are filled with blood vessels; inner
labia also sometimes darken in color while a woman is pregnant). The outer
ridges of the inner labia are often darker than the rest of the labia. Similarly, in
one study, forty-one of fifty women (92 percent) had genitals that were darker
than the skin around their genitals.8
Like a woman’s eyes, ears, and breasts, women’s inner labia are usually not
symmetrical. One labium (the singular version of labia) may be longer,
differently shaped, or differently “textured” compared to the other one. It is
critical to understand that this is a normal part of development. Because the inner
labia don’t have fat in them (unlike with outer labia, which contain fat that acts
like padding to keep the genitals safe and comfortable), the inner labia are
thinner and may lay in ways that give them the appearance of assorted shapes. In
fact, the inner labia can take on a variety of shapes depending on how one holds

them up or down or to the sides. If you have a full-length mirror, you might find
it interesting to sit in front of it (make sure the room is well lit), spread your legs
open enough so that you can view your genitals, and then see how the way you
touch or hold your labia can make them look symmetrical one way,
asymmetrical another way, like a heart or flower, or as if your vulva has angel
wings.
I wish there was more information on how women’s genitals actually look. All
you see in a health class is STD-infected genitals and it is gross to look at them.
I would have liked to [have seen] some pictures of healthy genitals and maybe
some starting not so close up (with a partner perhaps) and then closer up to ease
you in. They also NEVER show you a picture of how genitals look when they are
together (sex), because they consider that porn. I would have loved to see how
genitals move and stretch when people are having sex and how the vulva looks
different in various sexual activities (masturbation, oral sex, vaginal sex).
—KELLY, 28, New York
Some women worry that something is wrong with them if one labium is
bigger than the other one, but we’re here to tell you that that’s not the case.
“Even if nothing’s wrong,” some women have said to us, “I still wish they were
the same size.” Fair enough. But consider for a moment that some people look
for each other’s quirks, eccentricities, or special unique aspects of appearance to
love. You might think of a past or current lover whose freckles form a
constellation or come together to look like a paw print and how that special way
you re-imagined your partner’s body made you glow with love or attraction. If
you feel self-conscious about your genitals, try to imagine how someone else
might look upon them with love or adoration. What you view as quirky or
unusual, another person may view as special and unique. For example, a friend
of ours once mentioned that his wife told him that she felt self-conscious about
the dark edges of her inner labia. She had considered surgery to get rid of the
darker edges. This surprised our friend because he had always thought that the
dark edges of her inner labia were particularly sexy and appealing. Until they
talked about this, he didn’t know that she didn’t like her inner labia, and she
didn’t know that he thought they were beautiful just as they are. (This is also an
example of how communicating with one’s partner about his or her body and
about sexuality can help a couple’s sex life and relationship.) A woman we know
had a boyfriend who had a birthmark on his penis, which he felt self-conscious
about. However, she couldn’t imagine his penis any other way and loved that he
had this special, unique part of his body that she knew about but the rest of the

world did not; it made her feel special.
People have all sorts of individual aspects to their genitals. Some people—
like the man we just told you about—have a birthmark (an area of darker
pigmented skin) on their genitals. Many men find that their penis, when erect,
bends upward or downward or to the side. Like vulva variations, the degree and
direction of “bend” can be a normal and common difference among men and is
nothing that needs to cause feelings of embarrassment or shame.13
I just remembered that I have a freckle just outside my labia. I really like it.
—KARA, 20, Tonga
Many women, if they look closely at their inner labia, might notice that their
left labium is larger or longer than their right—a trait that is common to many
men, too, who often find that their left testes hang lower than their right. For
some women, it may be the right labium that is larger or that hangs down lower
than the left. People are diverse!
When Your Labia Hurt
There are times when women may have inner labia that cause them discomfort
or pain. In rare instances, a woman may find that the length or thickness of her
inner labia gets in the way of masturbation or vaginal intercourse, or that her
inner labia get uncomfortably pushed up inside the vagina during vaginal
penetration.14 Although some women wonder if surgery to make the labia
smaller will help, this is not always the case. Even women with very tiny inner
labia— smaller than one centimeter of length—can experience this “pushing
inside” effect during sex.
Surgery is not always an effective solution for labia that are pushed inside
during sex (and any surgery carries costs and risks of surgical or other health
complications). As such, it may be effective for women and their partners to take
their time to gently begin penetration. Once penetration begins (whether a
woman is having vaginal intercourse or enjoying finger or sex-toy penetration
with a partner) and care has been taken to penetrate in a way that doesn’t cause
discomfort or push the inner labia uncomfortably inside the vagina, sexual play
may be more comfortable. Then—and only then—both partners may be ready to
go faster, switch from gentle to rougher sex, or explore their sexuality in some
other way they find pleasurable. If the inner labia get pushed inside the vagina, a
woman and her partner can briefly stop sex to readjust. People take sex “breaks”
all the time for many different reasons, and it needn’t disrupt sex or feel

awkward. When you take a sex break, you always have the opportunity to switch
positions, apply or reapply lubricant, get a sip of water, or use the towel trick
(more on the towel trick later).
In other rare instances, some women may find that their inner labia cause
significant discomfort, chafing, or pain during everyday activities such as
walking long distances, running, or wearing tight clothing.14–16 As a last resort
for women with pain, some doctors offer a surgical procedure called a
labiaplasty—essentially, a reshaping and resizing of the inner labia—to women
as a means of improving their situation. Not all doctors have significant
experience performing labiaplasty. If you are interested in learning more about
this procedure, we recommend that you contact our favorite vulvovaginal society
—the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease
(www.ISSVD.org; 704.814.9493)—to find a doctor who is an expert in
vulvovaginal health. Women may also choose to have a labiaplasty for aesthetic
reasons, such as to remove darkened edges or make their labia more symmetric
(social critiques of the surgery are discussed in chapter 4). However, many
healthcare providers believe that this decision should be made with extreme care
and after consulting with a doctor who has expertise in vulvovaginal health.
After all, every surgery carries risks, and surgery to the genitals is certainly no
exception.17 As more doctors advertise labiaplasty (and thus more women
appear to be asking for the procedure), scientists are just now catching up in
terms of conducting research about the surgery, such as the potential risks,
benefits, and outcomes. One doctor even went so far to compare the field of
female elective genital surgery to the “old Wild, Wild West” because it is
currently “wide open and unregulated.”18 Once again, we recommend
connecting with a member of the ISSVD for additional information.
THE CLITORIS: IS IT REALLY THAT COMPLEX?
When we teach about the vulva, most people want to zero right in on the clitoris
(kind of like during sex play with a new partner who fumbles around down
there). People are often very interested in learning about the clitoris given the
glitz and glamour of the world it inhabits. What’s that, you say? The clitoris lives
in a world of glitz and glamour? In some ways, it does. Unlike many Hollywood
celebrities, the clitoris gets a ton of press without even trying: it’s mentioned
almost monthly in popular women’s and men’s magazines, and it doesn’t even
have a publicist or a drug problem. So, why all the hoopla?

The clitoris gets a lot of play because, frankly, it seems built for play, as
we’ll talk about more in later chapters. The clitoris also gets significant media
attention because scientists are constantly learning new things about this very
important part of women’s bodies. The sole function of the clitoris is to serve as
a place of sensation, pleasure, and orgasm. It has nothing to do with urination,
menstruation (periods), or the birthing process. It only serves a “feel good”
function (packed with about eight thousand nerve endings).
I wish that they didn’t seem so foreign. I know what’s what down there and the
general idea of how they work, but at the same time they’re so confusing. I think
understanding the mechanics of things would help a lot. Just like how you know
how your hands work, how hands should work and what the normal differences
between them are, it would be nice to be able to feel that comfortable with
genitals.
—SUSIE, 18, Illinois
Scientists continue to study the clitoris because there seem to be more
questions about it than answers. Although people used to only think of the
clitoris in terms of the part one can see from the outside of the body (that little
one-quarter to one-half-inch nubbin), the clitoris is much larger than that—
something that became more widely known in 1998 when an Australian
researcher named Helen O’Connell published a scientific paper that illustrated
the full size of the clitoris.20 Inside a woman’s body, there are various parts of
the clitoris that work together to enlarge during sexual arousal and to somehow
function as part of the female orgasm process (a process that remains pretty
mysterious).
YOU SAY VULVA, I SAY VAJAYJAY
People have all sorts of words that they use to describe women’s genitals or
specific genital parts, such as the clitoris or labia. When we’ve taught
college students, we’ve sometimes asked them to list all the slang terms
that they know for both women’s and men’s genitals. Then, we discuss the
terms as a class. This can be a particularly valuable exercise in a mixed-
gender class, as it may be the first time that some students have heard
women voice their feelings of discomfort or offense with terms for
women’s genitals that are violent (e.g., “ax wound”) or passive (e.g.,

“receptacle”).19 It also provides a space for women to talk about the words
that help them to feel that their genitals are places of pleasure and beauty
that they should feel proud about. In addition, students get a chance to talk
about their divergent views on certain terms, such as “cunt” or “pussy,” that
are loved by some and hated by others.
One of our favorite terms for women’s genitals has long been “Little
Miss Sassy”—one that we first heard in a research study that Debby
conducted years ago at The Kinsey Institute. If you’re curious about
female-genital slang, you may find it interesting to read through some of
the terms we’ve heard in our classes and also in our research. For better or
worse, the terms include:
pink taco
cunt
little girl
bits
vajayjay
twat
V-parts
lady bits
cooch
little man in a
boat
down there
gina
poonanny
muffin
downstairs
coochie hole
front bum
warm penis
holder
hooha
minge
fanny
waa-waa
Little Miss Sassy
receptacle
snatch
man eater
honeypot
button
kitten
ditty
pussy
slit
vertical smile
vagotch
clam
flower
cockpit
fluffy taco
poontang
box
special place
pleasure zone
lower lips
cooter
innie penis
privates
beaver
sideways
smile
lady garden
choche
fish taco
ax wound
yoni
poomps
mitt
bush
passarinha
womanhood
pipi
muschi
sexy
“you know”
love button
bald spot
girlie parts
stuff
wetness
pubic area
my sweet vulva
kitty cat
the V
smoothie
pleasure dome

More recently, Dr. O’Connell has suggested that perhaps a new name be used to
describe the clitoris and the surrounding bodies: the name she suggests is “the
clitoral complex.”21 This is because the vagina, urethra, and clitoris appear to
move hand-in-hand (or “clit-urethra-vag”?). Essentially, it seems that one cannot
move or stimulate one of these three parts without moving or stimulating the
other parts. This means that when a woman experiences penile-vaginal
intercourse, her male partner’s penis is not only stimulating her vagina but is
moving inside her in a way that also moves her urethra and clitoris (even if the
penis does not touch these parts directly). This may also explain, at least in part,
why some women feel as though they have to urinate when they are in the midst
of intercourse or approaching orgasm. The penis may be indirectly stimulating
the urethra (and maybe the bladder, too), as well as the nerves in these areas. For
a more detailed discussion of orgasm and the nerve pathways, we recommend
reading The Science of Orgasm.22
THE VAG IN ALL
Although the vaginal entrance is often technically called the “introitus” in
medical circles, another name for it and the area just around it is the
“vestibule”—coincidentally, this is also the name for the entrance to a church. In
fact, some people have likened churches to vulvas in their design and in their
ability to give birth to new life.
The Hymen
The vaginal opening of most girls’ bodies is partially covered with a thin layer of
tissue called the hymen, which—although thin—is filled with blood vessels. It is
important to note that the hymen does not fully cover the vaginal opening. If it
did, a girl’s vagina would not be able to easily self-clean through the release of
vaginal discharge. When a healthcare provider notices that a girl’s hymen
completely covers her vaginal opening, he or she may wait to see if it resolves
later during childhood or around the time of puberty. If it does not, a healthcare
provider will often perform a procedure to create an opening so that when a
woman menstruates, the blood and tissue have a way to leave the body.
Otherwise, the blood can back up and create feelings of pain and pressure in a
woman’s abdominal or pelvic area.
Some girls are not born with a hymen or are born with only a small amount
of hymen tissue. Even girls who are born with a hymen may find that it wears

away or tears during non-sexual activities during childhood or adolescence. A
young woman may, without realizing it, tear her hymen while using tampons or
during vaginal fingering that occurs as part of masturbation or sex play with a
partner. As such, not all women notice vaginal bleeding when they first
experience vaginal penetration or intercourse. Unfortunately, some people
mistakenly believe that if a woman does not bleed when she first has intercourse
that she must not truly have been a virgin. This is problematic for many reasons
including those related to sexual double standards that suggest that women
should be virgins until they get married but that men don’t have to be virgins at
the time of marriage. Also, women in some cultures are pressured to “prove”
their virginity, whereas men typically are not pressured to “prove” theirs,
probably because there is no way to “prove” their virginity by looking at their
penis or scrotum. If only more people realized that there is no sure way to
“prove” women’s virginity either!
Even women who are not waiting to have sex until they are married
sometimes feel confused if they have intercourse and don’t notice any blood. We
have heard from women who wonder what it means when they don’t bleed the
first time they have sex. They may ask, for example, if they are still virgins if
they have had sex but didn’t bleed from it. Or they may ask if something is
physically wrong with them if they did not bleed when they first had intercourse.
A lack of bleeding at first sex does not necessarily mean that there is anything
wrong with a woman or her body; vulvas and vaginas vary, just as women do,
and not all women bleed when they first have sex, particularly if the hymen has
been worn away from other activities.
Recently, in some countries, a procedure called a hymenoplasty has
increased in popularity. It involves surgically placing new tissue over part of a
woman’s vaginal opening as if it were a hymen. A woman might choose to have
this procedure in an effort to try and “prove” to her new husband or his family
that she is a virgin, even though she has previously (and perhaps secretly) had
vaginal intercourse. Other women who are sexually experienced choose to have
a hymenoplasty so that they can feel as though they are re-experiencing their
virginity loss with a new partner. We know of a woman who chose to have this
procedure done as an anniversary present for her husband, as neither one of them
had been virgins when they met or married, and she wanted to experience the
feeling of him taking her “virginity” (to her, this meant that she wanted to
experience him penetrating her by tearing her newly created “hymen”). Some
people may be intrigued by this idea; others may feel that this is a lot of expense,
recovery time, and possibly discomfort or pain to go through for an anniversary

celebration. Others are concerned that the procedure perpetuates the sexual
double standard that women should remain virgins. If the idea sounds like fun
sexual play, but you’d rather not go through a surgical procedure and its
accompanying costs, risks, and recovery time, why not consider placing a
penetrable material (e.g., wax paper) over a pair of crotchless panties? Or engage
in dirty-talk fantasy play in which you pretend you’re involved in a devirginizing
experience without actually breaking your hymen? A pain-free possibility!
The Vagina
The vagina is about three to four inches long when a woman is just hanging out
and not feeling sexually aroused (it gets bigger during sexual arousal, but more
on that later). At the far end of the vagina is the cervix, which is the opening to
the uterus. The cervical opening is very small, which is why menstrual blood
doesn’t “gush” out of it the way that water flows out of a faucet.
I am teaching my daughters the proper terms for their bodies and the bodies of
boys, with help from some terrific books with accurate illustrations. I also tell
them that MOST girls have vulvas and MOST boys have penises, but not always.
I want them to understand gender in complex ways. I tell them the [only] way to
know someone’s gender for certain is to ask.
—DEANNA, 41, Illinois
The vagina is not nearly as nerve-rich as the clitoris, which is probably a
good thing as otherwise, vaginal birth might be a whole lot more painful than it
already is for many women. Most of the nerve endings in the vagina are toward
the vaginal entrance. Due to the lack of sensory nerve endings toward the back
of the vagina, that part isn’t very sensitive, which is why a woman can’t
generally feel a tampon or vaginal ring contraceptive (i.e., NuvaRing) inside her
vagina if it’s pushed back far enough.
Although the vagina has long-been described as a muscular “tube,” research
suggests that there may be several slightly different shapes for women’s vaginas.
It’s not that there are dramatic differences between women’s vaginas, with some
being very large and others being quite small. Slight differences in shape may, in
part, account for why some women enjoy certain sexual positions or types of
vaginal stimulation and others do not. If you’ve ever had a friend who swears by
a certain position that makes you go “meh,” perhaps this helps explain some—
but of course not all—of the differences between your experiences.

Fact!
The vagina, when unaroused, is only about three to four inches long.
What are these shapes, you ask? Well, there are five shapes identified thus
far, and researchers have named them as follows: the heart, the pumpkin seed,
the parallel sides, conical, and—get ready for this one—the slug. Why they ever
thought that women would want their vagina to be named after a swamp
creature, we’ll never know, but there it is. (In November 2010, Debby talked
about these shapes to the cast of The Doctors on their television show, and they
didn’t seem too keen on the slug name either.)
Shapes aside, it’s also true that these very same researchers didn’t find
dramatic differences between the vaginal sizes of different women. Women who
had had babies didn’t have vaginas that were any bigger overall than women
who had not. So what accounts for differences in size and sensation if vaginas
tend to be of a similar size? Several things might affect how vaginas feel, so read
on!
LUBRICATION
Vaginal lubrication probably accounts for some of the differences in how “tight”
or “loose” vaginas feel. After all, the wetter a woman’s vagina is, the less
friction there will be during sex, as natural vaginal lubrication does just that—it
lubricates the vagina to decrease friction and thus decrease sensation. A vagina
that is low on lubrication and is thus drier will be higher on friction and
sensation, but this isn’t always a good thing. According to our own research,
women in the United States tend to prefer sex that feels pretty wet, as do most
men, so there seems to be some happy medium that many women and their male

or female partners strive for. Only you and your partner can determine what feels
most pleasurable to you.
The Towel Trick
If vaginal intercourse or penetration with a sex toy feels pretty wet and as if
there’s not a whole lot of sensation, try dabbing a towel on both of your genitals
(we call this the “towel trick”). By reducing some of the wetness, you may feel
more “tight” and full of sensation. On the other hand, if your vagina feels too dry
or as if sex is uncomfortable or full of too much unpleasant sensation, try
spending more time during foreplay doing exciting things to promote vaginal
lubrication. You can also add some personal lubricant (water-based or silicone-
based may be preferable, especially if you are using condoms) in order to
enhance wetness, comfort, and pleasure.
GENITAL FIT
For male-female couples, genital fit—how the penis and vagina fit together
during intercourse—can also play a role in people’s perceptions of vaginal size.
A woman who has intercourse with a man who has a smaller-than-average-sized
penis may feel as though sex (or her vagina) feels “roomy.” However, that same
woman could have sex with a man who has a larger-than-average-sized penis
and wonder if her vagina is too small or too tight. Keep in mind: nothing about
her vagina has changed. Neither the woman nor the men have “bad” genitals or
genitals that are an undesirable size. Rather, the genital fit between partners can
make sex feel different. So remember: there is no such thing as bad genital size,
only a challenging genital fit. And even a challenging fit can be managed by
adding lubricant, using the towel trick, or expanding one’s ideas of sex to find
other ways to experience fun, connection, and sexual pleasure. For example, a
couple may experience greater pleasure through oral sex, sensual massage, the
use of sex toys, or exploring sex positions that may help to make a tight genital
fit more comfortable or a roomier genital fit feel more rich with sensation.
VAGINAL-WALL RELAXATION
Although many women say that six months or a year after giving birth, sex feels
like it used to pre-pregnancy (except, of course, for the baby crying down the
hall), other women have a different experience. Some women say that sex feels

entirely different after they have been pregnant, whether or not they gave birth
vaginally. Just being pregnant and bearing extra baby weight that’s supported by
one’s pelvic-floor muscles may change the way that the vagina feels.
Unfortunately, some doctors have historically denied women’s experiences in
this regard and have told them things like “once you have a baby, nothing is ever
the same again.” Other providers may take matters into their own hands by
providing the woman with a “husband stitch” during her episiotomy in order to
“tighten” her vagina. Statements and actions like these can minimize women’s
feelings or make them feel as though they should put up with whatever
uncomfortable or unpleasurable experiences they may be having, and we don’t
think that’s right. We need a great deal more research to understand how
women’s bodies change after pregnancy and childbirth and what can be done to
help them should they experience problems. We also need more healthcare
providers trained to respond with sensitivity to women and with attention to how
sex feels for them. Rather than dismissing a woman’s experience by saying
“nothing will ever be the same again” post-birth, we think it would be more
helpful for that healthcare provider to ask follow-up questions, starting with,
“Tell me how things are different for you now—what’s changed?”
Research shows that with each additional birth, women are more likely to
experience pelvic-floor distress symptoms, such as difficulties with
incontinence. Often when women experience such pelvic-floor distress
symptoms—a fancy term to describe a range of issues such as peeing when one
doesn’t mean to pee (incontinence), uncontrollably passing gas, or frequently
needing to pee, among other symptoms—it is vaginal-wall relaxation that is at
the root of the problem. The bladder may push through the front vaginal wall
and create a slight bulge in it (the technical term is a “cystocele”). Or, the rectum
may push against the back vaginal wall and create a slight bulge in the back wall
(called a “rectocele”). Other terms you may hear used to describe these
conditions are “prolapse” and “genital prolapse.” Women who experience
prolapse often report that sex lacks sensation. Some say that they can’t feel their
partner inside of them during sex. It’s also the case that some women who
experience prolapse, especially severe prolapse, avoid sex altogether because
vaginal intercourse may increase their urge to pee or to have a bowel movement
(which doesn’t exactly make most women feel sexy).
Sometimes, women who undergo a surgical procedure commonly called a
“front wall repair” or a “back wall repair” may notice an improvement across the
board—both in terms of their pelvic-floor distress symptoms and their sensation
during sex. If you’ve noticed a frequent or uncontrollable urge to pee or to have

a bowel movement during sex or daily activities, or if you’ve noticed a
significant decrease in sensation during sex, talk to your healthcare provider.
AROUSAL
A fourth factor that can affect how small or big a woman’s vagina feels to her or
her partner is how sexually aroused the woman herself feels—and how aroused
she has allowed her body to become. Here’s why arousal matters to the vagina:
When a woman is not sexually aroused or excited, her vagina is only about
three to four inches long. For women who partner with men, and for women who
engage in vaginal sex-toy play, this might not seem like much room. After all,
most research on penis size suggests that the average erect penis is between five
and six inches long.23, 24 And sex toys such as dildos and insertive vibrators are
often that length or longer. So, what gives?
Magic, that’s what.
I had my first girlfriend when I was fifteen; this was before I came out to my
parents, and they didn’t mind my having female friends over to stay the night. So
she came over, and we went up to my room (“to watch a movie,” supposedly),
and locked the door. It was awkward, and embarrassing, and probably the most
erotic experience I’ve ever had. I had touched her vulva before that, but that was
the first time I’d actually seen it in good light.
—AVA, 23, Vermont
When a woman becomes sexually aroused, her body begins to change. More
blood flows to her genitals. Her heart rate and breathing increase. And her
vagina? It lubricates and tents. Tents? Yes, tents. During sexual arousal,
muscular tension pulls the uterus upward, which makes more room in a woman’s
vagina (after all, the uterus is at the far end of the vagina, so when it lifts up,
more space is created). This process is called “vaginal tenting.” It’s a magical
process because by making more space in the vagina, sex can feel more
comfortable and pleasurable for many women who need a little more than three
or four inches of space in order to accommodate their partner’s penis or a
favorite sex toy. This is one reason why spending more time in foreplay can help
to make sexual intercourse with a penis or sex toy feel better. If a woman spends
very little time in foreplay, her vagina might not have time to tent, and her
vagina may feel unusually small, or the couple’s genital fit may feel cramped for
space. When a woman allows her body time to go through the process of vaginal

tenting, there is the possibility that more space in the vagina will be created and
that the couple’s genital fit will be more comfortable.
HOW DO VAGINAS FEEL?
We can describe this all we want, but the only way to really get a sense is to feel
your own vagina (if you have one) or to feel the vagina of a partner who is not
only willing but who wants your finger or fingers in her vagina. You should
never, of course, make someone feel bad for not wanting to do something sexual
that you want to do.
So how do vaginas feel? Some might say “warm, wet, and a little bit
bumpy.” Vaginas—like some potato chips—have ridges in them, and yet, unlike
potato chips, they tend to be warm and wet. Depending on a woman’s age, the
phase of her menstrual cycle (assuming she’s still menstruating and has not yet
reached menopause), and whether she is sexually aroused or not, a woman’s
vagina may feel slightly wet or very wet. Vaginal discharge may be clear and egg
white-like in appearance, or it may be more thin and slick. Check it out and see
what it feels like to you. In Debby’s studies of men’s and women’s attitudes
toward women’s genitals (which is different than female genital self-image,
described below), the majority of college students surveyed said that women’s
genitals felt good to touch.
VAGINA FACTS
There are a few more things you should know about the vagina in order to be
well versed on the topic. For one, you should know that in addition to the way
the vagina changes size during arousal, it can also change in structure with age.
Specifically, the vagina typically rests at a 130-degree angle inside of
premenopausal women’s bodies. However, as women go through menopause,
their bodies change and the vaginal angle flattens a bit, which may make vaginal
intercourse feel different to women as they age and go through menopause.
Another important fact is that the vagina is a discreet space. The vagina starts
at the vaginal opening and ends at the cervix, which is the opening to the uterus.
The cervix has a very small opening in it, and there’s not much other than fluids
that can pass through it to go between the vagina and the uterus. Semen, of
course, can pass through the cervix, as can menstrual fluids. And of course when
a woman goes through labor to deliver a baby, then the baby can pass through

the dilated cervix, but that is a very special circumstance. On a daily basis, the
cervix is a small opening to the vagina, and the vagina remains a discreet space
that’s just three to four inches when unaroused and about two or three inches
longer when aroused.
Why is this an important vagina fact to know? It means that objects such as
condoms and diaphragms can’t get “lost” inside the vagina. If a condom slips off
a man’s penis during sex and gets stuck in the vagina, then the woman or her
partner can insert their fingers into her vagina to remove the condom. If they
cannot find it, then the woman can ask a healthcare provider for help removing it
(objects should always be removed from the vagina rather than left there as
gravity will not draw them out on their own). By using her own fingers or
getting help from her partner or healthcare provider, a woman should be able to
retrieve anything else that she has put up there (though we don’t recommend
putting most foreign objects inside the vagina). This, of course, also goes for
tampons (more in chapter 5) and Ben Wa balls, which some women use for
sexual pleasure or as part of pelvic-floor exercises (more in chapter 2).
YOU LIKE, YOU LOVE?
Activity
Get out a piece of paper and a pen. Ready? Set? Okay, go—
Taking a stream-of-conscious approach to this activity, write down all
the things that you like about your genitals. Think about smell, taste, sexy
feelings, how you look. If you get stuck, write down some of the nice
things that past or present partners have said about your genitals. Maybe
they said that they liked how you smell or that you taste delicious. Maybe
they liked how wet you get or how you squeezed their fingers or their penis
with your pelvic-floor muscles. There are numerous reasons to appreciate
one’s own vulva and vagina, and all the parts within these parts (the
clitoris, labia, etc.)—what are your reasons? What do you hope to change?
VAGINA CONTROVERSY
There are vagina facts, such as the fact that the vagina is about three to four

inches long, and there are vagina myths, such as the myth that vaginas smell like
fish (they don’t, and we’ll get to that later). Then there are vagina controversies.
One of the biggest vagina controversies has to do with the G-spot. The G-spot
was given its name in the 1980s, with the “G” referring to Dr. Grafenberg who,
decades earlier in the 1950s, described an area on the front wall of the vagina
that was full of erotic potential for some women. In 1982, the book The G Spot:
And Other Discoveries About Human Sexuality25 swept through the United
States and many other countries with the message that sexual pleasure had to do
with far more than the clitoral stimulation described by Kinsey26 in the 1950s
and Masters and Johnson27 in the 1960s and 1970s. In The G Spot, readers
discovered numerous stories of women who found stimulation of the front wall
of the vagina to be particularly pleasurable and, for many, to be a reliable source
of orgasm. For some, stimulation of this area— termed the G-spot—could also
lead to the expulsion of fluids that came to be called female ejaculation.
So why the controversy? Isn’t it a given that women vary in how they
experience sex? After all, we’re all different from each other.
The controversy lies in the fact that the G-spot is not a “thing” that can be
seen. The G-spot is generally seen as something on the other side of the front
vaginal wall—maybe it’s the inside parts of the clitoris, or maybe it’s the urethral
sponge (tissue that surrounds the female urethra, just as spongy erectile tissue
surrounds the male urethra in the penis). And when the front wall of the vagina
is stimulated, often with firm but gentle pressure rather than a light flicking
stimulation that the glans clitoris may respond to, the woman may feel
wonderful things. In one study, 65 percent of women ages twenty-two to eighty-
two in the United States and Canada felt that they had a particularly sensitive
area in the vagina.
But if it can’t be seen, then the G-spot is kind of like the Tooth Fairy to some
people. Or to science-y folks, perhaps the G-spot is one big placebo effect that, if
we believe it to be true, it becomes true and fun and possibly orgasm-inducing
when stimulated.
One might think that with improvements in science the G-spot would
become less controversial as more facts are gathered. However, that’s not been
the case. In 2008, Italian researchers using Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
techniques, claimed they found that women who experienced orgasm from
vaginal intercourse all by itself had a thicker urethrovaginal space (the area
around the front wall of the vagina) than did women who do not experience
orgasm from vaginal intercourse without extra stimulation, such as from a finger
or sex toy.28 In interviews, the researchers even suggested that perhaps MRI

could be used as a “test” to find out if a woman had a G-spot or not. Some
researchers (Debby included) felt that such statements were going well beyond
the limited data they had collected from a very small study of only twenty
women. And so this study largely became chalked up as interesting without
necessarily telling us anything one way or the other about the G-spot.
Then in 2010, a team of researchers from the UK published a study
suggesting that there is no G-spot—or at least no genetic basis for one, in spite
of 56 percent of the women in their survey saying they had one.29 They
conducted a survey of 1,840 twin, heterosexual women in the UK, asking them,
“Do you believe you have a so-called G-spot?” The fact that agreement among
identical twins was no more common than among fraternal (non-identical) twins
suggested to the researchers that there must be no physical basis to the G-spot.
However, many researchers criticized this study, too. After all, a woman may
believe or not believe in the existence of the “so-called G-spot” for any number
of reasons including her own sexual experiences, things she has heard from
friends or partners, human sexuality classes, or articles about the G-spot she has
read in the media. Again, it was a curious study but it didn’t close the gap in our
understanding of the G-spot one way or the other.
To sum up, what we do know about the G-spot is this:
It is clear that there is an area along the front wall of the vagina that some
but not all women find to be pleasurable when stimulated with fingers, a
penis, or a sex toy.
There are undeniably body parts on the other side of the front vaginal wall
(parts such as the internal parts (crura) of the clitoris, the urethral sponge,
and their associated nerve endings) that may be stimulated through the front
wall of the vagina.
Large studies of women suggest that the majority of women feel they have
a G-spot, or an area of erotic sensitivity on the front wall of the vagina.
As such, if you want to explore this area, go ahead! If you are a woman, you can
try this on your own with your own fingers or with a sex toy. If you have a
female partner, you might ask her if she would like to explore G-spot play, as
well, with fingers, a sex toy, or (if you’re a guy) with your penis. If it doesn’t
feel all that interesting or exciting to you, then perhaps move on to something
else and try again (or not) another time. And if it does feel pleasurable to you,
then yay for you! You’ve learned something new about your body that may
enhance your sex life.

VIVA LA VULVA!
Activity
One of our favorite vulva-themed movies (and we have a few) is Viva La
Vulva, created by vulva activist, educator, author, and artist Betty Dodson.9
In Viva La Vulva, women come to Betty’s home to be interviewed about
their bodies, to groom (or not groom) their pubic hair in whatever way
feels good to them, and to have their vulva portrait taken. One unique
feature of this film is that the women—who span a few decades in age—go
around and look at each other’s vulvas, admiring them and remarking on
various features such as the coloration of certain parts or the size or shape
of the inner labia or clitoral hood. We have both shown this video in classes
that we’ve taught, and male and female students alike often have a
powerful reaction to watching even just twenty minutes of the film. We
highly recommend you get a copy (see Resources).
FEMALE EJACULATION
Another vagina controversy has to do with female ejaculation—and it doesn’t
even seem to be coming from the vagina (although for years, some wondered if
female ejaculation came from the vagina, so we still consider it a “vagina
controversy”). It seems that some women release fluids from their urethra during
sexual excitement or orgasm. We don’t know how common this experience is, as
there have been no good population-based studies of women that would tell us
with any certainty whether it’s 10 percent of women, 40 percent of women, or
nearly all women who are capable of female ejaculation.
Some people don’t like the term “female ejaculation,” as the fluids aren’t
exact matches for male ejaculation, and it is certainly a different process with
different body parts involved. However, we use the term “female ejaculation”
because it’s commonly used in the United States and it’s a term that many people
are familiar with hearing described as such.
People vary in regard to how they feel about female ejaculation. Some
people enjoy it and feel that female ejaculation is a huge turn-on. Others are
uncomfortable with the amount of wetness it creates and may worry about

getting their sheets wet (some people have similar concerns with male
ejaculation). If you like the wetness, great! And if you’re not a fan of it, you
might want to lay a towel down on the bed before you masturbate or have sex. If
it’s a little unpredictable when you have sex, and you don’t want to run to the
towel closet on the spur of a moment, keep a few towels underneath your bed or
in your nightstand for easy reach.
If you have never experienced female ejaculation, we don’t recommend that
you put any extra effort into trying—in spite of the popularity of some books and
movies that try to show women how to go about doing this. Here’s why: it’s
generally not a good idea to frequently bear down on your pelvic-floor muscles,
as it may weaken them. Over time, everyone’s pelvic-floor muscles weaken
anyway, and this can lead to problems with incontinence (peeing when one
doesn’t mean to pee). Why hasten the process? Rather, if you feel that it is
happening, let yourself go there if you want to try it. But we wouldn’t
recommend that you strain yourself—or your pelvic-floor muscles— trying to
make it happen. There are enough pressures when it comes to sex; why add
another one? Instead, try to focus on how your body works and enjoy your
experience. People’s sex lives changes over time, anyway, and you may end up
experiencing female ejaculation one day without even trying. Stranger things
have happened.
Finally, although chemical analyses of female ejaculate have shown that it is
not the same as urine, some women can’t help but wonder if they are peeing (by
accident) during sex. If you have concerns about incontinence, for example, if
you leak urine when you laugh or cough or if you feel as though you’re often
running to the bathroom throughout the day, check in with your healthcare
provider. You might also try reducing or eliminating your caffeine intake, as
caffeine can cause people to feel as if they frequently need to urinate (it does this
by making the bladder muscle spasm).
PERINEUM
The perineum is the area between the bottom of a woman’s vaginal entrance and
her anus. It’s also called the “taint” (as in, t’ain’t the vagina, t’ain’t the anus) or
the “tween” area (as it is “between” those two parts). In medical circles, you will
hear it called the perineum. Most women won’t ever hear people talking about
their perineum. It’s not a particularly sensitive or erotic spot for most women,
although it is for some. More often, it comes into play because women who give
birth vaginally may experience natural tearing of their perineum during

childbirth or may have this area surgically cut during childbirth during a
procedure called an “episiotomy.” This procedure has become more
controversial in recent years, and many women choose to talk to their healthcare
providers and ask them not to perform an episiotomy unless absolutely
necessary, as natural tears may heal better than surgical cuts. If you are pregnant,
you may find it helpful to ask your healthcare provider or midwife about their
take on episiotomies.
THE FEMALE GENITAL SELF-IMAGE SCALE (FGSIS)
The following items are about how you feel about your own genitals (the
vulva and the vagina). The word “vulva” refers to a woman’s external
genitals (the parts that you can see from the outside such as the clitoris,
pubic mound, and vaginal lips). The word “vagina” refers to the inside part,
also sometimes called the “birth canal” (this is also the part where a penis
may enter or where a tampon is inserted). Please indicate how strongly you
agree or disagree with each statement.

How to score yourself:
1. Give yourself a 1 for each item for which you answered, “Strongly
Disagree,” a 2 for each item for which you answered “Disagree,” a 3
for each “Agree,” and a 4 for each “Strongly Agree.”
2. 2. Add up your points for a total score (possible points range from 7 to
28).
There is no “right” or “wrong” score on this measure. Women have a
wide variety of experiences in their lives that shape how they feel about
their genitals. Some women remember being told as little girls not to touch
their private parts. They may have been raised to believe that their genitals
were dirty or that only “bad girls” touched their privates. As adults, some
women are more exposed or susceptible to commercials, such as those for
feminine-hygiene products that further suggest that women’s genitals are

unclean. Other women may have had the very good fortune of having a
mother, sister, or good friend teach them about their vulvas and vaginas and
let them know that their parts are special, unique, and have the potential for
pleasure. Some women first learned to love their bodies, including their
genitals, thanks to the appreciative gaze of a loving or lustful partner.
As such, we’re not going to take the common approach to self-quizzes
that one often finds in women’s magazines. As much as we love playing
with genital words, we won’t tell you, for example, that higher scores make
you a “Vulva Vixen” or that certain scores in the lower ranges make you a
“Sad Snatch.” What we will suggest is that no matter where you fall on the
FGSIS, there is always room to rejoice and always room to grow. If you
would like to improve how you feel about your genitals, then we hope that
this book is a fruitful starting place for you to learn about your body and to
embrace it as the wonderful thing that it is.
FEMALE GENITAL SELF-IMAGE
In 2010, our research team published two studies in the Journal of Sexual
Medicine about how women feel about their own genitals, a concept we call
“female genital self-image.”30 To measure this concept, we created a seven-item
scale that women themselves (or doctors, nurses, or researchers) can use—it’s
called the Female Genital Self-Image Scale, or the FGSIS for short.
In our research, we found that women who engage in health-promoting
behaviors, such as having an annual gynecological exam or performing genital
self-examination, tend to have a higher female genital self-image.
Curious where you fall? You can take the FGSIS right here in this book (see
previous box). And remember: there is no “pass” or “fail” when it comes to
FGSIS. Rather, if you find that answering these questions helps you see an area
that you’d like to improve on, perhaps you can work on ways to feel better about
your genitals.
VULVA AND VAGINA LOVE
All too often we hear negative things about women’s genitals: middle-school
boys making “vaginas smell like fish” jokes, feminine-hygiene ads that suggest

women don’t smell “fresh,” or advertisements for surgeries that make us
question whether we look all right down there. We decided that more women—
including us— could benefit from talking about the things they like about their
genitals.
In a recent study, we asked women, “What do you like about your genitals?”
Hundreds of women responded. Although some women said that they didn’t
really like their genitals, many were very specific about the things about their
lady parts that make them feel happy, aroused, or grateful.
Here is a sampling of what they had to say:
“They’re absolutely beautiful! One labia is slightly longer than the other
and folds over the shorter one, and I have slight freckling on my outer labia.
They are a wonderful colour, and are very, very responsive.”
“They bring me tremendous pleasure and have participated in giving birth
to my two children.”
“That they’re my own and unique; that they easily respond to sexual
stimulation; that they will one day function in helping to create life; that
they look hot; and that they’re what make me a woman.”
“I like the look and colour of my labia, the fullness of the outer labia, and
the positive way they respond to sexual stimuli.”
“EVERYTHING! The pleasure they bring me, their uniqueness and beauty,
their potential for new life (literally and figuratively), their sensual smell,
the way they react to stimulation.”
“I like that I am a woman and mine are slightly different from everyone
else’s. I like that their exact appearance is something I only share with my
partner. I think the size/shape/color of every part is just adorable.”
“The uniqueness of the scent. One of my lovers said I smelled earthy and I
liked that. I’m also in awe of the way they open up when I’m making love.
And I love that my daughter came from them and through them.”
“They bring great sexual pleasure, they feel warm and smooth, they remind
me of my womanness, and I really like the smell when I touch myself and
bring my finger to my nose.”
“They are strong (I work my Kegel muscles), they are neat and comfortable
(I keep the hair trimmed so it doesn’t catch on underwear and hurt me), they
give me a lot of pleasure with a sexual partner or my vibrators.”
“I have learned to like the appearance of my vulva more so now than when
I was younger. I love how I maintain them, Brazilian waxing every six
weeks. I actually love that my partner loves my labia.”
“I like the way my genitals look, feel, and smell. I look at my vaginal area

often with a mirror, and I do it because I enjoy knowing what it looks like. I
also love that it feels so good when touched, and that it helps me have
orgasms.”
“I like that they give my husband and me pleasure and that they helped
make and deliver my son.”
“Sometimes the smell, I like that guys like them, I like that they give me
pleasure, I like that they’re mine.”
“I like that they are healthy. I like that they feel good. I like that my inner
labia hang down a bit; I think it is mature and sexual. Men like it. I like the
colors and textures. I even like the smell.”
“They give me good feelings. They are luscious and voluptuous. They
smell and taste good. They birthed a baby.”
“All the different colors (pinks, browns), the shape of the labia, the fluids,
the smell, the softness, the pleasure they give me (and sometimes others),
one special birthmark.”
“They can be fun to play with.”
“Hmm, haven’t really thought about this question before. I guess not
much.”
“They’re very sensitive! At least the clit is. I like how everything neatly
protects itself, like how the labia is all closed up, and then there are flaps
over the clit as well. The hair is pretty cool; I’ve tried different things like
shaving and whatnot.”
“Is it bad to say everything about them? I like that I have strawberry blonde
pubes—I like the size, length, etc., of my lips, I love my clit and hood
(which I want to pierce eventually).”
“It is very hairy, I like to stroke my genital hair.”
“That they were a part of the creation of my children. That they are unique.
That they are powerful.”
“They’re very neat ‘the perfect pussy’ as depicted in porn.”
“They make me feel good they can bring forth life. They are a source of
oppression, and while oppression sucks, the fact that so much effort is
expended on controlling women’s genitals suggests that they’re pretty
important.”
“I like . . . everything about my genitals? Except maybe that my vagina is
quite small so I can’t use some of the sex toys I own—and that’s not really
something I dislike so much as a vague annoyance. Also, my clitoris is
AMAZING. Orgasms— mine being directly related to my genitals—are
amazing. I also like how they look, feel, and taste (though I’ve only been
able to taste second-hand), so in short? Everything.”

“Nothing.”
“I like the pleasure they give me. I like the anatomical complexity and the
wonder I have from having a clitoris which doesn’t seem to have any
purpose in the evolutionary sense, but being an organ of pleasure. I like all
the orgasms I can have.”
“I like that inside my vulva is red but on the outside it’s tones of
brown/black. I also like the smell sometimes. I like my genitals a lot when
I’m aroused and my pussy lips get all full and plump. I really love how
everything down there feels when I’m really wet, like after I’ve cum. I also
like, when my finger is inside myself, to feel myself cum really hard—I
really like the feeling of the contractions and the super slick cum.”
“My pubes are awesome and they are very very sensitive, which sometimes
I don’t like too.”
“I am pretty tight, I like that. I also like that my clit is well hooded and not
out in the open. It’s wrapped like a present.”
“That they cause such pleasure. I like how it looks. I am very happy with
my vagina. Looking forward to pushing a baby out through my vagina
someday.”
TEST YOUR VQ
1. The inside branches of the clitoris are called
a. crura
b. cure-alls
c. cumulus
d. coochies
2. The five vaginal shapes are the heart, parallel sides, conical, pumpkin
seed, and the
a. cat
b. tiger
c. bee
d. slug
3. During sexual arousal, a woman’s vagina may increase in size due to a
process called
a. vaginal camping

b. vaginal tenting
c. vaginal awesomeness
d. vaginal carousing
Answers
1. a
2. d
3. b

• 2 •
A Healthy, Happy Vulva
Taking Care Down There
As children, we learn how to care for our bodies. We learn that exercise is good
for our bones, our muscles, and our hearts. Eating fruits and vegetables is good
for our bodies as a whole, as they deliver important vitamins and minerals. We
also learn about good hygiene: for example, we learn not to pick our nose (at
least in public) and that washing hands can prevent colds. And, over time, we
learn what’s normal about our bodies and what’s not. We learn that waking up
with sleep in our eyes is a common, healthy occurrence (our eyes need a way to
clean themselves out). But we also learn that constant runny noses or coughs are
often a sign that we’re sick and may need to go to the doctor. We learn these
things from our parents and our teachers; perhaps you remember talking about
“food groups” in kindergarten or in an elementary school health class. Your
physical education teacher may have encouraged you to try running or walking
for exercise or to find a sport that you enjoy or are good at. Growing up, we had
numerous ways to learn how to care for our bodies and our health.
Curiously, girls and young women learn little about how to care for their
genitals beyond the basic potty-training rules of wiping and then washing one’s
hands. Can you imagine if we women learned information about how to care for
our vulvas and vaginas? What if our parents, sisters, or teachers shared
information about healthy genital care with girls and young women? What if we
could share this information out in the open as if it were just as important as
other kinds of health information?
All too often, when girls or women learn how to care for their vulvas and
vaginas, it’s done with shades of secrecy or taboo. Fifth-and sixth-grade girls are
frequently separated from the boys so that they can watch a video about periods
and how babies are made (the boys may be outside playing sports or in another
room, learning about their own pubertal development). Although there may be
some benefits to girls and boys being separated so that they can learn about their
sex-specific parts, there may also be some benefit in bringing them together that
day, or on another day, to talk and learn about these topics together as a group.

After all, boys and girls could benefit from talking with each other about the
changes they’ll be experiencing over the next few years. Both sexes could learn
to talk with respect and compassion about otherwise mysterious topics such as
menstruation and erections.
9 REASONS TO LOVE YOUR VULVA AND VAGINA
1. It makes it easier to use non-applicator tampons.
2. It makes it easier to use birth-control methods like diaphragms and
NuvaRing.
3. It might make you feel more comfortable filming your own birth
experience video, should you give birth one day.
4. You may be more comfortable talking with your healthcare provider
about your genital health.
5. You may be more open to receiving cunnilingus. Or just plain into it.
6. It could enhance your masturbation to watch yourself in the mirror.
7. Your vagina and vulva will be with you forever, so you may as well
make friends.
8. The vagina can be warm and wet to touch, which can feel good.
9. During a self-exam in front of a mirror, it can be fun to make your
vulva “talk” by squishing the labia together.
There should be no shame in learning about vulvar and vaginal health. After
all, everyone with a vulva and vagina probably wants them to be healthy. Here in
this chapter, we’ll identify health challenges faced by vulvas and vaginas
worldwide and identify key steps that you can take—starting today—toward
vulvar and vaginal wellness. That said, we only have room enough to devote one
chapter to vulvar and vaginal health issues, so you should consider this a brief
overview rather than everything you will ever need to know about genital health.
For more extensive information about genital-health issues, we recommend
reading The V Book1 (see Resources).
WHAT WE’RE MADE OF
The vulva is a highly sensitive area of women’s bodies. Men’s genitals are

almost completely covered in skin. This skin acts as a protective barrier to the
outside world against common irritants and other things that could otherwise
harm the genitals. The only opening that men have on their penis is the urethral
opening (through which they urinate and ejaculate), and it’s a pretty small
opening, so not much is going to get through it.
Women, however, have the urethral opening and the vaginal opening, with
the latter being significantly larger than the tiny little urethral opening. As such,
we’re more exposed to the outside world and its many irritants. Also, the vulvar
skin is more sensitive and vulnerable to irritation than men’s genital skin, so it
can be helpful to learn the best way to care for our genital parts. Because genitals
and sexual health are such taboo topics in many cultures, many girls and young
women don’t receive accurate information about how to care for their vulvas and
vaginas. It’s not necessarily the fault of their mothers, aunts, or grandmothers—
after all, many women in older generations never learned much about how to
care for their genitals, either. We hope to change that. We hope to give you
enough information about how to care for your vulva and vagina so that you feel
confident about caring for yourself and sharing this information with your
girlfriends as well as with your mom, sister, daughter, niece, grandmother, or
neighbor. Even if you don’t want to have explicit conversations with friends or
family members about v-parts, you can always recommend this or other
vulva/vagina-friendly books to them.
VULVA SELF-EXAMINATION: HOW TO CHECK YOURSELF
OUT DOWN THERE
One of the simplest and most important ways that you can care for your vulva is
to get to know it well. Just as you can care for your skin by checking for
suspicious moles or other indications of skin cancer, you can care for your vulva
by looking at it about once each month as part of a vulvar self-examination
(VSE).
What you will need:
A well-lit room (if the room’s not brightly lit, a flashlight will help)
A mirror (a self-standing mirror, or one you can lean against the wall, may
save you from inverting into some awkward positions)
Self-love and an open-mind
Here’s how:

1. Find at least ten minutes of time when you’re unlikely to be interrupted by
children, roommates, a partner, the doorbell, or your favorite TV show
that’s about to come on.
2. In a well-lit room, find a comfortable position in front of your mirror. The
angle that you sit at will change the way your vulva appears, so make sure it
is a position in which you feel comfortable sitting and exploring. For many
women, sitting up on the bed or against a wall with a pillow behind one’s
back for comfort or support is a helpful position for VSE.
3. Open your legs enough so that you can clearly see all of your vulva parts.
4. Starting at the top of your genitals (the mons pubis), look at and touch each
of your genital parts: the mons, clitoral hood, glans clitoris, labia majora,
inner labia, the area around the vaginal entrance, and the perineum. If you
are able to view the perianal area (the area around your anus), look at and
touch this area as well. Run your fingers through any hair-covered areas so
that you can see the skin beneath the hair.
5. Notice what looks and feels normal for you. When you examine your
genitals each month, look for any areas that appear to have become darker
or lighter, red, itchy, or painful. If you notice any genital changes,
discomfort, pain, or new lumps or bumps, ask your healthcare provider
about these changes. Chronic itching is also a symptom that should always
be brought to the attention of one’s healthcare provider.
By performing monthly VSE, you can become familiar with what is normal
for your own personal genitals. As every woman is different, this can be an
important part of noticing changes that may be related to sexually transmissible
infections (such as genital warts), benign skin conditions (such as lichen
sclerosus, a skin condition that is often marked by white patches of genital skin),
or vulvar cancer that, though rare, has a high survival rate when caught and
treated in an early stage. If the size of your genital parts changes, this too is
something that you should share with your healthcare provider. Although it’s
common, for example, for the clitoris to temporarily increase in size when a
woman is feeling sexually aroused or after she has just had sex, it is not normal
for an adult woman’s clitoris to grow substantially bigger (unless she is taking
testosterone). In some cases, an enlarged clitoris is a sign of cancer, such as
ovarian cancer or adrenal cancer, so it should always be brought to the attention
of one’s healthcare provider at the earliest opportunity. Or to put it more simply:
if your clitoris looks bigger, let your healthcare provider know. Although there
are benign reasons for your clitoris to get bigger that have nothing to do with
cancer, these are indeed things that should be ruled out. By becoming familiar

with your personal “normal” in terms of the shapes, sizes, coloration, and feel of
your vulvar parts, you will be better situated to take care of your health and well
being.
I really resent that I’m supposed to either fear or love my genitals. They’re
annoying and frustrating, and I don’t feel it’s necessary to have strong feelings
either way. I am not a bad feminist because I don’t love my genitals.
—JAIME, MtF (no surgery), 24, Massachusetts
VULVA AND VAGINA SELF-CARE
Caring for your genital parts involves learning how to tweak some of our most
basic daily activities in vulva-and vagina-friendly ways. Here are some tips
related to basic hygiene and self-care that can help your lady parts stay happy
and healthy.
Wiping
As a child or teenager, you may have been taught to wipe from front to back (the
front being toward your clitoris and the back being the anus). Such directions are
meant to keep bacteria from the anal opening away from the vagina, as the
vagina can be quite sensitive. Generally speaking, it’s good advice to wipe from
front to back for this reason.
As for what to wipe with, most healthcare providers recommend using
regular, unfragranced toilet paper rather than moist wipes (such as those intended
for cleaning babies during a diaper change). Moist wipes may have chemicals in
them that can irritate the vulvar skin or leave the genitals wet for longer than
they need to be. If you prefer to use a moist wipe (some women keep these at
home and/or carry these in their purses for wiping when using public
bathrooms), ask your healthcare provider to recommend a brand that is unlikely
to cause genital irritation when used regularly. Finally, some women use a water
bidet to clean after using the bathroom. Patting oneself dry afterward with toilet
paper can be helpful, as keeping the genitals wet for too long can cause irritation.
Vaginal Discharge
The uterus, cervix, and vagina produce natural discharge that comes out of the
vagina. This is generally called “vaginal discharge” even though the fluids

coming out may be coming from the vaginal walls, cervix, or uterus. This is one
way in which women’s bodies clean themselves. Vaginal discharge is completely
natural, and it often changes appearance throughout a woman’s menstrual cycle.
It may be clear, milky white, or have a slight yellow tinge to it. Sometimes it
seems clear and thin. Other times, women notice that their discharge is more
clumpy, possibly even leaving little clear or white clumps in their underwear or
on the pubic hair closest to their vaginal opening. It’s also not uncommon to
notice white or light yellow stains on one’s underwear. Darker yellow or green
discharge or stains may indicate an infection and should be brought to the
attention of one’s healthcare provider.
If you find that your body produces excessive discharge, we recommend
asking your healthcare provider about it. He or she can test you for vaginal
infections, including sexually transmissible infections (STIs) that can cause
increases in vaginal discharge. After all, some STIs don’t have many noticeable
symptoms. One woman that Debby knows of noticed that she was experiencing
more vaginal wetness than usual, which she attributed to being highly sexually
aroused, or horny. When she learned that she had gonorrhea, she was surprised,
but it all made sense. This isn’t to say that vaginal wetness is always a bad thing
(it’s not) or that it’s never a sign of arousal (often, it is) but if you experience
vaginal discharge that is unusual in some way for you, please do bring it to the
attention of a healthcare provider. Try to avoid using pantyliners, pads, tampons,
or other menstrual products as a way to keep vaginal discharge in check.
Menstrual products are only intended for use during a woman’s period (i.e., on
the days that she is bleeding). Wearing pads or pantyliners too often can irritate
the vulva, especially if the pads or pantyliners are fragranced. And wearing
tampons on non-period days can make the vagina feel drier and cause irritation
as well, so save your period products for your period days! Your body and your
wallet will thank you.
Keeping Clean: Easier Than You Think
Because the vagina cleans itself out via vaginal discharge, there’s very little to
do when it comes to keeping your genital parts clean. However, many women
are convinced that they need to clean their lady parts. Here are a few tips to keep
in mind:
Try to avoid using fragranced and scented bath products. This includes
scented, colored, or antibacterial soaps, as these can irritate the sensitive
vulvar skin.

Go basic. Although it surprises some women to hear this, many doctors
who specialize in vulvar and vaginal health recommend that women wash
their genitals with only water and their hand. That’s right: no soaps
necessary.
Stay soft. An advantage of using your hand is that it’s soft and unlikely to
irritate the sensitive genital skin. Loofahs and other cloths meant for
scrubbing can irritate the genitals.
Avoid soaps. Harsh soaps and cleansers can cause irritation or itching of
the genitals. If you feel you must use some type of cleanser on your vulva,
consider using a gentle cleanser such as Cetaphil (sold over the counter in
many drug stores) along with water and your hand.
Turn down the heat. Opt for warm rather than hot showers, as hot water
can dry skin all over one’s body. Of course, most people opt for warm-to-
hot bath water. If you’re planning to have sex after a bath, try spending
longer than usual in fore-play, as the vagina may be dry (due to the warm
water) and may need time to get its lubrication going. You may find it
helpful to keep a bottle or packet of personal lubricant nearby in case you
need a little assistance with post-bath sex.
Don’t put any bath products up inside the vagina. Only the outside parts
(the vulva) should be cleaned with water and one’s hand. The inside parts
(i.e., the vagina) do not require any special cleaning.
Grooming
When grooming your pubic hair, try to choose a kinder, gentler method—
something that won’t make your genitals run for cover in the other direction.
Take care, for example, to groom carefully and not to nick your sensitive, curvy
genital parts with razors or scissors. And while we don’t think you need pubic
hair dye or labia dye, we understand that some women may want to use such
products, either to cover gray pubic hairs or to have a little fun with their pubes
or labia. We get it. If you go this route, please take care to follow package
instructions, to patch test dyes on nongenital parts before using them on genital
parts, and to avoid doing anything that doesn’t sound right to you. As pubic hair
and labia dyes are not approved by any health organization that we know of, the
instructions may contain inaccurate information—so please, ask your healthcare
provider if you have any questions about whether a product is safe for your
cooch or whether you should adjust the instructions in a particular way.

Genital Odor
Most vaginas do not smell like fish—but some do. It is common for women’s
genitals to have a slight scent to them, sometimes smelling a bit yeasty or like
sour milk. This can be normal, healthy, and nothing to worry about. If you have
questions about your genital odor, we encourage you to talk with a healthcare
provider who can examine you and see if you may have a vaginal infection, such
as trichomoniasis, that can result in a strong and often unpleasant odor. In some
cases, women may have strong genital odor as a result of overactive sweat
glands (this is sometimes treated with Botox). There are tons of sweat glands in
the vulva, which is why you may have noticed a damp crotch during exercise.
Having sweat glands down there is a good thing. The vulva is full of blood
vessels, which means that as blood flow increases to the genital area, it may feel
warmer. Sweat allows the warmth to dissipate, which is useful because it will
help you feel comfortable as you cool off. In other words, your sweat glands
have an important role to play, so try not to be too hard on them.
Douches, Sprays, and Powders
The vagina is a self-cleaning body part. As such, feminine-hygiene products
such as douches, deodorant sprays, and powders are not needed to keep the
vagina smelling or looking clean (more on this in chapter 5). As this chapter is
about health, we’ll go a step further and tell you a few additional icky facts about
douching: not only can douching not prevent pregnancy or STIs, but douching
may make a woman’s genital odor and discharge worse instead of better. Why?
Because it may promote more bacterial growth. Some research also suggests that
women who douche have a greater risk of pelvic inflammatory disease and of
ectopic pregnancy, which is when a pregnancy begins to develop outside of the
uterus (such as in the fallopian tube). Bottom line: avoid these kinds of feminine
hygiene products unless specifically recommended by a healthcare provider.
What to Wear Down There
As the vulva can be quite sensitive, healthcare providers sometimes suggest that
the most vagina/vulva-friendly underwear is cotton underwear, as it allows the
genitals to “breathe.” It also helps to keep the genital area dry rather than
trapping moisture.
Some women also find it helpful or comfortable to sleep or go through their
day without wearing underwear. This may be particularly helpful if they are
prone to genital discomfort or pain. In addition, thong underwear has been

identified as a common irritant of the vulva, so you may find it more
comfortable to choose other styles of underwear.
Laundry
Although most women find that they can use any laundry detergent they want
and not experience genital irritation, not all women are so lucky. If you’re prone
to vaginal or vulvar irritation, itching, or pain, you may want to use a detergent
that is free of fragrances and dyes. Some women even run their laundry—or at
least their underwear— through an additional rinse cycle to further dilute any
detergent that may be lingering in their undies.
EXERCISE
Exercise and Clothing
Not only is regular physical exercise good for the heart, lungs, weight
management, and overall wellness, it can also feel invigorating for many
women. Plus, exercise helps many women to manage menstrual or premenstrual
symptoms such as cramps and irritability.
If you exercise (and we hope you do, whether it’s walking, running,
swimming, dancing, or taking your dog out for long walks), try to change out of
your exercise clothes or underwear soon after you’re done exercising. This can
help to keep your genitals dry rather than having them trapped with all that
moisture from sweating, which can irritate the genitals. Putting on clean, dry
clothes is a welcome relief for vulvas and vaginas worldwide.
Heave, Ho
When you lift objects, try to adopt a healthy lifting posture (you know, the whole
“bend at the knees” thing). It’s not just good for your back, but it might be
vagina-friendly, too. Why? Because the pelvic-floor muscles support the bottoms
of our bodies including our vaginas, rectums, and reproductive organs. Lifting
heavy things, especially improperly, can put strain on the pelvic-floor muscles
and weaken them over time. Body weight, including weight gained during
pregnancy or even when one is not pregnant, can also put strain on the pelvic-
floor muscles. Of course, it’s important to be open to gaining a healthy amount
of weight during pregnancy but that amount varies from woman to woman. If

you are pregnant or thinking about becoming pregnant, ask your OB/GYN for
advice about attaining a healthy pregnancy, including a healthy pregnancy
weight. And if you are not pregnant but have questions about your health,
weight, or body composition, your healthcare provider can be a good source of
information as can a registered dietician. (Note: an RD is different from a
“nutritionist,” which anyone can call himself or herself, even with no advanced
training.)
Kegels
Kegel (say “kay-gull”) exercises are named for the gynecologist Dr. Arnold
Kegel who first described these exercises as a way to help women maintain
bladder control. Just as certain exercises can help to strengthen leg muscles or
arm muscles, Kegel exercises can help to improve the tone of the pelvic-floor
muscles. This can be important in terms of helping to reduce the risk of
incontinence that otherwise increases with age and childbearing. Some women
feel that pelvic-floor exercises also help them to experience more intense
orgasms, though this is not well understood in research.
To identify your pelvic-floor muscles, try stopping the flow of urine as you
pee. Those are the muscles that—when you’re not peeing— you will want to
squeeze as part of your Kegel exercises. Another way to identify these muscles
is by inserting a finger into the vagina and squeezing the muscles, which will
likely result in a sense of pressure around the finger. Sex educators and
healthcare providers often recommend different variations on Kegel exercises.
For example, they may recommend that women:
Squeeze the pelvic-floor muscles and hold to the count of five, then release
for another five counts. Repeat the squeeze-and-release pattern for five
minutes. Eventually work up to ten minutes.
Squeeze and release the pelvic-floor muscles in a quick pulsing pattern,
squeezing for only one or two seconds and then releasing for the same. Try
to do this for up to five minutes.
Use a Kegel exerciser as part of the exercises. A Kegel exerciser often looks
like a small, thin, weighted bar (about the length of a typical dildo, or
smaller). Some women insert the weighted bar an inch or two into their
vagina as they practice their preferred squeeze/release pattern. Over time,
some women begin inserting more of the weighted bar into their vagina so
that it holds more weight. Using water-based lubricant can help to make it
easier to insert the weighted bar into the vagina. Also make sure to clean

the bar before and after use.
Use balls meant for Kegel exercises, such as Ben Wa balls or Smart Balls,
as part of one’s Kegel exercises. Some women opt to place one ball inside
their vagina and use it to squeeze and then relax their muscles. Others opt to
place two balls inside the vagina as part of their Kegel exercises. Another
variation is to place one or both balls inside the vagina, squeeze one’s
pelvic-floor muscles, and then walk several feet or the full length of one’s
room using only the strength of one’s pelvic-floor muscles to keep the
ball(s) inside the vagina. Again, water-based lubricant can help to make
insertion more comfortable, and cleaning the balls before and after use is
recommended. These balls can be found in many of the sex shops listed in
the Resources section.
While practicing Kegel exercises, try to focus only on the pelvic-floor
muscles by lifting up rather than bearing down or using other nearby muscles,
such as the abdominal muscles. Try to find a time when you are relaxed,
comfortable, and have sufficient time to complete your exercises without
interruption. Some women do their Kegel exercises daily, and others aim for a
few times per week. If you have any questions or concerns about how to perform
Kegel exercises or if they are right for you, please check in with your healthcare
provider, as everyone’s body and personal-health needs are a little different.
Women who experience genital pain, including pain during sex, are particularly
encouraged to seek advice from their healthcare provider, such as a physical
therapist who has experience treating women for genital-pain issues, prior to
starting a program of pelvic-floor exercises like Kegels. This is because some
women with a genital-pain disorder may have pelvic-floor muscles that are too
tight, and they may benefit from different kinds of exercises.
DITCH THE ITCH
One of the most common complaints that women have about their genitals has to
do with itching. On the plus side, this means that you can pretty much always
find a shoulder to lean on when it comes to genital itching. If you mention it to a
friend or to your mom, chances are she’s been there, too. On the down side, this
also means that itching is a non-specific symptom. If your vulva itches, it doesn’t
exactly narrow down the list of many things that could be causing the itching.
That said, there are a few common causes of genital itching among women. The
next time you feel all “ugh!” down there, consider whether any of these may be

at the root of your problem:
Clothing. We’ve said it before, and we’ll say it again. Women’s genitals do
not like to be bound up and restricted. Multiple layers (think pantyliner,
tights, and a skirt) or too-tight clothes, such as spandex pants or tight jeans,
can trap moisture. These kinds of clothes can be fine on occasion, but if you
opt to spend the day in leggings, try to air out your bits by sleeping in the
nude, or at least going without panties, at night. Let your vulva and vagina
breathe! Truly, you may be surprised by how many cases of genital itching
could be prevented by wearing fewer layers, loose cotton underwear, or
more natural, breathable fabrics. Try not to wear constrictive pantyhose or
“shape” products (e.g., Spanx) too often.
Chemical irritants. You may not think twice about pouring bleach in the
laundry, but that bleach may be irritating your lady bits. And if your male
partner is using performance-enhancing condoms that help him to last
longer, then your itching may be linked to the benzocaine or lidocaine that’s
in some of those products. Or if you have ever thought it would be a good
idea to sanitize your menstrual cup or sponge with tea tree oil, think again
—that, too, can irritate women’s sensitive genitals. There have even been
case reports of women experiencing genital irritation from newspaper ink.2
That’s right—newspaper ink. It turns out that their partners were reading
the newspaper in bed before sex. The ink got on their hands, and their hands
got on their partner’s genitals, and next thing you know, there’s a case of
mysteriously irritated genitals. If your bed partner reads the newspaper
before bed, ask him or her to wash up before going any further. (Perhaps
this is yet another reason why digital newspapers are a good option!)
Bath products. Although these probably belong in the “chemical irritant”
section, bath products are so commonly linked to genital itching and
irritation that they deserve their own mention. Women’s vaginal itching and
irritation are commonly linked to fragranced products, and bath products
are among the worst culprits.2 Although these products may help create a
relaxing, fragrant retreat out of your shower or bath, women find
themselves less relaxed later when their bits begin to itch. If you choose to
use fancy schmancy bath products anyway, try to use only a small amount
and dilute them greatly with bath water.
Your lubricant. Although lubricant formulations are getting better every
day, many lubricants that you’ll find on store shelves contain propylene
glycol or chlorhexidine, which have also been linked to genital itching or

irritation among women.1 If you notice ongoing itching, check the labels of
your lubricants and consider switching products.
Feminine hygiene products. Please forgive us for saying this over and
over again, but feminine hygiene products such as douches, sprays, and
deodorants can cause more harm than good. And they can definitely
contribute to vulvar itching for some women.
Yogurt. Although Debby’s refrigerator is constantly stocked with dozens of
cups of yogurt, her vagina is not. You won’t find any yogurt near our lady
parts. Why? Because it doesn’t belong there. Forget what you may have
read on the Internet about using yogurt down there to fight yeast infections.
The next time you have an urge to put food of any kind on or in your
genitals, check with your healthcare provider first, as even food—
particularly when misplaced—can cause vulvar itching or irritation.
Yeast infections. Many women feel itchy down there and race to the drug
store to get over-the-counter yeast medications. This can be a huge mistake.
Why? Well, if you don’t have a yeast infection, then not only will yeast
creams not work, but they may also make your itching and other genital
symptoms worse. Or, equally bad is that the cream and any side effects you
have from the cream may make it more difficult for your healthcare
provider to properly diagnose the cause of your genital symptoms. As such,
we recommend always checking in with your healthcare provider before
seeking help from over-the-counter yeast infection medications. One of the
few exceptions to this is that women who are super prone to yeast
infections (meaning, they get four or more per year) are probably pretty
good at telling what is and what is not a yeast infection due to experience.
Some healthcare providers tell these women that they can probably make
the yeast-cream decision on their own without much risk. But if you’re not
sure, or if you have questions about your personal health, definitely check
in with your healthcare provider. If you do have a yeast infection, your
healthcare provider can walk you through your treatment options, which
may include over-the-counter yeast cream, a prescription pill, or other
treatments if the yeast is an uncommon type that doesn’t respond to typical
treatments.
Medications. Sometimes women’s healthcare providers advise them to use
over-the-counter or prescription creams on their genitals, for example, to
treat skin disorders (such as lichen sclerosus) or STIs (such as genital
warts). Yeast creams, estrogen or testosterone creams, and even numbing
agents may be used on the genital skin, or internally, for different reasons,
per the advice of one’s healthcare provider. Occasionally, women

experience itching, irritation, or feelings of burning, stinging, or pain when
they use such creams. If your healthcare provider prescribes a cream or
ointment for you to use on your vulva or inside your vagina, ask him or her
what kinds of symptoms you can expect and what to do if you experience
them (e.g., Stop the medication? Press an ice pack against your vulva to
stop the pain?).
SEXY TIMES
It’s common for women and men to incorporate sexual-enhancement products
into their sex lives. Using sex toys, creams, or lubricants can add novelty to a
relationship, be a fun part of sex play, or help to make sex feel more
comfortable, romantic, sexy, or more easily orgasmic. However, many sex toys
don’t come with instructions for safe or pleasurable use—let alone vagina-
friendly instructions. To make the most of your sexual experiences, consider the
following:
I wish girls were taught from younger ages the correct names for all body parts,
and empowered to love their genitals. I wish there was continued movement
away from vaginal orgasms being the “preferred” kind.
—ELIZABETH, 41, Michigan
Clean any sex toys before and after you use them. After cleaning them,
air dry your sex toys before putting them away so that they’re not kept in a
warm, moist environment, which can encourage bacterial growth.
Take care with a condom. If you’re prone to vulvar or vaginal irritation, or
if your vibrator or dildo is made of a soft, porous material (such as Jelly),
consider slipping a new condom over the vibrator or dildo before inserting
it into your vagina. This is a definite must if you are sharing a vibrator or
dildo with one or more partners or friends (not recommended, though we
realize people do it anyway).
Avoid douching, unless recommended by a healthcare provider.
Douching after sex does not prevent pregnancy, and it can disrupt the
otherwise friendly vaginal environment.
If you enjoy bathing alone or with a partner before sex, consider
steering clear of bubble baths, as they may irritate the vulva or vagina.
Instead, add a few drops of an essential oil to the bath. Alternatively, you
might find that lighting scented candles in the bathroom adds to the

sensuality of the bath experience without increasing your risk of genital
irritation.
Choose a vagina-friendly lubricant. In other words, one without
propylene glycol, chlorhexidine, or other chemicals that you may be
sensitive or allergic to (you may not be sensitive to the two we listed, but
some women find that they contribute to genital irritation). If you’re trying
to conceive, consider a lubricant such as PreSeed that is unlikely to
interfere with sperm movement.
Examine your birth control. Spermicidal products, such as spermicidal
foams and jellies, irritate some women’s vaginas. Some women who
experience chronic vulvar or vaginal pain have been advised by their
healthcare providers to switch methods of birth control. If you have
ongoing issues of vulvar or vaginal discomfort or pain, talk with your
healthcare provider about the current method of contraception you are using
and whether another method may be a better choice for you.
Go plain. Although flavored lubricants can seem fun, they’re not for
everyone. Keep in mind that men’s and women’s genitals are quite different
from each other. Because men’s genitals are mostly covered with skin, men
can often more easily tolerate flavored and sugary products on their
genitals. Similar products can cause irritation on lady parts. As such, opt for
plain lubricants over flavored lubricants, sprinkle body sugar or spread
body frosting on your breasts or stomach (rather than your vulva), and use
flavored condoms for oral sex only. Flavored condoms can cause irritation
if used vaginally.
Wash him off. Be sure to wash any sugars, body frosting, or flavored
lubricant off of your partner’s penis (if male) or your sex toy before you
allow it to enter into your vagina. Flavored, sugary sex-play products can be
fun and tasty, but they don’t belong in your vagina and may cause vaginal
itching or irritation. Run a small washcloth under warm water and then use
it to clean his penis before you go further into the Land of Penetrative Sex.
The same is true if you have a female or male partner wearing or using a
strap-on/dildo: if you’ve made it tasty for oral-sex play, clean it before it
goes back inside your body.
Lower your yeast risk. Although it can feel pleasurable to receive oral sex,
it’s not for everyone—and not just because of personal preference. Some
women are particularly prone to recurrent yeast infections. Research
suggests that these women may face an increased risk of yeast infections if
they have intercourse with a male partner who has saliva on his penis (for
example, if she or he put saliva on his penis as a lubricant, or if she recently

performed oral sex on him).3 Women are also more prone to repeat yeast
infections if they frequently received oral sex from a partner. If you’re
prone to repeat yeast infections, you might find it helpful to meet with a
vulvovaginal specialist (find one through issvd.org or nva.org). You might
also find it helpful to use a dental dam or condom cut in half during
cunnilingus or to wash his penis or your toy off before intercourse.
PERIOD DOS AND DON’TS
Most women experience menarche between the ages of ten and fourteen and
reach menopause by their early fifties. Women in the United States and many
Western countries don’t tend to have large numbers of children. This means that
women will commonly spend three to four decades of their lives having monthly
(or thereabouts) periods. Whether you started menstruating last month or twenty
years ago, you can benefit from the health-related period tips in this section.
Women have a wide variety of period products to choose from including
tampons, pads, pantyliners, menstrual cups, and menstrual sponges. Most
women can use any of these without upsetting the vulva or vagina goddesses.
Others have to choose more carefully based on their own health needs. We
describe all of the products in detail in chapter 5, but here are a few things to
consider when pondering the impact of period products on your health:
Tampons
Tampons are one of the most popular methods of period management among
women in the United States. But that doesn’t mean that women can’t benefit
from being reminded about how to use them for the safest possible experience.
First and foremost, let’s start with a few tips on the greatest danger associated
with tampons: TSS.
What’s TSS? It stands for toxic shock syndrome. If you have never known
anyone who has ever had it, you are in good company. At the height of the TSS
scare, only thirty-five people were diagnosed with it (and ten of those people
were men). Of the women, the majority had vaginal symptoms, which suggested
it was related to menstruation.4 Then, in 1980, use of a certain super-absorbency
tampon was found to be linked to TSS. Hence, the association with tampons.
The tampons that were linked with TSS risk were quickly taken off the market,
and the FDA has done a fine job of monitoring the market since then. TSS in
connection with period products still occurs, but it is extremely rare. There is

approximately one case of TSS out of every one hundred thousand menstruating
women per year.4 That isn’t 1 percent—not even .1 percent or .01 percent. Only
.001 percent of women have been diagnosed with TSS.
So, what’s with the scary warning on your tampon packages/instructions?
Although it is unlikely that you will get TSS, if you do, it can have some very
serious health consequences including shock, liver and kidney failure, and
possibly even death if left untreated. If you think you have it, don’t panic! Over
95 percent of women will recover from it, which are some pretty good odds.4
Still, as with most things, TSS gets worse the longer it goes untreated. So, to be
on the safe side, take out your tampon and consult a doctor if you have the
following symptoms:4
a fever over 102 degrees
a rash (it may appear to look like sunburn)
vomiting or diarrhea
disorientation
muscle aches
red eyes
fainting from a sudden drop in blood pressure
In addition to being aware of the symptoms, you can reduce your risk by
taking a few extra precautions. First, always try to choose the tampon with the
lowest absorbency necessary to get the job done. Researchers are mixed on how
much this actually matters, with one study finding that there really are no notable
safety differences between ultra-and super-plus-absorbency tampons.5 Although
these absorbencies don’t even sound that different, we still recommend this
because it is better to be safe than sorry, and it just seems like a good general
rule to use as little absorbency as needed. Besides, it can be uncomfortable to
insert a large tampon without the proper lubrication!
That brings us to rule number 2: Change your tampon often in accordance
with the recommendations listed on the tampon package insert or from your
healthcare provider. Tampons that are left too long inside the vagina can cause
bacterial infections or, although rare, can increase the risk of TSS. We know it’s
easier on you and the bank account to leave the tampon in until it feels ready to
pop, but it is better to follow the guidelines and change them every few hours.
Following these steps can help to reduce the risk of TSS, which, although rare,
can be deadly.
In addition to TSS, we’ve seen some scary emails floating around the cyber

universe that make it seem as though regular tampons will cause all sorts of
health problems (for example, that they contain asbestos). We know of no
evidence that supports these claims. In fact, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) issued a statement in 1999 indicating that it had “no
evidence of asbestos in tampons.”6 And given the choice between believing the
FDA or emails that also claim to come from foreigners who want to transfer
millions of US dollars into your bank account, we’ll believe the FDA.
Menstrual Pads and Pantyliners
It is recommended that women only use menstrual pads or pantyliners on days
that they are menstruating. If you find that you experience excessive vaginal
discharge and want to use pads or liners for this reason, consider checking in
with a healthcare provider before doing so. As we’ve mentioned, using pads or
liners too often can cause or contribute to genital itching, redness, and/or
irritation.
Sex and Your Period
Although some women avoid having sex while on their period, others are quite
happy to have sex with a partner while menstruating. For some women, sexual
pleasure and orgasm seem to help with any period-related discomfort, such as
cramps. Also, some women find that they’re highly aroused while menstruating.
If you want to have sex while menstruating, it is a perfectly common thing to do
—and it is not “unhealthy.” Of course, any time there is exposure to blood there
may be a greater risk of infection, so you’ll want to make sure to use a condom
and/or talk with your partner about each of your STI histories. A tip: some
people find it helpful to lay a towel down on the bed or other area (floor?) where
they plan to have sex to reduce the likelihood of staining one’s sheets.
BIRTH CONTROL
Women and men commonly have questions about birth control. They want to
know how effective different types of birth control are, how much they cost, and
how easy they are to use. Perhaps you’ve also wondered how certain birth-
control methods interact with your precious v-parts, the vulva and vagina. Given
the dozens of different types of birth control available, we don’t have room to go
over every single one here. However, this brief overview of common birth-

control methods and how they relate to your vulva and vagina, or your sex life,
should be a good start:
Male Condoms
Most women who have male sexual partners find that male condoms are
incredibly vagina-friendly. After all, male condoms—when used correctly and
consistently, and when they stay intact (which they nearly always do)—keep
semen away from the vagina, thus reducing the risk of infection and unintended
pregnancy. That’s pretty vagina-friendly, if you ask us! Every now and then,
though, women will say that they feel irritated after having sex with a condom-
clad partner. If you are sensitive or allergic to latex condoms, choose condoms
made of something other than latex, such as polyurethane. Even if you’re not
sensitive or allergic to condoms, you may find that your vagina and vulva are
more comfortable when you use a certain brand of condom. It’s possible that you
may be reacting to the lubricant on the condom, if it’s pre-lubricated. Make note
of condoms that work particularly well with your body and keep some on hand
so that you’ll be ready to have safer sex.
Female Condoms
American women rarely use female condoms; they are more commonly used by
women and promoted by health groups in other countries. Female condoms look
like pouches. The closed end is inserted head first into the vagina with the outer
edges folding over the vulva. Some women find that using a female condom
gives them more control over having safer sex. Condom-using couples may find
this a fun, pleasurable, and safe (albeit sometimes expensive) way to diversify
their sex lives.
NuvaRing
The NuvaRing is a vaginal-ring contraceptive. Women only need to insert one
ring into the vagina and then leave it there for three weeks. Some women worry
that leaving the NuvaRing in the vagina for three weeks is unhealthy for the
vagina. It’s not (that is, assuming the ring stayed in its original packaging and
then a woman washed her hands before opening the package, removing the ring,
and inserting it into her vagina). Women also sometimes wonder if male partners
will feel the NuvaRing during sex. In one study of women using NuvaRing and
their partners, nearly 70 percent of men said that they never felt the ring during

sex (it’s inserted pretty far up the vagina).7 Those who do feel the NuvaRing
don’t, for the most part, appear to be bothered by it. However, every woman is
built differently, and every couple has bodies that fit together differently and
different ways of having sex, including favorite or go-to sex positions. If you try
the NuvaRing and find it’s uncomfortable for either one of you during sex, you
may be able to remove it during sex (but not for long—ask your healthcare
provider for details), as long as you remember to reinsert it soon afterward.
Otherwise, consider other birth-control options that may be a better fit for you.
Birth-Control Pills
Birth-control pills are widely used by women around the world. Some women
who take low-dose estrogen pills notice that they lubricate less than they used to
(estrogen plays a role in vaginal lubrication). Also, keep in mind that birth-
control pills are to be taken orally, meaning swallowed by mouth. We mention
this only because every now and then, we hear about women who mistakenly
believe that birth-control pills work by inserting them into the vagina. This is not
the case! Please do NOT insert your birth-control pills into your (or anyone
else’s) vagina. If you have questions about how to take birth-control pills or any
other medication, please check in with your healthcare provider.
Diaphragms
Diaphragms are less commonly used in the United States, but they are still an
important barrier method of birth control, meaning they help keep semen from
reaching the cervix, uterus, and fallopian tubes. Women who use diaphragms
appear to be at increased risk of urinary tract infections (UTI), which are
infections of the urethra, bladder, the tubes that connect the bladder to the
kidneys, or the kidneys themselves.8 Any time you suspect that you may have a
UTI, it’s worth checking in with a healthcare provider who can advise you on
possible home treatment and/or prescription treatment.
Cervical Caps
Cervical caps fit over the cervix, thus serving as a barrier to keep sperm away
from the cervix, uterus, and fallopian tubes (just like diaphragms and condoms,
in this regard). If you’ve had a baby since you last used a cervical cap, check in
with your healthcare provider, as you may need to be re-fitted for one.

Spermicides
Spermicides may come in foams, jellies, or films. Spermicidal lubricant may
also be used on male condoms. Although many women tolerate spermicide just
fine, some women experience vulvovaginal irritation, such as vaginal burning,
itching, or pain, when they use spermicidal products. If you experience genital
irritation, we recommend asking your healthcare provider for recommendations
about birth-control methods that may be a better fit for your vaginal and vulvar
health.
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU’RE EXPECTING (TO GO
TO THE GYNECOLOGIST)
Going to the gynecologist. Whether you love or hate it, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that all women—even
women who are not sexually active or who are past their childbearing years—go
to the gynecologist. Nervous? Try not to be. We’ll give you all the information
you need to prepare yourself or someone else for a visit to the gynecologist,
whether it’s your first time ever or your first time in a long time.
When Should I Go?
As we said previously, the most recent guidelines recommend that young women
have their first appointment with a gynecologist between the ages of thirteen and
fifteen, though not necessarily for a pelvic exam or Pap test (those often come
later; in fact, at this writing, Pap tests are recommended for most women
beginning at the age of twenty-one).
Where Should I Go?
If 
you 
feel 
comfortable 
discussing 
it 
with 
your 
mother/female
caregiver/relative/teacher, they will likely be able to provide you with a good
local recommendation. With over eight hundred health centers across the United
States, you are also bound to find a Planned Parenthood near you (see
Resources). The nice thing about Planned Parenthood is that they do their best to
provide affordable care for everyone. This means that you do not need health
insurance or permission from a parent, in most cases, in order to schedule a visit.
I once had an amazingly considerate female gynaecologist who asked about my

sexual experiences before examining me, took them into consideration with the
diagnosis and was so careful when examining me that although my health issues
have not [ever] been resolved and probably never will be, that consultation
stands out as the most positive doctor’s experience I have ever had. I think all
gynaecologists should be trained like she was. I can’t stress enough how much
better I felt about my body and my health after seeing her.
—JOSIE, 26, United Kingdom
How Do I Prepare for My Visit?
There is not much that you need to do before you visit the gynecologist other
than trying to schedule an appointment during a time when you are not
menstruating. Other than that, there are a few things that you should try not to
do. You should try to refrain from having unprotected vaginal intercourse for a
day or two before your exam. If you douche, it is best not to douche within the
week before your appointment. Also, try to stay away from using vaginal wipes,
foams, and sprays during the week before your visit. All of these things may
make it more difficult to interpret your Pap test results.
What Happens during the Exam?
Prior to meeting with your healthcare provider, you will be asked to fill out
a comprehensive medical history. Try not to let shyness or embarrassment
get in the way of reporting your sexual or health history. Also, be sure to
list all of your genital symptoms (e.g., itching, burning, pain). Providers
need accurate information in order to make informed decisions about your
health. If this is your first visit, or if you’re nervous or scared, you may
want to indicate that on the paperwork or tell the nurse during the initial
intake.
Prior to beginning the exam, your healthcare provider will hopefully take
some time to talk with you about your history and what you should expect
from your visit. This is a great time to ask lots of questions. Some clinics
will automatically test you for STIs, while others will not, so be sure to ask.
By asking questions, you will be informed about what is going to happen,
and your healthcare provider will have the information necessary to tailor
the exam in ways that will maximize your comfort and health. If you feel
more comfortable, you can have a family member, friend, or partner stay in
the exam room with you.

After answering your questions, your healthcare provider will likely bring
you to a private space where you will be provided with a paper or cloth
gown to change into. Some gowns are made differently than others, so
don’t be afraid to ask how to put it on.
If these have not already been done during the intake, the exam will begin
as most doctors’ visits do: measuring your height, weight, blood pressure,
etc. Next, the provider will likely begin with a breast exam to look for any
tumors. You will probably be asked to lift one hand up as the provider feels
for tumors in your breasts. After your breast exam, the provider will likely
feel your abdomen for pain or other indications of abnormalities.
Finally, you will be asked to move toward the edge of the exam table and
place your feet in stirrups in order to provide an ample view of your vulva
and vagina. Your provider will begin by doing an external exam of your
genitals in order to check your vulvar skin, examine any discharge, or look
for potential abnormalities. Next, your provider will insert a lubricated
speculum (it looks a little like a duck’s bill) into your vagina in order to
separate the walls of the vagina so that he/she can view your cervix and
swab it quickly with a long cotton swab (similar to a Q-tip). This is done to
test for cervical changes and may also be used to test for some infections.
This is not painful for most women. If it is for you, make sure to tell your
healthcare provider because the solution may be as simple as using a
speculum of another size. After your speculum exam, your provider may
insert one or two lubricated fingers into your vagina while pressing down
on your abdomen. This is done to check for potential issues with your
uterus or fallopian tubes. Then, your provider may conduct a rectovaginal
exam by inserting a single lubricated finger into your anus and one into
your vagina in order to check for tumors behind the rectum or the lower
wall of the vagina. After the exam is done, your healthcare provider may
ask you to change back into your clothes while he or she leaves the room.
When he or she returns, you may have the chance to talk more about the
exam, to ask additional questions, and to further talk about your personal
health.
A few tips:
1. If you want to see your vulva and cervix, ask your practitioner to hand you
a mirror. It can be fun and informative!
2. If you are nervous during the exam, give your provider a few tips about the
best ways to help you relax. Do you want upto-the-minute details on what

he/she is doing? Perhaps you would prefer to be distracted by some small
talk? It is best for you, your provider, and your health if you are relaxed, so
speak up!
That’s it; all done! Now that wasn’t so bad—was it?
RAISING A DAUGHTER
When women finally learn about their vulvas and vaginas, they are often well
into adulthood. We envision a future in which more parents feel comfortable and
confident taking care of their young daughter’s genital health and raise them
with correct information as soon as they begin teaching them to speak. If you are
raising a daughter or are otherwise caring for a young girl, we hope that this
information will be helpful to you:
Although very rare, it is possible for a girl to be born without a vagina
or with a very small vagina. In many cases, a vagina can be surgically
created when she is older (genital surgeries are only very rarely
recommended for babies or young children, such as in cases where they
are medically necessary).
Her clitoris may appear unusually large. When a baby is first born, she
has estrogen from her mother’s blood supply. As estrogen is linked to a
range of vaginal and vulvar features, this means that she will likely
experience vaginal lubrication and discharge during the first few weeks
of life. Her labia majora and minora may also be noticeably plump.
After several weeks, when she no longer is impacted by her mother’s
estrogen, her mons and outer labia will likely shrink in size. This may
make her clitoris and inner labia look larger than before, but that is a
normal occurrence. Girls often “grow into” their genitals around the
time of puberty. However, if you have any questions about your
daughter’s genital size, ask her pediatrician.
Even a baby may experience vaginal bleeding. When a baby no longer
has her mother’s estrogen supply, her uterus may shed some of its lining
due to the drop in estrogen levels. As such, some female babies
experience small amounts of vaginal bleeding during their first few
weeks of life outside the womb.
Her labia may stick together. Without her mother’s estrogen supply, a
baby or toddler’s inner labia may stick together, a condition called

“labial adhesion.” In the United States, it happens to about 2 percent of
female babies and children up to the age of six.9 The inner labia may
stick together just a little or a lot, covering some or much of the vaginal
opening or urethra (which can be problematic in terms of having urine
pool there). If you have a daughter and notice this when changing her
diaper or helping her go to the bathroom, you should mention it to her
pediatrician. Sometimes no treatment is needed and the inner labia
separate on their own. Other times, an estrogen cream is prescribed, and
a girl’s parents or caretakers are asked to apply it to her labia, often for a
matter of weeks. The cream often helps the labia to separate. In rare
cases, if the cream is ineffective (as it is for approximately 20 to 50
percent of girls), a quick surgical procedure should permanently resolve
the problem.10–12 It is not usually an ongoing medical problem, but it is
something to speak with one’s pediatrician about.
She may touch herself. Young babies, both male and female, often touch
their genitals. Then again, they touch many of their body parts. This is
not unusual. Studies of parents and caregivers indicate that the vast
majority of young children touch their own genitals. Many children, as
we’ll discuss later, also play games that involve comparing their private
parts. This is also common and a normal part of exploration. Some
children touch their genitals with their fingers. Others stimulate their
genitals by rubbing their bodies against toys, bedding, pillows, stuffed
animals, or the floor. Many pediatricians and child psychologists
recommend that parents respond in a way that assures their child that
touching one’s genitals is okay and that their genitals are not dirty. For
example, a parent might say something like, “That’s okay to do, but
please do it somewhere private, such as in your bedroom or in the
bathroom.” Of course, this may be more appropriate for older children
(often aged four and up) who can understand the message.
Vaginal insertion. Some young girls insert objects into their vaginas for
reasons that are unclear. One mother, whose daughter was found to have
inserted part of a Bratz doll into her vagina, wondered if perhaps her
daughter had seen her insert a tampon and tried to imitate this action
with her toy.13 For other young girls, the vaginal insertion of objects
may be linked to sexual abuse. Other times, girls may have just found
their vagina one day, inserted a finger, and then wondered what else
could be placed in their “special hiding place.” For some, inserting toys
or objects into the vagina may be a form of self-stimulation. Mostly,

though, we just don’t know why some young girls do this, as research
has largely been focused on taking care of these girls’ health needs.
When you teach your daughter about her genitals, it is worth teaching
her how to care for them, including that her vagina is not a place to keep
things. We say this only half-jokingly, as it cannot be emphasized
enough that there are dangers associated with girls putting objects into
the vagina and leaving them there. Some girls who have had ongoing
fevers and/or abdominal pain were eventually brought to the emergency
room, only to find that they had inserted batteries into the vagina.14, 15
These have resulted in serious health emergencies, very careful removal
by skilled physicians, and (in some cases) hospitalization.
V-CRAFT: HOST YOUR OWN “DINNER PARTY”!
A vulvathemed party can be fun to host for no other reason than to
celebrate our down theres—and what better way to name it than your own
“Dinner Party” in honor of Judy Chicago’s famous vulvathemed art
installation (more on this later)? If you’re the kind of person who likes to
party with purpose, why not host a vulvathemed party as a fundraiser for
your local V-Day cast and crew’s production of The Vagina Monologues?
Or donate the proceeds to the National Vulvodynia Association? Or host in
recognition of International GYN Awareness Day (IGAD), celebrated on
September 10 or in recognition of Vulvar Health Awareness Month,
celebrated each March? Here are some ideas:
1. Make vulvathemed cupcakes by using frosting to draw vulvas or the
letter “V” on each cupcake (we recommend frosting some in pink,
others in beige or brown or black, and others in red or purple, etc).
2. Entertain yourselves by playing pin the clitoris on the vulva! Draw
your own poster-sized vulva, equipped with all its parts, and cheer
each other on as partygoers put the clitoris in its rightful place.
3. Make vulvathemed plates in advance, perhaps at your local paint-
your-own-pottery place. In our experience, we were not censored—
then again, the vulvas we’ve made on plates have been a bit Georgia
O’Keeffe-ish, in that they looked as much like flowers as they did
vulvas.
4. Give out hand mirrors as party favors along with information about
vulvar self-examination.

5. Color your vulvas! Set out crayons and pages from the Cunt Coloring
Book and get together and draw your own or your imaginary vulvas.
Use your imagination to make this a vulva-positive evening full of
good friends, food, and energy.
Give her the words. When you teach your daughter the names for her
body parts, try to teach her the words she will need to talk about and
think about her genital body parts. Just as she should know words for
her elbows, cheeks, chest, and legs, we feel that young girls should also
know the words vulva, vagina, and labia, among others. In her sex-
education work, Debby has given puberty talks to a number of girls and
their moms (as well as boys and their dads). In these conversations, she
has been able to teach girls the names of all their vulva parts, including
the clitoris, urethral opening, outer labia, and inner labia. The girls have
often been happy to learn that they have a body part that is just about
sensation and feeling good (that’s right: without giving them more detail
than they may be ready for, it is possible to teach even young girls about
the clitoris and its purpose related to pleasure). They’re also often very
curious to learn about periods in the years approaching puberty, and
having a good sense of the uterus, cervix, and vagina can help them to
have more clear conversations with their moms, aunts, sisters,
girlfriends, teachers, healthcare providers, or other adult caregivers.
If she itches, get her help. Because young girls lack estrogen before
puberty, they rarely have many vaginal problems, such as yeast
infections. However, that doesn’t mean that nothing will ever bother her
vagina. If a girl experiences ongoing vaginal itching, she may have a
skin disorder affecting her genitals called lichen sclerosus. It can affect
babies, children, or adults. Treatment (usually by a topical steroid
cream) can often relieve symptoms, such as itching. Unfortunately, some
healthcare providers are not familiar with this health condition and may
mistakenly wonder if the girl has been sexually abused (sometimes
genital symptoms are indeed a sign of sexual abuse). Itching can also be
caused by bath products, such as bubble baths, which should be limited
during childhood along with staying in a wet bathing suit or exercise
clothes too long or not wiping after urinating.
Raising children or otherwise caring for them—whether as a parent,

aunt, uncle, babysitter, or teacher—is important work. For more
information about books on how to talk to children and teenagers about
sexuality and genital-health issues, see the Resources section where we
also list books for children to read by themselves or together with a
parent or caregiver.
Get her GYN care. As girls become teenagers, it can be helpful to get
them started with gynecological care. The ACOG recommends that
sometime between the ages of thirteen and fifteen, young women can
benefit from having their first gynecological exam if they haven’t yet
had one. Depending on a young woman’s personal health needs, this
first visit may only include conversation about menstruation and
pubertal changes. The visit may simply help to get her comfortable with
her gynecologist and the idea of a future gynecological exam. Then
again, if she’s sexually active or experiences various symptoms, her
healthcare provider may recommend a pelvic exam. Current ACOG
recommendations don’t indicate Pap tests for young women until they
are at least twenty-one.
V-PROBLEMS YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT
Vulvas and vaginas can be affected by a number of health conditions; some of
these produce noticeable symptoms and others do not. Although we’ve
mentioned most of these conditions, we want to briefly highlight them here (for
more detailed information about vulvovaginal health and medical conditions, we
recommend checking out The V Book and, of course, speaking with your
healthcare provider).1
Although yeast, or candida albicans (the scientific name for a common type
of yeast), are normally found even in healthy vaginas, over-growth of yeast can
cause uncomfortable or even painful symptoms for women. As we mentioned
earlier, if you suspect you have a yeast infection, we recommend checking in
with a healthcare provider by telephone or in person for advice before treating
yourself with over-the-counter medications, which can sometimes cause more
harm than good.
Bacterial infections and imbalances of the vagina are common reasons why
women visit their healthcare providers. Most are easily treatable. However,
bacterial vaginosis (BV)—a condition in which the normal, healthy balance of
the vagina is disrupted and certain bacteria seem to overgrow—is one condition

that remains a challenge for many women, their partners, and their healthcare
providers. Although some women who have BV are easily treated and never
seem to experience a recurrence of their symptoms, other women have recurrent
episodes of BV. Common symptoms of BV include itching, pain, burning,
vaginal discharge, and genital odor (sometimes the odor is strongest after
intercourse). According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), BV is the most common vaginal infection among women who are of
childbearing age.16 Women who struggle with recurrent BV may be best helped
by meeting with a vulvovaginal specialist who focuses on infections like BV
(find one through issvd.org).
Genital warts are caused by certain strains of the human papillomavirus
(HPV). They are usually small and painless. Some healthcare providers
recommend a “wait and see” approach to genital warts, as they often do not
cause discomfort and frequently go away on their own. Other times, treatment
(which can include the use of a topical cream) is recommended. If you have been
diagnosed with genital warts, ask your healthcare provider for his or her
recommendation. As part of monthly vulvar self-examination, check on the
status of your warts: if they increase in number or size, bring this to the attention
of your healthcare provider. Don’t be afraid to ask your healthcare provider for
their thoughts on biopsying the warts to make sure they are indeed warts and not
something else. Also, Gardasil (an HPV vaccine) protects against two strains that
cause many cases of genital warts.
Genital herpes is caused by the herpes simplex virus and, like HPV, can be
passed on during oral sex, vaginal sex, or anal sex. Genital herpes lesions can be
very painful, perhaps particularly during the initial outbreak. Fortunately,
antiviral medications are available that can reduce the frequency and severity of
outbreaks.
Vulvodynia is a term that, according to the National Vulvodynia
Association, refers to “chronic vulvar pain without an identifiable cause.”
Women may experience pain that’s limited to the vulvar vestibule, which is the
area around the vaginal opening. This type has been called vulvar vestibulitis
syndrome or localized or provoked vulvodynia. A second type is called
generalized vulvodynia and refers to pain at other parts of the vulva, such as the
clitoris, labia, and/or vestibule. Women with vulvodynia may experience nearly
constant pain or sporadic pain. Other conditions such as allergies, STIs, and
genital skin disorders typically need to be ruled out before a diagnosis of
vulvodynia is given. Unfortunately, women with vulvodynia often see a number
of healthcare providers before receiving a diagnosis.

My experiences with vulvar vestibulitis have really influenced my feelings
towards my genitals. I could either choose to be ashamed about this and feel bad
about myself for not enjoying vaginal penetration, or I can accept that’s how my
genitals are and work with alternative forms of sexual expression while working
on exercises to help me relax my vestibule muscles (such as biofeedback).
—ALANA, 22, Indiana
There are also a number of skin disorders that can affect a woman’s genitals.
One of these is a condition called lichen sclerosus (LS), which can affect
women (and men) of all ages and can also affect nongenital skin. Women with
LS often have white areas of skin on their genitals and may experience genital
itching. With treatment (which often consists of topical creams), LS symptoms
can often be managed. If a woman does not receive treatment, her vulvar skin
may become more fragile and easily torn, and vaginal penetration and
intercourse may become uncomfortable or painful.
Although not a v-problem per se, being hypersensitive or allergic to semen
can certainly affect women’s vulvas and vaginas (as well as have other health
effects). If you experience genital irritation, burning, itching, or pain following
unprotected intercourse with a man, or other forms of contact with his semen, try
having sex with a condom the next time. If you don’t have similar reactions, you
might want to ask your healthcare provider about the possibility that you have a
seminal allergy or sensitivity. Although rare, some women have severe allergic
reactions to semen. Certainly, if you notice any health concerns during or after
sex with a partner (such as difficulty swallowing or breathing, or breaking out in
hives) seek emergency medical care. This is a relatively new area of research, so
semen allergies are not well understood. Some women appear to be allergic to
the semen of any man they have sex with; others seem to be allergic to the
semen of only a particular man. Still, other women who have never experienced
any reactions to men’s semen suddenly develop sensitivities or allergies
following a hormonal change, such as giving birth or going through menopause.
Finally, although rare, it is possible for women to develop cancer on their
genitals. Early signs of vulvar cancer (spelled “vulval cancer” in the United
Kingdom and Australia, among other countries) can include chronic itching as
well as lumps or bumps on the genitals. This is challenging, as many non-
cancerous conditions have similar symptoms. With early detection and
treatment, vulvar cancer has a high survival rate. Performing vulvar self-
examination can aid in the early detection of vulvar cancer and other conditions,
such as vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN, considered a pre-cancerous
condition of the vulva). Both vulvar cancer and VIN are linked to HPV. Cigarette

smoking also appears to increase the risk of vulvar cancer and VIN. Although
vulvar cancer and VIN used to be more often considered conditions of older
women, an increasing number of young women have been diagnosed with vulvar
cancer and VIN over the past decade.
INTERVIEW WITH KATH MAZZELLA, FOUNDER OF
THE GYNAECOLOGICAL AWARENESS INFORMATION
NETWORK
Can you tell us a bit about your background and how this work
became so important to you?
With a strong family history of cancer, I had an abnormal Pap smear at the
age of thirty-nine and eighteen months later, a lump appeared next to my
clitoris. Over two years, I consulted two general practitioners and two
gynaecologists who said it was common to have lumps in the vulva. I
requested for the lump to be removed, which when biopsied was indeed
cancer, and the removal of my clitoris, vulva, and lymph glands
immediately followed. I was completely unprepared for what I faced
personally and in society. The sadness was (is) so indescribable. Women in
general are so unsuspecting and uninformed. I felt I had died as a woman
and was now just an “it.” In general, I discovered there was a shroud of
secrecy and a willingness to suffer in silence with women. In my search for
answers, I found the word pudendum (Latin, meaning female genitalia; one
who should and ought to be ashamed; the shameful part of a woman). Then
I noticed women were being taught that the vulva was a vagina and still
most think this is so, keeping the pudendum mindset alive. Most viewed
the vulva as pornographic and not as an incredible part of our anatomy.
What does this say about women when we don’t call our genitalia the
correct terminology?
How did you form GAIN?
I met two other women who had radical vulvectomies, and being so
isolated, mostly from women in a world that did not speak about “down
there” or anything “gynae,” I placed an advertisement in a woman’s
magazine. The replies of the women who wanted to pour their hearts out
after years and years of suppression and suffering moved me, and I decided
I had to find a way to stop this suppression. I noticed the advice being

given was mostly from men—I saw a quote by a male gynaecologist
—“What women won’t talk about.” I gathered my mother, my sisters, and
my friends to help me work out how to form a support group for those too
anxious to speak up after enduring such devastation.
Which GAIN/IGAD-related accomplishments are you most proud of
and why?
1. After being treated like I was a crazy woman for speaking out as I did,
the global letters of support for my vision for an International GYN
Awareness Day is one of my greatest accomplishments.
2. Gaining Australian of the Year Professor Ian Frazer as GAIN Patron.
3. Giving voice to a woman who had her clitoris and vulva removed by a
deranged gynecologist—getting the media involved and seeing
legislation changed to offer more protection.
4. That I stood my own ground and didn’t take no for an answer, and the
empowerment I felt so that others can do the same.
5. Recipient of six awards, including the Order of Australia.
What do you wish more women knew about their vulval health?
I wish women could be more accepting that the vulva is a very important
part of the body where life begins and it is so very, very precious. The more
they understand about the vulva, the more empowering, for confidence lies
within this knowledge.
What can women do to help raise awareness in their own
communities?
As the vulva is still in the background of women’s health, women could
assist in their own communities by celebrating the International GYN
Awareness Day—September 10—annually and making it fun and
informative would give a good platform to raising a positive aspect to
vulval health. All they have to do is to draw together medical practitioners
and people from the community, invite a guest speaker to speak on a GYN-
related topic, and sit around the table together and talk about it.
Men need the support just as much as the women. By inviting people to
speak openly, we are allowing them the opportunity to receive the support
they need, and it empowers everyone. Also by breaking down those
barriers between medical professionals and their patients, a greater quality
of care and treatment can be gained which benefits everyone.

For more information about Kath and her very important work, please
check out Gynaecological Awareness Information Network (GAIN), Inc.
(www.gain.org.au and www.kathmazzella.com).
OPENING UP: VAGINAL DILATORS
Vaginal dilators are sometimes described as “medical dildos.” They often come
in sets of five or six with the smallest being about the size of an adult’s pinky
finger and the largest being longer and thicker than an average-sized penis.
Dilators may be used by women who have experienced vaginal narrowing or
pain as a result of side effects from cancer treatments (such as pelvic radiation).
They are also sometimes used as part of a larger treatment plan for women with
vaginismus, vulvodynia, or other vulvovaginal pain conditions. In addition,
some women who have very small vaginas—as is sometimes the case with
women who have a condition called androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS)—
find that using dilators can help them stretch their vaginas. Surgeons may also
suggest that their patients who have male-to-female sex-reassignment surgery
use dilators to help stretch their “neo-vagina” (the surgically created vagina).
Dilators can be purchased online or through some healthcare providers and
sex therapists. Some women use dilators in order to overcome a pain disorder
that keeps them from having sex with a partner. Others use a dilator to prevent
sexual-function problems or to treat sexual side effects. Still, these are not the
only reasons why dilator use can be helpful or important.
As mentioned, some cancer treatments can result in a woman’s vagina
narrowing substantially. Not only can this make sexual intercourse feel difficult,
if not impossible, but it can also make it very difficult for a healthcare provider
to properly examine a woman’s vagina and cervix during a GYN exam. This is
particularly important as healthcare providers will want to be able to properly
view and examine the cervix so that they can make sure that a woman does not
develop or have a recurrence of cervical cancer, among other issues. Dilator
therapy can help women maintain their vaginal patency (a fancy term that
basically means vaginal flexibility and tone, allowing it to open enough to be
viewed during exams).
How It Works

Dilators can be used in many different ways. Women who use them as part of a
treatment plan recommended by a healthcare provider or sex therapist should ask
their provider/therapist for specific recommendations. Generally speaking,
women are advised to begin with the smallest dilator and partially insert it into
their vagina, often with water-based lubricant applied to the dilator to ease
penetration. Women may move it in and out if they want, but often, they will just
leave it there for ten minutes or longer so that the vagina gets used to
accommodating an object of that size. As that size becomes more comfortable,
women may be advised to move to the next size and repeat the cycle until she
has gotten to the size that she, in consultation with her healthcare provider, has
decided she wants to use. For some women, the process of moving through the
dilator sizes takes weeks. For others, it takes months. Similarly, some women
insert the dilator while lying down and reading or watching television, while
other women make dilator use a part of masturbation or sex play with a partner.
There are many different ways that women experience dilator use. See the
Resources section for shops that may carry dilators.
YOUR HEALTHY HOOHA
Although there are many things that can go wrong with the vulva and vagina,
there are also many things that can go right. Every day, you have opportunities to
care for your genital parts—to wash them carefully, to wear clothes that let them
breathe, to choose partners and doctors that take care of them, and to love them
so much that you take the time to check them out every now and then just to
make sure they’re all right. This is the best that we can ask of ourselves. And if
something does go wrong, we hope that the information in this chapter helps you
figure out how to get the help and, if relevant, the treatment that you need.
Here’s to looking forward to a world of healthy vulvas and vaginas!
TEST YOUR VQ
1. Pantyliners are best used
a. every day
b. whenever vaginal discharge is present
c. only when a woman is menstruating
d. all of the above

2. Aside from yeast infections, vaginal itching may be caused by
a. ingredients in lubricants
b. bath products
c. wearing tight, restrictive clothing that traps moisture
d. all of the above
3. Current recommendations are for young women to have their first
gynecological exam
a. by age twelve
b. between the ages of thirteen and fifteen
c. at age eighteen
d. at age twenty-one
Answers
1. c
2. d
3. b

• 3 •
Vulvalicious
Vulvas and Vaginas in Bed
In spite of the significant efforts and good intentions of highly dedicated genital
admirers, the vulva and vagina remain a mystery for many—especially when it
comes to sex and pleasure. In some ways, this is not terribly shocking, given that
women’s bodies and sexual response are not fully understood even by scientists
and medical doctors. In other ways, it’s quite sad to not be able to unlock the
pleasures of parts we live with on a daily basis.
Unfortunately, a lack of knowledge about women’s bodies and sexuality can
pose challenges for people’s sexual lives. Women may feel frustrated if they
don’t know how they like to be touched on their genitals or where they liked to
be touched. They may feel guilty or embarrassed about masturbating, even
though most women masturbate.1 Also, many men and women who have sex
with women feel equally mystified about women’s bodies. They may not be sure
how to touch or lick their girlfriend or wife in order to please her sexually.
It’s really weird living with genitals I don’t like the look of in general. I like the
feeling of intercourse/masturbation, but when I am with a woman, I feel bad that
I don’t want to reciprocate anything. I’m also scared that after seeing me give
birth, my husband’s not going to want to go down there.
—LILLY, 23, California
In the first chapter, we took an introductory look at the parts of the vulva and
vagina. We learned, for example, that the clitoris is an incredibly nerve-rich part
of a woman’s body, packed with about eight thousand nerve endings in a pretty
small space. Yet, as fabulous as the clitoris’s potential role during sex may be,
it’s certainly not the only part of the vulva or vagina that’s relevant to sex or
sensual pleasure. Each and every part of women’s genitals has some level of
erotic potential or role to play in sexual play or sexual response.
In this chapter, we will provide you with information about the vulva,
vagina, and sex—including a few tips related to sex toys—so that you can feel
confident in and out of bed, whether you’re pleasuring yourself or showing your

partner what you find most enjoyable or erotic.
THE AGE OF CLIT-ARIUS
The clitoris is highly sensitive thanks to all the nerve endings inside of it, but
there’s more to it than nerves. The clitoris was first scientifically detailed in its
full size and glory in 1998,2 which means that the scientific study of the clitoris
is actually quite young.
I wish more women would think beyond the clitoris. We make jokes about men
who can’t find it or similar when, really, the whole area is so sensitive. We are
missing out if we just encourage our partners to go for the high point every time,
not to mention risking pain thinking the glans is all she wrote.
—JEAN, 32, New Mexico
Sure, we knew about the clitoris long before 1998, but—outside of
progressive feminist health books and medical circles—it was more commonly
thought of as a little nubby thing that was small and mostly on the outside of the
body. Following on the heels of earlier work, Dr. Helen O’Connell’s team2
published anatomical evidence that showed that the clitoris is much larger than
meets the eye and that it is made up of a variety of parts, like the crura (which
are two branches that extend backward into the body and swell during sexual
arousal) and the bulbs of the clitoris.2 This got people thinking about the clitoris
and about women’s sexuality more generally. The size and placement of the
clitoris means that the clitoris can be stimulated from various types of touch.
One can stimulate the glans clitoris (the part one can see from the outside) with
fingers or a vibrator during masturbation alone or with a partner. The glans
clitoris can also be stimulated with a tongue, lips, or fingers during cunnilingus,
as it often responds to light touch. Also, the inside parts of the clitoris can be
indirectly stimulated during vaginal penetration with fingers, a partner’s penis,
or a sex toy such as a dildo or vibrator. Because some clitoral parts are deeper
inside the body, firm pressure may be a better option for internal stimulation of
the clitoris.
I never liked any part of being a woman, especially my genitals, until I was 19
and in my second year of college. After seeing The Vagina Monologues and
breaking away from my home town and family’s negative view of women and
their sexuality, I began to look into these things for myself. I unfortunately did

not begin masturbating until I was 19, and finally had sexual experiences when I
was 20. Since I am only interested and attracted to women, I had a somewhat
good and helpful idea of what to do during my first sexual experiences since as a
woman, I know what women might generally like.
—DAWN, 20, Ohio
As such, vaginal penetration can deliver both vaginal stimulation as well as
stimulation of the inside branches of the clitoris (the crura)—and, if you
remember from chapter 1—it’s this indirect way of stimulating the clitoris
through the vaginal walls that may be what’s at the heart of the G-spot. After all,
when a woman becomes sexually excited and aroused, blood flows to her pelvic
area and genitals. The clitoris becomes enlarged during this process, which can
make the area more easily stimulated and more sensitive to stimulation.
The clitoris isn’t the only part to change in response to sexy times. More
recently, Dr. O’Connell—after further study of the clitoris and women’s genital
parts—came to another conclusion. She noted that the clitoris doesn’t seem to
function in a vacuum. Rather, she suggested we consider using the term “clitoral
complex” to describe the unique interplay among the clitoris, vagina, and
urethra.3 If one of these parts is moved, then the other parts move and are thus
stimulated as well, though not in a uniform way. Let’s take penilevaginal
intercourse as an example. When a man’s penis and a woman’s vagina are in
intercourse, her vagina expands to accommodate his penis. Thus, the vagina is
affected—it gets bigger and is stimulated on all of its walls. But the inside parts
of the clitoris are likely stimulated, too, and the urethra is pushed a bit upward,
as well. This is an important way of thinking about women’s bodies because it
takes us away from a simplistic model of sex, in which only the vagina is
stimulated during intercourse, to a more complex way of thinking about sex, in
which the vagina, urethra, and clitoris are all stimulated and impacted during
intercourse.
I wish that more women knew that for a lot of women, vaginal intercourse is
NOT the most satisfying sexual activity and therefore there is NOTHING wrong
with women who do not “get off” on vaginal intercourse. I think this would
increase the quality of women’s sex lives as they’re able to explore alternative
options (such as anal intercourse, oral sex, vibrators, etc.).
—ALANA, 22, Indiana
THE EXCITED VULVA AND VAGINA

During sexual excitement, increased blood flow to the genital area means
changes for the entire genital area. The labia minora (inner lips) are filled with
blood vessels. This means that during sexual arousal, when these blood vessels
engorge with blood, the labia may appear larger than usual. With increased blood
flow, they may also develop into a deeper shade of pink, red, or purple. Some
scientists believe that the mons pubis (the triangular area where hair often grows;
also called the “mons”) is a site where pheromones are released and that pubic
hair may trap pheromones that can be “read” by potential partners as a sort of
sexual signal.4 Still, it’s not known whether pubic hair truly serves this
pheromone-trapping function or not.
Some people also feel that sexual arousal and excitement change how the G-
spot area of the vagina feels, with some saying that the G-spot feels harder or
more pronounced when a woman is sexually excited. If you’re curious about
trying G-spot stimulation, you may want to try first arousing yourself through
fantasy, dirty talk, clitoral stimulation, kissing, watching porn, touching your
partner (and being touched), or whatever else turns you on. Once you feel
sufficiently excited or aroused, you may find it easier to locate your own G-spot.
If you’re interested in engaging in a little G-spot exploration with a female
partner, try building her arousal through breast play, kissing, or whatever gets
her motor humming for at least ten or fifteen minutes before attempting G-spot
stimulation. It may be that her G-spot is easier for you or her to find—or at the
very least that her G-spot exploration is more comfortable—once the vagina has
had more of a chance to lubricate during arousal.
TRANSUDATE: A BORING WORD WITH EXCITING
IMPLICATIONS
Speaking of vaginal lubrication, did you know that sexual excitement is one of
the leading triggers for vaginal wetness and natural lubrication? Here’s how: as
blood flows to the genitals during sexual excitement and arousal, something cool
happens. Transudate (basically, a clear part of the blood) passes through the
blood vessels and vaginal walls, where it lubricates the walls and thus gets the
name “vaginal lubrication” or, more casually, “vaginal wetness.”5 This is one
reason why sexual excitement and arousal are key to vaginal lubrication. If a
woman and her partner skip foreplay or don’t spend time on arousal and just
jump into sex, then there may not be enough time for blood to flow to the
genitals in any significant amount. If blood flow doesn’t increase to the genitals,

then the transudation process isn’t going to happen. And if transudation doesn’t
occur, then there’s not going to be much vaginal lubrication to make penetration
more slippery, comfortable, and pleasurable.
MEN TALK MUFFS
We asked men what they like about women’s genitals and whether there are
certain qualities that they prefer over others. Here’s what they had to say:
“Moisture, warmth.”—Andres, 31, Spain
“I have only ever been with my girlfriend, so I have no base of
comparison, but I can definitely say that I like to feel how soft and
warm her genitals are. I like how slick she gets when I excite her and
her heady scent. I like her hair, how it collects her pheromones and
the rush I get when I pleasure her orally. Sometimes I get a hair on
the back of my tongue but that’s nothing to harp about in comparison
to stroking her soft hair and her labia while we wind down after
making love.”—Chris, 22, Canada
“I like a little pubic hair verses a vagina being shaved bare.”—John, 36,
Georgia
“Taste, smell, less hair is better, lubricated.”—Austin, 31, Wisconsin
“Large clit, large lips (labia).”—Peter, 46, Illinois
“I think there is something inherently magical about seeing a woman’s
vagina glistening.”—Tyrese, 25, Virginia
“I like the soft feel, the folds to explore, the way they can get me
excited.”—Dan, 51, Massachusetts
“Everything! The variety of shapes and colours. The hair. I much prefer
genitals with hair. I also like exposed/protruding inner labia. I just
think female genitals are hugely interesting and attractive—much
more than people generally think.”—Henry, 60, UK
“Love the shape of them and how each one is different from the other.
Also like the metallic taste when it is soft (not too strong). Nice smell
and overall cleanliness is also something that I really like. I also like
the complexity of the vagina, especially when compared to the penis.
It is much more intricate and varied, and it is great to learn how every
woman gets pleasure from her vagina in a slightly (or completely

different) way.”—Victor, 30, Peru
“They look like a flower. Like an orchid. I like them best when they
have some exterior vulva. Like, after a woman has had a child, they
are sexier looking. I like them shaved so that nothing covers the view
of them. I like the scent and taste. I love it when some of the skin
pulls outward and pushes inward on each stroke. I like how they are
so close to the woman’s anus. One good lick can hit both spots. I love
it when they trickle liquid from a woman’s excitement. I love how the
inside of their pussy feels when I insert a finger or two. I love to find
and rub the G-spot while licking them.”—Tom, 45, New York
“The heat, the slickness, tightness, the structure of the labia appeals to
me, and the aesthetics and feel of the clitoris are also great. The parts
I feel are more important than the parts I see.”—Patrick, 18, Canada
“I prefer hairy, but not on the thighs. I prefer long inner lips. I prefer
darker color. I prefer large clitoris and hood.”—Ben, 70, Canada
“I like how dynamic they are, depending on the state of arousal. I like
how they feel when they are wet from excitement. I like how they
taste, look and smell. I love the clitoris.”—Mike, 44, Taiwan
“It is like a mystery cave over the years I have figured out spots that are
good hiding areas and can arouse a woman.”—Klaus, 32, New York
“Bald, smells nice. Tastes delicious. When it squirts, it’s nice.”—Mark,
31, Canada
“They look so beautiful, and they feel so beautiful. They have lovely
variations in texture, changing with increasing wetness. The way in
which the vulva opens up with increasing excitement is as welcoming
as anything humanly possible. The delicately shifting folds, the
kissable accessible bits, the lickable less-accessible bits, the let’s-feel-
how-deep-this-goes remoter bits—they’re all delectable. Pubic hair—
lovely stuff—good to stroke, to tease, to feel scratching my belly.”—
William, 48, UK
“I like the softness of the area in general, how easily it responds to a
touch. I like how it is always warm. I don’t have a preference for
pronounced or minimal inner or outer labial areas that I’m aware of. I
like the general shape and how the lines of the body seem to converge
there. I usually like the taste and smells associated with a woman’s
genitals.”—Joe, 29, Georgia
“The softness, when it is wet, the way it expands and conforms to the

shape of my penis.”—Don, 49, Missouri
“They are a beautiful, complex creation. They turn me on, particularly
my partner’s. I like that she has very little hair near her outer lips
(naturally) but hair on her mons. This makes oral sex very enjoyable
for me, but also gives her a ‘womanly’ look.”— Stephen, 28,
Minnesota
“They are a welcoming place of total love. They say, cum and stay a
while, as you are, completely and wholly accepted.”—Brian, 45,
Minnesota
“I like long, smooth, symmetrical lips—something voluptuous that
captures the gaze and imagination. I like large clits, but I don’t get as
excited over them as I do over lips and hoods. I like a vulva to be big,
lips unfurled, and deep in its cleft. And scent is very important—
some scents are profoundly more attractive than others. And wetness
—I like her to produce as much come as possible, whether watery or
thick. I love cunts :)”—Adam, 31, Maine
“Taste, smell, feel. I like pubic hair, so I prefer it when women do not
remove all of it.”—Gary, 23, Oklahoma
Mostly, I only enjoy clitoral stimulation because penetration is not that
enjoyable unless it’s a really big penis. I don’t seem to feel anything in the first
few inches, which I have always found strange.
—CLARA, 21, Ireland
That said, excitement isn’t the only key to unlocking the door to the castle of
vaginal lubrication. A woman’s estrogen levels are also important to vaginal
lubrication.5 Even young babies (who have high levels of estrogen thanks to
having just come from their mom’s body) experience vaginal lubrication.6 As
girls go through puberty and experience increases in estrogen, they again may
notice extra amounts of vaginal wetness even when they don’t feel aroused or
excited. This is, in part, why women may notice changes in their natural vaginal
wetness throughout their menstrual cycle, as estrogen levels change during their
cycle. When estrogen levels are low—such as when a woman is breastfeeding or
when she approaches menopause or is postmenopausal—she may experience
vaginal dryness. Women who take low-dose estrogen birth-control pills may also
notice less vaginal lubrication. The bottom line is that estrogen plays a big role
in vaginal lubrication and wetness. If you ever notice significant changes to your
experience of vaginal lubrication even though you’re feeling sexually aroused,

it’s worth asking your healthcare provider to look further into the issue, as your
hormones may be partially responsible.
LOW TIDE
Although people often associate vaginal dryness and lubrication difficulties with
menopause, women of all ages may experience related problems from time to
time. In our recent study, the National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior
(NSSHB), we found that nearly one-third of women ages eighteen to fifty-nine
experienced difficulties with lubrication during their most recent sexual
encounter.7 Specifically, vaginal lubrication difficulties during the most recent
sexual event were reported by
35.1 percent of women ages 18–24
29.1 percent of women ages 25–29
31.5 percent of women ages 30–39
36.1 percent of women ages 40–49
48.3 percent of women ages 50–59
65.2 percent of women ages 60–69
That’s a lot of women reporting difficulty with vaginal lubrication! And as you
can see, although vaginal-lubrication problems are more common among older
women, it’s not only a problem for older women. Even many young women—35
percent of college-aged women—experience such difficulties on occasion.
Because young women’s bodies should be able to produce natural vaginal
lubrication on their own, we’re guessing that many of these women’s sexual
experiences could be improved by relaxing and spending more time in foreplay
or exciting sex play prior to penetration.
I’ve experienced all kinds of orgasms, double orgasms, cascade orgasms that
lasted for minutes, all kinds. But I think my favorite happened when I was stuck
in rush hour traffic in a major midwest city. It was bumper to bumper, and was
late in the year, so it was dark already. I was bored, so I got a wild idea and got
my vibrator out of my bag (I was driving home from a weekend away). And I
masturbated while I inched along the expressway. When I came, I yelled so
loudly, I wondered if other people in other cars could hear me. That was part of
the thrill; I was in public, doing something forbidden, and it was fantastic.
—KELLY, 25, Illinois

Lubrication helps to decrease friction and, in turn, can help sex to feel more
comfortable and pleasurable. It can also reduce the risk of a woman experiencing
vaginal cuts and tears during vaginal penetration or intercourse. Vaginal dryness,
on the other hand, can make sex feel tight (in a not-very-pleasant way for most)
and may be uncomfortable for both partners. As such, it may be worth your time
to learn how to enhance your natural vaginal lubrication—or call in the
reinforcements (store-bought lube) when wanted or needed.
WAYS TO GET WET
What can you do to have more pleasurable, comfortable sex? Here are a few
ideas:
1. Spend more time in foreplay (or whatever it is that feels exciting to you
and your partner). This will allow your body to have sufficient time to
“warm up,” meaning more time for blood flow to increase to the genitals,
for transudation to happen, and consequently, for natural lubrication to kick
in. Aim for spending at least ten or fifteen minutes doing something that
feels arousing for you. It might be breast play, sex-toy play, oral sex,
massage, dirty talk, or reading or watching erotica together that turns you
on. When you and your body feel ready to romp (a feeling of vaginal
throbbing is often a good sign!), chances are that your vagina will be ready,
too, with sufficient wetness.
2. Create optimal conditions for sex. If you like to shower or take a bath
before sex, wait to have sex until you’ve relaxed for a while post-
shower/bath. Why? Because taking a bath or shower can dry the vagina—
just as it turns the rest of our skin into wrinkly “prunes” after a long bath or
swim. Taking time to let the vaginal tissues re-hydrate can help.
3. Talk to your healthcare provider. It may be that your vaginal-lubrication
difficulties are related to medications, aging, breastfeeding, or medical
conditions that you may be experiencing.
4. Choose wisely. If you and a sexual partner are using condoms, choose
lubricated condoms. They can help to decrease friction and make sex feel
more comfortable.
5. Ask your healthcare provider about a vaginal moisturizer. If you are
experiencing ongoing issues with vaginal dryness, then a vaginal
moisturizer might be right for you. Some moisturizers are enhanced with
hormones, and others do not contain hormones. If you have a history of

breast cancer or are otherwise concerned about hormones, let your
healthcare provider know. Vaginal moisturizers are often applied at night
before bed by using an applicator that delivers moisture to the vagina.
Using a vaginal moisturizer often leaves the vagina feeling moist for
several days.
6. Consider using a lubricant. Water-based lubricants and silicone-based
lubricants can be used with latex condoms. Steer clear of oil-based
lubricants if you’re using latex condoms, as they can cause latex condoms
to break. If you’re using silicone sex toys or birth control (such as a silicone
diaphragm or cervical cap), choose a water-based lubricant over a silicone-
based lubricant, as the latter may degrade or damage silicone products.
Research that we’ve conducted at the Center for Sexual Health Promotion
and published in 2011 in the Journal of Sexual Medicine shows that when
women used the water-based or silicone-based lubricants in our study, they
generally rated sex as more pleasurable and satisfying than when they
didn’t use lubricant.8 That said, other researchers have found that some
lubricants may slow down sperm and thus may not be good choices for
people trying to become pregnant. If you’re trying to conceive, ask your
healthcare provider for his or her opinion about PreSeed or other lubricants
that have been designed to be more friendly to sperm.
WHAT YOUR V-PARTS HAVE TO DO WITH THE BIG O
You’ve probably read about different “types” of orgasm. Perhaps you have
personally felt that your orgasms feel different depending on the type of
stimulation. Or maybe you’ve never had an orgasm, or have experienced them
only rarely, but you’ve heard about orgasm types and have been curious about
them. Often people divide orgasms into the categories of vaginal orgasm, clitoral
orgasm, uterine orgasm, and blended orgasm, though some people use different
terms or add on additional categories.9
Findings from scientific research suggest that the clitoris is likely involved in
most if not all of women’s orgasms—even if the glans clitoris itself isn’t directly
stimulated.9 Remember that “clitoral complex” and how vaginal penetration can
stimulate the clitoris, too? That just goes to show you how complicated this can
get very quickly. What may look like one type of orgasm (for example, an
orgasm from vaginal intercourse) may be an orgasm that involves the clitoris—
not just the vagina. So is that a vaginal orgasm, a clitoral orgasm, a G-spot
orgasm (if it was stimulation of that one part of the vagina that pushed a woman

over her orgasmic edge), or something else? Good question—we don’t know!
Scientists are still trying to understand the female orgasm including the many
ways that people try to categorize it.
What we do know is that there are various nerve pathways linked to orgasm.
In women, there are at least four nerve pathways that convey sensory
information from certain genital and reproductive organs to the brain. The
pudendal nerve conveys sensory information from the clitoris to the brain, so
this is the pathway for clitoral stimulation that may result in an orgasm. The
pelvic nerve conveys sensory information from a woman’s cervix and vagina up
to her brain, whereas the hypogastric nerve serves the uterus and cervix. More
recently identified as part of sexual response is the vagus nerve, which carries
sensory information from the cervix and uterus to the brain, bypassing the spinal
cord. (For more information about each of these nerve pathways, check out
Komisaruk, Beyer-Flores, and Whipple’s 2006 book, The Science of Orgasm.10)
I wish there was more information out there to counteract the porno view that
women can have orgasms—instantly—from vaginal penetration. It annoys me to
no end that some women think they’re ill if they can’t do this, and a lot of guys
seem to believe it to be the case as well.
—JEN, 23, Canada
V-CRAFT: PLEASURE PANTIES
Perhaps you’ve seen reflexology socks or gloves? They are socks or gloves
that are adorned with a “map” of the various pressure points and other
points of stimulation so that a person can wear them and either stimulate
their own feet or hands or have a friend or partner do it for them, according
to the map.
Years ago, when Debby was first acting in The Vagina Monologues and
getting into vulva and vagina art, she came up with an idea for DIY vulva
panties—also called “pleasure panties.” Here’s how you can make your
own.
What You Will Need
l pair of white or lightly colored cotton underwear (full or partial
bottom, not a thong or G-string)

permanent markers in different colors (the kind that you can use to
draw on clothing that won’t bleed or wash off in the laundry)
a friend or partner (helpful but not necessary)
What to Do
While wearing the underwear, ask your partner to help you outline the parts
of your vulva on the side of the panties facing him or her. Your
friend/partner might draw a circle or oval where your glans clitoris is. Your
inner and outer labia can also be traced. Remember, too, to include your
mons, vaginal entrance, perineum, and, if you so desire, your anal opening,
too (it can be a little tricky to get all the way there for some, but spreading
one’s legs can make for easier access).
You might want to ask your partner to use different colors for various
parts. You can then take your panties off and use the outline to write words
on the panties. You can be precise, if you want, and label the parts of your
vulva and anus (e.g., “clitoris,” etc.). Or, instead, you can write how you
like to be touched—for example, you can write, “Softly here,” or “More
attention here, please!” Alternatively, you can use design schemes, such as
a red “X” to mark the spot(s) where you like to be touched (or the parts to
avoid touching directly).
Some Tips
Some markers may ink through the panties, meaning you may end up
getting ink on your vulva. Some women don’t mind this. Others—
particularly those with sensitive skin—might wish to avoid this. To
reduce the likelihood of inking through to your genital parts, wear two
or three layers of underwear while you make your pleasure panties.
Although collaborating with a partner can make this easier, having a
friend or partner on hand is not necessary; you can make pleasure
panties by yourself. Wearing them and looking in a mirror at the same
time can be helpful.
Have fun! Be creative about what you want to map out. Perhaps you’d
like to map out the order of how you’d like to be touched, such as
writing a number one on the first place you’d like your partner to
touch you before proceeding to the part labeled two.
Making pleasure panties with a partner can be a great way to spruce
up your sex life. It creates space for you to talk about your vulva parts

and what kind of stimulation you do or don’t like. In turn, it creates
opportunities for your partner to learn about your preferences for
touching, licking, and various types of sex play. It can also be a very
sexy way to initiate foreplay and to add a playful—dare we say, crafty
—dimension to sex.
Knowing about these nerve pathways may help you to understand how
women can have a wide range of experiences related to orgasm. Vaginal
intercourse may end up stimulating the vagina as well as the clitoris and cervix,
which may mean that any of the previously listed nerve pathways—and maybe
others, too—carry information to the brain in a way that results in orgasm. While
not all women experience orgasm, the vast majority of women are capable of
experiencing orgasm, though it may take time, patience, and practice to do so.
Also, not all women want to experience orgasm (perhaps especially if they are
prone to orgasm-related migraines or other painful experiences) or care to, even
if they’ve had them before and enjoyed them. But for those who do want to
experience orgasm, this growing area of research may be helpful.
We don’t fully understand how orgasms occur—specifically, how a woman
goes from Point A (some type of sexual stimulation) to Point B (experiencing an
orgasm), although this is an area that scientists are trying to better understand.
What we do know is that, although the exact process of female orgasm is yet to
be discovered, we don’t have to wait for science to catch up in order to
experience the joys of sexual pleasure and/or orgasm.
PARTNERED PLAY TO PLEASURE YOUR POONANNY
For all of the heartbreak and loss of human lives associated with the ongoing
HIV epidemic, a positive change to come out of this period of the 1980s is that
healthcare providers, public-health professionals, and sex and health educators
began talking more openly about safer—but still pleasurable—sex. By
expanding conversations about “sex” to include more than just vaginal or anal
sex, sexual health professionals have hoped to introduce men and women to a
range of ways in which people can pleasure each other while reducing the risk of
spreading infections, such as HIV. Ultimately, safer-sex messages are about
saving lives.
Partnered masturbation is one of the safest forms of sex between two or more

people. It’s also a type of sex that many people are familiar with, if for no other
reason than that it’s similar to how a lot of teenagers and young adults start out
relating sexually with each other—touching each other’s genitals (through
fingering and/or hand jobs), sometimes to the point of orgasm and other times
not.
ACTIVITY: MASTER YOUR MASTURBATION
The vast majority of women masturbate—according to the NSSHB, more
than 80 percent of women in their twenties and thirties have masturbated1
—but just how women masturbate can vary not only from woman to
woman but also from day to day. How you enjoy masturbation tonight may
be very different than what you feel like doing next week or next year. As
with partnered sex, it sometimes pays to vary your masturbation rather than
stick with the same old, boring routine. Here are some ideas for setting the
scene for pleasurable masturbation:
Light candles to set a sensual mood for pleasure.
Watch your favorite porn, such as a DVD that you own or have rented,
or an online video.
Lay a soft blanket on the floor, perhaps in front of a fireplace (if you
have one) or candles, and lay down or kneel on the blanket for your
masturbation (for safety, keep a safe distance from the fireplace or
candles).
Put fresh sheets on the bed and christen it with a self-pleasuring
session.
Use a vibrator to massage other body parts, such as your back, thighs,
or breasts, before using it to stimulate your own genitals.
Position yourself in front of a mirror.
Take a waterproof sex toy into the bath or shower for a steamy
private-sex session.
You might also explore your inside parts (the vagina) as well as your
outside parts (the clitoris, labia, etc.). Watching in a mirror as you stimulate
your vulva and/or vagina can be sexy, too.
Know your own style for setting the mood, as well as for how you like
to stimulate yourself—but do try to be brave about exploring. Sometimes

particularly delicious pleasures lie in trying something new.
People can’t get pregnant from touching each other’s genitals— assuming, of
course, that a woman doesn’t let a male partner ejaculate on her hand and then
insert her semen-covered finger near or in her vaginal opening (or engage in
some other behavior that would result in semen getting close to or in the vagina).
It is also unlikely that people will pass STIs to one another through partnered
masturbation, which makes it a much safer form of sexual expression than
vaginal or anal sex.
There are many ways to enhance the quality of partnered masturbation. Here,
we’ll focus on ways to use various body parts— except for the lips, tongue,
mouth, or penis (which we’ll tackle soon enough)—to stimulate a woman’s
vagina and/or vulva during partnered play.
Ask for a tug. The mons pubis is a sensitive area for many women. In the
same way that many women enjoy having a partner run their fingers
through the hair on their heads, a woman may also enjoy having a partner
sensually run his/ her fingers through or gently tug on her pubic hair. This
can be a sensuous prelude or complement to partnered masturbation. For
some women, this can be an incredible way to build arousal during foreplay
or sex play.
Vulva massage. There are many ways to use one’s hand to pleasure a
woman’s vulva. Ask your partner to use the heel of the palm of his/her hand
to gently apply pressure to the mons or outer edges of the outer labia. You
might also find it pleasurable if your partner gently uses his/her fingers to
trace your vulva parts. If you enjoy vaginal penetration, then once sufficient
arousal and lubrication have been built up, you may be turned on by having
your partner insert a finger or two into your vagina while they gently
massage the front, back, and/or side walls of your vagina.
A sex partner who loves your vulva is a wonderful, validating experience—I wish
it for every woman.
—EMMA, 63, Oregon
Like to lap dance? Try using your vulva to stimulate your partner—and
simultaneously, yourself, too. Women may be stimulated by rubbing their
vulvas against a man’s erect penis or her female partner’s vulva—even if

their partner is wearing clothes. Even when both people are clothed, a
woman can sometimes feel the contours of her partner’s genitals via the
movements of her thighs and vulva. And even when heavy clothes don’t
allow for a woman to feel everything she wants to, the warmth between
both bodies, and the excitement of sitting on a partner’s lap, kissing one
another, or grinding, can be enormously arousing.
One finger at a time. Gentle pressure on the front wall of a woman’s
vagina has been shown to increase a woman’s threshold for pain (meaning
that there’s something about front-wall stimulation that may close a woman
off to low-levels of pain and open her to more possibilities of pleasure).
Wait until you are well lubricated, naturally or by way of a store-bought
lubricant on your genitals and/or your partner’s fingers. Ask your partner to
slip one finger inside your vagina, gently but firmly sliding against the front
wall. If or when you’re ready for more, gradually ask him or her to increase
stimulation one finger at a time.
Play footsies. The foot is an often-underutilized sex toy. While lying down,
legs apart, have your partner sit apart from you on a bed, or ask your
partner to stand above you. Then, have your partner gently use his/her toes
(make sure they’re clean with trimmed toenails first) to stimulate your inner
thigh and the parts of your vulva. Some women even like for their partner
to dip their big toe inside their vagina. Unconventional? Yes. But also,
perhaps, unexpectedly fun.
Take charge. While your partner is lying down, get on top cowgirl style,
then lean back, resting on your forearms and elbows. From this position,
you can use your vulva to stimulate your partner’s penis or strap-on, by
sliding your vulva up and down the shaft.
Dry hump each other. Also called outercourse, dry humping can be a
highly pleasurable way of stimulating each other’s genitals without hands,
tongues, or sex toys. All it takes is two people rolling around naked,
clothed, or wearing only underwear, and having an awful lot of fun rubbing
each other’s bodies, high-school style.
SMOOCHIE COOCHIE: THE YUMMY WORLD OF
CUNNILINGUS
Some women find it easier to experience orgasm while receiving cunnilingus
than during other types of sex, such as vaginal intercourse. Even for women who
don’t experience orgasm from cunnilingus, receiving oral sex can be a

pleasurable experience—a chance to sit or lie back and be attended to by one’s
partner. That’s not to say that cunnilingus is always a passive, sit-back-let-go-
and-be-worshipped experience. Cunnilingus can be an extremely active and
take-charge experience for the woman on the receiving end. Here are several
ways to tweak cunnilingus for maximum vulva and vagina pleasure:
The Ice Cream Trick. Dreaded by some, longed for by others, this
involves having your partner lick your vulva as if it were an ice cream cone:
think long, savory, delicious licks of wonder.
Lick a message to your partner. Perhaps you’ve played the massage game
in which one person uses his/her finger to “write” a message on a friend’s
back so that the friend has to guess what he/she is writing. This is similar,
except it involves the vulva. Some people make it into a game, with the
woman receiving cunnilingus having to guess the message. Other
cunnilinguists don’t tell their partners what they’re up to; they simply find
that spelling out a message like “I love you” or “You’re hot” or “Vulvas are
the best thing ever ever ever” (over and over again) can be an enjoyable
way to concentrate on what they’re doing.
Constant flicks. Some women—perhaps particularly those who enjoy the
consistent stimulation provided by vibrators— enjoy constant tongue
flicking as part of oral sex. If you don’t like it when your partner switches
things up down there, ask for constant flicks. Your partner may be able to
stay focused by breathing in and out, or counting flicks. Keep a glass of
water nearby for your partner if you desire or require lengthy stimulation
for reasons of pleasure or orgasm. And if he or she tires out at first? No
worries: it can take practice to build up endurance. The good news is that,
while your partner is learning to build up endurance, you can switch to
other types of sex play. Plus, practice can be a lot of fun—but everyone
deserves a break.
Be kissed ’round the clock. Starting at the twelve o’clock position (your
glans clitoris), ask your partner to sprinkle kisses at each “numbered”
position around your vulva as if it were a clock face. Or be kissed in a
random pattern. For some women, kissing alone—albeit often prolonged
kissing—is enough to drive them wild and/or bring them to orgasm.
To finger or not to finger? Women have different preferences when it
comes to fingers and oral sex. Some women find that it increases their
arousal when their partner fingers them during oral sex. This may be
especially true for those women who are responsive to vaginal-wall
stimulation, such as G-spot stimulation. For other women, the added finger

is a distraction that takes away from the general deliciousness of
cunnilingus. You might explore both options to see what you like. You
might also ask your partner what he or she thinks about the finger option.
Oh, and make sure to be specific about where you want a finger, as some
women would love to have a finger during cunnilingus but in their anus
(not the vagina).
Two fingers? There are also women who, at times, want a finger in both
orifices, a la double penetration. This can be done with a well-lubricated
thumb in one hole and a well-lubricated pointer finger in the other hole.
Wearing a condom over one’s finger is advisable for anal penetration,
especially if you think you might switch to more vaginal play later on. It’s
better to avoid getting fecal matter in or near the vagina. Another option is
to insert a condom-clad butt plug into the anus and/or a condom-clad dildo
in the vagina while your partner does the whole mouth/tongue thing on the
vulva.
Hold your partner’s head. It can feel very sexy for both partners to engage
not just in a little hand holding, but in head holding as well. This doesn’t
have to feel like a domination/ submission scene, unless that’s your thing.
Some people simply find it sexy to feel as though they are showing their
partner what they like—or insisting on what they want (or being shown, as
the case may be). Plus, it can be helpful to place a hand on your partner’s
head. When things are going well, you might press down more during
excitement, thus giving your partner feedback about what’s working so
nicely for you and your vulva.
Sit on your partner’s face. Whether you’re having oral sex in a bed, on a
sofa, on the floor or in the backseat of a car, there is often room to sit on
one’s partner’s face for oral sex. (In the backseat of a car, one can often
press against the roof or hold on to the dry cleaning handles on the roof for
more leverage.) If you ever get super into this type of sex, consider buying
or making your own queening chair (a special chair or stool with a hole cut
out in the middle so that a woman can sit on her lover’s face for long
periods of time while her partner performs oral sex on her; this is
sometimes used as part of power-play activities).
SAY NO TO BLOW!
You may have heard about the dangers of blowing air into the vagina

during oral sex, for fear of causing an air embolism (basically, air that
doesn’t belong in the cardiovascular system). Although it would be very
rare to cause an air embolism by blowing air into the vagina, it is a possible
outcome (and a dangerous possibility) and thus, we do not recommend this
practice. Instead, have your partner kiss, lick, or gently nibble your vulva
parts—he or she can save the blowing for gently blowing warm air on your
inner thighs, breasts, or neck.
I love looking at vaginas. Usually I look when I am about to go down on
someone and seeing it fills me with such anticipation. I think I was too scared of
my own sexuality to ever really look/compare with friends growing up.
—LINDSEY, 23, Washington
Side-by-side 69. Side-by-side oral sex is sometimes thought of as a yin-
yang, with both partners giving and receiving in perfect harmony. Oh, the
romance of it all! Of course, it can be awkward for some to try to
concentrate on giving when they’re having so much fun receiving, but a
challenge can be a good thing, too.
On-all-fours 69. In a more traditional 69, one partner lays down while the
other partner gets on top on all fours while they both give and receive. This
position can potentially provide a bit more “breathing room” than
facesitting and can be a nice set-up for mutual pleasure.
Make it extra tasty. Although vulvas are already often tasty on their own,
some people enjoy adding flavor to their vulva for the sake of variety or
pleasure. Though this is not recommended for women who are prone to
yeast infections or other forms of vaginal or vulvar irritation, other women
may enjoy spraying whipped cream, sprinkling body sugar, or slathering
flavored lube on their genital parts. The safest place for these tasty
playthings is farther away from the vaginal entrance, such as on the mons,
the outer labia, and the top of the clitoris, such as around the clitoral hood.
However, if you’re irritation-prone, you may want to skip this altogether.
As always, if you have questions about your personal health or what is or is
not safe for you, check in with your healthcare provider.
INTERCOURSE? OF COURSE!

Although there are numerous sex positions that can be found in books—or your
imagination—sometimes the most pleasurable positions involve slight
modifications of old stand-bys. Here are a few ways to transform common sex
positions into uncommon pleasure.
Mission: Pleasure Possible
When some people hear “missionary,” they think of boring, awkward, fumbling
sex. But missionary is perhaps the most common sex position for a reason—
namely, it can be an easy sex position in which a woman can relax and focus on
her pleasure and orgasm. Try these adaptations that may stimulate your vulva or
vagina in more targeted ways:
Tilt your hips upward during missionary, making your torso as flat as a
table. If your partner’s penis or strap-on points or aims upward, this can aid
in G-spot stimulation. Downward pointing or side-to-side play can also be
fun. Squeeze your pelvic-floor muscles (the muscles that help draw your
vagina in tighter) for more intense stimulation for yourself and your partner.
You might also find it easier to place a pillow under your hips so that you
can relax rather than holding your hips up with your own strength.
Become a CAT lady. CAT stands for coital alignment technique, another
modification of missionary. Have your male partner (or your female partner
if she’s wearing a strap-on) position their shoulders past yours, closer to
your ears or forehead. This should allow your partner’s pubic bone to more
easily rub against your vulva. This placement combined with the motions—
which are more about close grinding than in and out thrusting—has been
shown to make for easier orgasms for women.11–14
Breaking the Sex Ceiling: Woman on Top
Although woman on top is another popular sex position (at least in part due to
Sharon Stone’s sexy ways in the movie Basic Instinct), many women aren’t sure
what to do once they get on top. In fact, this is a question that Debby has been
asked hundreds of times in her work as a sex educator and columnist. Here are
four possibilities—though you should feel free to get creative all on your own.
Top a squat. Plant one foot flat on the ground on either side of your
partner’s torso, with your knees facing forward or out to the sides (if you
have knee problems or concerns about your knee health or safety, check in

with your healthcare provider before trying this or any other sex position
that works or puts stress on your knees). Using your hands on your
partner’s torso or on the bed for leverage, rise up to slide your vagina up the
shaft of your partner’s penis or strap-on and then back down. Squeeze your
pelvic-floor muscles for more intense stimulation.
Lean forward. Whether your feet or knees are planted on either side of
your partner, leaning forward allows you to get closer to your partner,
which can allow for kissing and building intimacy. If your partner’s penis or
strap-on points or bends upward, this can also intensify G-Spot stimulation
for you.
Lean back. No matter which way your partner points or bends, leaning
back can stimulate the front vaginal wall (G-spot area), as everything your
partner’s got down there will be pressing against that front vaginal wall.
Leaning back also makes it easier for your partner to stimulate your clitoris
with his/her fingers or a sex toy, such as a vibrator.
Grind it. Slowly move your hips forward and back, grinding your partner’s
genitals. Then try moving your hips in circles, thus providing ample
stimulation to your entire vulva.
Of course, you can also turn around and try these reverse cowgirl style, facing
your partner’s feet.
Back It On Up: Rear Entry
Sometimes people think of rear entry between a man and a woman as being
more about the man’s pleasure than the woman’s pleasure. After all, rear entry
can be a pretty deep-thrusting position, which can mean that a woman’s cervix
gets bumped up against (pleasurable for some women, but uncomfortable or
painful for others). Rear-entry sex positions (a.k.a. doggie style) have also gotten
a bad rap thanks to their frequent presence in, well, rap. Although sex as
portrayed in some rap and hip-hop songs has shaped many women’s sexuality in
positive ways, there are also a number of lyrics and videos that have made some
women feel more objectified than respected as an equal partner in pleasure—and
all too often, doggie style has been used as a part of those messages.
Nevertheless, rear entry can be a pleasurable part of many women’s sex lives.
Here are two ways to make it work in your favor:
All fours. This is traditional doggie style in which a woman is on all fours
while her partner thrusts while kneeling or standing behind her. You can

keep your back flat as a table for moderate-depth thrusting or lean down,
with your head in the pillows, for deeper thrusting (this poses a greater
likelihood of bumping against the cervix, so proceed with caution). If your
partner is particularly large or you find the depth of thrusting
uncomfortable, ask him to wear a two-holed masturbation sleeve on his
penis. Sleeves with a hole at each end can be slipped over his penis and
squished down to the base, giving him total coverage (the toy stimulates the
bottom half and you stimulate the top half ) while you don’t have to take as
much in at a time.
Lay down. Once you two are “inserted” in the all-fours position, you may
find it pleasurable to keep your bodies connected as you slink downward
and lay on the bed on your stomach. If your partner pops out, try raising
your hips upward for easier re-entry. By laying down for rear entry, you can
minimize the thrusting pace and depth, which can be easier on your vagina
and cervix. Women who enjoy G-spot or clitoral stimulation may also find
this pleasurable, as they can grind against their partner and their bed, while
face-down.
QUIRKY QUEEFS
If you’ve ever had a moment of passing air through your vagina in a kind
of noisy way—perhaps during sex—you may have wondered what the
heck happened. Vaginal queefs (also called varts, vaginal farts, vaginal
flatulence, and fanny farts) aren’t farts at all—meaning, they don’t involve
passing gas and thus aren’t smelly. Rather, a queef involves trapped air
passing out of the vagina. Some women experience queefs during exercise,
such as sit-ups. More often, they’re heard during sex. Queefs are very
common—especially in conjunction with vigorous thrusting sex positions
that move air in and out of the vagina—and nothing to be embarrassed
about. What are the rules of eti-queefe-tte? There really are none. We
recommend that you just laugh and move on.
ANOTHER V WORTH CELEBRATING: VIBRATORS!
Many women are curious about vibrators. In fact, according to research that our

team published in 2009, 53 percent of women and nearly half of men have used
a vibrator. Most men who had used a vibrator had done so with a partner, though
nearly one out of five had tried vibrator play alone.15 Here’s your opportunity for
a crash course on vibrators for vivacious vaginal and vulvar play (how’s that for
a bunch of Vs?), including how to choose vibrators and other sex toys and how
to put them to good, and possibly orgasmic, use.
In her work as a sex educator and columnist, Debby is often asked how to
choose a vibrator that’s good for beginners. While there is no one vibrator that
will be right for everyone, here are a few things to keep in mind. A woman who
is new to vibrators and other sex toys might be best served to choose one that:
Delivers the kind of stimulation she knows that she enjoys. For example,
women who prefer G-spot stimulation might want to choose a vibrator that
can be inserted into the vagina for G-spot play.
Has variable speeds. After all, if you’ve never used a vibrator before, the
only way to know if you like light stimulation or very intense stimulation is
to choose one that has multiple speeds, preferably one with a multi-speed
dial rather than a toy with pre-set buttons that delivers certain intensities.
That way, you can have more control over the degree of stimulation you
want to try.
Is easy to clean. This means that the toy should have few crevices and
preferably come with cleaning instructions or information from a
knowledgeable sales clerk at a sex boutique, in-home sex-toy party, or
through information at a reputable web site (see Resources).
Is affordable. Vibrator play should be pleasurable. If you’ve spent more
than you can afford, you may be less likely to relax, let go, and enjoy the
experience. Until you know what kind of vibrator you really like, stick with
a less costly model that is well within your budget.
Is safe. Try to choose a toy made of non-toxic, non-porous materials, such
as glass or medical-grade silicone. Though silicone toys can be more
expensive than Jelly toys, they tend to be safer and easier to clean and are
often available at affordable price points (as are many glass vibrators and
non-vibrating dildos).
If you have one of the following sex toys (some of which are vibrators,
though not all are), consider these tips on pleasurable vulva and vagina play.
Vaginal vibrators may be long, smooth, and almost cylindrical, or they
may be shaped like a penis (some even have features that look like veins in

the shaft and a scrotum). Vaginal vibrators are particularly good choices for
women who enjoy vaginal stimulation and/or G-spot stimulation. You may
want to choose a vaginal vibrator with a tapered end, as all too often the
head of the vibrator is too large for comfortable insertion—even with
exciting build-up and lubricant.
Non-vibrating dildos are basically like vaginal vibrators but without the
vibration. They too may resemble a penis (or not). More and more often,
dildos are being made with non-toxic materials, such as glass or hardwood.
Again, you’ll want to choose a shaft that can comfortably fit inside your
vagina. One variation on dildos is the double dildo, which is well suited for
sex play between two women. If you’re shopping for a dildo to use in a
harness, you’ll want to make sure that it can fit inside the harness in a stable
manner so that it doesn’t move around too much during sex play. Some
harnesses come with dildos; if yours doesn’t, you may find it helpful to ask
a knowledgeable store clerk if she recommends a certain dildo to go with
your harness type.
G-spot toys may be vibrating or non-vibrating. The chief difference is that
they are curved for easier stimulation of the front vaginal wall.
Clitoral vibrators are some of the most commonly used types of sex toys.
Although many women enjoy vaginal penetration, our research suggests
that more women use vibrators to stimulate their clitoris than the vagina.
Popular clitoral models include the silver bullet and egg varieties, which
can be found at most adult bookstores, sex boutiques, sex-toy web sites, and
in-home sex-toy party companies. Clitoral-focused vibrators have an
advantage in that they tend to be small and thus easier to use during vaginal
intercourse with a partner, as they can slip easily in between partners’
bodies.
Double-duty vibrators are sometimes called “dual action vibrators.” These
models usually provide possibilities to stimulate the clitoris and vagina at
the same time. The Rabbit is one of the more famous double-duty vibrators
thanks to an appearance on Sex and the City. Look for a model that allows
you to operate each part independently. That way, you can turn the clitoral
vibrator on while leaving the vaginal vibrator off or vice versa.
Triple-duty vibrators are sometimes more difficult to find in stores. They
offer clitoral, vaginal, and anal stimulation.
Vaginal balls (also called Ben Wa balls) don’t vibrate, but they’re an
interesting sexual-enhancement aid in that they can be used for pleasure or
for vaginal health (see chapter 2 for more information on Kegel exercises).
Some women insert vaginal balls into their vagina and squeeze their pelvic-

floor muscles to stimulate themselves as part of masturbation. Ben Wa balls
and Smart Balls are among the types of vaginal balls that are widely
available.
Vibrating c-rings can be worn around a man’s penis. The ring puts slight
constrictive pressure on a man’s penis and may feel pleasurable. Along one
part of the ring, there is sometimes a small, bullet-like vibrator that, if worn
on top of the shaft during face-to-face sex (such as missionary), may be
well positioned to stimulate a woman’s clitoris. Note: a c-ring (also called a
cock ring or penis ring) is generally not recommended for use for longer
than twenty minutes at a time. It should also be removed if a man finds it
uncomfortable or if he’s had experiences with penile bruising or pain from
wearing such rings.
TEST YOUR VQ
1. The clitoral complex is composed of all of the following EXCEPT the
a. vagina
b. urethra
c. labia
d. clitoris
2. A woman may experience orgasm as a result of sensory information
from which of the following nerves:
a. pudendal nerve
b. pelvic nerve
c. hypogastric nerve
d. vagus nerve
e. all of the above
3. According to data from the National Survey of Sexual Health and
Behavior (NSSHB), approximately how many women experienced
difficulty with lubrication during their most recent experience having
sex?
a. 5 percent
b. 10 percent
c. 30 percent
d. 50 percent

Answers
1. c
2. e
3. c

• 4 •
How Do I Look?
How We Come to Think and Feel the Way
We Do about Our Vulvas
I’LL SHOW YOU MINE IF YOU SHOW ME YOURS
As a young child, did you ever play “doctor”? Or games like “I’ll show you
mine if you show me yours”? If so, you’re not alone. A number of research
studies—including a study that Debby worked on years ago when she first began
working at The Kinsey Institute— have found that young children (both girls
and boys) play games like this.1 It’s a common way that girls and boys learn
about their bodies and explore the world around them.
A particularly interesting study on this topic was conducted in Germany by
Dr. Bettine Schuhrke.2 She studied children at age two and again at age six to
understand how they came to learn about their genitals. Specifically, she asked
one parent of each child in the study (typically she asked the mother) to answer
questions about the various ways that their child had indicated an interest in their
own or another’s genitals. She found that, at the age of two, over 90 percent of
the children had behaved in a way that indicated an interest in another person’s
genitals (e.g., the genitals of the child’s mother, father, brother, sister, etc.). In
her research article, Dr. Schuhrke provided an example of a toddler who noticed
her father’s penis as he was changing one day. The toddler asked to touch it and
her father allowed her to. The toddler continued to ask every day for about a
week and a half before she lost interest in her father’s penis. Although this is an
example of a girl learning about male genitals, the young girls in the study were
equally as interested in learning about the vulva.
Another interesting finding is that children in this study typically only began
to explore and ask questions about other people’s genitals after they had already
explored their own. Why is this important? First of all, if you have or care for
children now or in the future, we want you to feel prepared for some very
common situations of general exploration. There’s no reason to feel alarmed if,

for instance, your child points to your genitals or asks questions about your
genitals while you’re going to the bathroom, taking a shower, or changing
clothes. Second, and more importantly, we want to reassure you that this is
totally and completely 100 percent normal. Genital curiosity begins at a stage
before most children are even able to contemplate the complications of playing
doctor or house. And if children are exposed to family members of another sex,
then they often want to know why their private parts look different from their
own. All of this is a normal part of how young humans learn about bodies.
Cunt-parisons
Given how common it is for children to explore their own genitals and those of
other children, you might wonder what happens to this genital curiosity as
children get older. Some children don’t do much exploring for years. They may
be satisfied with having learned about the differences between boys’ bodies and
girls’ bodies, or they may have been scolded for touching their own genitals or
those of a friend and feel scared or embarrassed to touch themselves or ask to
see another child’s body again. Other children continue their exploration. As
children become more “sex-segregated”—meaning that girls tend to play mostly
with other girls and boys tend to play mostly with other boys—some of this
genital curiosity turns into genital comparison. Women in our research studies
have talked about comparing their vulvas, and specifically their labia, with their
friends. Also, in her book Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang, comedian and author
Chelsea Handler wrote about learning to masturbate at a sleepover at a childhood
friend’s home.3 Like teenagers and adults, children compare bodies and genitals
both because they are curious and also because they want to know if they are
“normal.”
As a professional dancer early on in my career (I was perhaps 20), I was in a
show where everyone was super comfortable and we were always naked in our
dressing room. I remember some of my friends comparing labia one day and for
me, I had never stared so closely or had such an up close look at a vagina other
than mine. I found it fascinating. I loved seeing how different they all were. I
haven’t had much opportunity since then (aside from porn) as my partners have
all been men.
—KATE, 28, Canada
For many other body parts, the “am I normal?” question is an easy one to
answer. If we want to know whether our ears are large or small, all we have to do

is look around at other people’s ears. After all, ears are everywhere and easily
seen. The same is true for noses, butts, and even—to some extent—breasts
(though it’s not always so easy to tell what’s real or not due to padded/enhanced
bras and breast implants). From these comparisons, we can usually identify
where we fit along the spectrum of height, weight, breast size, nose size, ear
size, and so on. We may not be thrilled with what we notice, but at least people
have a sense of where they belong and the knowledge that others are like them.
Vulvas are an entirely different story. How are girls or women supposed to
know what other vulvas look like? Vulvas are not noses or even breasts. Even in
leggings or bathing suits it can be tricky to see any genital detail. When we’ve
asked this question to groups of men, they often are quick to suggest that there
are plenty of opportunities for women to compare and contrast genitals,
frequently citing the locker room as a good place to get a sense of what other
women’s genitals look like. Those of us who spend time at the gym know that’s
not the case, though. First, it feels creepy and inappropriate to stare at other
women’s genitals when uninvited. Second, few women parade around the gym
completely nude. In our gym experiences, women seem to spend only a short
amount of time naked before putting their clothes back on. And third, even when
women are nude, there’s rarely much that one can see. Pubic hair, for those who
keep it, conceals some parts of the vulva. Also, unless a woman parts her legs,
there’s not often a lot to see. Vulva parts are naturally kind of “hidden” between
a woman’s legs.
The first real one I saw was my sister’s—when she needed me to help her apply
some medication. I was surprised, and I think pleased, that hers and mine looked
so similar.
—MAGGIE, 61, California
If women aren’t able to get a sense of what other women’s vulvas look like
from being in locker rooms or other public spaces, then what opportunities do
women have to learn what’s common or not when it comes to vulvas? Friends?
Perhaps. Some women may compare genitals with friends. Lovers? Yes, but this
is only true if a woman has a sexual partner who also has a vulva. Even for the
minority of women who do have female sexual partners, they may only have a
limited number of female partners, thus giving them a limited view of the
diverse range of vulvas in the world.
So, how are women supposed to know which genitals look “normal”? For all
women, the story is likely a little different. We have both found that the vulva
pictures that we show in classes or presentations are sometimes the first images

of vulvas that women have ever seen (including their own). Other women have
seen the vulvas of friends, lovers, or family members. Yet, those women who are
curious about the appearance of women’s genitals who don’t have access to
other women’s genitals may seek out the information from a variety of other
sources.
WHEREFORE ART THOU, LABIA?
If you were curious about the appearance of women’s genitals, where would be
the best place to look? We are not sure where you should look, but we certainly
know where you should not look. Psychologist Ros Bramwell4 at the University
of Liverpool investigated a variety of “glossy” women’s magazines in search of
pictures with a visible pubic area. These magazines were not the kind that you
would have to request from behind a counter or extract from a protective clear
plastic cover with “warning signs” for explicit material. These magazines were
the kind that you might leaf through while standing in line at the checkout
counter at your local grocery store—in other words, mainstream women’s
lifestyle and fashion magazines.
In these magazines, Bramwell4 and a research assistant extracted all pictures
of women with a visible pubic area including pictures of models in bathing suits,
underwear, tight-fitting clothing, and, of course, nude. From 240 pictures that fit
these criteria, they analyzed the 49 pictures that did not require a magnifying
glass to view the up-close details. From those pictures, they eliminated all
pictures that obscured the model’s pubic area with shading, bulky clothing,
crossed legs, and so on. In this final set of pictures, they looked closely at the
model’s pubic area for bumps, humps, or other lady lumps. They reviewed many
magazines and used a rigorous scientific method. Even without opening a
magazine, we bet that you can guess what they found. If you guessed “nothing,”
you would be correct. They didn’t notice any protruding labia. They found a
surprising number of pictures (six pictures, or 14 percent of all pictures with a
visible pubic area) that showed an “extrusion or indentation.” However, their
description of these pictures was “of tight clothing being drawn up between the
labia majora,”4 which sounds like a formal description of camel-toe to us. We
were not surprised by the lack of definable genitalia in these magazines. Sure,
European magazines tend to be a bit more relaxed about nudity, but they were
still mainstream magazines where airbrushing and other digital editing of photos
are the norm and genital (or any) bumps/lumps are quickly wiped away.

PAPER MACHE PANTY PARTY
Panty party: sounds like something that would spontaneously break out
during an all-girl sleepover following a really rambunctious pillow fight.
Not quite, but it is designed to be a female bonding experience. Plus, the
original French phrase, papier mâché (say “mah-shay”), means “chewed
paper,” which we like because, if you think of the vagina dentata myth (the
idea that vaginas have teeth), it’s kind of an interesting coincidence, yes? In
English, it’s written as “paper mache.”
What You Need
One pair of panties per person. They can be fierce, hideous, or lovely.
They can be thongs or high-waisted bloomers. There are no rules on
the types of panties you can use. Genitals come in all shapes and sizes
and so should the range of panties!
Newspapers, magazines, or printed pictures/words (try to use old
paper to recycle). Newspapers work best, but magazines can work
with enough patience.
water
flour or glue (the regular white sticky stuff)
mixing bowl
mixer (optional)
balloons
hairdryer (optional)
paint
decorations (Be Creative! We love sequins, feathers, and rhinestones.)
clothesline and pins (optional)
Directions
1. Get your group together. This is a great activity for a group of ladies,
but there is no harm in involving the fellas. Consider a panty party in
lieu of your next couple’s game night. The point of the party is to get a
conversation and celebration started. So decide on a group that will
help make that happen. You can provide the panties and decorations if
you are concerned about over-burdening your guests. However, the
party is designed to celebrate diversity, and there is no better way to

do that than by asking your guests to bring the items that represent
their individuality!
2. Begin the party by asking everyone to tear off adjectives, words, or
images that express how they feel or would like to feel about their
genitals. The strips should be about one inch by one inch. As you all
tear, discuss what words/images you are choosing and why. If you
want a themed paper-mache panty, consider printing a variety of
different words or vulva images. If you want to save your guests time,
you can also consider doing this beforehand.
3. Time for everyone to get their panties in a bunch! That’s right;
everyone sets up panty workstations. This is where the balloons come
in (and you thought they were just for celebration). Blow up the
balloon a little bit to give it some initial shape. Now stick it inside the
panty and continue to blow it up until it gives the panty a full shape.
The balloons are going to hold the panties in place while you paper
mache.
4. Mix one part water to two parts glue, if you decided to use glue, or
one part flour with two parts water, if you are using flour. If you are
using flour, mix it together until it is smooth and not bumpy. It can get
messy, so you may want to make a few different mixtures to reduce
the amount of dripping.
5. Let the fun begin! Dip the pieces of paper into the mixture, making
sure all sides are completely covered. Pull off excess mixture by
running the paper through your fingers. Stick the paper pieces onto the
panties, curling them underneath the edges to follow the shape of the
panty. Continue until the panties have one layer of paper.
6. Wait for the first layer to dry. You can expedite this process by using a
hairdryer. Complete at least two more layers to make sure that it
maintains its shape. Always make sure the layer is completely dry
before adding another one.
7. Once the final product is dry, it is time to decorate! Have some
negative words or pictures on the panties? It is your time to cover
them up with paint. Choose colors that represent how you feel about
your genitals. Snazz them up by decorating with buttons, sequins, or
feathers. Get creative!
8. Have an organization or institution that you think would benefit from
a vulva-awareness art project? If so, hang the finished projects on a
clothesline to remind everyone that their vulva is beautiful and unique.

I wish there was more education on the variations of colour, sizes, symmetry etc.
so women don’t feel like they’re abnormal. Where I come from it’s illegal to show
unedited pictures of vulvas in magazines. It’s stupid and the reason why most of
the vulvas I saw were cartoons/drawings.
—KARA, 20, Tonga
It was disappointing to us that there were no depictions of defined genitalia
in mainstream “glossy” magazines, but it was not entirely surprising; it can be
tricky to see genital definition through women’s clothing. We had to wonder,
what about pictures of women without clothing? How are those women’s
genitals portrayed?
The Playboy Perspective
While in graduate school, Vanessa and two colleagues (Sarah Calabrese and
Brandi Rima) decided that a content analysis of sexually explicit materials was
in order.5 The question was, where to begin? Although sexually explicit
materials have probably been around since the beginning of mankind, stone
carvings always left much to the imagination. Even paintings were simply a
rendition of the artist’s view of the woman. Then, there was Hugh. Hugh Hefner
mainstreamed nude images of women in 1953 with the introduction of Playboy,
which boasted a wonderfully voluptuous, debatably size-12 Marilyn Monroe on
the first cover.6–9
Since that original cover with Marilyn Monroe, a lot has changed. Poodle
skirts went out of style, bras were burned, and leg warmers became all the rage.
Just as there have been women’s clothing trends that have come and gone, there
have also been changes in women’s bodies (or at least the ways in which
women’s bodies have been portrayed) underneath all that clothing.
Consequently, Vanessa and her colleagues set out to conduct an empirical
investigation of these trends using rigorous and scientific methods. They
gathered every centerfold picture (from 1953 to the most recent issue at the time
in 2007) and set about looking for trends in women’s body size and shape over
time. Because they all came into the project with theories about how the models
would change over time, an objective way to understand the ways that models’
bodies changed over time (or did not) needed to be developed. In order to do
this, they decided that they couldn’t be the ones who evaluated the centerfold
models and found a few open-minded students who were interested in helping

with the project. Next, the research assistants were trained on what to look for.
The first part was easy, as the models’ body measurements (breast, waist, and
hip size, along with height and weight) are listed next to each one of the pictures.
If you are reading this and yelling, “Girl, if I was asked to list my measurements
in that magazine there is NO WAY that I would report my accurate
measurements!” then you are in good company. (Vanessa has tried to give herself
a few inches of height on her driver’s license every renewal year without any
success.) Needless to say, we thought the same thing. So, how do we know the
measurements listed are accurate, then? We don’t, and in fact, we would be
surprised if they were. The research team made peace with this because the
important thing wasn’t whether the model from January 1982 had larger breasts
or a thinner waist than the model of May 1968. Women’s average breast size
probably changes very little from decade to decade, so if the model said her
breasts were a little bigger one year and a little smaller during the next few
years, that was more interesting because it demonstrated a trend in cultural ideals
of beauty. In other words, if women were fudging their measurements, we were
interested in whether they were making the measurements bigger or smaller each
year.
Next, the team had to decide on how to evaluate changes in women’s
genitals. Unlike body-size measurements, there were no details listed about the
models’ pubic hair length or labia size. The team had to ask themselves how
much pubic hair could be missing before they considered the model to be
“shaved” (waxed, electrolysized, etc.)? What would be considered “longer”
inner labia, and what should be considered “shorter” inner labia? These were not
easy questions to answer and required Vanessa and her research team to spend
many long and tedious (but joyful) evenings debating these philosophical
questions. They would come up with a set of criteria, and then two of them
would evaluate a set of pictures. The next day they would come together and talk
through how everyone had scored each picture. They did this again . . . and again
. . . and again until finally, they were in almost 100 percent agreement. A few
gray hairs later, they were finally ready to give the categories to the research
assistants who would separately code the models’ pubic hair and genital
appearance in an objective manner. As one final safeguard, the centerfold images
were shuffled so that the research assistants wouldn’t know which models
belonged to which years.
What did Vanessa and her team find? In the 1950s and early 1960s, they saw
models with curvaceous frames, demure poses, big updos, large round breasts,
and concealed genitals (most would turn their back or cross their legs, making

the genitals difficult or impossible to see). The late 1960s and 1970s brought a
sexual revolution along with a more natural-looking model characterized by
straight hair and a curly bush down below, sometimes referred to as a “fur
bikini” because of the ability of natural pubic hair to hide genital details such as
the labia. The models of the 1980s got a little taller (about half an inch) and
thinner (about 2.5 pounds) than those in earlier years. However, little changed
south of the border. Over 95 percent of the models in the magazine in the 1970s
and 1980s displayed seemingly natural pubic hair (e.g., pubic hair that had not
been removed). That said, likely due to advancements in plastic surgery in the
1980s and 1990s, the average model’s breasts were about an inch larger than a
decade earlier. As the models’ breasts grew, their pubic hair began to disappear.
Over a third of the models in the 1990s appear to have modified their pubic hair
(although few removed it completely). If that seems like a lot, then get this: that
number more than doubled during the twenty-first century, when less than 10
percent of the women wore their pubic hair au natural. The most popular style
was to remove the hair partially (over two-thirds of the women), but a new
“style” also began making an appearance: approximately a quarter of the women
were bare down there.

Going Bare
Do you ever wonder what your head would look like if you shaved off all your
hair? Some women do, especially when they are facing treatments (such as
chemotherapy) that result in hair loss. But most of the time, women probably
don’t spend too much time thinking about what their scalp would look like
without hair. After all, unless you’ve experienced hair loss for medical reasons
or are among the minority of women who choose to shave it all off, the scalp is
rarely seen, except perhaps by one’s hair stylist or an attentive lover who brushes
one’s hair or massages one’s head.
However, what if Sinead O’Connor had another hit and head-shaving
became all the rage? Would you then wonder whether you had an “attractive”
head? Would you wonder what characteristics distinguish between an attractive
and unattractive head? We wonder if these kinds of discussions came up
regarding vulvas when pubic hair started disappearing and vulvas became more
visible than ever before. And if these discussions did come up, did someone
decide that they weren’t going to show long inner labia anymore, now that there
was no pubic hair to hide the vulva parts? Or is there another reason why inner
labia are largely absent, or minimized, in some mainstream men’s magazines
such as Playboy?
Unfortunately, we don’t know the answers to these questions. What we do
know is that inner labia were only visible in a small handful of the images that
Vanessa’s research team examined. Also, not a single image showed inner labia
that protruded beyond the outer labia or that were a color other than pink.
These results were surprising to Vanessa and her team. They went in
expecting that there wouldn’t be a lot of inner labia shown protruding—but
none? How could that be? After all, the world is full of women with long,
beautiful labia (and the men and women in another one of our research studies
sometimes cited a preference for long labia).
I’m tired of the societal/media/porn industry pressure on women to have
“perfect” genitals. It needs to stop! I think that it’s sick that women are going
under the knife to alter themselves. We need to stop the hate!
—MARY, 35, Washington, DC
Not wanting to jump to any conclusions, the research team wondered
whether this was perhaps just a reflection of the centerfold models. Would the
other models in the magazine look any different? In a follow-up study, they
examined each picture from the most recent year of Playboy. They categorized

every picture of a woman who wasn’t wearing underwear. Again, they found that
over 90 percent of the pictures did not show any inner labia. Also, there were
only two images of protruding labia and one lone image of inner labia that was a
color other than pink (and even that picture was possibly just showing a
shadow). Sure, some women don’t have very visible inner labia, many women’s
labia do not protrude, and lots of women have pink inner labia, but the likelihood
that every single one of these women happened to have identical vulvas is very
slim. There was certainly something wrong with these pictures!
Vulva Education
Whenever Vanessa discusses these results at a scientific conference, she makes
the point that one reason this is important is because many young women and
men see their very first vulvas when they look at magazines like Playboy. While
a quick glimpse at the world around them will let them know that women aren’t
normally as skinny as Playboy models and don’t often have the same figures,
one can’t just glimpse around to see that even the vulvas don’t add up. As such,
Playboy and other mainstream men’s magazines may misinform women and
men about what’s “normal” for women in terms of their genitals. Because people
want to feel normal, this is important.
When she makes this point, Vanessa often gets the same question: What
about other sources for genital images? After all, women may seek out genital
images from a variety of different sources. Some may look in magazines, and
others may seek out anatomy textbooks in their local libraries. Given how
private people feel about genitals (some even call them their “privates”), it is less
likely that people are openly seeking out these images when they have access to
a plethora of vulva images on their home computer.
Time and again people have tried to tell us that women should not be
concerned about their vulva appearance because they have a variety of vulva
images available to them at the click of a button. The only problem is the type of
images that pop up for the uninformed vulva investigator. Let us demonstrate.
Put on your savvy vulva sleuth hat for a second and pull up your preferred
Internet search engine. After you have checked to make sure that your computer
is up-to-date on pop-up blockers and firewalls, type the word “vagina” or
“vulva” into your search engine. What pops up? A beautiful, diverse range of
vulva pictures? Unlikely. Chances are that you—like us— came across a lot of
internal diagrams, several web sites about cancer, a few pornographic web sites,
and an advertisement for elective genital surgery. Now try it again, this time
searching only for images. Again, you are unlikely to have any luck. When we

tried this, the images and messages were the same, with the exception of a few
pictures of animal vulvas, which—not surprisingly—can be quite misleading!
Vulva Close-ups
Even if you decide to weed through Internet pornography for a diverse range of
vulva images, you may not find what you’re looking for. A recent study10 sought
to investigate whether the range of vulva appearances presented in textbooks,
books designed to represent vulva diversity (which they termed “feminist
publications”), and pornographic web sites were significantly different from one
another. They took measurements of the vulvas of the women represented in
these three sources by literally measuring the clitoral hood length, inner and
outer labia length, and distance from the clitoral hood to the urethra. In order to
get the measurement for the protrusion of the inner labia from the outer labia, the
researchers guesstimated using a five-point scale with every point indicating a
ten-millimeter protuberance.
BETTY DODSON’S GENITAL IMAGE GALLERY
Betty Dodson has worked tirelessly for more than thirty-five years to bring
vulva pride to women everywhere. She has done many wonderful things
that will forever change the way many women think about their bodies.
Our personal favorite is her online genital art gallery. If you go to her web
site 
(now 
shared 
with 
the 
delightful 
Carlin 
Ross) 
at
www.dodsonandross.com, you can easily find her genital art galleries.
Betty started this online gallery a while back to provide men and women
with a platform to submit their own genital pictures and write about the
reasons why they love them. These images likely served many purposes for
many people; however, the primary intention was to provide real images of
the vast range of normal/natural genital appearances. Due to some legal
changes, people can still submit photographs to the site, but they can no
longer be anonymous. The web site is now required to ask for identification
confirming a user’s age before he or she can post genital pictures. If you
are less interested in submitting a picture and more interested in browsing
the pictures, this is a top pick. For other wonderful web sites with diverse
vulva images, check out the Resources section.

When first reading this study, we were wary about the results because we
were not entirely clear how they controlled for the fact that the pictures may
have been taken at different distances or from different angles. After further
reflection, we realized that the measurements are not meant to reflect actual
vulva measurements of the women; they are meant to represent depictions of the
vulva to readers who may be viewing the images.
Keeping that disclaimer in mind, the researchers found that the pictures
showed the least diversity in the textbook images (and this is where we are
supposed to learn!), followed by online pornography, with the most variation
evident in “feminist resources.” Pictures of labia that protruded to their highest
measurement of protrusion were only available in the feminist resources. What
does that mean? On the bright side, it means that there are several resources for
women who are interested in viewing a range of genital images. In the study,
they analyzed two of our personal favorite collections of vulva images: Petals by
Nick Karras11 and Femalia by Joani Blank.12 On the other hand, it also means
that women who are seeking out information regarding the normal range of
vulva appearances may have a skewed representation of “normal” if they are
getting their information from another source.
SEXUAL ASSAULT: STORIES OF RESILIENCE
This book was intended to be a celebration of all of the wonders of the
vulva. The vulva has many amazing characteristics including its ability to
clean itself, open and lubricate for pleasurable experiences, and perhaps
most importantly, bring human life into this world. As undeniably
phenomenal as each one of these features is, it is the experiences and the
resilience of the women who own these vulvas and vaginas that we found
truly awe-inspiring.
Every woman’s relationship and experience with her genitals is
different. Some women have always loved their bodies, while others are
still searching for self-love. There are also those women who are hoping to
reclaim, or who have reclaimed, the genital love that they may have felt
was lost following sexual trauma. The experience of each and every
woman is unique, but we hope that the following stories will inspire you to
continue your search or support someone else along her journey toward
genital love and acceptance.

“I was raped by my father when I was four years old. That changed my
attitude about my yoni from natural acceptance to hatred. I came to
like myself again when I discovered female ejaculation, sex-positive
people, and BDSM. I learned to explore without judgment and won
my curiosity back.”—Patricia, Washington
“I felt ashamed of my genitals as a child. I came to feel positively about
my genitals by visiting feminist/sex-positive/body-positive health
web sites as an adolescent when I was looking for information.
Reading through the web sites reassured me that my vulva and vagina
were ‘normal.’ Learning about my anatomy and getting my questions
answered made me feel less shame. These web sites also helped after
being assaulted, because I realized that the physical consequences I
experienced were normal and not my fault. That was a huge relief.
After my assault, I’ve also come to feel more ‘ownership’ over my
genitals—that is, as the feelings of shame went away, I felt more and
more ‘in charge’ of my own body, and I think I value or cherish it
more now. I’ve made a conscious effort to avoid criticizing my
vagina or vulva’s appearance or function.”—Sarah, 22, Wisconsin
“I’m a strong feminist. Before realizing this, I just pretended my
vagina/vulva didn’t exist. And then felt immensely guilty for wanting
to use it sexually. Because women aren’t supposed to be the gender
with strong sexual desire. Purportedly. However, I just finished my
third year of the vagina monologues, and have recovered from rape.
Part of that self-discovery and healing process come with loving
yourself. And a major symbolic and very real part of myself is my
vagina. I’m still working on it, and I backslide, but the consciousness
is there.”—Melissa, 21, Washington
“Although I was raped in high school it never affected my feelings about
my vagina, only my self-esteem. I know this is different for many
women and I feel extremely lucky. I am now, however, very sensitive
to when and when not I am ok with being touched, and more able to
express that.”—Karen, 20, Washington
THE (W)HOLE TRUTH
Some resources show vulvas with small labia, some show large labia, and some
don’t show any at all (there is a Goldilocks reference in there somewhere). Why

does it matter? The same can be said for most body portrayals in mainstream
magazines that tend to feature size 0 models in their teens or early twenties. The
difference with vulvas is that we all know that pictures of the models in
magazines do not look like the women that we see on the streets every day.
There are a select few women who fit that profile, and even those women have
been airbrushed to be suitable for presentation in the magazines. We know this
because (a) we can see it, and (b) we can talk about it. In contrast, unless you are
living in a nudist colony or visiting a clothing-optional beach, you are probably
not surrounded by images of women’s genitals. Those women with questions or
concerns about the appearance of their vulvas may consider the matter too
private or embarrassing to discuss with others. As such, when women see these
vulva images in magazines or textbooks, they may automatically use them as a
reference point for what vulvas should look like. If the appearance of their own
vulvas deviates from those images, these women may become concerned that the
appearance of their vulvas is not normal or that it is unattractive.
This can be both good news and bad news. The bad news is that a lot of
women may rely on these restricted genital resources for information; the good
news is that there are other resources that show a diverse range of vulva images.
We were curious whether these images actually impacted the way women
viewed their vulvas.
OUR LABIA, OURSELVES
Vanessa and a team of researchers at George Washington University conducted
two experiments (and we are both in the process of conducting a third at Indiana
University) to investigate this question.13 As researchers, we are always excited
when we come across a new unanswered question to investigate. We keep
several tools in our toolboxes for such occasions including surveys, experiments,
observations, and interviews. Although any of these methods would have helped
us answer our question of interest, conducting an actual experiment can help the
researcher maintain control over the kinds of information available to the
participants, and this can yield more easily interpretable results. Consequently,
Vanessa set about designing an experiment. In the first experiment, female
college students were randomly assigned to one of four different groups.
Participants in the first three groups were asked to rate a series of six vulva
pictures. The first group saw pictures of airbrushed vulvas from a popular men’s
magazine, the second group saw pictures of vulvas after labiaplasty (an elective
procedure for labia reductions), and the third group saw the vulvas of the exact

same women before they underwent labiaplasty (their “before” photos). The
fourth group did not see any pictures at all. The participants were also asked
several questions about the appearance of their vulva including how large/ small
various components were, what their ideal vulva would look like, and how
satisfied they were with various components of their vulva. Approximately two
hundred female undergraduate students participated in the online experiment.
Participants had no idea that they had been assigned to a certain group and
would be seeing different images than the next participant in line.
The day that data came back, the first thing Vanessa was interested in was
whether the women rated one picture set as significantly more attractive than the
others. They had, without a doubt, rated the men’s magazine pictures the most
attractive.13 While this may feel disappointing for all of us who do not have
runway model vulvas, we have to keep in mind that those pictures were the only
ones that were airbrushed. It is quite possible that the participants were
responding to the nice airbrushed quality that we have become accustomed to by
reading magazines. In addition to rating the mainstream men’s magazines as the
most attractive, most participants also indicated that their ideal vulva would be
“smaller.” Of course, not all stated this, but that was the trend. Finally, the key
question was, given that we knew that these women thought smaller, airbrushed
vulvas were more ideal, how did viewing these pictures make them feel about
their own vulvas? Before guessing, think about the last time you opened a
fashion magazine and looked at the models. How did you feel about your body?
Now, take a look around the locker room, subway station, or wherever you come
across “ordinary” women. Have your feelings about your body changed? It is
likely that they have, just as they did for the women in the study.
I only learned—in the last five years—that women have different vaginas—
protruding inner labia, etc. I don’t think that women see enough images of
vulvas. They are airbrushed in skin mags and considered pornographic. I think
that hinders women’s pride in their genitals.
—JOY, 40, Australia
After taking into consideration factors like the frequency with which the
women in the study looked at pornography, how frequently they engaged in
sexual behavior with other women, how often they checked out their own lady
bits, and so on, Vanessa’s research team found that women who viewed the
“before” labiaplasty photos thought their labia were the smallest, followed by
women who saw the post-labiaplasty pictures, followed by the women who saw
pictures from a mainstream men’s magazine.13 So, what was happening? Is it

possible that these women really had different sized labia? Probably not. We
believe that they were using the pictures as reference points for what “normal”
looks like and were judging the size of their inner labia based upon those
judgments. In other words, the examples that we see of women’s genitals may
impact how we feel about our own.
Okay, so women thought their inner labia were bigger/smaller. Why is this
interesting? To many it isn’t—but considering you are reading a book about
vulvas, we are going to assume that you are interested in the implications. First,
this tells us that women’s perceptions of their labia size may be malleable. This
also suggests that the media may play a role in how women perceive their
genitals. This is no surprise given the media’s reach in today’s world; however, it
is still interesting to note that our perceptions of something so important to some
can be modified with just a few pictures. Finally, it is important because those
women who perceive larger inner labia to be less attractive may find their own
genitals less attractive if they believe that they are “larger” than their ideal.
VULVA MATCHING GAME
To make up for the fact that women and men are exposed to so few images of
women’s genital diversity, books that show images of women’s vulvas (such as
Femalia, Petals, and I’ll Show You Mine) have helped to bridge this gap. Of
course, as we all know from browsing photos of our friends and ourselves,
people can look very different in one photo compared to another. The same is
probably true for vulvas in that they may look different depending on the angle
the photo is taken from, the lighting, or how a woman is sitting or standing or
otherwise posed. We were delighted, then, when Catherine Johnson-Roehr,
curator of The Kinsey Institute’s art collection, showed us a remarkable series of
images by institute photographer William Dellenback. Among the many things
we like about this series is that there are multiple images taken for each woman,
showing how different we can all look based on how we hold our labia or how
we’re sitting. What we hope this does for you is to show you how the same
vulva on the same woman can vary so much. Not only is there genital diversity
that can be celebrated for all of womankind but also for you as an individual.
Now for a fun little game: looking at the twelve images of vulvas from the
institute’s collection, see if you can identify which vulvas go together. We’ll give
you a hint: there are four women represented here and three images of each
woman’s vulva. Can you guess which vulvas belong to which women? (Answers
are below the images— but don’t peek.)


DOES SIZE MATTER?

Messages about penis size bombard us (check your “junk” or spam email folder
if you disagree), but we rarely hear anything about the vulva. Is that because one
size fits all? We wish. Unfortunately, there may be perceptions about what makes
women’s genitals more or less attractive. As with the penis, men’s genital
perceptions are out there for all to see and discuss, whereas women’s genital
concerns remain more hidden. Women may feel uncomfortable about their
genital smell, size, or shape—though fortunately, most women don’t feel
persistently concerned or bothered about their genitals. It is more likely that a
woman will become aware of such concerns when her genitals are relevant to the
activity at hand. Does that mean any relevant activity? No—most women
probably don’t even think about their genitals much when they engage in day-to-
day activities like going to the bathroom or pulling underwear on or off.
When do we think about them, then? Probably when we are concerned that
someone else is thinking about them. When a lover goes down on her or a
gynecologist asks a woman to scoot forward into the stirrups, she may suddenly
become very aware of her genitals. Do I smell okay? How do I taste? What
about my pubic hairstyle? Do I have too much pubic hair? Too little? Are my
labia too long? Too short? These concerns crop up for different women at
different times in their lives. They can influence how comfortable or anxious we
feel in healthcare settings or in the bedroom.
It is often said that the mind is the biggest sex organ. Our mental state can
influence how receptive we feel to being sexually touched or caressed, the ease
with which we experience orgasm, or whether we want to have sex in the first
place. Women may enjoy and/or experience orgasm from a variety of sexual
activities including breast play, neck biting, and thigh licking; the list of non-
genital activities goes on. That being said, for many women, genital stimulation
is often a necessary element of their sexual experience. This includes everything
from hand or finger stimulation to cunnilingus to vaginal intercourse and
beyond. Some concerns may be temporary, while others are situation-dependent
(e.g., When did I shower last? Have I shaved recently?), and others are
somewhat more stable (e.g., Does my lover like my labia?). Any genital
concerns have the potential to hinder women’s enjoyment or pleasure. Whether it
is a baby crying in the room, a telephone ringing by the side of the bed, or
genital concerns badgering you inside your own head, it is tricky to stop and
focus on pleasure with so much distraction.
In her dissertation research, Debby found that women’s concerns about their
genital appearance were more problematic than concerns about genital smell or
taste when it came to whether or not a woman could sit back, relax, and enjoy

receiving oral sex—or experience an orgasm from it. Vanessa and colleagues14
also investigated the role of appearance-based concerns on women’s sexual
experience and found that women with concerns about their genital appearance
reported significantly lower sexual self-esteem (feeling good about themselves
in the bedroom), which translates into lower sexual satisfaction. It was even
related to reduced intentions to use condoms or protective methods. This may be
surprising at first, but it makes sense when you think about it. You are probably
more likely to take care of those things that you love. In the same survey, the
women were asked whether they enjoyed several sexual activities that involved
their vulva. Whether or not they liked the various activities was probably
dependent on many factors, but one commonly cited reason for their lack of
enjoyment in the activities was their concerns about their genitals.
Despite popular conceptions that a woman’s sexual complaints are due to her
man’s penis not being very long or her partner’s technique, a woman’s primary
complaint is oftentimes actually about herself. Does that mean that there is
nothing her lover can do to increase her sexual pleasure? Of course not.
Psychological tips can be just as sexy as the physiological ones. When people
ask us for one hint to enhance the quality of their sex lives, sometimes we tell
them to simply remind their partners of how beautiful they are. This can be
everything from her brain to her big brown eyes to her boobs or butt—just don’t
forget her lady bits. You can be perverted or polite about it—as long as you
compliment her in a way that she’s open to. Complimenting her vulva will open
a dialogue in the bedroom that may make you both feel more at ease.
IS YOUR VULVA READY FOR ITS CLOSE-UP?
Hook-up Ready
Definition: The state of being physically and mentally prepared for a sexual
encounter including the shaving of one’s legs, genitals, etc.
Origin: A phrase that first made its appearance amongst drinks with a few
girlfriends discussing an initial sexual encounter.
As properly used in the sentence: “I wanted to hook-up with him but couldn’t
because I wasn’t hook-up ready,” or “I snuck into his bathroom and dry-shaved
with his razor because I wasn’t hook-up ready.” (Note: not recommended! (A)
You should try to never share razors. It may increase the likelihood of STI
transmission, and (B) Ouch! No one likes a dry shave, particularly not on your
sensitive Sally.) Why are we filling you in on our cocktail party vernacular?

Because we think that it nicely illustrates an interesting phenomenon. Some
women may feel confident about their genitals regardless of the situation. Others
may feel uncomfortable and in need of a little reassurance to get them revved up
during the act, and still others are so shy, embarrassed, or ashamed about their
genitals that they decide not to engage in sex that they otherwise want. These, of
course, are not always three separate groups of women (although they certainly
can be). For our friends, being hook-up ready is often only a state that they felt
they needed to be in for their first sexual encounter with a new partner. It’s kind
of like avoiding sex because you’re wearing unflattering granny panties and
would rather wait until you feel like you’re wearing sexier panties. But as time
goes on, you feel comfortable breaking out your cotton day-of-the-week
underwear.
In the same way that genital concerns may deter women from seeking out
sexual behavior that they may want, it may also prevent women from getting the
healthcare that they need. Gynecologist Dr. Elizabeth Stewart, in her excellent
book The V Book,15 wrote about how women would often delay scheduling
GYN exams so that they could have time to get their genitals ready (she urges
women not to worry about how their genitals look or smell when it comes to
healthcare). In another study, Debby found that women who felt more positively
about their genitals were more likely to have had a recent gynecological exam.
And in her dissertation work, Vanessa found that young women who are
uncomfortable about the appearance of their genitals were more likely to be
concerned that the exam would be embarrassing, making them feel anxious
about the exam and eventually putting off a GYN exam entirely. This may have
been because some of these women were anticipating their first OB/GYN exam,
so they had yet to receive any reassurance about their genitals (which they would
hopefully get at the GYN). In a series of interviews with women after their
exams, Drs. Oscarsson and Benzein16 found that the only details that young
women remembered after their first Pap smear was reassurance that their
genitals were normal. Try to think back to your first exam. What can you
remember?
GETTING READY FOR THE GYN
One urban myth that we have heard refers to a woman who was rushing
one day for her annual OB/GYN exam. She was in a hurry but wanted to
make sure that she “washed up” before she saw the doctor. So, she grabbed

one of her children’s washcloths, wiped her vulva quickly, and took off to
make her appointment on time. While at the doctor’s office, everything
went well; she didn’t have to wait long and got a clean bill of health.
However, she was puzzled by something the doctor had said during her
examination. When she first got into the stirrups, the doctor mumbled,
“fancy.” She was a little disturbed by the comment but let it go in the hope
that she had misheard. When she got home and went to the bathroom, she
realized that she had not misheard at all. She had used her child’s arts-and-
crafts washcloth covered in glitter to wipe her genitals! She had presented
the doctor with a special little surprise that day.
Take home point from the story: no matter how embarrassed you feel
while visiting the gynecologist, just be thankful you are not covered in
glitter (accidentally—more power to our sisters who intentionally go disco
ball at the gynecologist!).
THE CONTROVERSY OVER ELECTIVE GENITAL
SURGERIES
In the UK, there is a popular show called Embarrassing Bodies.17 The premise is
an interesting one: men and women visit doctors to get a medical consult,
treatment, and follow-up for a physical concern that may be considered, well,
embarrassing. Many clips begin with patients talking about how their conditions
have impacted their lives and how they have been too embarrassed to seek help
in the past. (For some unknown reason, the patients find discussing and showing
their “medical conditions” on camera to millions of viewers less distressing than
bringing up the conversation in the privacy of their clinicians’ offices, but we
digress.)
The show is meant to normalize and de-stigmatize medical conditions. The
TV show’s web site (www.channel4embarrassingillnesses.com) features videos
and information about what “normal vulvas” look like, how to perform a vulva
self-exam, and other positive genital messages, which we applaud. Given that
the TV show focuses on medical conditions that are supposed to be
“embarrassing,” it’s perhaps not surprising that a number of women’s complaints
related to their genitals, a common site of taboo (even if we wish it weren’t so).
At least one video titled “Enlarged Labia” shows a woman’s journey to the
doctor’s office to ask about her inner labia. After a quick consultation is done

and shown on film (kudos to them for not hiding the genitals), the doctor
delivers the good and bad news. She says, “Don’t think that you are abnormal or
a freak. What you have got is a normal variant. . . . I think that we could be able
to help you with this. . . . I am not thinking gynecologist here, I am thinking
more cosmetic surgeon.”
We are not questioning the doctor’s advice. The patient came in to see her
with a concern, and the doctor told her that there was no reason to be concerned
but if she was concerned, then there was a way to “fix” the problem. Is it
possible that flipping through Petals, Femalia, or watching one of Betty
Dodson’s empowering films could have appeased the woman’s concerns?
Perhaps so, perhaps not. Regardless, we are not telling this story to question the
doctor’s approach to her patient. We are much more interested in how this
consultation affected the viewers.
If you are a woman who has ever worried or wondered about the size of your
labia, you likely would have watched closely as a woman receives a consult
from a medical professional on this very topic. Sure, the doctor suggests that the
appearance of the woman’s labia is not abnormal, but she also suggests surgery
in order to resolve the “problem.” Meanwhile, the viewer is undoubtedly
comparing her labia size with that of the woman onscreen to decipher whether
she has a similar problem that would likely have a similar solution.
Embarrassing Bodies is far from the only show that has helped to popularize
elective genital surgeries in the past decade. An increase in the number of

television shows, newspaper articles, and web sites about elective genital
surgeries has brought this subject to the public’s attention. Try searching “large
labia” (or even just “labia”) on the Internet, and you will get a range of
advertisements for labia-reduction surgery (called labiaplasty). Labiaplasty is
designed to help women who suffer from labial hypertrophy. Sound scary? It
isn’t. That is just a medical term for long labia. How is it defined? It isn’t; or at
least it isn’t defined very well. Some doctors have used two inches as a rough
approximate guideline for classification.18 Yet, just as a six-inch penis would
look massive on some men and small on others, two-inch inner labia may appear
longer on some women than they would on others. As such, many doctors use
the patient’s own feelings about and experiences with her labia to diagnose the
patient. If a woman’s labia present problems for the patient, the doctor may
recommend surgical treatment as one possibility.
Why Labiaplasty?
Women may decide to get labiaplasty for many reasons. Of course, there are the
aesthetic reasons, including concerns that labia are too long, too uneven, or too
dark around the edges. There are also those women whose labia cause them
physical discomfort (e.g., chafing or pain) while engaging in physical activities
such as walking, biking, hiking, running, dancing, or horseback riding. One
gynecologist we know who routinely performs genital surgeries told us that a
large percentage of the women who request labiaplasty in his practice are
women in the military because of the amount of physical activity required by
their job (apparently the physical nature of their job results in labia discomfort
for some women). This, of course, is anecdotal. There is very little research on
who gets these surgeries, why they get them, and how they feel about them. We
are doing our best to remedy this with a study we currently have underway with
a surgeon who specializes in these procedures. The data are still being collected,
so be on the lookout for the results.
I have not seriously considered labiaplasty but I have on more than one occasion
declared it the cosmetic surgery I would have if I were ever to have cosmetic
surgery. I am confident and comfortable, appearance-wise with my genitals. I
love the way my partner can pull and suck at my inner labia. I even like the way
they look jutting out between my outer labia when closed. BUT—they can be
hazardous! They get pinched in lace underwear, jeans, tight pants, hose . . .
anything! This can happen in the most unfortunate instances and is excruciating
until manually adjusted—not always possible in polite company. So—I get the

controversy that surrounds labiaplasty and I am always sad to hear women talk
about the embarrassment they feel around their large labia minora, but the very
real physical discomfort and occasional pain is not often validated.
—STEPHANIE, 25, Canada
Elective genital surgeries such as labiaplasty have been the subject of a great
deal of controversy within the scientific and medical communities. In a
discussion on this topic at an international medical conference, a gynecologist
from France indicated that she sometimes performs labiaplasty for women who
are sexually bothered or distressed by their labia size or appearance. Some of the
American gynecologists took issue with her statement, with a couple saying that
they only perform labiaplasty for patients if their labia get in the way of daily
activities such as exercise and going to the gym. This interested Debby, who
joined the conversation by asking why being comfortable exercising is any more
important than being comfortable having sex. After all, if a woman feels that her
labia get in the way of her sex life—if she’s embarrassed about them in spite of
being well aware that others consider them normal or beautiful, or if her labia
are uncomfortably pushed inside her vagina during intercourse, then why should
she be turned down for surgery?
As sex researchers and educators, we don’t believe that one activity (sex or
exercise) should be prioritized over the other. As long as a woman is fully
informed about all other options (some women may just need to flip through a
book of realistic vulva images) and is choosing surgery for herself (some women
report being pressured by their partner), then what is offered to one woman
should be offered to all. And this is coming from two women who adore vulvas
and vaginas and who wish, from their hearts, that every woman could feel happy
with their genitals (and their breasts, thighs, freckles, and hair) as they are, rather
than feel a need for surgery.
The only time I have ever felt ashamed or really less-than-satisfied with my
genitals was my mother-in-law’s fault. She’s got some weird, creepy competition
thing going on with me, and since I first got pregnant has made it a point to tell
me, my friends, random waiters, that HER vagina is as tight as it ever was
because SHE had a C-section. Then, in the delivery room immediately after I’d
given vaginal birth to my first daughter and was having the episiotomy stitched
up, she told my midwife to “put in an extra stitch for my son— or maybe two;
that looks like he’ll be throwing a hot dog down a hallway.” There’s nothing like
having your husband’s mother standing there looking at your stretched and
bruised and bleeding genitals and cheerily declaring them to be no longer fit for

her son to fuck to really make you wish you’d gone with the Fentanyl instead of
the epidural. I just keep reminding myself that she was taught anatomy by nuns,
it’s not all her fault she’s completely retarded about how lady parts work.
—GLORIA, 32, Kansas
Being offered the surgery and going through with the surgery are two
different things. Insurance companies tend not to cover such surgeries,19
meaning that these procedures often cost several thousand dollars. In addition to
money, they require a small amount of time for the surgery and a larger amount
of time to recover from the surgery (often several weeks to a couple months).
There is not a great deal of good research on how painful these procedures are
but like any major surgery, we imagine, and have heard from some patients, that
there is likely a fair amount of potential for pain or discomfort.20
The controversy about elective genital surgeries is not only about who should
be allowed to get elective cosmetic surgery; some genital advocates are critical
about the way that these surgeries are marketed to women. In addition to
labiaplasty, other elective genital surgeries include those intended to resize and
reshape the clitoral hood, tighten the vaginal canal (vaginal “rejuvenation”), and
surgery to reduce the size of the mons pubis. There are also procedures designed
to create a fake hymen to partially cover a woman’s vaginal entrance. Most of
these surgeries have not been well researched (we’re trying to change this in
conjunction with an OB/GYN we know who performs such surgeries).
Some feminist scholars, among others, are well-known critics of labiaplasty,
suggesting that it pathologizes the diversity of women’s genitals.20–23 This
means that the existence and marketing of the surgery creates the perception that
there is only one “normal” vulva appearance and that any other appearance
outside of this single appearance norm is viewed as abnormal and in need of
fixing. This idea is further perpetuated by web sites that show “before” and
“after” pictures, which can be used to define and differentiate between
appropriate and abnormal vulva appearances. It is a complicated issue without a
simple solution. What do you think? Should all women have access to these
surgeries? And how should they be presented to women so that they can best
make such an important decision?
WHAT’S THE (I)DEAL?
Have you ever stopped to wonder where breast augmentation procedures came
from? At what point was it decided that having a D cup was preferable to a B?

What about waist and hip sizes? There are evolutionary and social explanations
offered for all of these ideals. Evolutionary theorists suggest that these ideals
may be markers of youth and fertility, while feminist social constructionists
point to the ways in which these ideals have helped to maintain a patriarchal
society. Female genital ideals are the new kid on the block. Sure, we don’t know
a lot about her, but that has not stopped everyone from wondering, where did she
come from?
Before we go any further, let’s take a step back and think about what the
genital-appearance ideal is (if there is one). If our analysis of mainstream men’s
magazines is correct, it means the ideal vulva will have no pubic hair, a petite
clitoris, and practically invisible inner labia. Sound familiar? If you have ever
changed a baby girl’s diaper, her vulva may look a lot like this. As women, we
are told that there will be a lot of changes that will happen to our bodies as we
hit puberty. We will develop breasts, experience a widening of our hips, start
menstruating, and even sprout some hair down there. Yet no one really talks
about the fact that our inner labia and clitoris also may grow during puberty.24
This is why vulvas may look more similar prior to puberty but show such
enormous diversity following puberty. What does this have to do with the “vulva
ideal,” you ask? Perhaps nothing, but both evolutionary theorists and social
constructionists believe that women’s youth is valued either as a marker of
fertility 
or 
of 
innocence/dependence. 
Society’s 
value 
on 
women’s
innocence/dependence is just one of several possible explanations for this ideal.
What do you think the reason is?
ALL OVER THE MAP
Beach season can be an anxiety-provoking time for many women. For
some women in the United States, it signifies a time of intense work-outs
and heavy spray-tanning. However, these beauty ideals are not one-size-
fits-all. In Southeast Asia, many beauty creams come with skin lightener
because fairer skin is perceived to be a sign of beauty.25 In certain parts of
western Africa, you can forget the Western stick-figure body ideal. For
them, heavier women are perceived as most beautiful.25 Thus, it makes
sense that vulva-appearance ideals would also vary cross-culturally. In
Japan, women with large labia are called “winged butterflies” and are
considered a “sexual delicacy.”26 In certain parts of central Africa, it is a
custom for women to stretch their inner labia because it is perceived as

more beautiful and likely to increase sexual satisfaction. Some classify this
practice as female genital mutilation, though this is highly contestable.
TWAT TO DO IF . . .
You are a healthcare provider giving a genital exam.
This is a question we get time and time again: How do we help our
patients feel better about their genitals? If your first reaction is to
compliment your patient’s genitals, better think again. You wouldn’t tell
your patient she has a nice rack, and it is probably best to extend that
policy downstairs. According to one research study, women were not very
fond of being complimented on the appearance of their genitals.27 Instead,
consider saying something like, “your genitals look perfectly normal” or
“healthy.” Better yet, Nick and Sayaka Karras, the authors of Petals, are
working on an amazing new project. They created beautiful posters with a
variety of diverse vulva images (sepia-toned or color images are
available) with the saying, “Each Beautiful, and as Unique as a
Snowflake,” underneath the images (www.ilovemypetals.com). Nick and
Sayaka Karras made these posters in the hope that doctors (and educators
and others) would hang them in their offices or other relevant places so
that women could see how normal their genitals actually are. As the
famous saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words.
You love someone who has genital concerns.
Scientists don’t know much about what men think about women’s
genitals. Rhonda Reinholtz and Charlene Muehlen-hard conducted one
study at the University of Kansas.28 They asked a few hundred college
students to complete a questionnaire on their thoughts and feelings about
one another’s genitals. The male participants reported feeling more
positively about both their own genitals and their female partners’ genitals
than the female participants reported feeling about male or female
genitals. In another study that Debby conducted, she also found that men
generally felt more positively about women’s genitals than women
themselves did. In particular, the majority of men indicated that they
enjoyed performing oral sex (something the women who completed the
survey indicated they worry about).

We are also vulva advocates, which means that we talk to people
about genitals fairly often. To be fair, this means that the men in our lives
may be lying out of fear that we will shake our heads in disappointment if
they slander women’s genitals. Nevertheless, from our research
experience, many men love that women’s genitals come in all shapes,
sizes, and colors.
You are a genital advocate.
Sometimes this means just being a positive reinforcement to a friend
who has concerns. Maybe it means organizing a genital advocacy event
for a group of (girl)friends (see this chapter’s craft idea for one possible
suggestion). Perhaps it is as simple as reading this book in a public place,
such as a subway, park bench, or coffee shop, so that others can get a
glimpse of the place vulvas should have in the world. We feel very
fortunate to have so many opportunities to spread genital pride. Being
educators at a university puts us in a particularly good place to open up
discussions about thoughts and feelings about genitals. Debby has taught
over fifteen semesters’ worth of human sexuality courses to thousands of
students. We both like to start our genital lectures in similar ways: having
the students write or shout out every word that they can think of for male
and female genitals. It can be difficult to talk about something that you
feel funny saying, so we get it all out in the open in the beginning. We
remind our students that anything goes and listen as they laugh and giggle
when they realize that they are able to say “cunt” and “pussy” in a
classroom without getting in trouble. Once we have talked about the
language around women’s genitals, we are ready to begin our discussion.
Last fall, Vanessa was involved in a genital advocacy conference
where she was asked by the planner, Dr. Leonore Tiefer, to show a series
of vulva diversity videos and tape the students’ reactions. It was supposed
to be an “intervention” that any college professor could do regardless of
his or her background. Vanessa went to about five different college
classrooms and showed the students two videos. The first video was a
documentary about the making of the book Petals.11 It focused primarily
on the psychological impact of modeling for and viewing the photos. The
video also concentrates on some of the serious concerns and issues that
women may struggle with when relating to their vulvas, and it is a very
powerful film. The next film is a more light-hearted look at the vulva.
Betty Dodson’s Viva la Vulva takes viewers through a masturbation circle,

starting with a genital show-and-tell with many different women’s vulvas
on display. All vulvas are applauded as Betty uses words like “baroque”
and “sunset” to describe their vulva shapes and colors. Did it make a
difference? Sure, there were one or two students who were not fans, but
we are hopeful that the experience was positive for most; certainly, many
of the students expressed their reactions in thoughtful and insightful ways.
Although we are very thankful to have “official” educator titles that allow
us to show these types of films, “educators” can take many forms, as a
mother, daughter, sister, brother, friend, or lover. So don’t be afraid to
share the vulva love!
TEST YOUR VQ
1. How has the portrayal of pubic hair patterns changed over the past
twenty years?
a. Pubic hair patterns are relatively similar.
b. Pubic hair is now presented as slightly more abundant than it was
twenty years ago.
c. It is slightly less common to present pubic hair now than it was
twenty years ago.
d. Twenty years ago, representations of women in magazines were
approximately 90 percent more likely to have pubic hair.
2. If you have ever wondered whether your genital appearance is normal,
a. you might find it helpful to talk to a sex-positive, vulva-positive
healthcare provider (chances are, you’re “normal”)
b. there is probably something wrong with your genitals
c. you should Google it
d. you should talk to a plastic surgeon
3. If you want to be a genital advocate, you should consider
a. promoting positive messages in response to negative genital
comments on the Internet
b. throwing a genital craft party
c. joining us on Facebook or following us on Twitter
d. all of the above
Answers

1. d
2. a
3. d

• 5 •
Spraying, Dyeing, and
Douching . . . Oh My!
When did women’s genitals get their own aisle?” we wondered aloud recently
during a trip to our local drugstore. Don’t get us wrong; we are all about genital
awareness. We just couldn’t remember when the market had expanded from pads
and tampons to include everything from dyes to douches. Are these products
really necessary? More importantly, are they really safe? In this chapter, we’ll
give you the low-down on all those products marketed for your downtown.
PERIOD PRODUCT PARTICULARS
Love her or hate her, your dear Aunt Flo decides to stop in for another visit.
Sometimes she phones ahead to let you know she’ll be coming to (down)town;
other times, she may just surprise you. Prepared or not, there she is, on your
doorstep. Time to make some decisions about where she is going to stay.
Fortunately, you have a lot of options—and they’ve gotten better over time, so
even if you’ve been in the period game for decades, listen up.
The most popular period products are tampons and pads. Some women
choose to use only one, others use both at the same time, while some women
believe that there is a time and place for both. Dr. Czerwinski conducted a
survey of over seven hundred women in California about their use of various
feminine products and found that similar percentages of women reported using
pads and tampons with approximately half of the women reporting that they use
both.1

PAD DOWN
The pad is a product with many names including (but not limited to) maxi pad,
menstrual pad, sanitary pad, sanitary towel, and sanitary napkin; for simplicity’s
sake, we are going to refer to it simply as a pad. Thinner versions of pads are
often called pantyliners and may be worn on days with a lighter menstrual flow.
As a child I was told my genitals were nasty and disgusting. As a young girl
going through puberty I had to come to grips with my identity and my genitals. I
have a wonderful well functioning body part. My monthly cycles made it hard at
first to overcome the dirty and disgusting message. Over time and education
about the function and purpose of my body I came to love and enjoy being a
woman.
—CAROLINE, 35, Utah
If you are like many women, the first thing that probably comes to mind
when thinking of pads is pink cardboard boxes with individually wrapped plastic
packages containing “cotton” pads (that often have a plastic covering) that come
complete with an adhesive strip. This is a description of the contemporary pad
on today’s market, but they have taken many forms throughout history, dating
back to the fourth century.
Pads were originally made from an assortment of absorbent materials.
Disposable pads are a somewhat more recent phenomenon with the first pads
requiring a belt/band typically worn around the waist to stay in place. We’ve
never tried one, but we have heard that there was a lot of twisting, shifting, and
sliding. The invention of pads with adhesive backs made the pad somewhat more
comfortable and convenient. However, even those earliest disposable/stickable
pads (which we have used) had their flaws. It was difficult to get through a few
hours of menstruation without dyeing the sides of your panties a shade of
menstrual red/brown (which is surprisingly still not a Crayola color or paint
shade in the Martha Stewart Living paint palette).
The Wind Beneath Our Wings
The development of “wings” not only gave the pads a snazzy paper-airplane
look, they also helped them stay in place and kept the blood from crossing over
to the other side. We were fans. Then there was the somewhat recent invention
of pads for thongs. We know that thongs are not for everyone (perhaps especially
true for women with genital pain), but it is nice to have a pad option for all panty

choices. Some women like these pads because they stay “close to your body,”
while others think they are too thin or that wearing a padded thong defeats the
purpose of a thong all together. We say, to each their own!
As with silverware, plates, and diapers, having a pad that is disposable
makes life more convenient. You can pull it off and toss it in those special little
trashcans strategically placed in public bathrooms. Toss them and forget them,
right? Sure, but the pad’s story doesn’t end when you throw it away. In fact, that
pad’s story is never-ending (at least not in your lifetime). Most pads are made
from polypropylene, which is non-biodegradable (this is why we put cotton in
quotes earlier in the chapter). If you use pads, take a second and think about how
many pads you go through in one day. Let’s say you use one at night and change
it about every four hours while awake. That adds up to about five pads a day.
Five pads a day for five days is twenty-five pads, which adds up to somewhere
around three hundred pads over twelve months! Doesn’t sound like a lot? Try
finding a place to stack three hundred pads in your home. Now does it sound like
a lot?
Turning Your “Red” Days “Green”
If creating this much period-product waste concerns you, there are other options
available. There are disposable pads that claim to be biodegradable. They are not
widely available but may be found in health-food stores or similar locations.
Even if you are not concerned with the environmental impact of pads, you may
want to consider the impact on something else: your wallet. Depending on the
price of each pad, costs can add up quickly!
How can you save money and the environment? Consider making your own
pad. There are even underwear with pads already in them so that they don’t
scrunch and bunch (see Resources). Just toss them in with the rest of your wash
(pre-wash if heavily soaked), and they are ready to go for round two.
TAMP-ON-IT
Perhaps, like many women, you have a memory like this one:
It was a hot summer day and the pool beckoned. All of your friends were
having fun, splashing and enjoying the crisp, cool blue water. You wanted to
splash around, too, rather than sit on the lounge chair or your towel alone, but
you had your period, and you had only been using pads up to this point.
It was time to make a choice. You could

a. stay inside by your lonesome.
b. swelter in the heat, pretending that you just felt like “dipping your feet
in.”
c. stick a pad to the bottom of your bathing suit (although those images of
babies with droopy diapers were a definite deterrent).
d. hope the old wives tale that people do not menstruate in the water is
actually true.
e. tamp-on-it.
Some women start using tampons during their very first period and others
never decide to use tampons. On the other hand, many women transition from
pads to tampon use. There are many different reasons why women may do this.
Wanting to go swimming is one of them. Other times, girls who take dance
classes find that wearing a pad feels uncomfortable or awkward when they’re
wearing leotards and tights. Or they tire of staining the sides of their panties,
wings or no wings.
V-CRAFT: HOW TO MAKE A NO-SEW COOCHIE
CARRYING CLUTCH
You are sitting at a meeting or in class when it happens. To your horror,
your tampon has over-expanded and is slowly slipping out of your vaginal
comfort zone, or you suddenly feel a surge of menstrual blood that may or
may not have slipped past the defense. Time to take your tampon out!
You need to sneak off to the bathroom, but you also need to be
prepared, and your protection is currently stashed away between books and
papers. You go on a hunt and find your treasure. Now what? If you don’t
have pockets you may find yourself in a conundrum. You can proudly
parade across the room with your tampon/pad in hand or lug your giant
purse/backpack/briefcase across the room. Then, after you finally manage
to smuggle your tampon/pad into the bathroom— you notice it! That’s right
—it’s happened to all of us: pencil shavings/ dirt/food crumbs have
managed to find their way to your tampon/pad, and now they are stuck to
the wrapper.
This is a situation that we can all probably relate to in one way or
another. Fortunately, we have a craft solution: a no-sew coochie carrying

case! Design it to look like a vulva to make a bold statement, or use your
favorite fabrics for a more concealed one.
What You Will Need
A favorite fabric. Pick one that you love, but try to steer clear of
fabrics with stretch. If you are making a coochie carrying case, you
will need two different fabrics to differentiate between the outer and
inner labia. We recommend a material with some movement for the
inner labia. Silk (or imitation) is always a good bet.
Masking/duct tape. Most masking tape comes in a shade of brown. If
you like this, great! If not, keep shopping around. You may be able to
find colored masking tape at your local hardware store or through the
Internet. If you are unable to find colored masking tape, clear masking
tape will allow your fabric to shine through.
Double-sided tape (optional for pubic hair)
Cotton if you want to give your inner labia a little puff. The kind sold
at the grocery/drug store in the nail-polish remover section should be
just fine (optional for inner labia stuffing).
A ruler for measuring the fabric
A pencil for marking the fabric
A stapler. It doesn’t have to be super fancy, but it should be able to
staple through a few pieces of paper relatively easily.
Something to close up the bag. Velcro is the easiest, but zippers are
more likely to impress your friends. A pipe cleaner is definitely the
least-expensive option and probably the best if you are providing
supplies for lots of people or creating more than one carrying case
(optional).
Hair. We don’t recommend using your own (although you can by
cutting and taping the ends to a piece of paper. Your local craft store
should carry some relatively inexpensive doll wigs that should work).
If not, your Halloween/costume store is sure to have a wig that should
do the “trick” (get it—because it’s Halloween) (optional).
What to Do
Outer Labia
1. Let’s start by cutting the fabric that you want to use for the outside of
the bag. The length is entirely up to you. Are you just using this for
tampons/pads, or do you want to use it for other things as well? If

tampons and pads, are they large or are they small? How many do you
want to carry at one time? Take all of these things into consideration
when deciding on the size. Somewhere between six and twelve inches
is typical. Measure approximately ½ inch from the top of the fabric
and ½ inch from the right side of the edge of the fabric and mark those
spots. Now, draw a rectangle or square to your desired size, starting at
the ¾ inch and ½ inch marks. Now draw another line ½ inch from the
left-hand side of the square/rectangle. You are going to cut along the
line that you just drew so that you have three sides of the
square/rectangle cut out. Fold the material over so that it is doubled on
top of the fabric and trace the outline of the material. You are now
going to cut out the remainder of the square. So when you are
finished, it should be one long piece of material, with both sides of the
box or rectangle connected at the center.
2. It’s taping time! Get out your masking tape and cover one entire side
of the fabric with masking tape. You are obviously going to want to
cover the side of the fabric that you don’t want to be visible on the
inside of the bag.
Inner Labia
1. Now you are going to cut the inner labia (labiaplasty reference not
intended). The inner labia are going to be the same width as the outer
labia but a little bit shorter in length (about ½ inch). To start, measure
out a square/rectangle about the same length as the material that you
just cut for the outer labia and deduct about ½ inch from the top. Mark
that rectangle/square with your pencil. Now create three more boxes
connected to the original box you just created (it should look like one
giant box or rectangle). Cut along the outside of the box/rectangle.
2. You should now be ready to create the inner labia. Fold the material in
half once, lengthwise, so that you have a long tube (without an
enclosed bottom). If the material has two sides, fold the material so
that the “bad” side is folded on the inside and the side that you want is
facing you.
3. Stuffing time! Take the cotton balls and pull them slightly so that they
are less ball-shaped (this will give you lumpy inner labia) and more
fluffy and long. Once you have a handful, place them along the inside
of the tube. Keep going until the tube has a little fluff to it. Be careful
not to overfill. If too full, there won’t be room for anything else
besides the coochie inside of your clutch!

Clutch Handle
Set aside the inner labia for now. It is time to create the handle for the
clutch. Cut a piece of fabric about two inches thick and a foot and a half
long. Follow the same instructions as you did for the inner labia (minus the
stuffing). As a reminder: place the ugly-fabric side out, duct-tape the
bottom of the fabric and staple to make sure it stays in place. Now flip it
inside out so that the staples and duct tape are on the inside of the strap. Set
it aside—we’ll come back to it later.
Pubic Hair
Cut a strip of double-sided tape the length of the outer labia fabric (the first
fabric that you cut). Tape the end to the edge of a table or flat surface with
a ledge. Now, if you are using a wig, it’s time to give it a haircut! Trim the
hair to the length that you want to keep the pubic hair (a half-inch to an
inch works best). Now carefully tape the ends of the pubic hair to the edge
of the duct tape so that the hair takes up no more than half of the tape. Set
aside and try not to disrupt. We will come back to it in just a minute.
And It All Comes Together
Okay, almost there! This is the tricky part. We are going to put all the
pieces together. Start by laying out the outer labia (or bag fabric) so that the
duct tape is on the outside facing you.
1. Attach the inner labia: Surgery time! We are going to attach the inner
labia to the outer labia fabric. Lay the inner labia on top of the outer
labia so that the open edge of the inner labia meets the edge of the
outer labia fabric. Duct-tape the end of the fabric together so that the
duct tape wraps from the inside of the inner-labia fabric to the non-
duct taped side of the outer-labia fabric.
2. Put some hair on there: Fold over the top of the outer labia
approximately ¼ inch. Take the tape off of the ledge and place it on
top of the folded-over fabric so that pubic hair is on top and the back
side of the tape with pubic hair is on top of the flap. Wrap the other
half of the tape around the other side of the flap to hold it in place.
Press down.
3. Attach the bag closer/pipe cleaner: Now we are going to put in the
pipe cleaner so that we can open and close the bag. Simply slip the

pipe cleaner in the tube that you just created. If your pipe cleaner is
too short, you can twist the ends of two pieces together. If it is too
long, simply cut it. Staple the edge of the pipe cleaner to the edge of
the outer fabric. Try to get as close to the end as possible. Now fold
over the top edge of the outer labia about ½ inch. Place a piece of duct
tape over the top of the pubic hair tape. If you can, try to keep a
straight line because this will stay visible on the inside of the bag. Do
not tape over the ends of the tube.
4. Attach the clutch strap: Slip the clutch strap inside the open pocket
that you just created when you duct-taped the tube together with pipe
cleaner/pubic hair. Put in a single staple.
5. It all comes together: Fold the fabric widthwise once so that it is
approximately the size of the clutch. Fold so that the duct tape, pubic
hair, and inner labia are all visible. Wrap the clutch handle back
around so that it is facing the inside material (not duct-tape covered)
of the bag. Now put staples around two of the four edges. You may
want to do two rows for extra security. Do not staple the top with the
pipe cleaner/pubic hair or the edge that was naturally created when
you folded the fabric. Now tape over the edges that you stapled with
duct tape.
6. That’s so clutch! Time to flip it inside out to see your creative new
coochie clutch! Carefully invert the materials so that the inner labia
and duct tape are now on the inside of the bag. Violà! You have
coochie clutch complete with a strap, inner labia pocket, and fun pubic
hair trim. No more hanging your head in shame as you head to the
bathroom with your tampons/pads. You can stride with your new
clutch in (your own) style.
Oftentimes, people have questions about tampons. We are not sure why there
are so many myths about them, but we are happy that people are being
inquisitive about what’s going on inside their bodies. If you have mastered the
period waters for years, you may have forgotten some of these common
questions or myths from your childhood or adolescence. If you’re a mom, aunt,
or teacher, you may find it helpful to look through these questions and myths so
that you can best support the young girls in your life. When Debby has been
invited to speak with fifth-and sixth-grade girls about puberty, she has often
fielded similar kinds of questions—questions that she and her friends had years

earlier—reminding us that the more things change, the more they stay the same.
Here are some of the most frequently asked questions we hear about
tampons:
At what age is it appropriate to start using a tampon?
There is no right or wrong age. There isn’t even a right or wrong stage
of development. As we said, some women choose to use tampons during
their first period, while others never use them. The right time to use a
tampon is when and if you decide you want to. If you start using tampons
and then decide you want to stop, that’s okay too.
Are women who use tampons no longer virgins?
Most people define virginity based on whether or not they have had
“sex” with another person. In that sense, if you have not had sexual
intercourse or penetration with a partner, then you are still a virgin
whether you have used no tampons, one tampon, or five thousand
tampons over the course of your life.
Of course, “sex” can be defined in many ways, but we have not met
many people who define it as tampon insertion. That being said, we
recognize and respect that people may define different terms in diverse
ways. For some people, virginity means never having had vaginal
intercourse. For others, it means never having had any kind of sex, such
as vaginal sex, anal sex, or oral sex. And for other people, virginity may
mean having an intact hymen. Even if you don’t believe this, you may
have wondered: Is there any validity to the suggestion that those women
who have used tampons cannot be virgins? Several researchers at
Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School were apparently curious
as well.2 They included three hundred young women in a study
investigating this question. The young women were split evenly into three
groups based on their previous experiences: Group 1 reported that they
had never had sexual intercourse and only used pads during their periods;
Group 2 also reported that they had never had sexual intercourse but used
tampons; and Group 3 reported that they had sexual intercourse in the
past. The researchers found that the hymen differed for those women who
had a history of sexual intercourse and those who did not. Conversely,
there were no significant differences between the groups of women who
did or did not use tampons. They did find a difference in something less
expected: the participants’ perceptions of their speculum examinations.

Only about a quarter of the pad-using participants in Group 1 felt that the
exam was easy as compared to over half of the young women who
reported using tampons.
To summarize, tampon use doesn’t “de-virginize” a woman, and it
doesn’t make her hymen look different from those of women who don’t
use tampons. Tampon use may, however, help women to become more
comfortable with vaginal penetration and thus more comfortable with
gynecological exam procedures, such as a speculum examination.
Because of the lack of skill building around tampons (and other period devices),
I was very uncertain how to work with my genitals for a long time. There should
be more of this information given and skills worked on early on, so people don’t
get negative impressions of their genitals through these things. They definitely
had a negative impact on me, until I met a sexual partner who was much more
positive.
—MERCEDES, 28, New York
How do I insert a tampon?
Every woman probably has a slightly different method for inserting a
tampon. Some lift a leg, others prefer squatting, and others just stay right
where they are sitting. The best method will be the one that works best for
you. Inserting a tampon is very different based upon whether you use
tampons with or without applicators (see the following section, “Choosing
a Tampon That’s Right for You”).
If you use a tampon with an applicator, resist the urge to pull apart the
pieces when you open up the package. The tampon stays in the top
component and is pushed through by the bottom portion. If you use a non-
applicator tampon, try to press your fingertip against the bottom of the
tampon, where the string is (not all the way—just enough to be able to
push it) and push it in. It may take a few tries, but you’ll get it.
How do I know when a tampon is in right?
Women commonly say that they know they have a tampon in far
enough when they can no longer feel it inside of them. If you are having a
difficult time with it, don’t be too hard on yourself. Every woman and
every tampon is a little different, so don’t be afraid to give something new
a try!
Can my tampon get lost inside of my body?

The good news is that your vagina is not like the pipes in your house.
You cannot get something lost in it, and you don’t need to get it “snaked”
if there is something stuck in it. The vagina ends at the very small cervix
and a tampon cannot get through the cervix. So no, your vagina is not a
black hole in which things can get lost forever, and no tampon (or any
other reasonably sized object) will get lost inside it.
What happens if I forget that I have a tampon in and leave it for too long—
like, for several days?
Although tampons can’t get “lost” inside the vagina (it’s not that big
and it ends at the cervix), it is true that some women forget to remove a
tampon and may leave it in for days. This is not a good idea, but it
happens sometimes. Maybe your mind is elsewhere when switching
tampons and you insert a new tampon before remembering to take out the
first one. Or maybe in the heat of the moment, you forget to take it out
before having sex. Or maybe you just forgot it was in there at the end of
your period and went on with life, until one day things felt or smelled
funny, and you stuck your finger in your vagina to check things out. These
things happen. If it happens to you, don’t panic. Start by trying to get the
tampon out. The string may have gotten lost but that just means that you
are going to have to insert your fingers into your vagina and, as we say,
“go fishing for it.” Before embarking on the excavation, start by washing
your hands thoroughly. It also can’t hurt to give your fingernails a quick
look to make sure there are no sharp edges (file them down if needed).
Forgotten tampons usually come out without a hitch. But in case it
doesn’t, here are some tips. You may find that it helps to try a few
different positions to get the right angle. You may feel more comfortable
lying down with pillows to prop you up, standing with one foot on the
counter or squatting. Using a bit of water-based lubricant on your finger
or around your vaginal opening can ease the process. If you have the
benefit of a partner or open-minded friend around, it may help to enlist
his/her help. If you feel nervous about it, you may want to offer him/ her a
pair of gloves (latex gloves or similar—not winter gloves!). If neither you
nor your friend/lover/open-minded someone is able to find it, do not
assume that the problem has mysteriously resolved itself. Try to get into
your gynecologist’s office as soon as you can. Don’t be embarrassed!
Many gynecologists have told us that they see this kind of thing all the
time. People have lost far more unusual things inside their vaginas.
In order to avoid having this happen to you, we recommend practicing

inserting a finger inside your vagina. It only takes a second to do, and if
you get in the habit of doing it every now and then—and most definitely
in the days following your period—then you will be far more likely to
catch a stray tampon if you forgot you had one up there. If there’s ever a
good reason to become more comfortable touching your vagina, this is it!
When I was in 8th grade, I didn’t know what the word “pussy” meant. This boy
in my class started bothering me about it asking me to tell him what it meant. I
lied and said I did know, which just made him egg me on all the more. When it
was clear by my face that I had no idea what I was talking about, he said “You
idiot. You don’t even know what you have.” Then he told his friends. I inferred
what pussy meant and was so humiliated. This doesn’t necessarily have to do
with my physical perceptions of my genitals, but his mean, caustic attitude
towards me and my genitals filled me with shame, which extended into my
emotional feelings about my genitals. It took a long time to get over.
—AMBER, 23, California
What’s the deal with TSS?
TSS stands for toxic shock syndrome, a scary name that has likely
sent fear into the hearts and vaginas of many tampon users over the years.
The truth of the matter is it is very rarely associated with tampon use. You
can read more about TSS in Chapter 2: A Healthy, Happy Vulva.
CHOOSING A TAMPON THAT’S RIGHT FOR YOU
Just as women have options to choose from in terms of shoe styles, condom
features, and phones, there are various options to choose from when it comes to
tampons, too.
Size
Most tampons, regardless of the brand, will come in several different sizes.
Don’t worry; this is not like your shoe size, so there is no need for
measurements. Some women have a difficult time inserting a large tampon and
other women have a tricky time keeping in a smaller one. However, for most,
tampons are one-size-fits-all.
Instead of choosing a tampon for comfort, women will often pick their
tampons based on their menstrual flow. While some women always have heavier

periods, other’s menstrual flow never seems like more than a trickle. For women
with a heavier flow, the choice is relatively clear: bigger tampons are often more
absorbent. For many women, their flow will start heavier and slow down as the
days progress. For these women, there are mixed packages. A relatively recent
invention, we were super excited to see these in our regular tampon line-up
available in many drugstores. The packages we’ve seen will give you
approximately equal numbers of three different tampon absorbencies to “go with
the flow.” Although some women find that they run out of one type before the
others, it is still a great idea. They are also good for women who are new to
tampons and not really sure which size is best for them. Don’t be afraid to try
them out and find the fit that is best for you!
Shape and Materials
There is not much variability in the materials used for tampons. They are
typically made from rayon and/or cotton, and organic tampons are normally
made from 100 percent organic cotton without the bleach used on other tampons.
One of the most important ways that tampons differ is in the way they extend as
they absorb. Some tampons will extend lengthwise, while others extend radially
(widthwise). The ones that extend radially tend to have little grooves in the
sides. Each method has its advantages/disadvantages.
Tampons that extend lengthwise can start to “pop out” if you leave them in
for too long (sounds a little like a pop-up turkey thermometer). This can be a
little uncomfortable if you are not in a place where you can change it. The radial
ones, on the other hand, can start to make you feel uncomfortable as well, but it
may be a little less obvious. Some find that they get slight stomachaches when
they leave these tampons in for too long. So, while neither one is ideal, both
work great. It is just a matter of which is the least distracting/uncomfortable for
you!
Applicator
If you ask most women to divide tampons into two groups, many will
differentiate them based on whether or not they have an applicator. An applicator
can come in many different materials (e.g., cardboard, plastic) and essentially
includes a smaller tub inside of a larger one. The tampon sits inside of the larger
tube and is pushed out when you press on the smaller tube. Some women like an
applicator because it prevents you from having (or “getting,” depending on your
point of view) to insert the tampon into your vagina. Non-applicator users are

often very committed to their cause. It is not only better for the environment;
some women simply prefer the “fit” or the convenience of being able to carry
smaller tampons around in their purses.
Recently, the primary non-applicator tampon brand, o.b., disappeared from
many store shelves across America. For many women, it was a catastrophe and
was dubbed by some in the media as the “Tamponcalypse.” According to the
manufacturer, there was simply a pause in the shipping, which caused the
problem, and they promised that they would be back out soon. This did little to
reassure fans who panicked when they couldn’t find their treasured tampon.
They quickly became a black-market item, with women paying in excess of
$100 for a few boxes found online. When o.b. tampons started to slowly appear
on shelves again, women were overjoyed and united to find a place to purchase
them. There was even an online treasure map for women to mark where they
were able to find the tampons once they came back on the market. Sound like
commitment? Well, that’s nothing. In the midst of the Tamponcalypse, we
happened across a lonely o.b. sitting on the sidewalk while walking back from
lunch one day. At first, we wondered if this was perhaps one of those jokes that
little tricksters play, where they drop a valuable item on the floor and then pull it
away or glue it to the ground for giggles as the poor sap tries to pry it off the
floor. It felt like finding a $20 bill on the ground. After staring at it for some time
and trying to justify the fact that it was still wrapped in plastic and thus likely
clean inside, we decided to walk away and leave it on the ground. Would the
story have been different if we both had not already stocked up at home? If we
thought it was the only o.b. left on the planet? Would we have fought each other
over it? Perhaps. However, the alternative ending to the story would have been
less likely to find its way into the book. I mean, who wants to tell the world that
you’ve picked up a tampon off the ground and may use it later on in the month?
MENSTRUAL CUPS AND SPONGES
This section would not be complete without discussing some of the other options
on the market: notably, menstrual cups. As with pads, your use of tampons may
have you feeling concerned about the impact on the environment (particularly if
you use plastic applicators) and/or the cost of frequent tampon use. If so,
consider using menstrual cups.
There are several brands of menstrual cups including the Keeper, the Moon
Cup, and the DivaCup. Although the idea of a tampon alternative may sound
new and novel, they have actually been around since the 1930s. Shaped like

plastic (technically silicone) bells, the bell end is folded twice and inserted into
your vagina. As with a bell, there is a stem at the top that can be used for pulling
the menstrual cup out when you are ready to change it. The menstrual cup holds
approximately an ounce of liquid, so it is good for both heavy and light days. To
change it, just pull it out, empty it and wash or wipe it off. Ready to reinsert!
They are supposed to last upwards of ten years.
I’m grateful to the internet and my vagina is, too. I read about menstrual cups
online and there are some great communities dedicated to them where women
can ask questions, get advice, and share their experiences. The Diva Cup has
changed my period from something I hate, dread, and fear into something I can
handle and feel prepared for. It would have been scary to start using one on my
own and I might not have. It’s led to a better relationship with my vagina. And it
really sucks that I can talk to hundreds of women online about it but only a few
face to face.
—BECCA, 30, Illinois
In a study designed to investigate women’s attitudes about these products,
several gynecologists surveyed the patients in their clinic regarding their
thoughts and opinions after reading a brochure for the product.3 A total of sixty-
nine patients completed the survey, of which 52 percent (thirty-six women) said
that they would consider using the cup. The women found the cup appealing
because it was better for the environment, required less-frequent changes, and
eliminated the need to buy or carry supplies. In contrast, some women voiced
concerns that the product would be messy, and others were uncomfortable about
the fact that it required the use of one’s hands to insert and remove.
Nevertheless, it is important to keep in mind that these responses were from
women who had never used the product. The reactions may have been quite
different after the women had an opportunity to try menstrual cups for
themselves. Have you given the product a try? Want to share your experiences?
Let us and other readers know about your experience on our blog
(www.readmylipsbook.tumblr.com) or Facebook page.
Menstrual sponges appear to be less popular than menstrual cups (at least
they seem less widely available for sale on the Internet), but women have been
using natural sponges for menstrual flow for ages. The key is that natural
sponges are used—we’re not talking about inserting kitchen-sink sponges inside
your vagina, which would be unsanitary and potentially dangerous to the vagina
and reproductive organs. Rather, sea sponges seem to be the sponge of choice
when it comes to period flow. Of course, sponges are, well, spongy. Some

women we’ve talked to have experienced period blood leakage when using
menstrual sponges. Also, they need to be cleaned and preferably sterilized—such
as in boiling water—after use, which can take time and is not always convenient
(like if you’re wanting to change your sponge while at work or school, or in a
public restroom). Also, sea sponges commonly degrade over time and likely
need to be replaced every few months if not more often.
PROMOTING PERIOD PRODUCTS
In 2010, Kotex won over a lot of fans—women and men alike—by making
fun of typical feminine-product advertisements that depict periods as times
for dancing, long walks on the beach, hearts, and rainbows (without
actually ever showing a vulva diagram or even an actual tampon). Their
slogan was, “Why are tampon ads so ridiculous?”
Well, they were not the first ones to ask this question. There are at least
two analyses of tampon ads that were conducted to assess exactly what
messages women receive from these types of advertisements. The first
analysis from Dr. Debra Merskin4 used feminine-hygiene advertisements
from ten years’ worth of teen magazines. She found that the majority of
advertisements did not include a picture of a woman, and when they did,
the woman was stationary (as opposed to engaging in an athletic or
scientific activity). Most of the advertisements emphasized the comfort,
ease, and bulkiness (or lack thereof) of the product. The advertisements
addressed feelings of fear, secrecy, and freedom associated with
menstruation/menstrual products.
In a later study, Drs. Simes and Berg5 conducted an analysis of the
content from two hundred women’s magazines. They identified several
themes 
throughout 
the 
articles, 
including 
silence 
and 
shame,
embarrassment, ways to get caught (smelling like your period), ways to
avoid getting caught (smelling fresh), and being constantly “dirty” while
menstruating. Although the themes identified by both researchers were
similar, one suggested that the ads were designed to dispel these negative
perceptions, whereas the other suggested that these advertisements
promoted women’s negative feelings about their periods and their bodies.
What do you think?

Menstrual cups and sponges can be safe and “greener” alternatives to
tampons and pads. However, because they are used over and over again in the
vagina, they must be properly sanitized in between uses. Read the package insert
that comes with your product for the most accurate and up-to-date directions
regarding cleaning and sanitizing your cup or sponge. Some cups and sponges
can be sanitized by boiling them in water for five to ten minutes and then left to
air dry. Generally speaking, it is not recommended to use soapy products that
may leave a residue on the cup or sponge, as the residue may irritate the vagina.
Other cleaning agents that are generally NOT recommended for cup or sponge
cleaning include tea tree oil, bleach, vinegar, peppermint castile soap, oil-based
soaps, rubbing alcohol, hand sanitizer, dishwashing fluids, or soaps. Some of
these may irritate the vagina, and some of them may compromise the integrity of
silicone menstrual cups. Again: when in doubt, check your package insert or
check with your healthcare provider for recommendations about cleaning agents
or products that may be more likely to irritate the vagina so that you can avoid
them.
THE SCENT OF A WOMAN
Recently, Always came out with a line of pads that included individually
wrapped wipes for use between pads. As women, we have heard the message a
million times before: your menstrual blood is dirty and needs to be covered up,
and your vagina needs to be cleaned. It is an upsetting message given how
natural menstrual blood is. Of course, we understand that people can get a little
squeamish around blood, so we sympathize if menstrual blood brings about
some of these feelings for the blood-phobic.
These handy little wipes do not only play sidekick to menstrual products.
Advertisements encourage women to use an array of different products to get
that “fresh feeling,” including wipes, foams, and sprays. On the go? No problem!
These products come in single-serving packages to take on the town with you in
case you find yourself in a situation where you need your genitals to smell like
fruit.
Okay, okay. We know a lot of people critique these products for making
women feel bad about their genital smell. Rightfully so. We hate that women feel
the need to conceal the natural scent of their genitals with the same scents that
we would find in an air freshener. Still, if you are one of the women who use
these products, we want you to know that we understand. With all these
messages out there, it can be difficult not to feel self-conscious about one’s

genital odor.
VULVA IN A BOTTLE
Do you wish that your vulva smelled more like roses and less like a vulva?
Perhaps this is because so many companies have pushed women to
consider using flower-scented products to cover their natural feminine
odor. However, what would you say if we told you there is a company that
sells a product (of oil/lubricant consistency) that smells like a vulva? In
fact, it’s called Vulva. This is not a back-alley pervert product, either; it is
marketed as classy and exotic, and selling for approximately 25 euros for
two milliliters, it is also kind of pricey. Bottom line? The next time you are
feeling self-conscious about your vulva smell, try to remember that some
people would pay for just a sniff!
With so many of these products out there, do you ever wonder how many
women are actually supporting this multi-million-dollar industry? Wonder no
more! In Dr. Czerwinski’s survey, she also asked about the use of other
“feminine” products.1 She found that older groups of women were actually more
likely to use products than the younger women in the study. In the study, over 20
percent of women in the fifty-seven-and-up age group used feminine deodorant
sprays and 40 percent used wet wipes. This is compared to only 8 percent of
women in the under-forty-one age group who reported using feminine deodorant
sprays and 26 percent who reported the use of wet wipes. In another study
conducted several years later by our colleagues at the Indiana School of
Medicine, Drs. Ott, Ofner, and Fortenberry found that these rates were actually
much higher in the younger populations they studied.6 They found that in a
group of fourteen to eighteen-year-old women, 29 percent reported using
feminine sprays and 27 percent reported using feminine wipes. Although they
did not find that women who reported recent use were more likely to be
diagnosed with an STI, they did find that the young women who reported an STI
in their past were 1.7 times more likely to use feminine wipes. So, it remains
unclear from this study whether product use was the cause or the effect.
That said, using these products may make it more difficult to diagnose a
vaginal health problem. After all, some vaginal infections have a characteristic

odor to them (such as a fishy odor) that can clue a doctor or nurse into what may
be causing a woman’s symptoms. If a woman covers up her vaginal odor with
scented feminine-hygiene products, it may make it more difficult for her
healthcare provider to realize that there’s a problem or a possible infection that
needs to be treated.
As such, whether you use feminine-hygiene products or not, consider
steering clear of them before you go to the gynecologist. We know that they are
tempting if you want to smell super special for your gynecologist, but remember
that he/she is only concerned about your health and can miss something if you
have recently used one of these products. If you use feminine-hygiene products
at all, be sure to tell your gynecologist so that he/she can stay informed. The
more he/she knows about the things you do with your vagina and vulva, the
better his/her help and advice will be.
We are not here to tell you what to do or make you feel bad about your
choices. What we do want to do is give you all the information that you need to
make an informed choice.
DOUCHE OR DON’T?
When Vanessa was in fourth grade, her babysitter broke the news to her: it was
time to start douching. A little unusual? Although it does seem outside of the
typical 
realm 
of 
babysitting 
duties, 
many 
women 
receive 
similar
recommendations from the women in their lives. One study found that most
women who douched learned about it from their mothers (45 percent), other
female relatives (11.1 percent), friends (15.7 percent), or advertisements (11.7
percent).7 Whether by commercial, magazine advertisements, family members,
or (in Vanessa’s case) babysitters, the fact is that many women learn from
someone or somewhere that they are not naturally “clean” down there, and
douching is recommended as the solution. It’s too bad that these messages of
vaginas being “dirty” or needing “cleaning” continue to be shared with women.
I wish women didn’t feel so ashamed about the smell of their vaginas. So many of
my friends tell me that they can’t enjoy oral sex because they are always
paranoid that they smell or taste badly or that they feel pressured to cum.
—JACQUIE, 28, Canada
Although people can douche in more ways than one, douches often look like
a bag with a tube and nozzle attached. In order to douche, women typically fill

the bag with water and insert the nozzle into their vaginas. Lift the bag up and—
voila!—you have a steady douche. Some women use water, while others use
marketed products, and a little over 5 percent of women use “home remedies.”7
Some of these self-made concoctions have included Lysol, hydrogen peroxide,
tea tree oil, vinegar, yogurt, and Coca-Cola (yes, Coke)—none of which are
recommended as they could cause vaginal irritation or other health problems.
Who Douches?
How many women do you think douche regularly? Take a guess. According to
some of the latest national data (meaning that it includes people of various
backgrounds, ages, geographic locations, etc.), just over 25 percent of women
douche regularly,8 down 10 percent from a decade earlier. These are averages
and vary based on age and race, with about twice as many women in their
twenties and thirties reporting douching than younger women. This may be
because younger women are less interested in douching, have not started
douching yet, or maybe even are not able to douche regularly if they are worried
that a disapproving parent could catch them in the act. Most women who
reported douching did it once or twice a month.7
Why Douche?
Every woman who douches probably has her reasons, but the most popular ones
are to clean-up after periods or before/after sex, general hygiene, odor control, or
just because it is what they think women do.7
On one hand, without any information, it seems to make sense. Without
washing, the rest of our body can get pretty stinky. We even wash out our mouth
and clean our ears. Why would our vagina be any different? Well, we’ll tell you
why. The vagina is a pretty magical place. It prepares itself for both sex and
childbirth. In fact, one of its simplest tricks is its ability to keep itself clean (one
of the few things that pussycats and pussy actually have in common).
Okay, so the vagina cleans itself. But the cleaner the better, right? Actually,
no. The process of douching may remove normal vaginal flora (bacteria). If it
seems that bacteria are something you normally want to get rid of, think again,
as some bacteria are “good” in that they help to keep our bodies healthy. And
anyway, your vagina is not a dirty kitchen counter. It is more like a wild flower;
it is built to regulate itself and shouldn’t be overwatered (and definitely not
treated with Lysol or other kitchen disinfectants).

That isn’t the only possible problem with douching. In addition to washing
away good bacteria, douching can work as a not-so-fun little water slide,
washing any potential issues (bad bacteria, STI) up past the cervix and into the
uterus and the fallopian tubes. Numerous research studies have found that
women who douche are more likely to be diagnosed with bacterial vaginosis,
gonorrhea, chlamydia, pelvic inflammatory disease, cervical cancer, and HIV.
They are also more likely to have higher infertility rates and ectopic
pregnancies.8 Does that mean that if you douche you are guaranteed to get an
STI and have pregnancy difficulties? Of course not! It just means that your
likelihood may be higher. So, when it comes to douching, our advice to most of
you is “don’t douche it!” Douching may help some women to feel more
confident about their genital smell, taste, or health, or to feel more generally
“clean,” and who are we to tell you what you should do or how you should feel?
As with other health issues, if you have questions about douching and whether it
is right for you, or how you can choose safer douches, this is a great topic to
discuss with your OB/GYN or other healthcare provider. Remember: the more
you tell your healthcare provider about your health practices, such as douching,
the better he/she can handle your healthcare needs.
DOUCHING AS A FORM OF PREGNANCY
PREVENTION
The condom breaks, he was supposed to pull out and missed the exit, you
forgot the pill. We’ve heard them all, those stories that sent chills through
the hearts of those who fear getting pregnant. Still, these things happen. If
it happens to you, what do you do? Do you douche? In a certain way, it
makes sense. You want that sperm out, and the douche will help get you
clean quick, right? Wrong. The douche will squirt the sperm up, sending
them on a joyride right toward their destination. So douching as a birth-
control method is not recommended. Instead, try to reduce your pregnancy
risk by using an effective method of contraception that works for you and
condoms with sufficient lubrication. Emergency contraception (a.k.a. “the
morning after pill”) is a great backup method should something not go as
planned.

PRETTY IN PINK?
How many friends do you have who share the same skin color as you? No, no,
we are not talking about race or ethnicity here. We mean the EXACT same color.
Our guess is not many (if any). The same would probably be true if you were to
compare the color of your inner labia.
Most inner labia are not just unique in terms of size and shape, they also vary
in their color. Some are pink, some have purple hues, others are brown, and
some are (or, with age, gradually turn) a bit gray. With few exceptions, no labia
color is any better or healthier than others (one exception is that if you notice
white patches of skin on your genitals, tell a healthcare provider, as this may
signal a benign genital skin disorder that benefits from treatment; and if your
labia or other vulva parts change in color, such as if they darken or develop
moles, let a healthcare provider know so that he or she can examine them and
make sure they are okay—more on this later in the chapter).
In our personal opinion, we feel that what is unique is beautiful. We once
heard the colors of multicolored labia (it is sometimes a bit darker at the edges)
described as being like a sunset. We love that image and are trying to reinforce
comparisons between women’s genitals and beautiful images in nature. As
women, we are after all a part of nature, as well.
However, if in spite of reassurance from us or from your partner or
healthcare provider you are still feeling concerned about the color of your inner
labia, there is a new product that claims to restore the youthful look of your inner
labia by making them pink. According to the product instructions, “A common
concern amongst women about their labia minora (inside vaginal lips) and
genital area, is the color loss and color change due to age, health, and many other
factors. When the question is put to the female population about what color is
most appealing to the eye, for their labia minora, the answer is ‘Pink.’ This is
also the majority response amongst males for what is aesthetically appealing to
the eye of their sexual partner.”9
Even after disregarding the inaccuracy of this message (not all “young”
women’s inner labia are pink), we are still disturbed by the notion that only pink
inner labia are attractive inner labia. That aside, although we may share our
opinions in this book, we have a zero-judgment policy. Your vulva is your own,
and you should be able to do with it whatever you would like. That being said,
we do want you to be fully informed when doing it. We could think of no better
way of doing that than giving the dye a try ourselves. Does it work? Does it
burn? Does it result in a yeast infection? We wanted to give you a review you

could trust.
We started the process by doing a spot test on our arms. We thought that this
would be a good way to check for allergies and a fun way to tape the experience
for your at-home enjoyment on our Genitales podcast. Long story short: it stung
Debby’s arm quite a bit and changed the color of her arm slightly. The
discomfort, sting, and pain on her arm subsided after a few minutes, but it was
enough for Debby to know that she didn’t want this stuff anywhere near her
labia.
Vanessa did not have much of an allergic reaction to it (or any noticeable
results—the dye didn’t seem to color her skin as much as it did Debby’s skin, but
then again, Debby has lighter skin than Vanessa). Because Vanessa had less of an
adverse reaction during the spot test, it was decided that it was best for Vanessa
to use it on its intended area: that’s right, her labia. So, she did. The application
process was quick and relatively easy given her comfort with and knowledge of
her genitals. Unfortunately, the ease ended there. The process quickly turned
from painless to what can best be described as sensations similar to that of an
angry fire-ant colony attack on one’s genitals. The sixty seconds required before
it could be washed off could not come quickly enough. Thankfully, with water
came quick relief. Once out of the shower and dry, Vanessa felt her labia were
ready for inspection. She noted a discernable difference. Although the color we
had chosen looked deep pink on the package, it managed to transform the labia a
shade of red. If she didn’t know any better, she would have guessed that her
labia were just irritated (and we don’t just mean mad because of the painful
experience she underwent). It was definitely the dye— and it had definitely
made a difference. That being said, hair-coloring rules likely apply here: you can
go a shade darker, but this will not help you to go any lighter. So, the final
recommendation: if you are not dissuaded by the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD) that your labia may endure following the coloring and are willing to risk
the potential for pain or discomfort, then this product may “work” to dye labia a
darker color. If you feel as though the color of your labia is fading, or if you just
want to try a new color on for size, then this product may give you a color boost.
If you are wanting to dye your labia a lighter color, this product is likely not for
you. That’s our honest review for you.
BLEACHING: AN ANALYSIS
Yes, we know this book is mostly about vulvas and vaginas and is not

about the anus. Nevertheless, we thought this was an interesting topic and
we figured, “Hey, the anus is the vulva’s neighbor!”
So what color is your anal opening? If you answered, “I have no idea,”
then you are probably in good company. Many women (and men) have
never given their anus a thorough analysis before. For others, it can be a
point of concern if they believe that it is too dark. Like the inner labia,
there are dyes and lightening products available to address concerns about
the color of one’s anal opening. Some of these are applied in salons, and
others can be applied at home on one’s own. We’ve never tried these
creams, but healthcare providers we know and trust generally do not
recommend them (some suggest that certain lightening products may
irritate the anal skin, which may, over time, lead to hyper-pigmentation or
darkening of the skin). Given the lack of evidence on the safety or side
effects related to anal-bleaching products, we’re not big fans. And anyway:
your lover is probably just as clueless about the color of your anus as you
are. Why not appreciate each other’s parts instead of trying to change
them?
RECARPETING
“Does the carpet match the drapes?” As brunettes, we fortunately have avoided
this question for most of our lives. Many redheaded and blonde ladies have not
been so lucky. There are several famous examples of celebrities whose pubic
hair color has been called into question based on the colors of the hair on their
head (poor Lindsay).
The truth of the matter is that sometimes head hair and pubic hair match and
other times they don’t. For some women, it may not naturally match, and for
others, it may not match because they dye their head hair, and others may go
gray in one area before the other. Like the hair on our head, pubic hair comes in
all different colors, all of which are beautiful. If you still feel self-conscious
about your hair down there, we don’t recommend using your typical hair dye in
that sensitive area. It may be fine, but most hair dyes are not recommended for
use on or near the genitals.
Purple Pubes?

That said, there is a new product line made specifically for dyeing pubic hair
(see Resources). The owner claims to have come up with the idea while living in
Europe. She said that she would notice salon customers lingering by the door,
only to leave after the hairstylist approached them with a small brown bag of dye
that they had mixed to match the hair on their head. The dye comes in “natural”
colors, including blond, brown, and red. We particularly like their fun color line,
which includes pink, purple, and bright green.
During a rebellious stage in high school, Vanessa used to dip into the
bleach/blond hair dye and even played around with blue streaks. So the fun
pubic hair dye colors brought back fond memories, and she volunteered to give it
a try. We started with a spot test of the dye on Vanessa’s leg. While this is often
recommended to help detect if you are hypersensitive or allergic to a cosmetic
product, we also did it for the benefit of the podcast. If you want to see the spot
test 
and 
the 
results, 
check 
it 
out 
on 
our 
podcast 
at
www.readmylipsthebook.tumblr.com. After twenty-four hours with no reaction
from her leg-dyeing adventure, it was time for the real deal. The process was not
terribly difficult, but it was time consuming. It involves two steps:
1. Bleach the hair blonde.
2. Dye the hair your color of choice (in this case, purple).
We learned a few lessons during the spot test that definitely helped during
the actual test. First of all, it is important to follow the directions. This may seem
obvious, but it is important and seemed worth repeating. Second, you want to
coat every hair from root to tip. It is going to become obvious if you miss a spot.
Finally, if you use the boosting tip to save time (covering the spot with
cellophane wrap and blow-drying for five to ten minutes), it is important to make
sure that your hairdryer has several heat and speed options. Put your hairdryer on
a low speed and a medium heat setting, and be sure to keep the hairdryer
moving. The improper use of the hairdryer (on high heat in one place) may have
contributed to Vanessa experiencing a slight reaction following the bleaching
stage. Other than that, Vanessa felt like a blonde down there for the first time in
her life! It was a complete transformation.
The directions recommend using the dye immediately after the bleach. She
considered following the “rules,” but the first stage (being blond for once in her
life) was so much fun that she waited a day before moving on to the dyeing-it-
purple stage. The purple dyeing session went much more smoothly, as she’d
learned from her previous mistake and was more careful with the hairdryer. In
about ten minutes, she was in and out of the shower with a purple people eater

all her own!
All in all, Vanessa felt that dyeing her pubes purple was a relatively easy
process with surprisingly fun results. In addition to following the instructions
(and considering our suggestions about hairdryer use above), we have a few
additional tips/tricks:
It is only recommended for use (as per the package insert) in a “safety
zone.” This zone includes your mons pubis. In other words, it is not for
dyeing hair on the outer labia. This is important for safety reasons, as
getting the dye closer to your inner labia or vaginal opening could cause
significant irritation. Thus, it is perhaps best used by those who want to
stencil in a design or change the color of the hair on the mons—or who are
into two-toned hair (dyed hair in the safety zone and natural color hair
elsewhere).
If you are not careful, it will dye your skin along with your hair. Don’t
panic, the dye should wash off of your skin in a day or less. This may be
helpful to know in case you are introducing someone new to the color or to
your vulva for the first time. If that is the case, you may want to dye your
hair at least twenty-four hours in advance in preparation/anticipation.
If you are deciding between the blond and another color, we recommend the
color! As mentioned, the process of coloring your pubic hair involves
dyeing it blond first anyway. We think that getting the color is like a little
freebie: two colors (blond plus a fun color, such as purple, green, pink) for
the price of one.
Women’s pubic hair comes in all shapes, sizes, lengths, textures, and colors. Try
not to stress if you think that your pubic hair is unusual. However, if you like the
idea of unusual pubic hair, there are now plenty of color options for you to try—
a definite option when lingerie gets old and you are feeling bold!
I wish more women knew that porn is airbrushed, and whatever size or color or
shape their genitals are is just lovely. We (men especially, I think) have been
conditioned to think that women’s genitals should be perfectly coiffed (or
hairless), that the labia should be even and not too long, and that the clitoris
should be straight. That’s ridiculous.
—TAYLOR, 25, Illinois
DOES ONE SIZE FIT ALL?

Vanessa used to have a friend who would always joke begrudgingly that “it was
just her luck that her vagina was the only small part of her body.” That statement
always struck Vanessa as a little funny because she had always been under the
impression that, like most other parts of the body, women were supposed to
believe that “less is more” when it comes to their vaginal circumference. Isn’t it
the common cultural idea for women to have a vagina that’s “tight” (a.k.a.
small)?
Fortunately, no. Women and their vaginas come in all shapes and sizes—and
men and women who partner with women have a range of likes and preferences,
too. Many women have probably never checked out their vaginal size in any
detail. Those who have considered their vaginal size may have done so in
relation to a partner. For instance, depending on your “fit” with your partner, you
may wish that your vagina had a slightly wider circumference for more
comfortable sex if your partner is quite large or a narrower circumference if your
partner is on the slimmer side. (Or you may have wished that your male partner’s
penis was a little smaller or bigger to enhance your genital fit or sensation during
sex.)
We understand thinking/feeling this way at times. We also understand that
where there is a market, there will be a product to fill it (literally, in this case).
Although we understand the reasons for the products, we do not have to agree
with the marketing tactics used to promote some of them. For instance, there are
vaginal creams that claim to make you feel “like a virgin” again. Who would
want that? We can’t imagine that many women would want to undergo the fear
and pain that they may have experienced when “losing” their virginity the first
time. We also worry that such products may make some women feel badly about
their vagina and its size. Disapprove. Then again, we are well aware that many
women struggle with issues related to how they feel about their vaginal size or
sensation, perhaps especially after having children. We get it. And we definitely
believe that healthcare providers should be more attentive to women’s questions
about their vaginas, including how vaginas and vulvas may change due to
pregnancy or childbirth. Far too many women feel brushed aside by their doctors
who tell them things like, “Once you have a baby, nothing is ever the same again
—including your vagina.” Who benefits from a line like that?
Marketing messages aside (they don’t all share the same message), what do
we think of vaginal-tightening products? Well, Vanessa has been pretty brave
and has experimented quite a bit with the products out there, but we were extra
wary about this one. Most of the products contain potassium alum. Have you
ever used or seen natural rock deodorant from the health-food store? Well, that’s

a great example of potassium alum—not something that we were excited to
insert in our vaginas. That being said, we did peruse the reviews for some time
before we came to that decision. If all the reviews are real, they ranged from “it
increased my and my partner’s sexual pleasure” to “it did nothing” to “it dried
me out” to “it gave me a yeast infection.” Sure it may work—but it sounds risky.
Also, we had heard from some of our colleagues who are doctors and others
who sell sex toys and other sexual-enhancement products that many of the
vaginal-tightening creams work by inflaming the vagina. That didn’t sound at all
fun to us. Rather than risking irritation or inflammation to our vaginas or yours,
why not opt for Kegel exercises, which can help to tone the pelvic-floor
muscles? For decades, these exercises have helped many women with genital
sensation. That said, we realized that some women feel as though Kegels only do
so much for them. In these cases, women should ask their healthcare providers,
or a physical therapist who has training in genital-health issues and the pelvic-
floor muscles, what else may be done to improve their perceptions of their
genital size or genital sensation.
At the Other End of the Spectrum
We started off this section by pointing out that women vary in how they feel
about their vaginal size and circumference. Of course, this doesn’t mean that all
women wish that they were smaller. We want to make sure that we don’t leave
out our ladies who long for a larger circumference or a more comfortable genital
fit with a male partner.
If you are hoping to increase your vaginal circumference to ease intercourse
with a more endowed male partner, we recommend the following:
1. Don’t be too hard on yourself. Take it easy and relax—the more nervous
you are, the tighter and less lubricated you may be.
2. Spend at least ten minutes in foreplay, which can help your vagina to tent
and create more space.
3. Use lots and lots and lots of lubrication. It can make vaginal penetration
more comfortable and easier.
4. Try to ease into it. Have a partner ease in one finger at a time and move it
around until you find an arousing angle. Once you are comfortable, ease in
another finger and repeat. If you have a few sex toys that are narrower in
girth, it may help to get started with those.
These little tricks should have you eased into a more pleasurable sexual

experience in no time. If you still find vaginal penetration difficult or even
impossible, we recommend that you check in with a healthcare provider.
Occasionally, various medical or anatomical issues can make penetration more
difficult. Some of these conditions can be easily treated to make penetration a
more comfortable possibility. Finally, if you feel as though your vagina is too
small for comfortable penetration with tampons, fingers, sex toys, or a male
partner’s penis—don’t despair. Dilator use (described in detail in chapter 4) may
be of benefit to you.
A Different Type of Hole
Whoever said that women’s genitals only have three holes clearly did not get her
vulva pierced. This section would not be complete without a brief section on
genital piercing. Although slightly more common for males, there are certainly
many women who have a pierced poonanny. The safety of these piercings varies,
and there is little regulation over the procedures. As you can imagine, then,
people who choose to have their genitals pierced are taking a risk and would be
well advised to talk with their healthcare providers and ask questions before
doing so.
What we can tell you about are some of the most popular piercing styles.10
Piercings through the outer labia can take longer to heal (two to four months)
than clitoral or inner-labia piercings (two to six weeks). The most common
piercings are through the clitoral hood, the body of the clitoris, or the inner or
outer labia. Oftentimes, women will opt for several piercings. As you can
imagine, the clitoral piercings are said to increase sexual sensation. In fact, it is
likely not just sexual sensation, but also sensation when at the office, grocery
store, and everywhere in between. Do you decorate down there? Do you love it?
Hate it? Does it give you pleasure? An infection? Tell us about it on our web site
or Facebook page.
If you or your partner has a genital piercing, you may find it easier to start
sex slowly. If your piercing can be removed and put back in, you may want to
remove your piercing(s) before having intercourse or oral sex (yes, there have
been cases in which piercings have chipped teeth or been accidentally
swallowed). Condom use can be challenging, too, as piercings may tear the
condoms. As such, make sure to get screened for STIs before having sex
together, just in case the male or female condom breaks or in case you choose to
forgo condoms altogether.

PRODUCTS?
Love it or hate it, the vulva has been a source of revenue for many people—and
we’re not talking about prostitution here. Some products are simply modern
translations of products that have been around for thousands of years; others
probably address realistic wants/ needs/desires of women, and other companies
may create a need for a product or a service that no one ever cared about before
its existence (and marketing). Regardless of how you feel about the products, we
are hoping this chapter armed you with the information you need to make a
choice about what (if any) product is right for you.
TEST YOUR VQ
1. When do doctors recommend that an average woman should douche?
a. as frequently as she can—the cleaner the better!
b. once a month after she finishes her period
c. after sex as a form of birth control
d. never ever
2. Which of the following statements is true about tampons?
a. They may take your virginity.
b. Some expand lengthwise while others expand widthwise.
c. There is a likelihood that you will get TSS if left in for too long.
d. If you push your tampon too hard, it can get lost inside of your
body.
3. Inner labia that are not pink
a. are considered unattractive
b. only occur after menopause
c. indictate a health issue
d. are very common
Answers
1. d
2. b
3. d


• 6 •
The Hair Down There
Think back to when you first remember becoming aware of the fact that girls, as
they develop into young women, develop hair on their genitals (let alone their
underarms and perhaps thicker hair on their legs). You may have seen a drawing
that illustrated the kinds of body changes you could expect to see on girls and
boys. Maybe you used to shower or bathe with your mother and noticed that her
genitals looked different than yours, particularly in regard to the hair on hers or
how she used a razor on her genitals whereas you, as a child without pubic hair,
didn’t do this as part of bathing. Or maybe no one told you or showed you
anything about puberty as it pertains to pubic hair. Like many girls on the verge
of womanhood, perhaps the first time you knew anything about pubic hair was
when it first began to appear on your own genitals. Alternatively, the first time
pubic hair appeared on your radar screen may have been when, on Sex and the
City, Charlotte got a Brazilian wax, Samantha freaked out over a gray pube, or
the girls suggested that Miranda—married and having infrequent sex with her
husband, Steve—trim things up down there.
Men: Back off the hair. Seriously. I am very positive about my body, and I can
only imagine how these jerks affect women who are less positive or unsure. This
belongs to me!
—RACHEL, 32, New Mexico
Women recall varied experiences relating to first becoming aware of pubic
hair. Some women remember feeling horrified or embarrassed about pubic hair
as it began sprouting on their genitals. At least one woman we know used to
sneak her mother’s razor in order to get rid of the hair that she didn’t realize was
a natural part of puberty and thus didn’t fully understand. Other women
remember feeling proud and happy about their pubertal changes, including their
genital changes, feeling as though they were going through a momentous and
special change that would soon enough turn them into grown women.
One mom we know talked to us about her daughter’s process of pubertal
change. As a mom who is knowledgeable about sex and comfortable talking
about it, she raised her daughter in a home environment that fostered

developmentally appropriate conversations about gender, sexuality, and pubertal
changes. When her daughter began developing pubic hair, she would count her
new pubic hairs. Not only that, but much to her mother’s surprise, she would
report new hair growth—with great joy and pride—to her mother, who would
congratulate her on her development. “I have six hairs now!” she would say over
breakfast, as if telling her mom about receiving a good grade on an exam. If only
all girls were raised in such open, supportive homes! And if only all women
could continue to feel proud about their bodies rather than feeling as though they
have to tweak them to meet the (real or imagined) approval of their doctors,
partners, or a standard set by magazines.
I think that it is important to talk about our vulvas, vaginas, clitori, labias, and
pubic hair out loud and in public. Men have been talking about their respective
genitals since men could speak, and they do so in the television, on the radio, on
the cross-town bus, at the bar, in mixed company, at family reunions, and so on.
So I think it is time we took some of the mystery and silence out of female
genitalia. Women’s bodies aren’t dirty and shameful and it is time that the world
realizes it.
—SAMANTHA, 28, Michigan
In this chapter, we’ll describe the many things that women have done to their
pubic hair throughout different historical time periods and in different cultures,
including what we know from Greek vase painting, Egyptian art, and nudes of
the Northern Italian Renaissance (who had hair, who didn’t, and why). You’ll
learn about a research study we conducted that involved asking more than
twenty-five hundred women about their pubic hair. In this study, we asked
women what they do with their pubic hair (Shave it? Wax it? Leave it alone?)
and how much they remove (if any), and we also looked at patterns to
understand how women’s pubic hairstyles relate to their sex lives and how they
feel about their genitals. The data were surprising to us, and we hope they will
be of interest to you, too. We’ll also take a look at merkins of yesteryear in
addition to modern-day salon offerings such as vajazzling, vajacials, and
vatooing. Although pubic hair isn’t a new invention, some of the things people
do down there are. Consider this the ultimate guide to your pubes.
OUR HERSTORY IN HAIR
Pubic hair doesn’t have as much of a recorded herstory as, say, how women’s

bodies or hairstyles (on their head) have evolved over time. After all, bodies and
hairstyles are publicly viewable. For centuries, when women were drawn,
painted, turned into sculptures or—in more recent times—photographed or
filmed, they were mostly done so wearing clothes. Consequently, while their
bodies and hairstyles were evident, their pubic hair was typically not visible. As
such, it’s not entirely clear how women’s pubic hairstyles have changed over
time. We only have a handful of sources, such as literature and paintings, that
give us any hint at all about what our female ancestors did to their pubic hair.
WHAT’S HAIR FOR, ANYWAY?
As humans didn’t invent pubic hair—it’s been there all along as far as we
can tell—it’s a little unclear to scientists why exactly we have pubic hair.
Some think that it may help to trap pheromones, which may help us to
unconsciously connect with people we’re attracted to. Others suggest that
pubic hair helps to create a sort of “padding” during intercourse to reduce
friction between two people’s bodies. It may also help to keep our
reproductive parts somewhat warmer.
Women were shown with triangular areas of pubic hair in ancient Egyptian
art, and Greek literature suggests that women engaged in at least some form of
pubic hair grooming, such as plucking hairs or singeing them with a lamp.1 Also,
there is some suggestion that the presence of pubic hair on women’s bodies was
considered sexually attractive. The reasons why the women depicted in Italian
Renaissance art appear with no pubic hair and the women depicted in art from
Northern Italy, and in Gothic art, appear to have some pubic hair is not clear.2
Were there differences in women’s pubic hairstyles in these places and times? Or
did the (often male) artists paint women’s genitals as they imagined them—
regardless of what women often looked like nude? We don’t know. The German
Renaissance artist Lucas Cranach the Elder often depicted women’s genitals in
rather vague ways. Sometimes they were covered with leaves and/or branches,
as in Adam and Eve (1528) and The Close of the Silver Age (approximately
1527–1535). In other paintings, such as Venus Standing in a Landscape (1529)
and Venus and Amor (1534), the mons is visible but lacks detail—there are no
pubic hairs to speak of, but then again, there is also no hint of labia (e.g., a “slit”

or “camel toe”).
It’s not always clear to what extent the artists had experience with women as
nude models or if they simply imagined what women looked like naked. Also,
artists who did have nude female models available to them may have been more
likely to have prostitutes or courtesans model for them, and these women’s pubic
hairstyles may have differed from other women in their towns. Women with
many sex partners, such as prostitutes and courtesans, would have been at
greater risk for pubic lice (as they are even today), and removing one’s pubic
hair is one way to protect oneself from pubic-lice transmission, a tactic that some
suggest was widely practiced by sex workers of the time for this reason.3, 4 After
all, if a person (male or female) doesn’t have pubic hair, then even if they’re
exposed to pubic lice (crabs), there are no hairs for the lice to cling to.
In the late nineteenth century, Goya’s painting The Naked Maja featured a
nude woman with sparse pubic hair reclining on a lounge chair. But it was
Gustave Courbet’s L’Origine du Monde (1866; translated as The Origin of the
World) that eventually—at least when it was publicly exhibited—caused a bit of
a stir by prominently featuring a woman’s genitals in detail, with a full mound of
pubic hair and the outer labia (labia majora). (Note: this painting was originally
created for a benefactor’s private collection and passed through several private
collections before becoming a part of various museum collections and being
seen by the masses.) This painting didn’t just depict the origin of babies’ worlds,
as per conception and vaginal birth; it also—at least in hindsight—hinted at a
world in which women’s genitals would (eventually) begin to be more openly
displayed. Or, at least, we like to think of it this way. The image has been
reprinted in several books and has continued to be a source of controversy, at
times challenging community standards of decency.
THE NOT-SO-PERFECT PUBIC STORM
As fascinating as the herstory of pubic hair from days gone by can be, many
people are interested in the state of pubic hair in more contemporary times—and
for good reason, as it’s an interesting story! Though the media often focus on the
dawn of the Brazilian in the 1990s in New York City, or on the frequent images
of young, often panty-less female celebrities being photographed up their skirts
as they exit cars, there is much more to the story of vulvas and pubic hair than
these elements. Join us as we take a brief tour through the past few decades of
pubes.

V-CRAFT: MAKE YOUR OWN MERKIN
If it’s not already abundantly clear, we are big fans of the vulva and of
women’s rights to make choices about their own bodies and sexualities. In
short, we think you should style, keep, or remove your pubic hair in
whatever way makes you happy. If you want to grow a long, thick, natural
mane (the better to run your fingers sensually through), we’ve got your
back. We’ll also high-five you if you prefer to keep your pubic hair
trimmed or shaved into shapes, or if you remove every last hair on your
mons, labia, inner thighs, and around your anal area. If you’re down with
your down there, we think that’s great.
Whether you have hair and think it would be fun to have even more or
you’re bare and would occasionally like to masquerade around with some,
here’s how you can make your own merkin (a.k.a. a pubic wig). Many
people think that prostitutes who would go bare to treat or prevent pubic
lice created merkins. However, now they are used mainly for fun, or in
Hollywood movies to mask actresses’ genitals or for period pieces in which
the female characters would have had full, natural pubic hair rather than
neat landing strips or some other design.
Before proceeding with this craft, you may want to watch Amanda
Palmer’s music video “Map of Tasmania” for inspiration (it’s available on
YouTube the last time we checked; “map of Tasmania” is apparently
Australian slang for a woman’s pubic area).
What You’ll Need
A cotton thong or G-string, the thinner and stringier the sides, the
better. Your merkin will look more natural if the thong or G-string
matches the color of the skin on your hips/stomach.
A wig—often available at arts-and-crafts shops or costume shops.
Choose whatever color (Brown? Black? Red? Purple?) or texture
(Short and curly? Straight and smooth?) you prefer. Wigs can work
better than free-standing hair or weaves because the hair is already
sewn into some type of fabric or cap.
glue
scissors
marker

What to Do
1. Hold the triangular pubic area of your thong/G-string up to the back
fabric-side of your wig.
2. Trace the triangular part of the underwear onto the fabric side of the
wig.
3. Cut the wig along the lines you’ve traced.
4. Place glue on the fabric side of the wig, then press it onto the
triangular part of your thong or G-string underwear on the part facing
out.
If you’re good at sewing, you might find that sewing the triangular
piece of the wig to your G-string provides a more secure fit than gluing it.
You can wear your merkin at home alone for fun. Alternatively, you
can wear it for a partner and encourage him or her to rub their fingers
through your new set of hair. A homemade merkin also serves as quite the
conversation piece when worn as part of a costume (wear tights underneath
your merkin if you’d like to cover more skin or are worried it might slip to
the side, thus revealing your genitals).
Note, too, that you can switch the wig out for any kind of materials that
you prefer: cotton balls, Legos, yarn, hair curlers, or fake flowers or leaves
(frequently sold at craft stores) are all options. Use your imagination!
NOTABLE MOMENTS IN PUBIC HAIR
1972: Dr. Benjamin Nair invents a depilatory cream, now known as “Nair,”
that is marketed for hair removal.
1979: Artist Judy Chicago first exhibits her installation The Dinner Party,
featuring thirty-nine place settings and china plates (many of the latter
featuring vulvas) for historical and mythical women. Being somewhat
abstract, it’s unclear whether most of the vulvas have pubic hair.5
1982: Full, natural pubic hair is on display in the naked college-coed
shower scene made famous in Porky’s.
1985: Designer Rudi Gernreich—already known for inventing the
monokini—unveiled the pubikini, a bathing suit for women that featured
a small V-shaped strip to show off women’s pubic hair.

1989: The Cunt Coloring Book is published, giving artistic license for
women (and men) to create their Dream Vulvas—hairstyles included.
1992: In her role in Basic Instinct, Sharon Stone reveals her vulva in a
famous (but brief) leg-crossing scene, leading to a great deal of curiosity
about her hairstyle. Reports circulated suggesting that she did not realize
her vulva would be shown in the movie, making this an early instance of
non-consensual female upskirt shots in Hollywood.
1996: The Vagina Monologues, written by and starring Eve Ensler, debuts
at HERE Arts Center in New York. One monologue is titled “Hair.”6
1998: Betty Dodson releases Viva La Vulva, a video that highlights
interviews with women about their genitals and, as part of the genital
portraits, features pubic hair grooming and styling.7
The Vagina Monologues author Eve Ensler launches V-Day, a campaign to
end violence against women and girls that involves women on college
campuses and cities around the world mounting performances of The
Vagina Monologues as fundraising events. Consequently, thousands of
women begin talking more openly about vaginas and selling products,
such as T-shirts with the word “vagina” on them and chocolate-vulva
lolli-pops. There is some controversy over how many of the “vaginas”
mentioned in the play are actually vulvas, and there is much continued
dialogue about hair.
2000: The Brazilian wax—already somewhat trendy thanks to quotes
surfacing from actress Gwyneth Paltrow about how waxing changed her
life—is featured on Sex and the City.
2003: Photographer Mario Testino shoots model Carmen Kass, mostly
naked and with her underwear pulled down to reveal her pubic hair
shaved into the letter G (for Gucci). Some called for the ad image—
dubbed “Pubic Enemy”—to be banned.
2004: The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete Vulvovaginal Health8 is
published along with information about pubic hair removal methods.
2006: Brandon Davis uses the word “firecrotch” to describe Lindsay
Lohan in an online video. The video gets picked up and the term is,
sadly, used persistently by gossip blogger Perez Hilton in posts about
Lohan.
2005: In a New York Times article titled “The Revised Birthday Suit,”
writer Natasha Singer speaks to women opting for a more permanent
“baldness” down there, via laser hair-reduction treatments. There are

also mentions of men going bare, women dyeing their pubic hair pink,
and a woman with a lightning bolt pattern to her pubes.
2006: In separate incidents, the bare vulvas of Paris Hilton, Lindsay
Lohan, and Britney Spears are photographed and appear on Hollywood
gossip blogs.
Just speaking the words vagina, pussy, genitals, clitoris without hesitation is a
huge leap! I think we as women give permission to other women to feel
comfortable, maybe that seems obvious but I rarely spoke the words even to my
girls. I care if a man might feel turned off and not want to have oral sex because
he thinks I’m not like some picture at times, but deep down I think most men are
not that picky. I think fear can crush some sweet girls out there. I guess that we
as women need to shift from thinking about our bodies only for sex and
remember health and happiness comes first . . . sex follows.
—ELLEN, 53, New Jersey
In The Break Up, Brooke (played by Jennifer Aniston) gets a Brazilian wax
and then—to induce jealousy or to get revenge— walks around naked in
the apartment she’s sharing with the boyfriend she’s recently split from,
played by Vince Vaughn.
Two physicians in the UK, Dr. Armstrong and Dr. Wilson, publish a letter
in the journal Sexually Transmitted Infections titled “Did the Brazilian
Kill the Pubic Louse?” The doctors note that although rates of
chlamydia and gonorrhea increased in their practice from 1997 to 2003,
the rates of pubic lice (crabs) decreased, particularly around 2000 (for
women) and 2003 (for men), coinciding with the popularity of Brazilian
waxing.9
2007: Body Drama by Nancy Redd is published as a book for younger
women. It is body-affirming, featuring many images of diverse bodies—
including vulvas. In fact, there are twenty-four images of vulvas laid
side by side with varied pubic hairstyles including fancy fluffs, groomed
lady gardens, and beautiful bare-naked lady parts. (Well, we came up
with these terms; but you get the picture—the women in her photos do
all sorts of fun things with their hair.)
Hank Moody sings the praises of women’s natural pubic hair (and natural
labia) on the popular show, Californication.
Debby takes her Wondrous Vulva Puppet on The Tyra Banks Show to teach
women about their genital parts in an episode called “What’s Up Down

There?” The clip goes viral to millions of viewers on YouTube, in part
because of it being posted on PerezHilton.com and aired on Talk Soup
and Best Week Ever. And yes, pubic hairstyles get a nod.
The movie Knocked Up features a famous birth scene in which the main
character, played by Katherine Heigl, gives birth and her vulva is
completely bare. The blogosphere chatters away about the bald “stunt
vulva.”
Reality show actor Spencer Pratt allegedly writes a negative post about
actress Lauren Conrad (LC), describing her as having “beef curtains.”
Perez Hilton runs with this term and frequently calls LC by that name
afterward.
Finnish performance artist Mimosa Pale launches her “Mobile Female
Monument,” which she describes as “an interactive performance
sculpture on wheels.” It’s also known as a large vulva sculpture
operating as a bicycle taxi. Her “bicycle bits,” as we like to think of
them, were on exhibit at the Tennis-palatsi Art Museum in Helsinki,
where they were taken for a walk around town every other day.
Individuals could enter the sculpture, and there was reportedly enough
room for an adult to lie down in it. (See MimosaPale.com for photos.)10
2008: Rachel Liebert founds the International Vulva Knitting Circle
(IVKC), a “grass-roots activist collective in support of the New View
Campaign’s WTF-ing against the emerging industry of female genital
cosmetic surgeries.” In its first year, the IVKC had almost 150 diverse
knit vulvas from five countries.
Comedian and author Amy Sedaris appears on Chelsea Handler’s show,
Chelsea Lately, and teaches Chelsea about “vaginal cleansing” using a
model that she says was made by Todd Oldham. Though there are some
wavy lines on the outside of what she calls the “outer folds” (the outer
labia, we presume), it’s unclear if these are meant to be pubic hairs or
not.
2009: Actress Kate Winslet tells Allure about wearing a merkin for her role
in The Reader. “I had to grow the hair down there,” she said. “But
because of years of waxing . . . it doesn’t come back quite the way it
used to. They even made me a merkin—a wig—because they were so
concerned that I might not be able to grow enough.”
The New View Campaign holds an event titled “Vulvagraphics: An
Intervention in Honor of Female Genital Diversity” at The Change You

Want to See Gallery in Brooklyn, New York. The event features vulva-
related art including knit vulvas from the IVKC.
The UK newspaper The Guardian publishes an article featuring the work
of “The Muffia”—two female performance artists, Sinead King and
Katie O’Brien, who lift their dresses and expose merkin-covered
underwear while communicating messages to passersby. These
messages raise questions about women’s issues, such as female genital
cosmetic surgery, eating disorders, and more.
2010: The Hairy Underwear Collection is founded on January 4, 2010, by
Finnish duo the Nutty Tarts (tarahtaneet.net) and features underwear that
are given the appearance of having pubic hair on the crotch.
On Lopez Tonight, actress Jennifer Love Hewitt talks about getting
vajazzled. “After a breakup, a friend of mine Swarovski crystalled my,
um, precious lady,” Hewitt told Lopez. “It shined like a disco ball.”
VATOOING
We would rather this be called a “vulvoo,” rather than a “vatoo”—as it’s
not actually a temporary tattoo for the vagina but for the vulva. And in all
fairness, it’s also been called a “vatu” and a “twatoo” in the blogosphere.
Essentially, the vatoo is an airbrushed image toward the top of, or just
above, a woman’s waxed-bare mons, and it was pioneered by the
Completely Bare salon in Manhattan.
Although a fun and kind of quirky idea, one video we watched about
vatoos had the aesthetician warning not to mess it up during sex. This
doesn’t bode well for sex positions such as the coital alignment technique,
a variation on missionary that involves a woman and her partner lining
their bodies up quite closely and grinding, rather than thrusting in and out.
Coital alignment technique has been shown to help make it easier for
women to experience orgasm during intercourse. Given the choice between
a no-holds-barred sex act and a not-smudged vatoo, which would you take?
In a New York Times profile of the J Sisters (who reportedly started the
Brazilian-wax trend), writer Stephanie Clifford attributes the decline of

the Brazilian to the 2008 recession.
Vanessa and Debby take to the Las Vegas Strip with Vanessa dressed up as
a giant vulva, a costume she made herself. This occurs the evening
before the New View Campaign’s conference at the University of
Nevada Las Vegas called Framing the Vulva: Genital Cosmetic Surgery
and Genital Diversity (newview campaign.org).11
In her book Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang, Chelsea Handler writes about
learning about her genitals—what she calls her “coslopus” and likens to
a pincushion—while growing up. When she learned that she would one
day grow pubic hair on her coslopus, she says that she experienced
mixed feelings about this and would frequently wonder, in a way that
only Chelsea can do, “Pubic hair or pincushion by itself?”
2011: Groupon airs a Super Bowl commercial featuring model Elizabeth
Hurley in which she begins by talking about the perils of deforestation
impacting the Brazilian rainforest—that is, before she says, “but not all
deforestation is bad.” The example she uses is that “since 100 of us
bought at Groupon .com, we’re all saving 50 percent on a Brazilian wax
at Completely Bare in New York City.”
WHAT DO WOMEN DO DOWN THERE, ANYWAY?
Not long ago, our research team at Indiana University conducted a study about
women’s pubic hair-removal patterns. Like many people, we were curious about
what women were doing with their pubic hair. We had read many magazine
articles that claimed that nearly all young women were going bare. We even
came across articles that said going bare was increasingly common among
women from their mid-twenties to their forties and fifties. But this didn’t make
much sense to us.12
WHAT’S YOUR STYLE?
“I prefer to have a ‘tuft’ of pubic hair on my mons pubis, and keep my
labia majora as hairless as possible. I like how this looks, and it
decreases my frequency of yeast infections. My partner also likes this
style because it is easier for him to perform oral sex on me.”—Alana,
22, Indiana

“Bald, smooth, shaved top to bottom. It is what I have always liked.”—
Zoe, 36, Canada
“Have shaved completely in the past because of partner’s preference.
Currently shave vulva and keep mons hair short.”—Abby, 28, Texas
“I trim, but not shave. I don’t think this is influenced by anyone’s
preference besides my own.”—Rachel, 25, Colorado
“I prefer to have a nicely manicured triangle at the top and hair-free
labia. It’s due to my preferences. I love to touch the bare labia.”—
Gina, 36, Washington
“I’ve often trimmed it but also leave it ungroomed often. One lover
shaved my pubic hair. I really liked how it felt, but it was
inconvenient to maintain. Also, if I shaved my pubic hair now, I’d be
self-conscious in the locker room. Most of my lovers haven’t
expressed a preference.”—Casey, 43, Indiana
“Busy, with the ‘hedges’—hair that extends past my panty line,
removed.”—Jill, 36, New York
“My pubic hair is waxed into a ‘California’ strip. My labia majora and
mons pubis both have hair on them (that I keep trimmed), but the
bikini line, plus a bit extra is waxed off. My partner doesn’t care one
way or another how I have my pubic hair. I just like feeling clean and
able to wear a bathing suit without being embarrassed by hair
sticking out everywhere.”—Mary, 31, Texas
“Trimmed (sometimes VERY short and other times just a bit). I have no
pain tolerance and am irrationally afraid of taking a razor to that area
(no clue why but I am)! However, going wild and free is a little itchy
so I give it a haircut. I remember making a pact with a friend in high
school to never do anything to our vulvas for a partner . . . only for us
based on what we want! While this, in hindsight, is a little extreme,
when I was rocking full bush and my of you and I’m kind of loving it
(until I didn’t anymore)!”—Hilary, 22, Massachusetts
“I leave my pubic hair completely alone. Sometimes for fun I will trim—
and one time I tried shaving it all—but generally I just leave it. I do
however have very little hair and when it’s completely grown out it
still doesn’t show outside my bikini bottoms. As for my friends . . .
definitely everyone grooms, if not waxing or laser. My friends and I
talk about it sometimes but I am in no way interested in grooming my
pubic hair constantly. My partner prefers when I’m completely grown

out.”—Jessica, 28, Canada “Prefer it all shaved/waxed. I’m not fond
of body hair on me or on anyone else.”—Kali, 22, India
“I prefer it slightly waxed so it doesn’t show in a bathing suit. I disagree
with Brazilians. I wish grown women didn’t want to look like 10 year
old girls.”—Jane, 48, New York
“I don’t care much how it looks. I enjoy cutting hair so it’s fun to mess
with. I also tried trimming it to get my girlfriend to want to go down
on me more. Didn’t work, however.”—Anne, 26, Idaho
“When I was with my first partner I hadn’t had sex before so I didn’t
know of his expectations. I left my genital hair natural and he was
very surprised when he first saw it, he said something along the lines
of ‘it’s hairier than mine’ (which wasn’t even true) and I think he
expected that I’d naturally have very little hair there or none at all.
For this reason I shaved it off while I was with him. When I broke up
with him I decided that it was a stupid expectation and that I actually
preferred to have some hair there as shaving is uncomfortable, so
now I just trim and shave around it but leave most of the hair where it
naturally should be!”—Liz, 22, UK
“Completely shaved, obviously affected by society, but I personally like
the feel of it bare and shave even when I am not planning on having
anyone see it. My partner definitely likes it shaved, but if he didn’t I
wouldn’t grow it because hair feels scratchy and uncomfortable to me
down there.”—Cynthia, 18, Connecticut
“There is no peer pressure for a woman of my age to be waxed or shaven
but since I was in my twenties I have trimmed my pubic hair and had
electrolysis on the bikini line or waxing. These days I only trim as I
wear skimpy clothing less. I do pluck the odd hair from the groin
area.”—Brenda, 55, Australia
In part, this didn’t hold up because Debby often teaches human sexuality
classes to college students at Indiana University, and they had more diverse
stories to tell. When the topic of pubic hair removal would come up in class or in
students’ papers, she learned that these young women described a wide range of
things they did with their pubic hair. Some kept it natural. Others trimmed. And
still others shaved, waxed, or used more permanent methods (such as laser hair
reduction). We had also talked about pubic hairstyles with friends and found that
they did different things with their hair, too. And being in a locker room, one can
see a range of styles.

We found that there was very little scientific data on the subject and decided
to conduct our own study of women’s pubic-hair removal patterns as part of a
larger study we were conducting related to women’s sexuality. We published the
results of our study in the Journal of Sexual Medicine in 2010 and are happy to
share them with you here as well.
In total, we asked 2,451 women ages eighteen to sixty-eight, to tell us
whether, how, and how often they had removed their pubic hair over the
previous month.12 We asked about shaving, waxing, laser hair reduction, and
electrolysis. We also asked how much hair they removed (some or all of it).
Then we categorized women into groups based on what their pubic hair had been
like over the previous month—did they remove all of it so often that they were
likely bare most or all of the time? If so, we called them “typically hair-free.” If
they removed all of their hair only a few times, we described them as engaging
in “some total removal.” Women who removed some, but never all, of their
pubic hair were grouped as “some removal, not total.” Everyone else fell into the
category of not having used any of the removal methods we asked about.
Now, this wasn’t a perfect study. We didn’t, for example, ask about
depilatory creams, which some women may use on their genitals. But it was the
largest study ever conducted on women’s pubic-hair removal patterns and
covered a lot of different age groups, so we’re quite proud of it, even if it wasn’t
perfect.
HAIR, BARE, AND EVERYWHERE: WHAT WE LEARNED
What we found is that going bare isn’t nearly as common as many media reports
suggest. Even among the youngest age group in our study (women ages eighteen
to twenty-four), only 20.6 percent of women were typically bare. Another third
(38.0 percent) removed all of their pubic hair some of the time, which means that
some of the time they had pubic hair. We can’t help but wonder if these women
remove their pubic hair only if they expect to have sex or when they have a
GYN exam, as we know from other research we’ve conducted that women
commonly groom their pubic hair before they see their doctor. Nearly one-third
of college-aged women (29.1 percent) reported removing some, but never all, of
their pubic hair over the previous month. The rest (12.4 percent) didn’t remove
any of it that we know of.12
Women in older age groups were even less likely to remove all of their pubic
hair. Among women ages twenty-five to twenty-nine:

12.4 percent were typically hair-free (went bare much of the time)
32.2 percent were sometimes hair-free
39.4 percent removed some of their hair, such as through waxing or
shaving, but never all of it
16 percent didn’t shave, wax, or use electrolysis or laser methods
For women in their thirties and forties, about half removed some pubic hair but
didn’t go bare. Only about 9 percent of women in their thirties reported being
bare much of the time over the past month, as did about 7 percent of women in
their forties. We also found that bisexual women were more likely to go bare
compared to straight or lesbian women. Women who were partnered were more
likely to go bare at least some of the time, and those who were not sexually
active generally didn’t remove their pubic hair compared to other women.
What was particularly curious is that women who went bare some or much
of the time had higher scores on measures of genital self-image and sexual
function. This means that these women generally felt more positively about their
genitals. They also generally experienced higher desire, higher arousal, and
greater sexual satisfaction than women who didn’t go bare. We’re not really sure
what this means. We find it difficult to believe that going bare automatically
makes women like their genitals more or have better sex. We think it’s more
likely that women who are more into how their genitals look perhaps want to
show them off, by taking it all off from time to time. Or maybe women who are
highly into sex and who have arousing, satisfying, and perhaps more
adventurous or experimental sex lives are more likely to be daring with their
pubic hair, such as taking it all off. More research is needed to better understand
how women’s pubic hairstyles relate to the rest of their sex lives.
Perhaps the most important take-home message from this study is that—
contrary to what we sometimes see in the media about there being one dominant
pubic hairstyle for women—women do all kinds of different things to their pubic
hair. Some do nothing. Some trim their hair. Others shave the sides off or shave
it into shapes, such as a heart or a star. Some women shave or wax all of it off, or
opt for electrolysis or laser methods to permanently reduce how much hair they
have. As far as we’re concerned, this is great news, as it means that there’s no
“standard” that women should feel pressured to live up to when it comes to their
hair. Just as women’s labia come in all sorts of shapes, sizes, and colors, pubic
hairstyles are diverse, too.
We weren’t the only ones that were excited about this finding from our study.
After our study was published, numerous writers from women’s magazines and
blogs called us to ask about the study so they could share our results with their

readers. Many of these writers thanked us for conducting the study and said that
they, too, were tired of media articles that made it seem like every woman on the
planet was as bare as a baby down there. Not that there’s anything wrong with
being bare—there’s not, as far as we’re concerned. But there’s something really
nice about finding out how individual we all are, and that more women than we
may realize are bucking the so-called trends and doing whatever the heck they
want down there.
WEARING YOUR HAIR
Now that we’ve talked about what other women do with their pubic hair, let’s
talk about you and your pubic hair. What follows are some basic tips for each
type of style listed—just in case you’re thinking about switching things up down
there.
Going Natural
This is exactly what it sounds like. When you go natural, you don’t trim, shave,
wax, or engage in any kind of removal. Some women naturally have very little
hair, whereas others boast a full natural “bush” that could stand up to even the
wildest merkin on the market.
Advantages No maintenance is required—just wash and air dry, and you’re
all set. Plus you may have hairs that are long enough to decorate with little
ribbons or even braid. There are no side effects to going natural, and it’s free! It’s
also coming back in style, albeit with a new name—the Retro Bush.
Disadvantages You may find yourself in a bit of a pickle in swimsuit season;
if you don’t want the world to see your pubes, you may want to opt for a “boy
short” swimsuit bottom. If you’re okay flashing your hairs, like Miranda does in
the Sex and the City movie, go for it! There’s nothing wrong with going natural.
Also, sexual partners of women with long or bushy pubic hair may find it more
difficult to perform oral sex on them (then again, some people like a challenge,
so this isn’t a disadvantage for everyone).

Trimming
This is perhaps one of the most common forms of pubic hairstyling that men

engage in, but it’s also common among women. Tip: small scissors are often
easier to maneuver than larger “craft” or kitchen scissors. Plus, no one wants
pubes in kitchen scissors that may later be used on food items.
Advantages Easy to do on your own and only needs to be done once every
week or so to keep hair length in check. Trimming hairs can make it easier for
partners to perform oral sex. There’s also no risk of razor burn or chemical
irritation and nothing to buy except for scissors (not a bad initial investment).
Disadvantages Be careful not to cut yourself (rare, but it happens). There are
also similar swimsuit considerations as noted in the “going natural” category.
Shaving
Many women choose to shave their pubic hair, especially if they prefer to not
have pubic hair sticking out the sides of their underwear or bathing suits. You
may get a closer shave using a double-edged razor blade. Some disposable
razors come with soft lotion-strips to soften the skin post-shave. Shaving in the
direction of hair growth can reduce the risk of razor burn (this is opposite to the
direction that many women use to shave their legs).
Advantages Inexpensive. You can do it yourself. Relatively easy to do once
you get the hang of which direction to shave. Razors are also portable, so you
can continue to shave while traveling.
Disadvantages Hair can grow back quickly, which means you may be left
with stubble or find yourself having to shave often (e.g., every day or so) to
avoid stubble. Many women also find that they get razor burn or are prone to
ingrown hairs as a result of shaving.
Depilatories
Depilatories are made of chemicals that remove hair. They come in different
forms including gels, lotions, creams, and roll-on devices. Not all depilatories
are recommended for use in the genital area, so read any instructions or package
inserts to make sure that you are using it correctly.
Advantages Relatively inexpensive, you can do it yourself, and hair removal
may be longer lasting than it is with shaving, leaving a smooth hair-free feeling.
Disadvantages Some women are prone to irritation from chemicals
commonly found in depilatories. You may want to do a skin test first (on another
part of the body, such as your leg or inner arm), as is often recommended in the
instructions that come with depilatories. Also, avoid using depilatories on skin

that is inflamed or broken, such as if you have razor burn or sores.
Waxing
Pubic hair waxing has become increasingly popular over the past decade or so.
Many full-service hair salons now offer bikini area waxing. There are also many
waxing-specific salons, particularly in major cities such as New York
(Completely Bare), San Francisco (Stript), and Chicago (The Waxing Room).
Advantages Because waxing involves pulling the hair out at the root, it lasts
longer than shaving or depilatories. The area that was waxed may feel smooth
for one or more weeks following a treatment. There’s also no risk of razor burn.
Disadvantages The cost is moderate to expensive (the more hair removed,
the more expensive). Also, the wax irritates some women’s skin. Oh, and it can
hurt like hell—especially the closer one gets to the inside parts of the outer labia.
Plus, the terms can be confusing. For example, some salons describe a Brazilian
wax as leaving a small “landing strip” of hair and a “Hollywood” as going
completely bare. But when many other salons list “Brazilian,” they’re referring
to removing every last hair. Our advice? Ask questions! Be specific with the
aesthetician about what you do or do not want removed. (All the hair on top?
What about the hair on your labia? What about the hair in your butt crack? Yes,
some wax jobs go there . . . Be prepared to get awfully cozy with your
aesthetician.) Finally, one often needs at least a couple weeks of hair growth in
order to have hair that’s long enough to wax off, so get ready to grow before you
go.
VAJACIALS
A few years ago, Stript wax bar founder Katherine Goldman started
offering vajacials in her Bay Area salons—essentially, treatments for
women’s vulvas about a week following their full Brazilian waxes.13 The
treatment is meant to care for women’s skin and includes a warm wash,
exfoliation, extractions (removal of ingrown hairs), and a mask that may
include an antifreckle agent, an antibacterial agent, or a calming solution.
The vajacial is finished off with a lightening treatment to even out skin
tone. Last time we checked, it cost about $60. Though vajacials have gotten
a lot of press (after all, they are yet another way for the vulva to become
trendy!), we haven’t seen any signs that would suggest they’re sweeping

the nation. Over the past few years, it’s seemed as though inventing new
words that start with VA and have something to do with women’s sexy
parts (e.g., vajazzling, vajacial, vatooing, vajayjay) has been enough to get
a lot of traction in the blogosphere.
Sugaring
Sugaring is an all-natural method of hair removal. The “sugaring” paste is often
made with ingredients such as sugar, lemon juice, and water (though salons may
vary). Also called “sugar waxing,” although technically, there shouldn’t be any
wax involved, at least not with the traditional Middle Eastern methods we are
familiar with.
Advantages A greater hair-covered area can be sugared off at once than with
waxing. As such, sugaring may not take as long. Sugaring can be less painful
than waxing (Debby tried this once years ago and concurs). You can also try
mixing up your own sugar paste with recipes and instructions found online (you
may want to try non-genital areas, such as your legs, before you experiment with
sugaring your pubic hair).
Disadvantages Sugaring hasn’t taken off everywhere, so it can be difficult to
find a salon that offers this service (some salons mix sugar with their wax and
call it sugaring, but this is not the same). In salons, the cost is moderate to
expensive, often close in price to waxing. Also, as with waxing, you often need
at least a couple of weeks of hair growth in order to have enough length to sugar
off.
Electrolysis
Electrolysis sounds more science fiction than salon, but it’s been a common
method of hair removal for years. It involves having a trained professional use a
needle device (called an “epilator”) or a tweezer epilator to send electric current
to the hair root. It’s meant to destroy the hair follicle so that hair won’t grow
back.
Advantages When it works, it can result in permanent hair removal (or at
least a reduction in the amount of hairs).
Disadvantages Electrolysis can be expensive and require a series of
treatments (home electrolysis kits are available but not often recommended).
And it can be painful. Also, it sometimes doesn’t work (the electric current may

miss or not be enough), and the hair grows back. There are also risks of scarring,
infection, and electric shock (the latter is uncommon but possible), and not all
states require electrologists to be licensed.
Laser Hair Reduction
Laser hair reduction is one of the more recent innovations in hair removal. More
doctor’s offices now offer laser hair reduction. Before scheduling an
appointment, you may want to ask who will be performing the treatment (if it’s
not the doctor, you should make sure that it will be performed by a technician
who has specific training).
Advantages Laser hair reduction has been shown to be more effective in
reducing hair regrowth as compared to electrolysis. Newer lasers also make the
treatment effective for a broader range of skin pigments and hair types than in
years past. Often, several treatments are needed to reach one’s desired results, so
you should ask questions about roughly how many treatments are recommended,
how you should prepare for the treatment, how much it will cost, what the
technician’s credentials are, and what you can expect as far as the treatment
goes.
Disadvantages Like electrolysis, not everyone who offers laser hair
reduction is well-trained or experienced in it (again, ask before you schedule an
appointment or go through with the procedure). Also, laser treatments can be
quite painful, particularly the closer one gets to the outer labia. Ask about
options for decreasing discomfort, such as the use of an anesthetic cream. Side
effects are possible, including inflammation, hypopigmentation (areas of
lightened skin), and hyper-pigmentation (areas of darkened skin).
YOUR PERSONAL PUBIC STYLE: SOME THINGS TO
CONSIDER
Given the many different options for one’s pubic hair, there are several things
that you may find helpful to consider as you choose your next pubic hairstyle or
method of grooming:
Cost. Try to select a method that you can afford to keep up. Some methods
are particularly expensive. College women, for example, are more likely to
shave than wax. Brazilian waxes, for many women, went by the wayside
during the 2008 recession. And laser hair reduction? It’s not unheard of for

women to choose this longer-lasting, but more expensive, method of hair
removal after they get their first job or a raise.
Convenience. Ask yourself if this is a method that you can keep up on your
own. If you’re planning to go on a camping trip and don’t expect to have
access to regular showers, you may find it easier to either go totally natural
or to do something longer lasting (like wax rather than shave) before your
trip.
Upkeep. Consider the upkeep. Trimming, for example, may only require
weekly or biweekly attention. If you shave your pubic hair, you may find
that you’re smoothest with a daily or every-other-day shave. Electrolysis
and laser hair reduction take less time and are done less often, but they do
require one to make—and keep—appointments. How much time are you
willing to put into your hair down there, and how often?
Your preference. What pubic hairstyle helps you to feel confident? Sexy?
Your partner’s preference. What kind of pubic hairstyle turns your partner
on? How do your preferences match up?
Hypersensitivities and allergic reactions. Some women have more
sensitive skin than others. If you’re prone to razor burn, shaving may not be
for you. And if you keep getting ingrown hairs, you may want to ask your
healthcare provider about other options for grooming, such as laser hair
reduction. Or just trim your hairs—if you’re not getting them at the root,
you’ll be far less likely to encounter problems.
Steady hand. The stories we could tell you of shaving and trimming gone
wrong! Simply put, if you don’t have a steady hand, or if you approach
shaving or trimming your pubic hair with a great deal of anxiety, then leave
it to the pros and have an aesthetician do your pubes for you. Either that or
go completely natural. Years ago, Debby was at a vulvovaginal health
conference and sat through a presentation that highlighted various hair
removal injuries on women’s vulvas, including many shaving strokes gone
astray. Be careful out there!
When you’re down with getting down. If you’re not a morning person,
you might not want to grab a razor and hit up your downtown area until you
are wide awake, alert, and have a steady hand. If your partner frequently
intrudes on your showers, wait until you’re alone to hop in the shower and
shave your pubic hair into your preferred style—that way, your partner
can’t get in the way or make you nervous while you groom. If you’re into
waxing, you may want to schedule it for a time when you are not on your
period, as some women feel more sensitive while menstruating.
Personal characteristics. Believe it or not, your race/ethnicity may

influence the best method of hair removal for you. In The V Book: A
Doctor’s Guide to Complete Vulvovaginal Health,8 gynecologist Dr.
Elizabeth Gunther Stewart describes how Caucasian women tend to have
egg-shaped hair shafts, Asian and Native American women tend to have
round hair shafts, and African American women tend to have elliptical-
shaped hair shafts. As such, she says, different hair removal methods may
work better for different women. She writes, for example, that African
American women tend to be more prone to bumps from shaving but often
have better results with laser hair reduction. Check out her book for more
detailed information.
WHOSE HAIR IS IT, ANYWAY? HOW TO HAVE A PUBIC
HAIR POWWOW WITH YOUR PARTNER
In her work as a sex columnist, Debby often hears from women and men who
seek advice about how to talk with their partners about pubic hair. Sometimes
the question comes from a woman or a man who wishes their partner would go
bare, go natural, or do something fancy down there. Other times, the question is
from someone who has long had one pubic hairstyle but now wants to change it
up—they just aren’t sure how their partner will react.
I feel that I am really lucky in that all of my sexual partners have been incredibly
sex-positive and very educated and comfortable with my genitalia. I know from
talking to my female friends that this is not always the case for many women,
though, and often women are hurt or shamed by their partners’ attitudes. I wish
there was more information out there to help women realize that they should
stand up for themselves and their bodies and not let sex-negative male partners
shame them and make them feel insecure for the rest of their lives!
—ALYSSA, 24, New York
The key to good relationships and to good sex is communication, and the
same is true for negotiating pubic hairstyles. If you’d like to have a pubic hair
powwow with your partner, consider the following:
Try to find a time when neither of you is distracted by anything else (e.g.,
television, studying, work, packing the kids’ lunches). This could be while
you’re lying around on the sofa or when you’re lying around postsex.
If you’re the one who’s thinking of changing your pubic hairstyle, and you

worry that it will matter to your partner, bring it up. In your own words, say
something about how you’ve been thinking about doing something different
with your pubic hair and you’d like his or her opinion on the matter.
If you’re open to it, ask your partner if he or she would like to help out,
such as by carefully shaving part of your hair, supportively cheering you on
as you grow it out, or helping you create a pube-encil (see this chapter’s
activity).
If you’re hoping your partner will change his or her pubic hairstyle, start the
conversation by saying something positive about your partner, such as how
you find him or her sexy or attractive or that you love his or her body
(maybe even his or her pubic hair specifically). Rather than saying that you
don’t like your partner’s style and think he or she should change it, why not
start from a more positive place? Suggest that an even sexier look might be
fun (natural, trimmed, shaped like a lightning rod). Or say something like,
“I thought I might enjoy/get turned on by grooming your pubic hair, if
you’d let me.” If your partner’s not into your ideas, try not to take it
personally. After all, it is his or her hair—you just get to play with it.
If your partner wants you to change your pubic hairstyle and you’re up for
it, great! There are many ways to add variety to one’s relationship or sex
life, and this can be one of them. If you’re not into your partner’s
suggestion, politely say so. You can always suggest an alternate style or ask
if there are other things you can do, outside of the pubic hair realm, to
please him or her.
If you do decide to groom each other’s pubic hair, be careful—especially
with scissors or razors. When you shave yourself, it’s easy to feel if you cut
yourself or if you’re shaving too hard. When you shave another person, it’s
not necessarily so clear, so be gentle. Also make sure to groom each other
in a well-lit space—and not when you’re drunk (save the wine or
champagne for later on in your romantic interlude).
ACTIVITY: DIY PUBE-ENCILS
If you’d like to customize your pubic hair into a shape, such as a heart or
flower or the first letter of your or your partner’s name, we invite you to
consider making your own at-home pube-encil.
What You Will Need

a washable marker
scissors
paper
1. Use your marker to draw your preferred shape on a piece of paper.
You may want to hold up the piece of paper to your mons to make
sure it’s the size you want.
2. Cut out the shape by cutting along the lines that you have drawn.
3. Hold the shape up to your mons while you or a partner use a washable
marker to trace around the shape. This will result in a shape drawn on
to your vulvar skin. If you have questions or concerns about ink
getting on your vulva, we recommend that you talk with a healthcare
provider before trying this activity.
4. Trim the hairs outside the line, then shave or wax them off for total
removal. This should result in a neat shape of pubic hair, which you
can further trim or keep their natural length, depending on your
preference for the finished look.
HAVE FUN WITH YOUR HAIR
There are many ways to enjoy your pubic hair. For example, you might
Check out a pubic hair dye. Make sure to use one specially designed for
the pubic area, such as Betty Beauty, and even then, make sure to patch test
it away from your pubic area before using it there. Follow the instructions
to reduce your risk of irritation.
Love your grays! Even Samantha from Sex and the City went gray. If we
live long enough, every single one of us will. Though it’s a little unclear
exactly when this happens for everyone, most people we’ve asked say that
they get their first gray down there years after they go gray up top.
Give it a little tug. Some women find it pleasurable to stroke or tug their
pubic hair during masturbation, foreplay, while receiving oral sex, or during
other types of sex.
Make it even prettier. If you’ve got a lot of hair down there, why not go all
out? Tie little bows around a few strands for a fancy look. Bare women
shouldn’t have all the fun, a la vajazzling. Besides, bows are way more

affordable than crystals or rhinestones. You can color coordinate your bows
with your outfits. And if you’ve got a Pride party to go to, do them up in
rainbow colors!
Get down with pube-encils. Create your own stencils to more easily
fashion your or your partner’s pubic hair into the shape or letter of your
choice.
Ask for help! Many couples find it erotic to groom each other’s pubic hair.
As noted earlier, just go slowly, do it sober, and be careful. There’s nothing
sexy about accidentally nicking one’s partner with a razor.
GIVING BIRTH BARE—OR WITH HAIR?
When Katherine Heigl’s character gave birth in Knocked Up, many moviegoers
noticed that her vulva was bare. For many women, this was surprising—after all,
as one approaches her due date, the vulva may be more sensitive with increased
blood flow to the pelvic area. Would one really want to risk the pain of getting
waxed? And with a large late-third-trimester tummy, would one really be able to
easily reach one’s own vulva to shave?
Nurses, midwives, and OB/GYNs we spoke with had a different take on the
matter. Some said that women in their labor and delivery rooms routinely had
their vulvas shaved as a matter of course. Others noted that although pubic hair
shaving had previously been common when women were admitted to the
hospital to deliver, the practice had largely fallen out of favor where they work.
At least one nurse said that it didn’t matter, though, as many of her patients came
to the hospital with their vulvas already bare from having waxed or shaved on
their own.
Several studies have been conducted on the topic of shaving women’s pubic
hair for labor and delivery, with some finding that the practice has no impact on
perineal infection or healing.14 If there’s no benefit to the practice, one can see
why the practice has largely fallen by the wayside. If you’re pregnant, you might
want to ask your OB/ GYN or midwife about his/her viewpoint on this matter
and his/her plans for your pubes. That way, you can also weigh in with your own
pubic preferences and ask the questions that matter to you.
TEST YOUR VQ

1. The least expensive (and safest) pubic hairstyle is
a. going natural
b. going totally bare
c. shaving daily
d. waxing monthly
2. The term for a “pubic wig” is
a. mister
b. muffin
c. merkin
d. muff
3. Which comedian famously “taught” Chelsea Handler about vaginal
cleansing on TV?
a. Sarah Silverman
b. Joan Rivers
c. Tina Fey
d. Amy Sedaris
Answers
1. a
2. c
3. d

• 7 •
Evulvalution
Vulva Culture
Take a moment to close your eyes and think of an artistic vulva image (or any
vulva image really) made prior to the twentieth century. What have you come up
with? With the exception of the few art history majors or vulva-art connoisseurs,
it is likely that most of you did not have an image come to mind, unless perhaps
you went looking for some of the images we mentioned earlier when discussing
pubic hair.
Think back to some of the most famous female nudes throughout history. For
us, some of the first images that come to mind are of Eve with her leaf
strategically covering her genitals or Botticelli’s fifteenth-century Venus with her
hand (and hair) modestly hovering over her vulva. In contrast, consider some of
the corresponding famous male nudes from similar time periods. Both
Michelangelo’s David and the Creation of Adam depict clear images of the
penis. What about the vulva? Was it invisible until the creation of Internet
pornography? Hardly. In this chapter we will explore the many ways in which
vulvovaginal culture has manifested, from ancient mythology to masturbation
workshops in New York City to contemporary online art-and-craft projects.
LET THERE BE VULVA! FROM THE BEGINNING
Vulvas have unarguably been around since the beginning of woman-kind, and
vulva art goes back almost as far as herstory itself does. The first vulva
representation available to our knowledge is that of the Venus of Willendorf,
which dates back over twenty-five thousand to thirty thousand years to the
Paleolithic era.1,2 That’s right—one of the oldest pieces of art in the world
includes a representation of the vulva. She is a limestone statue discovered in the
early twentieth century. By today’s social standards, she would be considered
obese and would likely be classified as unhealthy. However, researchers suspect
that she was a symbol of beauty and fertility at the time she was created. The
size of her body has received a great deal of discussion and debate, but there is

less attention paid to her vulva. Some of the individuals who have mentioned her
vulva have described it as everything from defined to pronounced to missing. To
us, the appearance of her vulva is quite clear. In fact, if you examine an image of
her closely (highly recommended), you can almost decipher both her inner and
her outer labia. Not only did one of our first artistic representations of women
have genitals, she had genitals with details! It seems as though she was a far cry
from contemporary female figures (e.g., Barbie) in more ways than one.
I also want to say that since discovering how much I embrace my own vagina,
enjoying the way it looks and feels, it has made me curious about other women. I
am in love with my partner, who is male, and have considered myself
heterosexual most of my life, but find myself curious about others’ vaginas and
find women’s genitalia to be beautiful. I’m not sure if this is a sexual desire or
not. I’m not sure I would call it an “orientation” because I am with a man, and I
also don’t want to appropriate that term, considering I have had none of the
experience of a queer-identified person. But I do think that feeling comfortable
and embracing my own body has led me to have new ideas about sexuality and
the fluidity of desire. Deconstructing my own ideas about sex, bodies, and
pleasure has opened my eyes to the possibility of new desires and attraction.
—JESSICA, 21, New York
The vulva of Venus of Willendorf was not the only ancient representation of
women’s genitals. Some of the earliest historical stories from Mesopotamia
contain positive references to women’s genitals. There are both direct and
indirect references to the vulva throughout songs and tales from the time. In
translations of ancient poetry, both male and female genitals are referred to using
positive words and metaphors. One poem even describes the vulva as “sweet like
beer” (an association that we would expect to come from a college party, not
ancient Mesopotamian literature).3 In fact, the Mesopotamians felt so positively
about women’s genitals that they even had a goddess of the vulva, Nin-Imma.
Nin-Imma was a fertility goddess whose name literally translates to “the goddess
that creates everything.”3 Not a bad title if you ask us! The next time you are
struggling for a positive term for your vulva, you may want to consider calling
her your Nin-Imma. It doesn’t have the ring of “vajayjay,” but it does have a
long history that may make it even more powerful than an Oprah-approved term.
RAISE A SKIRT TO GOOD FORTUNE

What do you call someone who flashes his/her genitals at you? Unless invited,
that person is often called a flasher, and that behavior is often grounds for a call
to the police. People tend to think of flashers as male, but what about female
flashers? In one case in Madison, Wisconsin, female flashers were identified as
the cause of a 2002 Halloween riot that resulted in broken windows, fires, and a
general state of reckless chaos.4
Women flashing their various parts (breasts, vulvas, and bottoms) is
encouraged at select times (e.g., Mardi Gras) and is the source of a very
profitable business in some cases (e.g., Girls Gone Wild). In fact, the behavior is
the basis for many strip clubs. So today, flashing your vulva would likely be
viewed as a deviant or highly sexualized act. In ancient mythology, however, the
stories were very different.
An investigation of the ancient mythology from several different continents
reveals several surprisingly similar stories about anásyrma (flashing of the
genitals or bottom). In Greek mythology, there is a tale of a mother named
Demeter (the goddess of the harvest) who was left feeling lost and dismayed
after her daughter Persephone (daughter of Zeus, the father of gods and men)
was abducted to the underworld by Hades (the god of the underworld).5 Demeter
spiraled into what can likely be described as a deep depression as she searched
for her daughter. While traveling despairingly in search for her abducted
daughter, she met a woman by the name of Baubo. Stories about the way in
which Demeter meets Baubo and their relationship vary. Regardless, one portion
of the story remains the same in most versions of the tale: Baubo immediately
lifted Demeter’s spirits simply by lifting up her skirt. One Latin translation by
Clemens states, “Having said so, she at once drew up her garments from down
below and revealed to the sight the form of her privy parts; which Baubo tossing
with hollow hand—for their appearance was puerile—strikes, handles
caressingly.”6
To us, it sounds as though she also masturbated when she lifted up her skirt.
We have also heard that she was a postmenopausal woman who was
masturbating, which would be a wonderful celebration of sexual pleasure for all
ages! Unfortunately, we were unable to find any historians who explicitly
support (or mention) her masturbation in this context. There is, however, a
consensus on the positive impact Baubo’s vulva-flashing has on Demeter, who
immediately cheered and drank the potion that was offered to her.6 That one
simple act is said to have ended a long sorrowful journey for Demeter. In
celebration of that story, ancient statues of Baubo were carved and have been
located in numerous places throughout Europe. Many statues represent Baubo as

two legs with a large triangle for a face and a vulva in place of her chin. Other
figurines emphasize a pronounced vulva, representing the importance of the
vulva in ancient Greek mythology and art.
The story of Baubo in Greek mythology has a surprising number of
similarities with ancient tales from both Egypt and Japan. According to Japanese
mythology, the sun goddess Amaterasu was tortured by her brother, the wind-
god Susanowo.5 While this starts as simple brother/sister teasing, it escalates and
results in the death of one of her maids. This frightens her (as it would anybody),
and she decides to hide in the rocks and refuses to come out despite pleas from
numerous gods and goddesses. After multiple attempts from many to get her out
of her hiding spot, Uzume, the Dread Female of Heaven, revealed her genitals to
Amaterasu. This action caused eight hundred gods and goddesses to break out
into a laughter so deep that it caused the land to shake. Amaterasu was surprised
by the laughter, assuming that everyone would be in profound sorrow waiting for
her to come out of her hiding spot. For the first time since going into hiding from
her brother, Amaterasu left her cave, bringing light back to the world.
Similar to the story of Amaterasu in Japanese mythology and Baubo in
Greek mythology is the story of Ra in Egyptian mythology. This Egyptian tale
takes place during a time of turbulence between gods and begins when a god by
the name of Ra is insulted. He was evidently very upset by this insult and
proceeded to sulk, refusing to speak to anyone.5 As with Demeter, no one was
able to cheer him until a goddess exposed her private parts to him. And as in the
story of Baubo, this caused him to laugh, ending his desolate emotional state.
This story is honored during the celebration of Bast, one of the most popular
during its time in Egypt. During the celebration, women traveled on barges and
shouted crude insults to those onshore, often exposing their vulvas as they did.
Thus, as with the Baubo figurines, the commemoration of these stories
demonstrates how celebrated the skirt-lifters once were.
To this date, there remains an intellectual debate between historians about
why lifting a skirt and exposing genitals would result in so much laughter
(apparently they don’t think vulvas are as humorous as we do—see the “Vulvas
Are Funny” sidebar).
It has been suggested that the laughter was a result of the surprise/shock of
seeing a(nother) woman’s genitals. It is also possible that what was considered
humorous at the time may have been quite different than what is today, and that
people were amused by the degradation of others for their amusement. If this is
the case, then the stories indicate that these women/goddesses were actually
humiliated by raising their skirts. While this is possible, it seems less likely,

given that the skirt-lifting was done of their own free will.
VULVAS ARE FUNNY: A PERSONAL ANECDOTE
After sitting quite nicely through a friendly (yet somewhat formal) dinner
where we somehow managed to keep the conversation off of vulvas for at
least two straight hours (back pat), we headed over to a comedy club. At
one point, the comedian made a comment about vulvas that Debby felt was
a bit vagina-negative. It’s not clear whether the quiet formality of the night
overtook Debby or whether that glass of wine had just taken its toll, but in
an effort to counter his comment, Debby yelled out, “But we love vulvas!”
It worked. The comedian stopped his monologue, asked her what she said,
and she repeated it, which got them into a brief conversation about vulvas.
Soon enough, he was working vulva love into his stand-up routine.
Although we like to think that the vulva awareness helped everyone that
night, we felt particularly inspired by a joyful conclusion. Not only are
vulvas powerful and feminist and shocking—they can also be funny.
Alternatively, pulling from several other lines throughout the ancient texts,
theorists suggest that it is the unusual appearance of the skirt-lifters’ vulvas that
triggered the laughter.6 For instance, authors point to a line about Baubo’s
genitalia that states that it is similar to that of a little boy who is flaccid and
without hair. Still, some historical theorists suggest that Demeter’s laughter is
caused by the fact that Baubo shaves her pubic hair,7 while others suggest that
she has an enlarged clitoris and is perhaps intersex.6 We don’t have the answer
but do think it is interesting that a modern interpretation of this ancient, joyous
tale of the vulva has been changed into a story about the mockery of deviant
genitalia and/or the humiliation of the women who show it.
VULVAS ON DISPLAY
Figurines of Baubo were not the only ancient figurines with prominent vulvas
found throughout Europe. Have you ever approached someone’s home or a

building and stopped to wonder whether it would result in enhanced fertility,
protection against evil, or warnings against lustful behavior? It is unlikely. These
days, few modern buildings are adorned with symbolic carvings or figurines, and
even fewer of these figurines have large, pronounced vulvas. Conversely,
figurines designed for this exact purpose have been located throughout Ireland
and Spain. Dated back to approximately the eleventh century, these figurines
were not so different from some of the Baubo carvings. The figurines had large,
round heads and small, undefined torsos with breasts and two thin legs spread
wide open (not unlike the lithotomy position you climb into at your
gynecologist’s office) with large, open vulvas/vaginas as the central focal point.
There are at least sixty-five buildings with these figurines in Ireland alone.8
The name of the figurines, sheela-na-gigs, is about as unclear as their
purpose. While some have claimed that the name translates to “immodest
woman,” others believe that it is simply a name for the crouched position of the
sheela-na-gigs. Like the name, people have speculated that sheela-na-gigs are
everything from gargoyles that protect buildings to evil spirits to warnings
against immodesty to representations of goddesses.8 We may never be sure what
the meaning of sheela-na-gig is (although our vote is for the goddess) but we do
know that we like the idea of hanging a vulva statue outside our door to
welcome guests. We are particularly fond of this idea for gynecologists’ offices.
SOCIAL CUNTSRUCTIONS
What are the exterior parts of women’s genitals called? Hopefully, at this point
in the book you guessed “vulva.” If you did, you’re correct. Okay, now hop into
an intellectual time machine and go back to before the fourteenth century. Same
question: what do you call women’s genitals? Sure, you can still use the terms
“vulva” or “genitals,” but now you have another option. You can also use the
term “cunt”! That’s right, once upon a time, the term was not insulting or
derogatory; it was simply another term used to refer to women’s genitals. The
name is believed to have stemmed from the Asian goddess Cunti (knowing what
you now know about the relationship between goddesses and the vulva, we hope
that this is not as difficult to believe as it once was). Therefore, it is quite
possible that the origin of the word was positive and powerful.
We really need a good word that means “vulva, labia, vagina, and clitoris.” A
positive word. People get snarky and mean about women who say “vagina”
when they mean the genital area as a whole, but I think that is a load of crap.

People often use a part to represent the whole, especially when there is no good
word for the whole. Don’t be a douche. Most of the women doing that know
perfectly well what the word vagina really means.
—PEGGY, 24, Minnesota
One of the first-documented uses of the word “cunt” was found on a street
sign from the Middle Ages in England. The name of the street was Gropecunt
Lane because of the purpose of the street at the time.9 In the same way that some
cities use grids systems, they used to name streets for the purposes they served.
So the street received its name for the number of prostitutes who worked there.
There were several other streets with similar names throughout Europe. Can you
imagine proposing that street name at your local community board meeting
today? Forget the meaning, the word “cunt” would probably send everyone into
a frenzy. Well, it was apparently just fine until approximately the seventeenth
century when the word was deemed obscene and inappropriate.10 Even today, in
contemporary times, many people feel that cunt is a negative word. (And in all
fairness, it is often used in a derogatory way, so that doesn’t exactly help things.)
Some feminist activists hope to reclaim the word and the power behind it,
returning it to its positive place. Vanessa tried to be a part of this cunt-positive
movement in graduate school. It’s tricky, though, as, “thank you” is often not the
automatic retort to being called a cunt. However, we recommend giving it a try!
THE STORY OF SARAH BAARTMAN
In the early nineteenth century, a few centuries after “cunt” went out of style, the
vulva had another major blow to its self-esteem. In 1825, a woman by the name
of Sarah Baartman was a slave in Capetown, Africa. Originally Khoisan, the
family she worked for encouraged her to travel to England under the false guise
that it would lead to her emancipation and corresponding riches.11 To her
surprise and horror, freedom was a far cry from what she was forced to endure
throughout her life and after her death. She shared the distinctive feature
common to many Khoisan women called steatopygia, which was characterized
by protruding buttocks and portly thighs. In order to display these “distinctive”
features, all of her clothing was taken from her, and she was paraded around
stages/cages as a spectacle for the fine men and women of England to gawk at.
While her “large protruding buttocks” were her primary claim to “fame,” you
can find extensive descriptions about her genitalia if you dig through the history
books a bit deeper. She was poked and prodded while onstage in order to display

her vulva to crowds of judgmental onlookers.12
The English men and women of the time gave Ms. Baartman the nickname
of Venus Hottentot and her long, flowing inner labia received the most scrutiny
of all. Thus, inner labia that were long or dark in color became labeled as
“other,” as “deviant,” and as “improper.” After her death, her genitals were
pickled and placed in a museum for years to shame her and any onlookers who
may have had similar genitals hiding underneath their petticoats. (Sadly, the
genitals of some African men were also kept in jars by Westerners who saw
these individuals as more curiosities than living, breathing humans of equal
value.)
FREUD’S PSYCHO-GENITAL-ICAL ANALYSIS
Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalytic theory in the early twentieth
century, is often considered controversial by contemporary psychologists.
However, one thing can be said for certain about Freud: he put a lot of thought
into the importance of genitals (or lack thereof). In fact, he believed that the
genitals played a key role in the psychosexual development of both males and
females. He believed that it was a psychologically momentous event for young
boys or girls to see the genitals of someone of the opposite sex for the first
time.13 For young girls, the scene would go something like this: newly out of
diapers (somewhere between 3.5 and 6 years old), she is sitting around minding
her own business when she suddenly notices a penis. She looks down between
her legs to find that she is without such a bulge and becomes overtaken with
envy of the long schlong. Why? Well, the answer is simple. According to Freud,
the sight of a penis leads to the realization that she will be unable to sexually
satisfy her mother. Yep, her mother. So, she develops a desire for her father, and
the soap opera plotline thickens. This, of course, is not an entirely conscious
process, making it a tricky theory to test.
What do we think about penis envy, you ask? We say penis envy, schmenis
envy. Not to hate on male genitals (we want men to feel good about themselves,
too!), but vulvas have distinct advantages:
1. With a vulva, you never have to worry about covering your excitement with
a book when called to the front of the classroom.
2. You always have the option to sit in the privacy of your own bathroom stall.
3. Your genitals have been compared to flowers and fruit.
4. You have your own private pleasure button.

That’s not to say that there aren’t advantages to having a penis, either. Some
men play with their genitals to the point that they call it penis “puppetry.” And
they can pee pretty much anywhere without having to worry about sitting down.
To the extent that this makes lines for men’s public restrooms that much shorter
certainly creates envy in many women. But still, we’re happy with what we
have, and we hope that men are happy with their parts, too.
Speaking of their parts—if Freud thought that women had penis envy, does
that mean that he thought males must have penis pride? Not quite. Let’s go back
to our stage. A little boy in the same age range is again none the wiser when—
BAM!—he is confronted with a vulva. Instead of being in awe of the beauty of
the vulva or even thankful for his own little package, he is psychosexually
traumatized by the event. That’s right; Freud proposes that his reaction is not
actually one of appreciation but one of fear. To him, the vulva looks like a slit
where a penis used to be, and he concludes that the woman (likely his mom)
must have had a penis at one time that has since been removed. This leads to
what Freud terms “castration anxiety” that someone will slice off his penis
(although penectomy anxiety would be a better term because castration implies
that only the testicles have been removed). How would this happen, you ask? As
far as we know, Freud does not exactly specify how men fear this will happen.
Do Vaginas Have Teeth?
Freud’s non-specificity about castration anxiety would not be particularly
noteworthy if it was not for the obvious omission of famous folklore that warned
of a toothed-vagina. This belief is titled “vagina dentata” and has a long history
from early mythology to contemporary stories in which men’s penises are
severed after inserting them (often forcefully) into women’s vaginas. Depending
on who tells or interprets the stories, they can be viewed as forewarnings of the
dangers of women to men or a forewarning to men about the dangers of forcing
oneself on a woman. Either way, according to Freud, seeing a vulva leads to
castration anxiety in males. As such, although we wouldn’t describe it as the
most positive of theories about the vulva, it did bring genital issues back up for
discussion.
YOU SAY LILY, I SAY LABIA
If you ever mention vulva art to anyone who knows art, one of the first artists
they are likely to mention is Georgia O’Keeffe. She was born into a large family

in the late nineteeth century on a farm in Wisconsin. Later in life, she attended
the University of Virginia and then Columbia University for art classes, where
some of her later art was inspired.14 During this time, she also became involved
with the National Women’s Party, an organization formed to advance the
women’s suffrage movement. In 1924, she exhibited her first now-famous large
still-life floral paintings.14 The similarity of the appearance of her flowers to
vulvas in these famous still-life paintings is unmistakable. Still, she denied that
the paintings were intended to represent anything other than flowers. When
asked about it, she once said “when you took time to really notice my flower you
hung all your associations with flowers on my flower, and you think and see of
the flower—and I don’t.”15 In other words, she attributes any aesthetic
similarities between her paintings and women’s genitals to the natural
resemblance of flowers to vulvas, as opposed to the intentional imitation many
people had assumed. Because her initial art exhibits coincided with Freud’s early
publications on psychoanalytic theory, the meanings of the flowers were further
deconstructed by their relationship to women’s genitals. Whether or not the
flowers’ resemblance to women’s genitals was intentional is unclear. Though,
one thing we can be certain of is that the paintings remain one of the most
popular representations of vulvas in history, even if unintentionally.
I wish women knew there is no one right model for how female genitals are
supposed to look. Small is not better than large, “tidy” is not better than loose
and floppy. They all are capable of doing their jobs—feeling good, giving
pleasure, containing, taking in, protecting, accommodating, opening to give
birth. Female genitalia are gorgeous, awe-inspiring, powerful, sensitive, diverse,
vulnerable, and nothing to be ashamed of. Looking at female genitalia is like
looking at a garden—tulips or freesias are not better than daffodils or tiger
lilies.
—BARBARA, 61, California
The relationship between Georgia O’Keeffe, art, and vulvas does not end
with her artistic representations of flowers. She was also the most contemporary
woman to be seated at the table for The Dinner Party.16 This installation by Judy
Chicago depicts 1,038 women who have made substantial contributions
throughout time. Chicago’s piece was inspired by the belief that much of art was
designed based on history, and she wanted to create an artistic piece that
represented herstory instead. With a great deal of help from other women over
several years, she created a vulvastic piece of art with thirty-nine powerful and

influential women sitting around a dinner table (hence the name).
“Why so vulvastic,” you ask? First, the dinner table was shaped like a
triangle with three equal sides. For many people, the triangle is evocative of the
vulva (in particular, the mons). The real kicker comes from the way that the
women at the table were represented. She could have created wax figures or
paintings, but instead—as alluded to earlier in the pubic hair chapter—Chicago
decided to pay homage to each woman with a beautiful and unique vulva-like
place setting. There were also more than nine hundred names of other women
who united these individuals or were worth recognizing in some way. As far as
we’re concerned, beautiful + unique + female unity + vulva = vulvastic! The
dinner party is still on display and can be visited at the Brooklyn Museum in the
Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art. It is a must-see on any vulva
adventurer’s scavenger-hunt list.16
VULVACTIVISM
You may be thinking that Judy Chicago was pretty brave to bring vulvas to
public awareness. She was, but she certainly was not the only one. In fact, the
1970s were a pretty revolutionary time for the vulva and vagina. The 1960s–
1970s were the decades of vulva awakening and awareness. Women from around
the United States began to come together to talk about their lives and roles as
women in groups that were called consciousness-raising groups. It was an
important time for feminism, and these women did some pretty kick-ass things.
In some of the groups, the women would discuss their bodies and would become
frustrated by how little they knew about them. They decided that the best way to
take control over their bodies and sexualities was to take matters into their own
hands (literally).
V-CRAFT: VULVA MOLDEL: MAKING YOUR VERY
OWN VULVA ART
What You Will Need
alginate
water
a large, shallow bowl or medium-sized pan/tin

plastic gloves
plastic wrap (optional)
Vaseline (optional)
a large plastic bag (large trash bags work well)
a comfortable place to sit sans pants for several minutes
a book full of creative ideas for the vulva mold (check!)
Steps
1. Do you want to be a vulva moldel? There are probably lots of ways to
go about this, but this is one way we recommend! You actually only
need a few ingredients to create a vulva mold, and most of these can
probably be found around the house. The only ingredient that you may
not have is alginate. You can probably use several different things to
make a cast, but we recommend alginate because that is what the
artists we talked to recommend. Fortunately, purchasing alginate
should not be a terribly difficult or expensive process. If they do not
have it at your local arts-and-crafts store, you can find it for sale on
numerous web sites. You don’t need a lot of alginate for a single mold,
so no need to order a bulk size (unless you are having a vulva casting
party!). When purchasing online, you may want to consider contacting
the seller ahead of time to ask how much water he/she recommends
adding to the alginate because it may vary by seller. However many
cups of water it takes for you to completely submerge your vulva is
probably about the amount of alginate you should order for a single
vulva mold.
2. First things first, alginate can be messy and tricky to clean. You will
want to cover your workspace with a non-porous material. Some extra
trash bags or plastic shopping bags should do the trick! Cover all the
areas of your home/clothing that you want to protect, as you would do
with any other art project.
3. Once you have acquired some alginate and set up your workspace, the
rest is easy. First, you have to decide how comfortable you are with
the alginate touching your skin. It is possible that you may be allergic.
If you decide to place it directly on your skin, it is a good idea to test
it on your inner labia (they may be more sensitive than your other
skin) at least twenty-four hours in advance. In addition to being
sensitive or allergic, if you apply the alginate directly to your skin,
you risk pulling out some very sensitive hairs down there. It may work

for shorter hair if covered in Vaseline or another protective agent, but
it is risky. Also, we don’t recommend putting it directly on your
genitals if you have any cuts, sores, or scrapes. To be on the safe side,
we recommend wrapping your genitals in plastic wrap or other
material (e.g., latex for the allergy-free) that you feel comfortable
placing on your genitals. Take some time with this. The more detailed
your wrapping job, the more detailed your mold will be.
4. Once you have made sure that your genitals are ready to mold, pour
the appropriate amount of alginate into a separate container (not the
mixing/molding bowl), and fluff it with your hands until you have
gotten out all of the lumps. Next, measure the appropriate amount of
water. Every alginate is different, so be sure to follow the directions
you were provided. Pour the water into the molding container,
followed by the alginate. Quickly squeeze the batter through your
fingers to smooth it as best you can.
5. Once the batter is mixed, you have to continue to move very quickly
because alginate takes under ten minutes to dry. So place the molding
tray on a pre-covered chair or floor, and position yourself strategically
above it. Dip in as much of your genitals as you want included in the
mold. Sit very still.
6. Approximately ten minutes later, the mold should have hardened.
Carefully remove your genitals from the solution and . . . voila! Enjoy
the vulvastic mold you just created!
7. The options are endless. You can paint it and put it on your wall (for
the brave and bold) or in a drawer (for the brave and discreet).
Consider adding some chocolate for a delicious, sexy treat or some
soap for some good clean fun. Enjoy!
Interested but sound a little too complicated? You may want to consider
purchasing a kit from an online retailer. We suggest the one from
holisticwisdom.com.
During some of these parties, the women would gather together with
speculums to look inside and learn all about their own vulvas, vaginas, and
cervixes. We were not around during the time of these parties, so we can only
imagine how liberating they must have felt for the women participants. Just
think about how wonderful it would be to change your associations with

speculums from the fear and discomfort you feel at the gynecologist’s office (if
you are like many women) to feelings of excitement, curiosity, and sisterhood.
Even if you are not interested in starting your own speculum party, you may be
interested in purchasing one to learn all about the ins and outs of your vulva.
Betty Dodson
Many women in the United States attended and led consciousness-raising groups
during the 1970s. One well-known group leader was Betty Dodson, a foremother
in the genital advocacy movement. She has written several books (including Sex
for One: The Joy of Selfloving and Orgasms for Two: The Joy of Partnersex) that
tell of her plight for genital-diversity awareness.17 She came to accept her
genitals only after looking over a series of “beaver shots” that depicted a normal
range of genital images (these were obviously not today’s magazines—see
Chapter 4: How Do I Look? for more information).
Inspired by the beauty of the natural diversity of women’s genitals, she took
photos of numerous courageous women’s vulvas. Betty showed these pictures at
a National Organization for Women conference in 1973 in a presentation titled
“Creating a Genital Aesthetic.” For many women, this was the first time that
they had ever seen genital images, and she writes about how shocked many of
the women were to see these images.17 After the picture show was finished, she
was met with a resounding applause. Since then, she has continued to work
tirelessly advocating for genital awareness and acceptance. One of the things she
has become famous for are her masturbation workshops. Similar to speculum
parties, Betty’s masturbation workshops focused on helping women to learn
about their own bodies in order to enrich their potential for sexual pleasure and
orgasm. She found that one of women’s biggest barriers to sexual pleasure was
their anxiety about the appearance of their genitals. As such, in the masturbation
circles, she would ask the women to go around and discuss these concerns
honestly and openly with one another. Later in the session, they would have a
genital show-and-tell, and some even had a genital portrait taken. It allowed the
women to learn that their genitals were natural, normal, and beautiful. Betty has
written extensively and taped several videos on this exact topic, which are now
available on DVD. In our experience showing these films to women and men,
we’ve found that more people come to appreciate their genitals—and learn a few
tips for sexual pleasure as well.
Annie Sprinkle

Betty Dodson was not the only genital activist (or in her words, “vulvactionist”)
who promoted genital acceptance through art. Annie Sprinkle has advocated
similarly powerful genital messages. If the name itself doesn’t make you smile,
maybe her work will. Sprinkle is a former sex worker/porn-star extraordinaire
and a foremother in sex-positive feminism who continues to work as an activist
and artist.18 She has conducted a variety of art shows and engaged in numerous
activist projects meant to disrupt the way that we think about women’s
sexualized bodies. At one point in her earlier career, she created a small business
with a close friend selling locks of pubic hair, vials of urine, and used panties.
Does this sound like a list of things that you would dread confronting in a shared
bathroom? Probably—but that’s exactly her point! They are all part of natural
body functions and experiences and what it means to be human. And yet many
of us feel repelled by these very things.
It makes us think of that book Everyone Poops.19 Well, everyone urinates
and pretty much everyone grows pubic hair and wears panties (at least some of
the time). Yet, for some reason, we are embarrassed or ashamed about these
things. Annie’s business venture pointed out that pubic hair and excretory
functions are not only natural, but they can also be sexy! How great is that?!
This is not her only urine venture, either. She would always end one totally
amazing performance-art piece by standing upside-down and urinating a bright
golden firework of a finale.18 We never had a chance to attend the show, but we
would put money on the fact that her audiences never left pissed (we couldn’t
resist).
There are almost too many amazing Annie Sprinkle performance-art shows
and presentations to count. However, one of the performance-art pieces of
particular relevance to the vulva was her show “Post-Porn Modernist.”18
Performed throughout the early 1990s, “Post-Porn Modernist” featured a
segment brilliantly titled “The Public Cervix Announcement,” where she would
unabashedly show her cervix to the audience members. She would start by
douching, inserting a speculum into her vagina, and then asking the audience
members to line up to view her cervix. Audience members who did were handed
a flashlight and encouraged to ask questions. Sprinkle gave the audience three
reasons why she thought it was important to show her cervix:18, 20
Reason number one: a cervix is such a beautiful thing and most people
go through their whole lives and never get to see one. I’m really proud of
mine, and I’d like to give that opportunity to anyone who’d like to have
it. Reason number two is, I find it’s a lot of fun to show my cervix in

little groups like this. And reason number three is, I want to prove to
some of the guys out there that there are absolutely no teeth inside there.
Not only does Sprinkle try to remind the audience that the vulva and vagina
are places of beauty and mystery, she also reassures the audience that they can be
both safe and fun. Unfortunately, she no longer performs this particular
performance-art piece, but she remains one of the foremothers of the sex-
positive movement. For more about Sprinkle, check out our Resources section.
And Then There Was Eve
The 1960s and 1970s were a powerful time for the vulva-activism movement.
Women from across the United States were uniting to discuss and discover their
vulvas. Then, something happened. Maybe it was the new wave of feminism.
Maybe it was everyone’s obsession with exercise (and body size) in the 1980s.
However, feminist-consciousness groups came to a halt (not a screeching one—
they still exist but are fewer and farther between) and with them, many women’s
interest in discovering and understanding their bodies—or at least their vulvas.
Sure, women like Betty and Annie persisted in their work, but overall, people
stopped talking about vulvas, vaginas, cunts, and twats. For some time, vulvas
and vaginas went underground and were rarely talked about in any mainstream
way.
And then there was Eve.
In 1996, Eve Ensler came out with the now-infamous play, The Vagina
Monologues. Based on interviews with approximately two hundred women, the
play highlights a series of topics related to women’s vulvas and vaginas
including menstruation, vaginal smell, taste, rape, sexual exploration,
oppression, vaginal birth, pleasure, and the word “cunt.”21 The play took off and
became wildly popular. Over a period of years, celebrities such as Oprah
Winfrey, Jane Fonda, Julia Stiles, and Rosie Perez performed the monologues for
various shows. It made the vagina a household name and opened up
conversations around many topics that were previously considered too taboo to
discuss. The show has been translated into numerous languages and continues to
be performed across the globe (Debby has performed in local productions of The
Vagina Monologues several times). If you are interested in seeing the show or
being a part of it, many college campuses continue to perform the show annually.

FEMALE GENITAL CUTTING
We would be remiss if we didn’t mention female genital-cutting practices,
sometimes described as “female genital mutilation (FGM)” or “female
genital circumcision,” depending on one’s perspective. Although many
girls and women have suffered from the physical consequences or even
died as a result of genital-cutting practices, the term FGM is offensive to
many girls and women who have been circumcised and feel more beautiful
or womanly as a result of the procedure. While we don’t like the idea of
people cutting women’s vulvas—especially when they are children and
may not be able to consent to the procedure or understand the potential for
health complications—we also don’t like the idea of making women feel
badly for something (like having been circumcised) that is a common part
of their culture, which has happened to them (perhaps not by choice) and
which they may embrace.
In fact, we’re far from the only feminists to face such a crisis of how to
respond to female genital-cutting practices and even how to talk about
them. Millions of pages have been written about the practice, and we
certainly can’t do the cultural, sexual health, and very personal features of
these practices justice in this book. But we do want to provide some basic
information and suggest resources for more information in what we feel is
culturally sensitive advocacy.
What It Entails
There are several different types of female genital-circumcision practices.
In a 1994 article published in the New England Journal of Medicine, Dr.
Nahid Toubia grouped these practices into four types22:
Type 1 clitoridectomy refers to removal of part or all of the clitoris;
also commonly known as the “Sunna circumcision.”
Type 2 clitoridectomy refers to the excision of the clitoris as well as
part of the labia minora. The urethra and vaginal opening remain
visible and accessible.
Type 3 may be referred to as an “intermediate” infibulation. It
involves removal of the clitoris and labia minora and the stitching
together of the labia majora, leaving a moderate-sized opening for

urine, menstrual blood, and vaginal discharge to leave the body.
Type 4, also called total infibulation, is a more extreme version of
infibulation in that only a small opening is left for fluids to leave the
body.
Because female genital-circumcision procedures are typically carried out
by laypersons (often female elders in a community), there is wide variation
in the type and amount of cutting, so these are only general guidelines. We
would never want this to happen to us, but then again, we both grew up in
cultures in which these practices are largely unheard of and doctors are not
allowed to perform them.
Being “outsiders” to this practice presents specific challenges in how to
respond to it. Some people feel that it’s the work of feminism to oppose
practices worldwide that are harmful to women. Others feel that it’s quite
patriarchal for (largely) Western women to be so critical of cultural
practices that they are not a part of and can’t ever truly understand—
perhaps particularly when many Western women willingly engage in all
sorts of body cutting in their own quest for perfection, beauty, or symmetry
(e.g., breast-implant surgeries, elective female-genital surgeries such as
labiaplasty, liposuction, etc.).
What We Do Know Is This
We love vulvas as they are and hope that one day these practices go
away. However, we feel that changing this is best done in a culturally
sensitive way. The V-Day organization, for example, has a long
history of supporting a safe house in Kenya that assists young women
who wish to escape this practice and instead live at the safe house and
receive education. To learn more about how you can support this kind
of work, visit VDay.org.
Women from cultures or countries where these practices are common
should not be asked about the state of their genitals except by people
whose business it is to know, such as their healthcare providers,
partners, or midwives. We know of some African women who, for
example, have been asked by complete strangers if they have “been
mutilated.” Would you want a stranger asking you about your
genitals?
Although it’s commonly said that women who have experienced
genital cutting cannot and do not experience sexual pleasure, this is

not always the case. Research has found that many women who have
experienced genital cutting are indeed able to experience sexual
pleasure and orgasm, even if their genitals are not intact.
Women who have had this done should not be made to feel ugly or
damaged or “mutilated.” We are all beautiful and valuable regardless
of what has been done to our genitals, whether by choice, cultural
pressure, or force.
For more information about female genital-cutting practices, visit
VDay.org or the World Health Organization (who.org).
Although The Vagina Monologues was originally intended as a celebration of
the vagina and women, it is now often performed to support V-Day: A Global
Movement to End Violence against Women and Girls. While there are few
people who would not applaud the promotion of anti-violence efforts, some
critics, such as Betty Dodson, are less positive about the association between
violence and the vagina.23 Others fault the play (which was eventually made into
an HBO special) for failing to include pictures of vulvas/vaginas. Still others
critique the use of the term “vagina” when the play is predominantly about the
“vulva,” a term which, according to critics, may have become popularized if
used in the play.23 In her defense, Eve is said to have believed that the title
would have been confusing to those who were not aware of the meaning of the
word “vulva.” It will never be known whether The Vulva Monologues would
have flopped or whether it would have made “vulva” a household name, but we
do know that The Vagina Monologues got people talking about a subject that
they may not have discussed without the play. In fact, it is unlikely that this book
would have been possible without her work. For many reasons, including this
one, we are incredibly thankful for Eve Ensler and her groundbreaking work—
the woman who got the word “vagina” on marquees worldwide, encouraged
audiences to chant the word “cunt,” and inspired women to honor the “vagina
warriors” in their lives.
THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE FAMOUS.COM
Fifteen years ago, the terms “Google,” “poke,” “tweet,” and “sext” were
probably meaningless to you. You had to arrange to meet friends ahead of time,

answering machines were used to screen calls, and cameras (with film!) were
used to take pictures that you had to wait a minimum of an hour to see. Recent
technological inventions have changed the way we think, feel, and talk about the
vulva. Our ability to capture a picture at a moment’s notice has made panty-less
celebrities who exit their limos one of the most commonly discussed vulva-
related conversations. Sure, this is probably not a new phenomenon. If you think
about it, one of the most famous pictures of any celebrity is the image of Marilyn
Monroe in that flowing white halter dress taken from The Seven Year Itch where
she appears to be trying to hide her genitalia (or at least her underwear) as the
wind shoots her skirt up from below.
Modern-day upskirt shots are different and so is the way that we talk about
them. Within the past few years, several of today’s hottest celebrities have found
themselves in panty-less predicaments. They go out one lovely evening donning
a fetching mini-skirt or dress. Presumably, the dress is oftentimes not only short
but quite tight. In fact, it is likely too tight to wear with panties (sorry—this is
beginning to sound like the beginning of a bad porn). Not wanting to be caught
on film with panty lines (or perhaps to feel super sexy or just plain comfortable),
they leave their panties at home and cross their fingers/legs that no sneaky
photographer has decided to wear shoes with mirrors on the tops that evening.
Fortunately, while no celebrity to our knowledge has fallen victim to
mirrored shoes, they have been caught by a similarly sneaky move. When
crouched at the right angle, photographers can snap a picture up the celebrity’s
skirt as she steps out of her car. When they do, do the photographers say, “Oops,
got the vulva,” and then quietly delete the photo? No. There is money to be
made from a picture of a celebrity without underwear. Consequently, a number
of these photos have wound up on the Internet.
So far, this story is understandable to us. The celebrity left the house likely
hoping that no one would be the wiser about her undergarments (or lack thereof).
The term “money shot” is not lost on the photographer, and he/she publishes the
picture for financial gain. Are we fans of this? No. But we understand how it
happens. Where we feel the story gets interesting is in the public’s reaction to the
pictures. Are we, the public, shocked and appalled that the photographer would
snap a private picture without the celebrity’s permission and put it on the
Internet for all to see? Perhaps some are, but the public’s outrage is usually
directed toward the female celebrity. She is vilified for daring to leave the house
without the “proper” undergarments. Even though seemingly accidental, these
celebrities are deemed promiscuous even though the picture was entirely
unrelated to their sexual behavior. Not only that, but her vulva becomes the easy

target of criticism by commenters who apply a mob mentality to her most private
parts. We’ve read anonymous comments that not only shame these women for
leaving their homes without underwear, but also attempt to shame them for the
way their genitals look. It’s particularly upsetting to us when anonymous
commenters describe women’s vulvas as looking “used up” or “slutty.” Since
when can a woman’s genitals tell you anything about her sexual behavior?
We felt that one ex–teen star’s comment on a recent talk show summed up
these comments nicely. Let’s call her Brenda. During Brenda’s teen stardom, she
was widely known for being rebellious and temperamental. When Brenda was
asked about her teenage rebellions, she said something along the lines of “at
least I always wore panties.” As though showing your vulva (accidentally) can
be the worst thing that a girl can do! It is no wonder women feel so
uncomfortable showing their vulvas to their doctors or loved ones. These are
clearly not the messages passed down from our sex-positive foremothers.
The disparaging comments made about celebrities’ vulvas are particularly
difficult for us to digest. When researching some of these pictures and their
corresponding comments, we noticed that people had taken the opportunity to
insult the appearance of the celebrity’s vulva. This is problematic for a couple of
reasons. First, it is clearly insulting to the women whose vulvas are being
commented on. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly considering that
celebrities are less likely to read the commentary, someone without prior vulva
knowledge may use these images and corresponding comments to make
assumptions about their own genitalia. Somewhere out there may be a young
woman who is reading about her favorite pop-star or socialite, and then gets a
sense from the comments that vulvas should always be perfectly waxed or
always have short or long labia and so on. Young women have enough to worry
about. Do we really need to suggest that women are to be judged by their
genitals, too?
THE DOWN THERE UPSIDE
Fortunately, not all technology has led to vulva-negative outcomes. In fact, we
think that technological advances have led to positive vulva developments, as
well. First of all, the Internet can be a great way to meet people who share an
interest in vulva promotion/advocacy. You can see a list of some web sites and
communities that we love (including our own podcast Genitales—a shameless
plug, we know) in the Resources section. As you can probably tell from the craft
projects included in this book, we believe that vulva craft is a great form of

activism in addition to being a heck of a lot of fun. One of our favorite genital
crafters is Rachel Leibert, founder of the International Vulva Knitting Circle.
VULVA ARTS AND CRAFTS
If you are not much of a knitter but still support or love vulva arts and crafts, the
Internet has made it possible for you to easily own a variety of vulva products.
You can get everything from sofas to lip-balms to jewelry to bicycle covers
shaped like vulvas (see Resources). There is no end to the neat things that one
can create to look like or honor a vulva. One of our absolute favorite products is
the vulva puppet (the original is called the Wondrous Vulva Puppet and it’s made
by Dorrie Lane). Vulva puppets come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and materials

but typically contain a clitoral hood, a fluffy clitoris, puffy inner and outer labia,
a lovely inner lining, and a button or flower urethra and vagina. The best part is
that you can stick your hand inside to move the lips of the vulva! The reason we
love the vulva puppet so much is because it serves several purposes. Not only is
it a great conversation piece as a decoration around your home (or in our case,
our offices), but it is also a wonderful tool for teaching about the vulva. Even we
understand that some people may feel uncomfortable looking at pictures of the
vulva, especially if they have never seen one before. Using vulva puppets as sex-
education props helps us to quickly and easily explain the parts of the vulva in a
non-intimidating way that is easy for anyone to understand, and it is particularly
kid-friendly. This was best demonstrated to a national audience when Debby
made the vulva puppet famous by bringing it on The Tyra Banks Show while
explaining the parts of the vulva. That’s right: Debby’s vulva puppet has met
Tyra, not to mention sex columnist and author Dan Savage, who graciously
slipped his hand into her vulva puppet. (If he denies it, remind him that we have
photographic evidence.)
AN INTERVIEW WITH THE FOUNDER OF THE
INTERNATIONAL VULVA KNITTING CIRCLE, RACHEL
LIEBERT
“The International Vulva Knitting Circle was founded in 2008 as a grass-
roots activist collective in support of The New View campaign’s WTF-ing
against the emerging industry of female genital cosmetic surgeries. We
wanted to mass-produce our own line of diverse lady-bits to speak back to
the increasing ways in which female bodies and sexualities are colonized
by corporate practices. Within a year we had nearly 150 deliciously
different vulvas from people across eleven cities and five countries, and
over 500 members of all ages, genders, and geographies.
“People either craft on their own or host circles, although politically we
prefer the latter as it more so spoons the dialogue and solidarity needed for
broader social change. Either way, we discourage the use [of] patterns
(diversity!) so long as people include the labia majora, the labia minora,
and of course Her Highness the Clitoris. All skill-levels and crafts are
welcomed.
“Late 2009 our first public exhibition was held in Brooklyn, NYC, at a
grass-roots event called Vulvagraphics, which pulled together the work of a

number of artists celebrating female genital diversity. This event launched
the International Vulva Knitting Circle as a traveling exhibition to support
localized activism in different parts of the world. We only ask that with any
event, it remains grass-roots, fits broadly within our political feminist
agenda, and involves people from the community contributing their own
crafted vulvas to the traveling collection.
“Our vision is for The Vulva Train to just keep on growing and moving,
with women uniquely and collectively crafting resistance to the regulation
of their bodies and sexualities.
“And it all begins with the not-so-lady-like knitting needle.
“So, join us!”
Learn more about the International Vulva Knitting Circle in our
Resources section.
Pootie Attack
Sadly, not everyone shares our love for vulva arts and crafts. For instance, two
vulva crafters recently ran into some major issues on a popular web site designed
to sell homemade crafts. Prior to these issues, the web site was a major source of
revenue for these crafters and was one of the best ways for them to sell crafts on
the web. However, both ran into resistance from the web site and beyond. The
web site prohibited the crafters from tagging their products with certain names
such as “feminist” that helped to drive their business. It also asked them to label
their materials as “mature” or “explicit” despite the fact that many of these crafts
were simply symbolic representations of vulvas and were not sexualized in any
way.

Beyond the web site, a counter web site designed to mock the crafts of the
original site targeted the vulva crafters specifically. The vulva crafters felt
mocked and discouraged. Melissa Nannen, a friend of Vanessa’s who creates
Plushpooties (simple vulvas of various colors and sizes with pubic hair shells
that are often joyfully comical in appearance and name), removed her pooties
from the web site after an attack on one of her art pieces. She wrote on her blog
that she was hurt by it because the comments “were much more concerned with
the type of person who made them rather than the object itself.”24 That’s the
strange thing about vulva craft, art, or even research. All too often, assumptions
are made about the behaviors and attitudes of those who create or conduct it. We
know that these critiques come with the job, but sometimes when we tell people
what we do, it is hard to ignore the fact that they are going into TSA scanner
mode, wondering what is up with us down there. We try our best to use these
responses as fuel for our fire. After all, talking about the vulva is only strange if
no one else does it!

As vulva researchers, artists, authors, and crafters, we are opening ourselves
up to people who are critical of the vulva, but what really gets our muffs mad is
when the vulva itself is attacked. Take for instance a recent celebrity blogger
with a huge following who posted an image of several lovely vulva necklaces for
sale. These particular necklaces came in several shapes and sizes, and the
designs were based on images of real women’s vulvas. The blog about the
necklaces was sarcastic and critical of the idea of vulva necklaces, but the
blogger did not attack the actual appearance of the necklaces. The viewers’
comments on the blog were another story, with most comments containing a
variation of “ewwww” or “gross.” Several comments attacked the appearance of
specific vulva pieces, including one web site commentator who said, “The black
one looks like that fake dog chit [sic]!!” Another person insulted the appearance
of all the vulva necklace models by saying, “if you have major nasty
beefcurtains [sic], why the hell would you want to show it off in the first place??
So gross.”
Comments like these make us feel sad. While someone probably wrote these
comments without thinking twice about the impression that it would make on
those who read them (other than hoping it was funny, perhaps), these comments
have the potential to impact women of all ages and all vulva types. Let’s say, for
example, that you are checking out your favorite celebrity blog when you
happen upon a necklace that just happens to look surprisingly similar to your
very own lady bits. Wow, you think, how great that someone thought my genitals
were beautiful enough to accessorize an outfit! You feel empowered until you
scroll down a bit farther and read the reaction to your genital doppelgangers.
Then, you read the series of negative reactions to your “beefcurtains.” Sure it’s
just one little message. However, given that you probably do not come across a
mini-version of your muff every day, this feedback may become quite
meaningful and even harmful to how you feel about your genitals. So, how do
these messages change the way women feel about their genitals, you ask? We
cover that (and a whole lot more) in chapter 4.
CUNTCLUSIONS
Vulva art has been around almost as long as vulvas themselves. Vulvas have
been portrayed as everything from humorous to dangerous to disgusting. The
relatively recent invention of the Internet has exposed us to vulva culture in
ways that are continually changing. So what can we do to make sure that change
is a positive one?

1. Support small vulva crafters when you can. Low on cash? No worries,
support does not have to mean financial support these days. Consider
“liking” them on Facebook, sharing their craft web sites on your Facebook
page (so that friends with cash to spare might support them), or tweeting
their web site with a positive message to your friends/followers.
2. Craft is not just for the crafty! This book contains tons of tips for fun
vulva crafts that you can do yourself or with a group of friends. Instead of a
book club (unless, of course, this is the book), consider assembling a vulva-
crafting club at your school or in your community.
3. See a vulva-negative comment on a web site? Take a minute and post a
positive one! It may be your message that makes someone think or feel
differently about her vulva.
4. Keep talking. Remember when your mother used to say, “If you don’t have
something nice to say, don’t say anything at all”? Well, we disagree.
Sometimes even the “not nice” things will get a conversation going. The
worst thing that we can do to our vulvas is ignore them. So above all else,
let’s keep the conversation going!
TEST YOUR VQ
1. What is the first vulva image created by (wo)man?
a. sheela-na-gig carvings found around Europe
b. Baubo figurines in Greece
c. paparazzi shots of young socialites as they exit their limos
d. Venus of Willendorf
2. What is a speculum party?
a. A pact by women to visit their gynecologists on the same day
b. When your gynecologist makes a house call
c. A group of women who examine their own vulvas and vaginas
together
d. the decoration of speculums
3. What is a vulva puppet?
a. a female puppet with an enlarged vulva
b. a plushy vulva with a slit in the back for your hand
c. a BDSM activity

d. a character created by Jim Henson in the 1950s
Answers
1. d
2. c
3. b

Notes
CHAPTER 1
1. V. Braun and S. Wilkinson, “Socio-Cultural Representations of the
Vagina,” Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology 19, no. 1 (2001).
2. C. Blackledge, The Story of V: A Natural History of Female Sexuality
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004).
3. A. Kingsley, “A Conference at UNLV Urges Women to Love Their Lady
Parts,” Las Vegas: City Life, September 30, 2010.
4. L. Alptraum, “‘Cunts for Fags’ Teaches Gay Men How the Other Half
Fucks,” 
2008. 
http://boinkology.com/2008/02/01/cunts-for-fags-teaches-gay-
men-how-the-other-half-fucks. Accessed May 2, 2011.
5. J. Blank, Femalia (San Francisco, CA: Down There Press, 1993).
6. B. Dodson, Sex for One: The Joy of Selfloving (New York: Crown Trade
Paperbacks, 1996).
7. N. Karras, Petals (San Diego, CA: Crystal River Publishing, 2003).
8. J. Lloyd, N. S. Crouch, C. L. Minto, L-M Liao, and S. M. Creighton,
“Female Genital Appearance: Normality Unfolds,” BJOG: An International
Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 112, no. 5 (2005): 643–46.
9. Betty Dodson, Viva la Vulva! (New York: Betty Dodson, 1998).
10. O. Lunde, “A Study of Body Hair Density and Distribution in Normal
Women,” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 64, no. 2 (1984): 179–84.
11. V. Schick, B. N. Rima, and S. K. Calabrese, “Evulvalution: The Portrayal
of Women’s External Genitalia and Physique Across Time and the Current
Barbie Doll Ideals,” The Journal of Sex Research 48 (2011): 74–81.
12. R. Robinson, Georgia O’Keeffe: A Life (Hanover: University Press of
New England, 1999).
13. M. Paley, The Book of the Penis (New York: Grove Press, 1999).
14. L. M. Liao, L. Michala, and S. M. Creighton, “Labial Surgery for Well

Women: A Review of the Literature,” BJOG: An International Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology 117, no. 1 (2010): 20–25.
15. ACOG, “ACOG Committee Opinion No. 378: Vaginal ‘Rejuvenation’
and Cosmetic Vaginal Procedures,” Obstetrics and Gynecology 110 (2007): 737–
38.
16. J. M. Miklos, “RD Labiaplasty of the Labia Minora: Patients’ Indications
for Pursuing Surgery,” Journal of Sexual Medicine 5, no. 6 (2008): 1492–95.
17. V. Braun, “Female Genital Cosmetic Surgery: A Critical Review of
Current Knowledge and Contemporary Debates,” Journal of Womens Health 19,
no. 7 (2010): 1393–1407.
18. M. P. Goodman, “Female Cosmetic Genital Surgery,” Obstetrics and
Gynecology 113, no. 2 (2009): 154–59.
19. V. Braun and C. Kitzinger, “‘Snatch,’ ‘Hole,’ or ‘Honey-pot’? Semantic
Categories and the Problem of Nonspecificity in Female Genital Slang,” Journal
of Sex Research 38, no. 2 (2001): 146–58.
20. H. E. O’Connell, J. M. Hutson, C. R. Anderson, & R. J. Plenter,
“Anatomical Relationship Between Urethra and Clitoris,” The Journal of
Urology 159, no. 6 (1998): 1892.
21. H. O’Connell and J. O. L. Delancey, “Clitoral Anatomy in Nulliparous,
Healthy, Premenopausal Volunteers Using Unenhanced Magnetic Resonance
Imaging,” The Journal of Urology 173, no. 6 (2005): 2060.
22. B. R. Komisaruk, C. Beyer, and B. Whipple, The Science of Orgasm
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006).
23. M. Reece, D. Herbenick, and B. Dodge, “Penile Dimensions and Men’s
Perceptions of Condom Fit and Feel,” Sexually Transmitted Infections 85
(2009):127–31.
24. H. Wessells, T. F. Lue, and J. W. McAninch, “Penile Length in Flaccid
and Erect States: Guidelines for Penile Augmentation,” Journal of Urology 156,
no. 3 (1996): 995–97.
25. A. K. Ladas, B. Whipple, and J. D. Perry, The G Spot and Other Recent
Discoveries about Human Sexuality (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston,
1982).
26. A. C. Kinsey, Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders, 1953).
27. W. H. J. Masters, V. E. Johnson, Human Sexual Response (Boston, MA:
Little, Brown and Company, 1966).
28. G. L. Gravina, F. Brandetti, P. Martini, E. Carosa, S. M. Di Stasi, S.

Morano, A. Lenzi, and E. A. Jannini, “Measurement of the Thickness of the
Urethrovaginal Space in Women with or without Vaginal Orgasm,” Journal of
Sexual Medicine 5 (2008): 610–18.
29. A. V. Burri, L. Cherkas, and T. D. Spector, “Genetic and Environmental
Influences on Self-Reported G-Spots in Women: A Twin Study,” Journal of
Sexual Medicine 7, no. 5 (2010): 1842–52.
30. D. Herbenick, V. Schick, M. Reece, S. Sanders, B. Dodge, and J. D.
Fortenberry, “The Female Genital Self-Image Scale (FGSIS): Results from a
Nationally Representative Probability Sample of Women in the United States,”
Journal of Sexual Medicine 8, no. 1 (2011): 158–66.
CHAPTER 2
1. E. G. Stewart and P. Spencer, The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete
Vulvovaginal Health (New York: Bantam Books, 2002).
2. C. Sonne, “Genital Allergy,” Sexually Transmitted Infections 80 (2004):
4–7.
3. B. Reed, D. W. Gorenflo, B. W. Gillespie, C. L. Pierson, and P. Zazove,
“Sexual Behaviors and Other Risk Factors for Candida Vulvovaginitis,” Journal
of Women’s Health and Gender Based Medicine 9, no. 6 (2000): 645–56.
4. J. Todd, “Toxic Shock Syndrome—Evolution of an Emerging Disease,”
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 697 (2011): 175–81.
5. A. E. Hochwalt, M. B. Jones, and S. J. Meyer, “Clinical Safety
Assessment of an Ultra Absorbency Menstrual Tampon,” Journal of Women’s
Health 19, no. 2 (2010): 273–78.
6. “Tampons and Asbestos, Dioxin and Toxic Shock Syndrome,” 2009,
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/PatientAlerts/ucm0
7. M. Guida, A. D. S. Sardo, S. Bramante, S. Sparice, G. Acunzo, G. A.
Tommaselli, C. Di Carlo, M. Pellicano, E. Greco, and C. Nappi, “Effects of Two
Types of Hormonal Contraception—Oral Versus Intravaginal—on the Sexual
Life of Women and Their Partners,” Human Reproduction 20, no. 4 (2005):
1100–1106.
8. S. D. Fihn, R. H. Latham, P. Roberts, K. Running, and W. E. Stamm,
“Association between Diaphragm Use and Urinary Tract Infection,” Journal of
the American Medical Association 254 (1985): 240–45.
9. A. K. Leung, W. L. Robson, and J. Tay-Uyboco, “The Incidence of Labial
Fusion in Children,” Journal Pediatric Child Health 29 (1993): 235–36.

10. D. Muram, “Treatment of Prepubertal Girls with Labial Adhesions,”
Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology 12, no. 2 (1999): 67–70.
11. L. M. Kumetz, E. H. Quint, S. Fisseha, and Y. R. Smith, “Estrogen
Treatment Success in Recurrent and Persistent Labial Agglutination,” Journal of
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology 19, no. 6 (2006): 381.
12. M. J. Nurzia, K. M. Eickhorst, M. K. Ankem, and J. G. Barone, “The
Surgical Treatment of Labial Adhesions in Prepubertal Girls,” Journal of
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology 16, no. 1 (2003): 21.
13. J. Someshwar, R. Lutfi, and L. S. Nield, “The Missing ‘Bratz’ Doll: A
Case of Vaginal Foreign Body,” Pediatric Emergency Care 23, no. 12 (2007):
897–98.
14. J. Huppert, S. Griffeth, L. Breech, and P. Hillard, “Vaginal Burn Injury
Due to Alkaline Batteries,” Journal of Pediatric & Adolescent Gynecology 22,
no. 5 (2009): 133–36.
15. K. Y. Yanoh and Y. Yonemura, “Severe Vaginal Ulcerations Secondary to
Insertion of an Alkaline Battery,” Journal of Trauma-Injury Infection & Critical
Care 58, no. 2 (2005): 410–12.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Infection, “Bacterial Vaginosis: CDC
Fact Sheet,” 2010. http://www.cdc.gov/std/bv/stdfact-bacterial-vaginosis.htm.
Accessed February 28, 2011.
CHAPTER 3
1. D. Herbenick, M. Reece, V. Schick, S. A. Sanders, B. Dodge, and J. D.
Fortenberry, “Sexual Behavior in the United States: Results from a National
Probability Sample of Males and Females Ages 14 to 94,” The Journal of Sexual
Medicine 7 supp. 5 (2010): 255–65.
2. H. E. O’Connell, J. M. Hutson, C. R. Anderson, and R. J. Plenter,
“Anatomical Relationship Between Urethra and Clitoris,” The Journal of
Urology 159, no. 6 (1998): 1892.
3. H. E. O’Connell and J. O. L. Delancey, “Clitoral Anatomy in Nulliparous,
Healthy, Premenopausal Volunteers Using Unenhanced Magnetic Resonance
Imaging,” The Journal of Urology 173, no. 6 (2005): 2060.
4. S. Ramsey, G. Oades, C. Sweeney, and M. Fraser, “Pubic Hair and
Sexuality: A Review,” Journal of Sexual Medicine 6, no. 8 (2009): 2102–10.
5. R. Levin, “The Ins and Outs of Vaginal Lubrication,” Sexual and
Relationship Therapy 18, no. 4 (2003): 509–13.

6. E. G. Stewart and P. Spencer, The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete
Vulvovaginal Health (New York: Bantam Books, 2002).
7. D. Herbenick, M. Reece, V. Schick, S. A. Sanders, B. Dodge, and J. D.
Fortenberry, “An Event-Level Analysis of the Sexual Characteristics and
Composition among Adults Ages 18 to 59: Results from a National Probability
Sample in the United States,” The Journal of Sexual Medicine 7 supp. 5 (2010):
346–61.
8. D. Herbenick, M. Reece, D. Hensel, S. Sanders, K. Jozkowski, and J. D.
Fortenberry, “Association of Lubricant Use with Women’s Sexual Pleasure,
Sexual Satisfaction, and Genital Symptoms: A Prospective Daily Diary Study
Journal of Sexual Medicine,” Journal of Sexual Medicine 8, no. 1 (2011): 202–
12.
9. C. M. Meston, R. J. Levin, M. L. Sipski, E. M. Hull, and J. R. Heiman,
“Women’s Orgasm,” Annual Review of Sex Research 15 (2004): 173–257.
10. B. R. Komisaruk, C. Beyer, and B. Whipple, The Science of Orgasm
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006).
11. E. W. Eichel, J. D. Eichel, and S. Kule, “The Technique of Coital
Alignment and Its Relation to Female Orgasmic Response and Simultaneous
Orgasm,” Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 14, no. 2 (1988): 129–41.
12. E. W. Eichel and P. Nobile, The Perfect Fit: How to Achieve Mutual
Fulfillment and Monogamous Passion through the New Intercourse (New York:
D. I. Fine, 1992).
13. D. F. Hurlbert and C. Apt, “The Coital Alignment Technique and
Directed Masturbation: A Comparative Study on Female Orgasm,” Journal of
Sex & Marital Therapy 21, no. 1 (1995): 21.
14. A. Pierce, “The Coital Alignment Technique (CAT): An Overview of
Studies,” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 26, no. 3 (2000): 257–68.
15. M. Reece, D. Herbenick, S. A. Sanders, B. Dodge, A. Ghassemi, and J.
D. Fortenberry, “Prevalence and Characteristics of Vibrator Use by Men in the
United States,” Journal of Sexual Medicine 6 (2009): 1867–74.
CHAPTER 4
1. M. Reynolds, D. L. Herbenick, and J. H. Bancroft, “The Nature of
Childhood Sexual Experiences: Two Studies 50 Years Apart,” in Sexual
Development in Childhood, ed. J. Bancroft (Bloomington: Indiana Indiana
University Press, 2003).

2. B. Schuhrke, “Young Children’s Curiosity about Other People’s Genitals,”
Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality 12 (2000): 27–48.
3. C. Handler, Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang (New York: Grand Central Pub.,
2010).
4. R. Bramwell, “Invisible Labia: The Representation of Female External
Genitals in Women’s Magazines,” Sexual & Relationship Therapy 17, no. 2
(2002): 187–90.
5. V. Schick, B. N. Rima, and S. K. Calabrese, “Evulvalution: The Portrayal
of Women’s External Genitalia and Physique across Time and the Current Barbie
Doll Ideals,” The Journal of Sex Research 48 (2011): 74–81.
6. G. Edgren, The Playboy Book: Forty Years (London: Mitchell Beazley,
1994).
7. J. R. Petersen, The Century of Sex: Playboy’s History of the Sexual
Revolution, 1900–1999 (New York: Grove Press, 1999).
8. J. Robertson, 50 Years of the Playboy Bunny (San Francisco, CA:
Chronicle Books, 2010).
9. M. Voracek and M. Fisher, “Shapely Centrefolds? Temporal Change in
Body Measures: Trend Analysis,” British Medical Journal 325, no. 7378 (2002):
1447–48.
10. H. Howarth, V. Sommer, and F. M. Jordan, “Visual Depictions of Female
Genitalia Differ Depending on Source,” Medical Humanities 36, no. 2 (2010):
75.
11. N. Karras, Petals (San Diego, CA: Crystal River Publishing, 2003).
12. J. Blank, Femalia (San Francisco, CA: Down There Press, 1993).
13. V. Schick, S. Calabrese, and B. Rima, “Does (Labia) Size Really Matter?
The Distorting Impact of Exposure to Unrealistic Labia Minora Images on
Women’s Perceived Labia Size: Implications for Genital Discontent and
Sexuality,” Annual Meeting of Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality, San
Juan, Puerto Rico, 2008.
14. V. Schick, S. K. Calabrese, B. N. Rima, and A. N. Zucker, “Genital
Appearance Dissatisfaction: Implications for Women’s Genital Image Self-
Consciousness, Sexual Esteem, Sexual Satisfaction, and Sexual Risk,”
Psychology of Women Quarterly 34 (2010): 394–404.
15. E. G. Stewart and P. Spencer, The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete
Vulvovaginal Health (New York: Bantam Books, 2002).
16. M. B. Oscarsson and E. Benzein, “Women’s Experience of Pelvic
Examination: An Interview Study,” Obstetrics and Gynecology 23 (2002): 17–

25.
17. Embarrassing Bodies, http://www.channel4embarrassingillnesses.com.
Accessed February 11, 2011.
18. 
J. 
Ashton, 
Hygeia 
Gynecology,
http://www.drjenniferashton.com/labiaplasty.asp. Accessed February 26, 2011.
19. M. P. Goodman, “Female Cosmetic Genital Surgery,” Obstetrics and
Gynecology 113, no. 2 (2009): 154–59.
20. V. Braun, “Female Genital Cosmetic Surgery: A Critical Review of
Current Knowledge and Contemporary Debates,” Journal of Womens Health 19,
no. 7 (2010): 1393–1407.
21. V. Braun, “In Search of (Better) Sexual Pleasure: Female Genital
Cosmetic Surgery,” Sexualities 8, no. 4 (2005): 407–24.
22. V. Braun, “Selling the Perfect Vulva,” in Cosmetic Surgery: A Feminist
Primer, eds. C. J. Heyes and M. R. Jones (Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate, 2009).
23. V. Braun and L. Tiefer, “The ‘Designer Vagina’ and the Pathologisation
of Female Genital Diversity: Interventions for Change,” Radical Psychology 8,
no. 1 (2009).
24. M. Farage and H. Maibach, “Lifetime Changes in the Vulva and Vagina,”
Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics 273, no. 4 (2006): 195–202.
25. T. Lewis, “The Lengths We Go for Beauty,” Newsweek, July 19, 2010.
26. F. J. Green, “From Clitoridectomies to Designer Vaginas: The Medical
Construction of Heteronormative Female Bodies and Sexuality through Female
Genital Cutting,” Sexualities Evolution & Gender 7, no. 2 (2005): 153–87.
27. S. Moore, H. Gridley, K. Taylor, and K. Johnson, “Women’s Views about
Intimate Examinations and Sexually Inappropriate Practices by Their General
Practitioners,” Psychology and Health 15 (2000): 71–84.
28. R. K. Reinholtz and C. L. Muehlenhard, “Genital Perceptions and Sexual
Activity in a College Population,” The Journal of Sex Research 32, no. 2 (1995):
155–65.
CHAPTER 5
1. B. S. Czerwinski, “Clinical Studies—Variation in Feminine Hygiene
Practices as a Function of Age,” Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and
Neonatal Nursing 29, no. 6 (2000).
2. S. J. Emans, E. R. Woods, E. N. Allred, and E. Grace, “Hymenal Findings
in Adolescent Women: Impact of Tampon Use and Consensual Sexual Activity,”

The Journal of Pediatrics 125, no. 1 (1994): 153–60.
3. K. Stewart, M. Powell, and R. Greer, “An Alternative to Conventional
Sanitary Protection: Would Women Use a Menstrual Cup?” Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology 29, no. 1 (2009): 49–52.
4. D. Merskin, “Adolescence, Advertising, and the Ideology of
Menstruation,” Sex Roles 40 (1999): 941.
5. M. Simes and D. H. Berg, “Surreptitious Learning: Menarche and
Menstrual Product Advertisements,” Health Care for Women International 22,
no. 5 (2001): 455–69.
6. M. A. Ott, S. Ofner, and J. D. Fortenberry, “Beyond Douching: Use of
Feminine Hygiene Products and STI Risk among Young Women,” Journal of
Sexual Medicine 6, no. 5 (2009): 1335–40.
7. R. B. Ness, S. L. Hillier, H. E. Richter, D. E. Soper, C. Stamm, D. C. Bass,
R. L. Sweet, and S. Aral, “Why Women Douche and Why They May or May
Not Stop,” Sexually Transmitted Diseases 30, no. 1 (2003): 71–74.
8. J. L. Martino and S. H. Vermund, “Vaginal Douching: Evidence for Risks
or Benefits to Women’s Health,” Epidemiologic Reviews 24, no. 3 (2002): 109–
24.
9. Instructions, My New Pink Button.
10. W. R. Anderson, D. J. Summerton, D. M. Sharma, and S. A. Holmes,
“The Urologist’s Guide to Genital Piercing,” BJU International 91, no. 3 (2003):
245–51.
CHAPTER 6
1. M. Kilmer, “Genital Phobia and Depilation,” Journal of Hellenic Studies
102 (1982): 104–12.
2. A. Hollander, “The Clothed Image: Picture and Performance,” New
Literary History 1971, no. 2 (1971): 477–93.
3. S. Moalem, How Sex Works: Why We Look, Smell, Taste, Feel, and Act the
Way We Do (New York: Harper, 2009).
4. S. Ramsey, G. Oades, C. Sweeney, and M. Fraser, “Pubic Hair and
Sexuality: A Review,” Journal of Sexual Medicine 6, no. 8 (2009): 2102–10.
5. J. Chicago, The Dinner Party: A Symbol of Our Heritage (Garden City,
NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1979).
6. E. Ensler, The Vagina Monologues (New York: Villard, 2001).
7. B. Dodson, Viva la Vulva! (New York Betty Dodson, 1998).

8. E. G. Stewart and P. Spencer, The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete
Vulvovaginal Health (New York: Bantam Books, 2002).
9. N. R. Armstrong and J. D. Wilson, “Did the ‘Brazilian’ Kill the Pubic
Louse? Sexually Transmitted Infections 82, no. 3 (2006).
10. M. Pale, Sculptures. 2007; http://mimosapale.com/?s=sculptures.
11. A. Kingsley, “A Conference at UNLV Urges Women to Love Their Lady
Parts,” Las Vegas: City Life, September 30, 2010.
12. D. Herbenick, V. Schick, M. Reece, S. Sanders, and J. D. Fortenberry,
“Pubic Hair Removal among Women in the United States: Prevalence, Methods
and Characteristics,” The Journal of Sexual Medicine 7, no. 10 (2010): 3322–30.
13. C. Zinko, “Who Needs a Facial When You Can Get a ‘Vajacial’?” San
Francisco Chronicle, June 3, 2010.
14. E. J. Kovavisarach and P. Jirasettasiri, “Randomised Controlled Trial of
Perineal Shaving versus Hair Cutting in Parturients on Admission in Labor,”
Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 88, no. 9 (2005): 1167–71.
CHAPTER 7
1. G. Eknoyan, “A History of Obesity, or How What Was Good Became
Ugly and Then Bad,” Advances in Chronic Kidney Disease 13, no. 4 (2006):
421–27.
2. M. Kohen, “The Venus of Willendorf,” American Imago: A
Psychoanalytic Journal for the Arts and Sciences 3, no. 4 (1946): 49–60.
3. Z. Bahrani, Women of Babylon: Gender and Representation in
Mesopotamia (London: Routledge, 2001).
4. “Madison Police Blame Halloween Riot on Female Flashers,” Milwaukee
News, November 4, 2002.
5. E. Morris, “Sacred and Obscene Laughter in the Contendings of Horus
and Seth, in Egyptian Inversions of Everyday Life, and in the Context of Cultic
Competition,” in Egyptian Stories: A British Egyptological Tribute to Alan B
Lloyd on the Occasion of his Retirement, ed. T. S. Schneider and K. Szpakowska
(Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 2007).
6. N. A. Georgopoulos, G. A. Vagenakis, and A. L. Pierris, “Baubo: A Case
of Ambiguous Genitalia in the Eleusinian Mysteries,” Hormones 2, no. 1 (2003):
72–75.
7. M. Marcovich, “Demeter, Baubo, Iacchus, and a Redactor,” Vigiliae
Christianae 40 (1986): 294–301.

8. A. Pearson, “Reclaiming the Sheela-na-gigs: Goddess Imagery in
Medieval Sculptures in Ireland,” Canadian Woman Studies 17, no. 3 (1997): 20–
25.
9. H. Ludgate, London Laid Bare (Cambridge: Vanguard, 2007).
10. G. Dines, J. M. Humez, and C. G. Aleman, “Gender, Race, and Class in
Media: A Text-Reader,” Contemporary Psychology 41, no. 4 (1996).
11. S. Qureshi, “Displaying Sara Baartman, the ‘Hottentot Venus,’” History
of Science 42 (2004): 233–57.
12. E. Alexander, “The Venus Hottentot (1825),” Callaloo 24, no. 3 (2001):
688–91.
13. S. Freud, “Female Sexuality,” International Journal of Psycho-Analysis
13 (1932): 281–97.
14. C. C. Eldredge, Georgia O’Keeffe: American and Modern (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1993).
15. R. Robinson, Georgia O’Keeffe: A Life (Hanover: University Press of
New England, 1999), 282.
16. J. Chicago, The Dinner Party: A Symbol of Our Heritage (Garden City,
NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1979).
17. B. Dodson, Sex for One: The Joy of Selfloving (New York: Crown Trade
Paperbacks, 1996).
18. A. Sprinkle, “Post-Porn Modernist,” http://anniesprinkle.org/past/ppm-
bobsart/script.html. Accessed February 20, 2011.
19. T. Gomi, Everyone Poops (Brooklyn, NY: Kane/Miller Book Publishers,
1993).
20. T. Kapsalis, Public Privates: Performing Gynecology from Both Ends of
the Speculum (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997).
21. E. Ensler, The Vagina Monologues (New York: Villard, 2001).
22. N. Toubia, “Female Circumcision as a Public Health Issue,” New
England Journal of Medicine 331, no. 11 (1994): 712–16.
23. B. Dodson, “Betty’s Response to the Vagina Monologues,”
http://dodsonandross.com/sexfeature/bettys-response-vagina-monologues.
Accessed May 02, 2011.
24. 
M. 
Nannen, 
“Closing 
Down 
Plushpootie,”
http://goodmarvin.blogspot.com/2010/08/closing-down-plushpootie.html.
Accessed August 23, 2010.

Resources
TO BROWSE, BUY, OR BORROW
To Read and to Watch: Vulva Visuals
Femalia
In 1993, Joani Blank published a beautiful book full of close-up color images of
the vulva, which—at the time of this writing—is sadly out of print. However, it
should be back in print from another publisher soon.
J. Blank. Femalia. San Francisco, CA: Down There Press, 1993.
J. Blank. Femalia. San Francisco, CA: Last Gasp, 2010.
Web: www.joaniblank.com
Petals
Husband-and-wife team Nick and Sayaka Karras published Petals in 2003. The
lovely coffee table book features a wide variety of vulva images displayed in
sepia tones. We met them at a vulva conference in Las Vegas in fall 2010 where
they were recruiting volunteers to model for their new book of vulva images.
The much-anticipated new book will contain full-color images. Information
about their upcoming book, exam-room poster project, and other products are on
their web site (www.nickkarras.com).
N. Karras. Petals. San Diego, CA: Crystal River Publishing, 2003.
N. Karras and B. Peacock. Petals: A Journey into Self-Discovery. Video
(the making of the book). Berlin: Rogner & Bernhard, 2010.
Cunt Coloring Book: Drawings
Although there are no vulva photographs in the Cunt Coloring Book, there is a

diverse range of vulva drawings. We think that the book is a lot of fun and a
great way to open dialogue about genital diversity.
T. Corinne. Cunt Coloring Book: Drawings. San Francisco, CA: Last Gasp,
1988.
Body Drama: Real Girls, Real Bodies, Real Issues, Real Answers Although this
is a great book for everybody (complete with pictures of women of many body
types), this book is particularly suited for young women. Author Nancy Redd
fought to include vulva images in the book, and we praise her for that.
N. Redd. Body Drama: Real Girls, Real Bodies, Real Issues, Real Answers.
New York: Gotham Books, 2007.
Annie Sprinkle
If we wanted to list every video with images of vulvas in it, we wouldn’t have
room for anything else. However, we made an exception for Annie Sprinkle’s
videos. These are not pornography; they celebrate the diversity of women’s
genitals—and we wanted to celebrate Annie.
J. Kramer and A. Sprinkle. Fire in the Valley: Female Genital Massage.
Oakland, CA: New School of Erotic Touch, 2004.
A. Sprinkle and J. Kramer. Zen Pussy: A Meditation on Eleven Vulvas.
Oakland, CA: EroSpirit Research Institute, 1999.
Web: www.anniesprinkle.org
Vulva Health (General)
The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete Vulvovaginal Health The V Book is
one of our favorites, and it’s packed with illuminating and easy-to-understand
information.
E. G. Stewart and P. Spencer. The V Book: A Doctor’s Guide to Complete
Vulvovaginal Health. New York: Bantam Books, 2002.
Web: www.thevbook.com
Vaginas: An Owner’s Manual
A book about the vulva from an OB/GYN mother and her daughter.
C. Livoti and E. Topp. Vaginas: An Owner’s Manual. New York: Thunder’s

Mouth Press, 2004.
Vulva Culture
Cunt: A Declaration of Independence
Personal vulva stories sprinkled with facts and filled with empowerment.
I. Muscio. Cunt: A Declaration of Independence. Seattle: Seal Press, 2002.
Public Privates
Although vulvas may not play the lead, they do a great job in their supporting
role in Kapsalis’s interesting analysis of the gynecological exam.
T. Kapsalis. Public Privates: Performing Gynecology from Both Ends of the
Speculum. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997.
Betty’s Work
Betty Dodson has produced a range of important work related to women’s bodies
and sexuality. Among our favorites: B. Dodson. Sex for One: The Joy of
Selfloving. New York: Crown Trade Paperbacks, 1996.
B. Dodson. Orgasms for Two: The Joy of Partnersex. New York: Harmony,
2002.
B. Dodson. Celebrating Orgasm: Women’s Private Selfloving Sessions.
Video. New York: Betty Dodson, 1996.
B. Dodson. Viva la Vulva! Video. New York: Betty Dodson, 1998.
B. Dodson. Orgasmic Women: 13 Selfloving Divas. Video. New York: Betty
Dodson, 2005.
B. Dodson, K. Decosterd, and ITC Communications. Selfloving. Video.
New York: Betty Dodson, 1991.
The Dinner Party
Invited to a dinner party with some fabulous women? Forgo the wine and
consider this interesting hostess gift instead.
J. Chicago. The Dinner Party: A Symbol of Our Heritage. Garden City, NY:
Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1979.

The Story of V: A Natural History of Female Sexuality Coochie culture at its
best.
C. Blackledge. The Story of V: A Natural History of Female Sexuality. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004.
The Vagina Monologues
This series of monologues by Eve Ensler popularized vagina love.
E. Ensler. The Vagina Monologues. New York: Villard, 2001.
E. Ensler. The Vagina Monologues. Video. New York, NY: HBO Home
Video, 2002.
Web: www.vday.org
OUR CHANGING BODIES
General Health
Our Bodies, Ourselves
A book by women, for women. There are now many editions on numerous
relevant topics. All are highly recommended.
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective. Our Bodies, Ourselves: A New
Edition for a New Era. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005.
Puberty and Your Period
Get a little help navigating those tricky topics with some of these parent-
approved titles: K. Gravelle, J. Gravelle, and D. Palen. The Period Book:
Everything You Don’t Want to Ask (But Need to Know). New York: Walker & Co,
1996.
M. Jukes and D. Tilley. Growing Up: It’s a Girl Thing: Straight Talk about
First Bras, First Periods, and Your Changing Body. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1998.
J. A. Loulan, B. Worthen, C. W. Dyrud, and M. Quackenbush. Period: A
Girl’s Guide to Menstruation with a Parent’s Guide. Minnetonka, MN:
Book Peddlers, 2001.
A. B. Middleman, K. G. Pfeifer, and American Medical Association.

American Medical Association Girl’s Guide to Becoming a Teen. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2006.
P. Schwartz and D. Cappello. Ten Talks Parents Must Have with Their
Children about Sex and Character. New York: Hyperion, 2000.
Pregnancy
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective. Our Bodies, Ourselves: Pregnancy
and Birth. New York: Touchstone Book/Simon & Schuster, 2008.
Web: www.ourbodiesourselves.org
Menopause
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective. Our Bodies, Ourselves: Menopause.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006.
Web: www.ourbodiesourselves.org
SEX
Although a little older, this book is a classic:
J. Heiman and J. LoPiccolo. Becoming Orgasmic: A Sexual and Personal
Growth Program for Women. New York: Prentice Hall, 1988.
Does this name look familiar? If you liked this book, chances are you may enjoy
Debby’s first book: D. Herbenick. Because It Feels Good: A Woman’s Guide to
Sexual Pleasure and Satisfaction. Emmaus, PA: Rodale, 2009.
A contemporary bestseller, this will guide you (or your partner) through
everything cunnilingus: I. Kerner. She Comes First: The Thinking Man’s Guide
to Pleasuring a Woman. New York: ReganBooks, 2004.
What do you get when you combine a neuroscientist, an endocrinologist, and a
sexuality researcher? Answer: A really smart and interesting book about orgasm.
B. R. Komisaruk, C. Beyer, and B. Whipple. The Science of Orgasm.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
Groundbreaking, great, and glorious. What else could you want in a book about
the G-spot?

A. K. Ladas, B. Whipple, and J. D. Perry. The G-spot and Other Recent
Discoveries about Human Sexuality. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston, 1982.
Does it exist? This book will answer all your questions, and you’ll have fun
while it does it.
D. Sundahl. Female Ejaculation & the G-spot. London: Fusion, 2004.
PERIOD PRODUCTS
Organic Products
Natracare
All natural and organic products, they have a wide range of tampons and pads to
fit everyone’s needs.
Web: www.natracare.com
Phone: +44 (0) 117 9823492
Seventh Generation
They use 100 percent organic cotton in their products with mostly recycled
content to construct their packaging. They carry both tampons and pads.
Web: www.seventhgeneration.com
Phone: 800.456.1191
Menstrual Cups
The DivaCup
Made of healthcare-grade silicone, this menstrual cup has been around for over
thirty-five years and is approved by the FDA.
Web: www.divacup.com
Phone: 866.444.DIVA (3482)
The Keeper
Invented in 1987, the Keeper is FDA approved for its intended use. Although the

material is natural (gum rubber), it is not recommended for those with a latex
allergy.
Web: www.keeper.com
Phone: 800.500.0077
The Moon Cup
For those with allergies to latex, the Moon Cup is made from medical-grade
silicone. Like the other two products, it is FDA approved.
Web: www.mooncup.com
Phone: 800.500.0077
Fabric Pads
Comfy Cloth Pads
They sell a variety of pads, pad bags, pantyliners, and other pad paraphernalia.
Web: www.comfyclothpads.com
Gladrags
A variety of different products to fill all your period needs.
Web: www.gladrags.com
Phone: 800.799.4523
Lunapads
A large selection of pads, kits, pantyliners, and even underwear with pads
attached.
Web: www.lunapads.com
Phone: 888.590.2299
VULVA STUFF(ED)
BadMimi
If loving Mimi is bad, we don’t want to be good! Find vulva pillows, pens, and

other products.
Web: www.badmimi.com
Phone: 707.332.5117
Etsy
Search for everything from artwork to custom vulva pendants to pictures of your
poonanny.
Web: www.etsy.com; popular vulva product sellers: VulvaLoveLovely,
DeviantCandy, WomaninBloom, ArtbyWinona Feminist Women’s
Health Center
They provide two speculum options at good prices: a full kit with a speculum
and a speculum (only). In addition to the speculum, the kit includes a mirror,
flashlight, lubricant, and instructions. They carry three different sizes: small,
medium, and large.
Web: www.fwhc.org
House O’Chicks
The home of the original Wondrous Vulva Puppet by Dorrie Lane.
Web: www.houseochicks.com
NuttyTarts
This Finnish team of artists puts the pubes in panties with their hairy underwear
collection.
Web: www.nuttytarts.com
Plush Pooties
Our friend makes these neat little pooties that come in fun names like Squirrel
and Cookie Monster Pussy.
Web: www.melissanannen.com
Yoni
Your source for everything yoni, including the Wondrous Vulva Puppet!

Web: www.yoni.com
HAIR IT IS
Less
Shave or Trim
You don’t need any fancy-schmancy tools for this. A good pair of scissors or a
sharp razor/shaving-cream combination should do the trick, but if you are
looking for a product that does it all (in the shower), we recommend the Schick
Quattro TrimStyle.
Web: www.quattroforwomen.com
Phone: 800.SHAVERS (742.8377)
Electrolysis
If you’d like to say a more permanent good-bye to your pubic hair, you may
want to look into electrology. If you do, the American Electrology Association
hosts a list of certified electrologists.
Web: www.electrology.com
More
Merkins
You may want to check-in (or merk-in) with your local wig store to ask whether
they carry these fun little wigs for wear down there. If not, we found them for
order from: Max Wigs
Web: www.maxwigs.com
Phone: 888.661.8884
International Wigs
Web: www.internationalwig.com
Phone: 800.344.4999
Different

Betty Beauty
Betty Beauty makes dye especially for your hair down there. They come in
natural (black, brown, blond, and red) and fun colors (pink, purple, blue, and
green). In addition to selling dye, they have stencils and crystal body stickers.
Webs: www.bettybeauty.com
Phone: 888.44.BETTY (23889)
PLACES TO GO, PEOPLE TO SEE, CAUSES TO SUPPORT
Women’s Sex Organ-ization-s: Happy and Healthy
American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and Therapists
(AASECT) The title says it all! Have a sexuality question? They have an
answer.
Web: www.aasect.org
Phone: 202.449.1099
Address: 1444 I St NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20005
American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists A go-to for
everything gynecologist. If you have a question, this is the most reliable place to
find an answer. Although geared toward professionals, there is definitely
something for everyone on their web site.
Web: www.acog.org
Phone: 202.638.5577
Address: PO Box 96920, Washington, DC 20090-6920
American Psychological Association
Find psychologists, support groups, or just general information about anything
and everything related to psychology.
Web: www.apa.org
Phone: 800.374.2721
Address: 750 First St NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242
American Social Health Association (ASHA)

Information, referrals, and support groups related to sexually transmitted
infections.
Web: www.ashastd.org
Phone: 919.361.8400
Address: PO Box 13827, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC 27709
Gynecologic Cancer Foundation
Information and referrals related to gynecologic cancers.
Web: www.thegcf.org
Phone: 312.578.1439
Address: 230 W. Monroe, Suite 2528, Chicago, IL 60606
The International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease We are both
proud members of this vulvologist society. A credible source for cutting-edge
vulva research. Contact them to find a medical provider in your area, or browse
their web site for patient-education materials.
Web: www.issvd.org
Phone: 704.814.9493
Address: 8814 Peppergrass Ln, Waxhaw, NC 28173
Planned Parenthood
Planned Parenthood has been helping women keep their vulvas happy and
healthy for over ninety years. With over 820 health centers across the United
States, you can likely find low-cost GYN exams, testing, and birth control at a
Planned Parenthood near you.
Web: www.plannedparenthood.org
Phone: 800.230.PLAN (7526)
Address: 434 West 33rd St, New York, NY 10001
National Lichen Sclerosus Support Group (NLSSG)
Based in the United Kingdom (and founded by Fabia Bracken-bury, who also
originally dedicated March as Vulval Health Awareness Month), the NLSSG
provides information, support, and referrals related to lichen sclerosus, a skin
condition that can affect the genitals.

Web: www.lichensclerosus.org
National Vulvodynia Association (NVA)
Provides information related to vulvodynia (vulvar pain), referrals, and
newsletters for patients and providers. The NVA is also a source for patient
advocacy and research support.
Web: www.nva.org
Phone: 301.299.3999
Address: PO Box 4491, Silver Spring, MD 20914-4491
Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States Web:
www.siecus.org
Phone: 212.819.9770 (NY)/202.462.2340 (DC)
Addresses: 90 John St, Suite 402, New York, NY 10038 1706 R Street NW,
Washington, DC 20009
Vulval Health Awareness Campaign
Provides information and support related to vulval health conditions. Vulval
Health Awareness Month was also founded as part of the campaign.
Phone: +44 07765 947599
Web: www.vhac.org
Vulval Pain Society
Provides information and education about vulval pain to women and their
partners. Based in the United Kingdom.
Web: www.vulvalpainsociety.org
Address: PO Box 7804, Nottingham NG3 5ZQ, United Kingdom
Centers of Our Yoni-verse
Center for Sex and Culture
A safe space for sexual education regardless of your sex or gender. If you are
ever in the area, they have great workshops including “Cunts for Fags.”
Web: www.sexandculture.org

Phone: 415.255.1155
Address: 2261 Market St, Box 455-A, San Francisco, CA 94114
Center for Sexual Health & Pleasure
Sex Ed isn’t just for kids! Drop-in for a one-on-one consultation with Ms.
Andelloux.
Web: www.thecsph.org
Phone: 401.345.8685
Address: 250 Main St, The Grant Building, Pawtucket RI, 02860
Center for Sexual Health Promotion
Visit our Center’s web site to get the latest updates on our research.
Web: www.sexualhealth.indiana.edu
Phone: 812.855.0861
Address: HPER 116, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405
Center for Young Women’s Health
A collaboration between the Division of Adolescent & Young Adult Medicine
and the Division of Gynecology at Children’s Hospital Boston, it is a great place
for teens and parents to learn about their changing health needs. Full of great fact
sheets, including information about labial adhesions.
Web: www.youngwomenshealth.org
Phone: 617.355.2994
Address: 333 Longwood Ave, 5th fl., Boston, MA 02115
The Kinsey Institute
The one that started it all. We are proud to be associated with The Kinsey
Institute, a continued source of research and art about sex and sexuality.
Web: www.kinseyinstitute.org and www.kinseyconfidential.org (for Q&A)
Phone: 812.855.7686
Address: Morrison Hall 313, 1165 E. Third St, Bloomington, IN 47405
Just Causes

The International Vulva Knitting Circle
We said it before and we’ll say it again, we love the message of the Circle!
Celebrating vulva diversity while doing crafts = a perfect afternoon.
Join/Like them on Facebook: International Vulva Knitting Circle The
Muffia
Sinead King and Katie O’Brien take their muffs to the streets. Outrageously
phenomenal performance street artists, they make people stop and think about
the ways in which we critique women’s bodies.
Web: www.themuffia.co.uk
The New View Campaign
Vulvactivists unite! Originally started to challenge Female Sexual Dysfunction
in 2000, they now have a variety of pro-genital programs successfully
connecting academics and activists.
Web: www.newviewcampaign.org
Address: PO Box 1845, New York, NY 10159-1845
Pads4Girls
Girls in developing countries may be forced to miss school or work if they do
not have the proper tools (e.g., tampons, pads) to help them manage their
periods. Pads4Girls donates reusable pads to women and girls in need through
several different programs listed on their web site. They will take cash or pad
donations!
Web: www.lunapads.com/padsfgirls
V-Day
It all began with a single performance of The Vagina Monologues. This past
year, there were over fifty-four hundred events (including performances of The
Vagina Monologues) to raise money and awareness to end violence against
women and girls globally.
Web: www.vday.org
Phone: 212.645.8329

Female-Friendly Sex Shops (listed alphabetically)
Ann Summers
Web: www.annsummers.com
Phone: +44 0845 456 6948
Multiple locations across the UK. In-home parties.
Aphrodite’s Toy Box
Web: www.aphroditestoybox.com
Phone: 404.292.9700
Address: 3040 N. Decatur Rd, Atlanta, GA 30079
Babeland
Web: www.babeland.com
Phone: 800.658.9119
Addresses:
707 E. Pike St, Seattle, WA 98122
462 Bergen St (Flatbush/5th Ave), Brooklyn, NY 11217
94 Rivington St (Ludlow/Orchard), New York, NY 10002
43 Mercer St (Broome/Grand), New York, NY 10013
Early to Bed
Web: www.early2bed.com
Phone: 866.585.2BED (2233)
Address: 5232 N. Sheridan Rd, Chicago, IL 60640
For Your Pleasure
Web: www.foryourpleasure.com
Phone: 603.925.4397
In-home parties throughout the United States and Canada
Good for Her
Web: www.goodforher.com
Phone: 877.588.0900
Address: 175 Harbord St, Toronto, Canada M5S 1H3

Good Vibrations
Web: www.goodvibes.com
Phone: 800.BUY.VIBE (289.8423) Locations:
899 Mission St, San Francisco, CA 94103
603 Valencia St, San Francisco, CA 94110
1620 Polk St, San Francisco, CA 94109
2504 San Pablo Ave, Berkeley, CA 94702
308A Harvard St, Brookline, MA 02446
My Pleasure
Web: www.mypleasure.com
Phone: 866.697.5327
NOMIA
Web: www.nomiaboutique.com
Phone: 207.773.4774
Address: 24 Exchange St, Suite 215 (2nd fl.), Portland, ME 04101
Passion Parties
Web: www.passionparties.com
Phone: 800.4.PASSION (727.7466)
In-home parties throughout the United States and Canada
Pure Romance
Web: www.pureromance.com
Phone: 866.ROMANCE (766.2623)
In-home parties throughout the United States and Puerto Rico (and
expanding!) Self Serve Toys
Web: www.selfservetoys.com
Phone: 505.265.5815
Address: 3904B Central Ave SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108
She Bop
Web: www.sheboptheshop.com
Phone: 503.473.8018

Address: 909 N. Beech St, Portland, OR 97227
Smitten Kitten
Web: www.smittenkittenonline.com
Phone: 888.751.0523
Address: 3010 Lyndale Ave S, Minneapolis, MN 55408
Sugar
Web: www.sugartheshop.com
Phone: 410.467.2632
Address: 927 W. 36th St (Hampden), Baltimore, MD
Surprise Parties
Web: www.surpriseparties.com
Phone: 1.877.Surpriz (787.7749)
In-home parties throughout the United States
Tulip Toy Gallery
Web: www.mytulip.com
Phone: 877.70.TULIP (88547) Locations:
1422 Milwaukee Ave, Chicago, IL 60622
3459 N. Halsted St, Chicago, IL 60657
1480 W. Berwyn Ave, Chicago, IL 60640
Va Va Voom
Web: www.vavavooom.com
Phone: 828.254.6329
Address: 36 Battery Park Ave, Asheville, NC 28801
Whole DC
Web: www.facebook.com/WholeDC
Phone: TBD. Keep an eye out for this LGBT-friendly sex shop.

About the Authors
Debby Herbenick, PhD, is associate director and research scientist at the Center
for Sexual Health Promotion, Indiana University; the sexual health educator for
the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction; and a
widely read sex columnist for various newspapers and magazines. She is also the
author of Because It Feels Good: A Woman’s Guide to Sexual Pleasure and
Satisfaction (2009) and the forthcoming I Love You More Book (StoryPeople
Press). She has served as an expert on the vagina and vulva (and other sex
topics) for the Tyra Banks Show and The Doctors and writes about sex for
MySexProfessor.com, Psychology Today, WebMD, and Men’s Health magazine.
She is also a member of the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal
Disease, the International Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health, and
the International Academy of Sex Research. As a widely cited sex expert, she
has been quoted in more than five hundred magazine and newspaper articles
including those in the New York Times, LA Times, San Francisco Chronicle,
Washington Post, Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Marie Claire, Women’s Health, Men’s
Health, and SELF.
Vanessa Schick, PhD, is a social psychologist and a research scientist at the
Center for Sexual Health Promotion, Indiana University. She has conducted a
variety of studies on the vulva that have been published in peer-reviewed
journals ranging from the changes in the portrayal of the vulva in sexually
explicit magazines to understanding how women’s concerns about their vulva
appearance impact them in the bedroom. She has presented her work to diverse
audiences, from the Kinsey Institute to students in the classroom to sex
researchers at the European Federation of Sexology conference in Rome, Italy.
She is also a member of the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal
Disease and the International Academy of Sex Research.
Dr. Herbenick and Dr. Schick are also two of the scientists behind the
National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior (NSSHB), the largest nationally
representative study of sexual behavior in the United States, which surveyed

individuals ages fourteen to ninety-four about their sexual lives.

