 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project	  READI	  Technical	  Report	  #13	  
	  
Allison Hall, Teresa Sosa, Sarah Levine 
Carol Lee, Susan Goldman 
Iterative Design and Implementation of Literature Modules 
in High School Classrooms 

 
 
2 
Citation for this Report: Hall, A., Sosa, T., Levine, S., Lee, C.D., & Goldman, S.R. (2016).  
Iterative design and implementation of literature modules in high school classrooms. Project 
READI Technical Report #13. Retrieved from URL: projectreadi.org 
 
 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of the following members of the 
Project READI Literature team MariAnne George, Joe Magliano, Stephen Briner, Angela 
Fortune, Candice Burkett, Katie McCarthy, Mary Pat Sullivan, and our design team teachers: 
Rick Coppola, Jessica Chambers, Courtney Milligan, and Jenny Gustavson. 
 
 
Please send us comments, questions, etc.: info.projectreadi@gmail.com 
 
 
Project READI was supported by the Reading for Understanding (RFU) initiative of the Institute 
for Education Sciences, U. S. Department of Education through Grant R305F100007 to the 
University of Illinois at Chicago from July 1, 2010 – June 30, 2016. The opinions expressed are 
those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U. S. Department of 
Education.  
 
 
Project READI operated as a multi-institution collaboration among the Learning Sciences 
Research Institute, University of Illinois at Chicago; Northern Illinois University; Northwestern 
University; WestEd’s Strategic Literacy Initiative; and Inquirium, LLC. Project READI 
developed and researched interventions in collaboration with classroom teachers that were 
designed to improve reading comprehension through argumentation from multiple sources in 
literature, history, and the sciences appropriate for adolescent learners.  Curriculum materials in 
the READI modules were developed based on enacted instruction and are intended as case 
examples of the READI approach to deep and meaningful disciplinary literacy and learning. 
 
 
 
 
©2016 Project READI 
 
 

 
 
3 
Introduction and Overview of Literature Module Designs 
 
Literature modules were iteratively designed and implemented each year of Project READI, 
beginning in year 2 (Fall 2011) and continuing through year 5 (Spring, 2015). Modules were 
designed for middle school and for high school using the same set of design principles and 
evidence-based argument assessments (see READI Technical Report #10) but differed in terms of the 
texts, instructional activities and supports, and formative assessments. The design principles and 
components of the literature instructional modules evolved over the multiple iterations of the 
project, building on prior work (e.g., Lee, 1995, 2007, 2011; Goldman, et al., 2012). A 
description of the components, along with their rationale and purposes appears in Lee (2016; 
READI Technical Report #9).  
The process of iterative design and implementation was the same for the middle and high 
school modules: collaborative and iterative cycles of design and implementation followed by 
reflection on the instruction in relation to student work relative to READI student learning goals. 
The reflection process generated foci for redesign and implementation. The cycle of design – 
reflection - revision – implementation occurred over the course of an academic year so that 
teachers implemented revised modules with new groups of students in the next academic year. 
The iterative design process was conducted by the Literature Team, a group consisting of the 
middle and high school classroom teachers who implemented the designs as well as university-
based researchers with expertise in English literature and assessment of literary understanding; 
discourse comprehension, literacy and reading; learning and cognitive sciences; and research and 
assessment methods. Implementations were documented through design documents; field notes 
of classroom implementations and design meetings; audio and video of classroom observations 
(selected class meetings); audio of literature team meetings to supplement meeting notes; student 
work, including assessments designed and analyzed by members of the Literature Team as well 
as assignments throughout the modules; and field notes of planning meetings that occurred 
between subsets of the Literature Team, often in conjunction with observing implementations. 
The documentation was the basis for the information on module design and implementation 
provided in two technical reports, one focused on middle school modules (grades 7 and 8) 
(READI Technical Report #14) and the other on high school (this report).  
 
The middle and high school modules share a common conceptual framework as well as 
substantial overlap in the life themes and rhetorical devices that were the targets of the modules. 
Accordingly, the information included in the next two sections of this report is the same for both 
middle and high school module descriptions.     
 
 
Conceptual Framework 
In the first year of READI (2010 – 2011) members of the Literature Team developed a 
characterization of the kinds of knowledge about literary works that experts in literary reading 
and analysis draw on when interpreting literary works. This characterization, subsequently 

 
 
4 
referred to as Core Constructs (Goldman, et al., 2016) reflected a conceptual meta-analysis of 
research in areas of rhetoric, literary interpretation, and the teaching and learning of literature 
(e.g., Booth, 1974, 1983; Bortolussi & Dixon, 2003; Dixon & Bortolussi, 2009; Hillocks, 2011; 
Langer, 2011a, 2011b; Lee, 2007; Lee & Spratley, 2010; Rabinowitz, 1987; Smith, 1989, 1991). 
The core constructs for literature reflect knowledge in the areas of epistemology (beliefs, values, 
and commitments that the reader draws upon to pose, prioritize, and warrant claims based on a 
conception of the terrain of literature) (Lee, Goldman, Levine, & Magliano, 2016); concepts and 
knowledge frameworks on which readers draw as they construct interpretations of literary texts; 
strategies/heuristics that expert readers use; types of texts that characterize the literature 
curriculum in grades 6–12 (prototypical plot structures and character types), and the 
discourse/rhetorical problems of literary texts (Goldman, et al., 2016). As well, the larger Project 
READI team reached agreement on reading and sense-making processes that modules would aim 
to develop in each of the three disciplinary areas (science and history in addition to literature). 
These included close reading of multiple texts for purposes of completing a developmentally 
appropriate version of an authentic disciplinary task, analysis and synthesis within and across 
texts, and the construction, justification, and critique of disciplinary arguments (see Goldman, et 
al., 2016).  
Interestingly, there is remarkably little empirical research on literary interpretation by 
adolescent readers. Thus, we undertook some initial basic studies of adolescents’ processing of 
literary works and used these data to inform the postulation of 12th grade benchmarks on the core 
constructs, as well as a developmental progression from grades 6–12. One key issue that surfaced 
almost immediately in considerations of progressions in the core constructs was how to capture 
the difficulty “level” of literary texts. We came to recognize that measures for assessing 
complexity of texts, such as lexiles or metrics generated by quantitative corpus analyses (e.g., 
Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse & Cai, 2004), seemed less appropriate for capturing the 
challenges of literary texts than for capturing text complexity in other disciplines. As an 
alternative, the literature team developed a set of heuristic questions for exploring potential 
sources of complexity and challenge in literary works (Lee & Goldman, 2015). 
 
Life Themes and Rhetorical Devices 
Based on our initial basic studies and a consideration of the psychosocial concerns that 
face adolescent students, we chose to focus the modules on the life theme of coming of age and 
stories where symbolism was central to interpreting the story. Coming of age represents an 
archetypal theme in many literary works.  In addition, coming of age represents a crucial set of 
experiences that characterize the transition from either middle childhood to adolescence or more 
often from adolescence toward the maturity of adulthood.  We know from studies in adolescent 
development that this is a period of intense change: biological changes heighten the importance 
of peer relationships and the salience of emerging gender identities and sexual attractions while 
cognitive changes heighten adolescent’s cognizance of social comparisons and social standing, 
especially in peer groups – they are more able to make inferences about abstract belief systems 
(right versus wrong, good versus bad, moral versus immoral, meaning of broader societal 

 
 
5 
affiliations for example with regard to race and ethnicity, etc.) as these belief systems impinge on 
them.   
Because adolescence and indeed pre-adolescence are such important periods of physical, 
psychological, cognitive and emotional transitions, examining rich literary texts that provide 
opportunities for youth to reflect critically about their own life experiences can be empowering.  
The texts focused on a critical set of life experiences with which students would be grappling and 
included characters who wrestled with making sense of oppressive conditions not of their 
making and who experienced supports (sometimes internal psychological beliefs, sometimes 
external supports from others) that enabled them to be resilient and to learn lessons about an 
adult world that they would soon enter. (See for an example Sosa, Hall, Goldman, and Lee, 
2015). 
With respect to the rhetorical device, we selected the frequently taught device of 
symbolism. Symbolism is a common rhetorical tool used by authors to invite readers to 
hypothesize some broader proposition.  The ability to detect when something in a literary text is 
intended to be figurative rather than literal, to distinguish whether the non-literal meaning is 
intended to augment or expand the literal or whether the target text is intended to stand in tension 
or contrast with the literal is a powerful skill in literary reasoning.  When readers know how to 
detect and construct potential warrantable interpretations of symbols, they can access a wide 
range of literary texts. Thus, a second and equally important goal of this unit was to help students 
learn how to detect symbolism and to construct interpretations of those symbols.  We taught 
what Rabinowitz calls rules of notice and rules of significance.  The method for teaching these 
strategies was the interrogation of cultural data sets (Lee, 1995, 2007) and the orchestration of 
metacognitive instructional conversations (i.e. students talking about how they use intuitive 
strategies for detecting and making sense of symbolism in everyday popular texts such as rap 
lyrics, rap videos, film clips, advertisements, etc.). Middle school as compared to high school 
students were expected to identify symbols and engage in symbolic interpretation in more 
accessible texts and contexts. 
Designs were adapted to the demographics and instructional histories of the different 
Literature Team teachers and their students and differed in terms of the specific text sets, cultural 
data sets (for activating relevant prior knowledge of strategies), and gateway activities (for 
building criteria by which to evaluate a coming of age experience). Thus, modules differed in 
terms of the specific texts as well as in the complexity of the coming of age motif.  However, all 
modules conformed to the basic components of the architecture, as described in Lee (2016, 
READI Technical Report #9): explicit knowledge of strategies for interpreting symbolism 
through the use of cultural datasets, background knowledge for evaluating theme, strategies for 
close reading and for metacognitive processing, and routines for attending to the rhetorical 
functions of language and for building claims, evidence and warrants for constructing arguments 
about symbolic meanings. Furthermore, in conjunction with the module development, members 
of the Literature Team developed an assessment of evidence-based argument in literature, 
described in Goldman, Britt, Lee, Wallace & Project READI (2016), READI Technical Report 
#10. Classrooms implementing modules contributed to the piloting and validation of this 

 
 
6 
assessment. Thus, data were available on performance on this assessment at the beginning and 
end of each academic year.  Assessments were designed to provide evidence of the joint READI 
learning goals of teaching the construction of argument (e.g. the relationship between claims, 
evidence, and reasoning) as well as its manifestation in literary texts. The inclusion of 
counterclaims, for example, provides evidence that students understand that when arguing, one 
must anticipate others’ points of view.  Such an understanding is critical to the formation of 
authentic arguments (Graff, 2003), and is one of the foci of the Common Core ELA standards 
across grade levels. Additionally, READI modules are designed to teach students not only how 
to track the literal events in a text, but how to understand the nature of literary texts in general. 
The assessments were thus intended to provide evidence regarding students’ understanding that 
literature not only communicates engaging stories for entertainment, but that authors 
communicate their ideas about human behavior in the world; hence, part of the transaction 
between reader and text is the construction of abstract or universalized thematic inferences from 
the specifics of character, plot, and language.  
 
Iterative Design and Implementation of High School Modules 
This report describes the design process and implementations of high school literature 
modules as well as student performance on the evidence-based argument assessment. Table 1 
shows the title/topic of high school modules implemented in grades 9, 11, and 12 starting in Fall, 
2011. A major difference between the grade 9 and 11 modules is that the 9th grade modules 
covered a larger range of rhetorical devices and the identity aspects of coming of age whereas the 
11th grade modules explored symbolic interpretation from power and gender perspectives. There 
were at least two iterative cycles with each module. Each of the design team teacher 
collaborators (JG, CM, and JC) implemented at least two iterations of the modules. TS and SL 
were university – based researchers who had been high school literature teachers. They 
implemented one or two modules to gain a better understanding “on the ground” of the 
instructional challenges. Table 2 shows the implementations chronologically by teacher. 
 
Table 1. Design-Based Research Classroom Implementation Modules 
 
Symbolism/ 
Coming of Age 
Symbolism/ 
Power & Gender 
Argument 
Unreliable 
Narrator 
JG (9th grade) 
Fall, 2011 
 
Fall, 2012 
Spring, 2012 
Fall, 2012 
TS (9th grade) 
Fall, 2011 
 
 
Spring, 2012 
CM (9th) 
Spring, 2013 
Fall, 2013  
Spring, 2014 
 
Spring, 2013 
Fall, 2013 
 
JC (11th) 
Spring 2013 
Fall, 2013 
Spring 2014 
Fall 2014 
Spring, 2015 
Fall, 2013 
 
SL (12t grade) 
Fall, 2011 
 
 
Spring, 2012 
 

 
 
7 
Table 2. Chronology of Module Implementations for High School Design Team Teachers 
 
TS (9th) 
SL (12th) 
JG (9th) 
CM (9th) 
JC (11th) 
Fall 2011 
Symb/Cof A 
Symb/Cof A 
Symb/Cof A 
 
 
Spring 2012 
Unreliable 
Narrator 
Ureliable 
Narrator 
Unrel. Narr. 
 
 
Fall 2012 
 
 
Argument; 
Unrel. Narr. 
 
 
Spring 2013 
 
 
 
Argument 
Symb/Cof A 
Symb/Cof A 
Fall 2013 
 
 
 
Argument 
Symb/Cof A 
Argument 
Symb/Cof A/ 
Power & Gend 
Spring 2014 
 
 
 
Symbol/C of A Symb/Cof A/ 
Power & Gend 
Fall 2014, 
Spring 2015 
 
 
 
 
Symb/Cof A/ 
Power & Gend 
 
 
The high school modules also placed more emphasis than the middle school modules on 
supporting students in explaining how authors use language and structure to focus the attention 
of the reader on that which is symbolic and to convey details whose associations provide the data 
for making claims about the meaning of the symbol.  Problems of this type are what Hillocks 
(Hillocks & Ludlow, 1984) calls structural generalizations and are embodied in the core 
constructs under discourse and strategies for literary reasoning. Finally, high school students 
were expected to construct oral and written arguments involving claims that identify that which 
is symbolic in a text and provide evidence from the text to support their claims. For high school 
students, the evidence should explain why the target has symbolic meaning beyond the literal, 
and why the text evidence supports the claim about the symbolic meaning. Oral and written 
argumentation forms were introduced in highly scaffolded ways in the middle school modules 
and in the 9th grade high school modules. Section 1 of this report is devoted to the 
symbolism/coming of age modules. We first look at three iterations as they occurred in 
classrooms of 9th grade students and teachers and then turn to three iterations that were enacted 
with 12th and 11th grade students. In addition to the major focus on symbolism and coming of 
age, two other modules were designed and implemented. In Section 2 we report on two iterations 
of work on a second rhetorical device, unreliable narrator. This was implemented iteratively only 
in 9th grade, although the first iteration was also implemented in grade 12. Finally, Section 3 
reports on the development of a “mini” module designed to introduce students to distinctions 
among basic components of argument and types of argument.    
Section 1. Iterative Design of High School Symbolism and Coming of Age Modules 
Iteration 1: 9th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age 
The first iteration of the 9th grade symbolism and coming of age module was 
implemented in two classes taught by the same collaborating teacher (JG). For purposes of 
maximizing insights into implementation, JG taught one of the classes and a member of the 
university-based team (TS) taught the other. The design of the first iteration implemented all of 

 
 
8 
the components of the literature module architecture, as shown in the schematic overview and 
Table 3.  A detailed description of the rationale for the design and its implementation are 
provided in Technical Report #15.  Ultimately, a revised version of that technical report, Sosa, 
Hall, Goldman, & Lee (2016) appeared in the Journal of the Learning Sciences. (See also 
READI Curriculum Module Technical Report CM#1.) 
 
Figure 1. Schematic overview of 9th grade symbolism/coming of age module, iteration 1.  
 
Table 3 
Descriptive Overview of the 9th Grade Symbolism/Coming of Age Module, iteration 1 
 
Days 
Purpose/Texts 
Student Activities1 
Days 1-2  
 
Cultural data set: Introduction to 
argumentation using Hillocks’ 
scenarios Slip or Trip and Case of 
the Dead Musician 
• Whole class and groups: Found evidence and 
made warrants  
• Individual: Wrote an argument paragraph  
Day 3 
Gateway activity: Focus on short 
excerpts from book on 
immigrants in Chicago.  
• Whole class: Read aloud 
• In groups: Answered discussion questions 
Days 4-5  Cultural data set: Introduction to 
symbolism using a power point 
presentation and lyrics from True 
Colors & Bag Lady  
• Whole class: Watched videos 
• Whole class: Discussed symbolism in the 
songs using worksheet (Sample 1 in Table 2). 
Days 6-
Main literary text: Read and 
• Whole class and individual: Close reading 
                                                        
1	  Whole	  class	  discussions	  were	  part	  of	  class	  activities	  every	  day	  except	  Days	  10	  and	  17.	  

 
 
9 
10  
interpret excerpt from When I 
was Puerto Rican  
and annotating 
• Whole class, groups, and individual: Filled in 
character map and follow the plot  
Days 11-
12 
Main literary text: Read and 
interpret vignette Four Skinny 
Trees 
• Whole class: Discussed interpretation of 
“four skinny trees” using worksheet (Sample 
2 in Table 2) 
• Individual: Wrote argument about symbol 
with reminders from teacher about need for 
claim, evidence and warrant 
Days 13-
14 
Main literary text: Read and 
interpret poem A Song in the 
Front Yard 
• Whole class: Discussed symbolism in poem 
• Individual: Wrote paragraph about coming of 
age 
Day 15 
Gateway activity: Focus on Asian 
proverbs and Tiger Mom video 
• Whole class: Discussed proverbs 
• Whole class: Watched video 
Days 16-
19 
Main literary text: Read and 
interpret story Two Kinds 
• Whole class and individual: Close reading 
and annotating 
• Groups: Presented sections of text  
• Whole class and individual: Filled out 
symbolism worksheet (Sample 3 in Table 2) 
Days 20-
21 
Main literary texts: Write about 
When I Was Puerto Rican and 
Two Kinds 
• Whole class, groups, and individual: Wrote 
long essay about the symbols in two texts 
and what they say about the world using a 
writing template  
 
Phase 1 EBA pre-post assessments were administered to the students in both 
classes.  The following essay prompt asked them to compare how the authors of two short 
stories used images to communicate a message about the world.  
“You have read two stories: [story title by author] and [story title by author]. 
In both stories, the main characters experience something that has a great 
impact on them. One way the authors show that impact is through the 
symbols the authors create in their stories. Symbols are words or phrases in 
stories that stand for more than what they seem to be. These words or phrases 
could be images, actions, objects, or characters (what they do, how they 
think, how they look, their names).  
     Write an essay that compares and contrasts how the symbols in each story 
help you understand the characters and their worlds.” 
 
Students were told to first read the stories and then keeping the texts present, they wrote 
their essay. The pre- and the post-tests were each conducted over two class periods of 45 minutes 
each on two consecutive days. The pretest was administered the week prior to beginning the 

 
 
10 
module implementation and the posttest was given on two consecutive days within 1 to 3 days of 
completing the implementation of the module. 
Essays were coded using the rubrics for the dimensions of literary reasoning and 
rhetorical organization: claims, functions of claims, evidence, reasoning, symbolism, theme 
(coming of age), synthesis (1 score across both texts), organization, language and syntax. Details 
of the assessment and of the criteria for each score point are provided in READI Technical 
Report #10, Phase 1 EBA design and development.  Analyses of the rubric scores on each 
dimension at pre and post module intervention were computed for the combined sample of 
consented students in both sections (N = 22). Preliminary analyses compared the dimension 
scores given to each story in the pre- or posttest set (except for Synthesis). In only 10% of the 
cases were there any differences in the scores on the two stories within a set. In those cases, we 
used the higher of the two scores. Wilcoxon signed-ranks tests were calculated for each 
dimension on the rubric, as is appropriate with non-parametric data of this type.  
Significant improvement in rubric score points from pre- to posttest occurred for three of 
the dimensions: Claims (z = 2.04, p = .041), Functions of Claims (z = 2.11, p = .035), and 
Symbolism (z = 3.26, p = .001).  The students who improved on Claims tended to move from one 
or two unconnected claims to making claims that were connected. No essay received a score of 
four, which would include nested claims or counterclaims. Increases for Function of Claims 
reflected more students making claims specifically referring to the character or the world of the 
text. The modal score moved from score point 0 to 1.  No essay received a 2, which would have 
indicated an examination of how the language of the text functioned to explain a character’s 
internal state and/or social world of the text. Students showed the greatest gains in Symbolism 
with more students being able to either identify or both identify and interpret symbols on the 
post-test. On the pre-test, all of the students received a score of 0, making no attempt to attribute 
symbolic significance. On the post-test, the majority of students who improved received a score 
of 1, indicating that they identified a symbol in the text.  
The scores for Evidence, Reasoning, Coming of Age, and Synthesis did not change 
significantly from pre-test to post-test. For Evidence, about 70% of the students gave some 
evidence on both pre- and posttest. For Reasoning, about 60% of the students demonstrated 
implicit reasoning in their arguments on both pre- and posttest. One student used explicit 
reasoning on the posttest. Coming of Age scores started at zero and remained at zero for every 
student. About half of the students used some level of Synthesis on both the pre- and posttests. 
Finally, Organization of Ideas showed some improvement but it was not statistically significant, 
(z = 1.93, p =.053). 
The essays that students write reflect products of their thinking but not evidence of the 
process of thinking about literary works. As well, these are individual products whereas the 
participation structures in the modules include individual, small group, and whole class 
activities. In particular, classroom discussions are in some ways at the “opposite end” of 
performance based on an individual working alone in the written language mode: multiple 
students contribute ideas; teachers, and sometimes peers, facilitate the discussion; and meaning is 
constructed in the “here and now” allowing for clarification and elaboration in the moment. 
Analyses of the discourse during whole class discussions indicated that both the number of 
different students and the number of contributions made by students increased over the course of 
the module. In the beginning student contributions to the discussion were sparse; in the middle of 
the module, discussion was dominated by two students, CJ and YR, in particular; and by the end 

 
 
11 
of the module, discussion was distributed more evenly across the students in the classes. Thus, 
the trend over the course of the module was one of increased student participation and 
contributions to the substance of the discussions. Content analyses indicated clear shifts in what 
students were talking about, with control over the topic shifting from teacher to students. These 
trends occurred even as the texts, topics and foci of the lesson became more complex across the 
span of the module. Overall, what students were able to do across early, mid, end of the unit 
discussions was consistent with what the pre to post changes in the essays indicated. That is, 
students were increasingly able to identify symbols and use evidence to support their claims.  
However, it should also be noted that most of the time, students’ contributions were directed 
toward the teacher, indicating that the discussions were largely teacher mediated. 
Performance changes between the pre- and post-module essays as well as the changes in 
the literary argument qualities of the class discussions over the course of the module focused our 
reflective analyses of the instructional design for purposes of revising it. These analyses revealed 
three areas that needed revision: explicit warranting of claim-evidence relations, written 
argument, and thematic interpretation. We honed in on these three objectives for revision of the 
module. These revisions in the second iteration module were targeted at the skills and practices 
that were most challenging to students given the focus and allocation of time in the first iteration 
module design.  
 
Iteration 2: 9th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age 
The second iteration for the symbolism/coming of age module was implemented during the 
Spring, 2013 semester (March to May 2013) in the classroom of a second collaborating design 
team teacher (CM). (See READI Curriculum Module Technical Report CM #3.) Based on the 
issues identified in reflective analyses of iteration 1 we extended the module plan to 9 weeks and 
added or increased the focus in four areas.  
• Developing criteria for theme identification. We used short scenarios to introduce 
students to constructing criteria for coming of age (e.g., innocence to experience, 
idealism to realism). 
• Writing arguments. More time was spent on written arguments, including the use of a 
two-week module focused explicitly on argument, discussed in Section 3 of this report. 
Support worksheets were introduced at the beginning of the module (e.g., “Building my 
Argument” worksheet) to help students in making more explicit connections between 
claims and reasoning.  
• Connecting symbolic meaning to what its interpret function. Instructional routines and 
sentence frames provided students with academic language and language forms to 
encourage thinking and reasoning about the import of particular symbols they identified 
as potentially relevant and important to messages about characters and/or their worlds.   
• Synthesizing across texts. Instructional supports were introduced that were intended to 
scaffold the reasoning and language forms needed to connect across different works by 
the same author or different works on similar themes.  
 
 

 
 
12 
Over the nine weeks, students engaged in various opportunities to develop knowledge of how 
to recognize and interpret symbols and develop criteria for judgments about coming of age 
experiences, as well as develop classroom norms for engaging in knowledge-building 
discussions and critical analysis of text. Figure 2 provides the overall design of the module, 
including the instructional goals and opportunities for discussions over the 9-week module.  A 
text set was designed and sequenced to lead up to the canonical text “To Kill a Mockingbird” 
(Lee, 1982). The sequence began with texts that reflected a perspective on coming of age that 
was close to the age of the students in the class, specifically the vignette “Linoleum Roses” from 
The House on Mango Street (Cisneros, 1991). A second text drew on experiences that could be 
assumed to be closer to those of the students than the events in the Lee text in that students 
analyzed the symbols and discussed interpretations of the Tupac Shakur poem “The Rose That 
Grew From Concrete”.  In working with each text, class activities provided multiple occasions 
during which students engaged in oral arguments through small-group and whole-class 
discussions, and individually composed writing assignments focused on claims about symbolic 
meanings and the evidence for these claims. Figure 3 depicts the flow of instruction and 
integration of texts with components of the architecture of the literature modules.  
 
 
Module Design 
 
     Simple                                                                                                      
Complex 
 
Weeks 1-2 
Week 3 
Weeks 4-9 
Instructional 
Goals 
• Develop 
strategies for 
interpreting 
symbolic 
meaning 
• Practice 
metacognitive 
strategies for 
interpreting 
theme and 
symbolism 
• Develop criteria 
for coming of age 
theme 
• Practice in oral and 
written literary 
argumentation 
related to coming 
of age and 
symbolic 
interpretation 
Texts 
• Cultural data sets 
(song lyrics, 
images) 
• Coming of age 
scenarios, short 
literary texts 
• Canonical text (To 
Kill a 
Mockingbird) 
Opportunities 
for Discussion 
• Questions and 
prompts help 
students explain 
and provide 
evidence for 
claims 
• Highly scaffolded 
to build 
• Inquiry 
determined by 
teacher and 
students 
• Students provide 
evidence and 
logic 
• Moderately 
• Inquiry determined 
by teacher and 
students 
• Minimum to no 
scaffolding during 
discussions—
student to student 

 
 
13 
interpretive 
arguments 
scaffolded by 
teacher guiding 
questions  
interactions 
 
Figure 2. Overall design of 9th grade symbolism/coming of age module, iteration 2 
 
 
Figure 3. Flowchart of instructional foci and texts in 9th grade symbolism/coming of age module, 
iteration 2. 
Analyses of Iteration 2 Implementation 
We again conducted both product and process analyses of the implementation, albeit with a 
smaller sample size for iteration 2.  
 Pre/Post Essays. Using the Phase 2 story sets, all students in the class completed the pre and 
post essay assessment (See READI Technical Report #10 for details). Story sets were 
counterbalanced across students and time of test, however data on pre and post were available from 
11 of 13 consented students in the class. Instructions for the Phase 2 version of the assessment were 
altered from those of Phase 1 to emphasize that stories convey messages and ideas about the human 
condition. Specific instructions were the following. 
 “You have read two stories: [story title by author] and [story title by author. Both 
stories suggest messages and ideas about the way people are and the world we 
live in. In each story there are symbols that the author included to help us 
understand some of those messages and ideas. Symbols are words or phrases in 

 
 
14 
stories that stand for more than what they seem to be. These words or phrases 
could be images, actions, objects, or characters (what they do, how they think, 
how they look, their names). Write an essay that compares how the symbols in 
each story help us understand some of the messages and ideas about the way 
people are or the world we live in.” 
 
The essays were again assigned rubric scores for nine dimensions: claims, function of 
claims, evidence, reasoning, symbolism, coming of age, organization, synthesis, and language 
and syntax.  
Results of pre-post assessment. Due to the small number of subjects, we examined the 
results on the dimensions from a descriptive perspective first. Table 4 provides the mode, 
minimum, and maximum rubric score points at pre and post for each dimensions. As seen in the 
descriptives reported in Table 4 there were shifts in scores from pre- to post-assessment. For 
example, the modal scores increased from pre- to post- assessment in the Evidence, Symbolism 
and Synthesis dimensions. In addition, there were increases in the minimum scores achieved in 
the Claims, Evidence, and Organization dimensions. Furthermore, increases in maximum scores 
achieved were evident in the Evidence, Coming of Age, Organization and Language and Syntax 
dimensions. 
 
Table 4 
Descriptive Statistics for Pre- and Post-Assessment Essay Scores by Dimension 
 
Mode 
 
Minimum 
 
Maximum 
 
Pre 
Post 
 
Pre 
Post 
 
Pre 
Post 
Claims 
3 
3 
 
0.5 
1 
 
3 
3 
Function of Claims 
1 
1 
 
0 
0 
 
1 
1 
Evidence 
1 
3 
 
0 
1 
 
2 
3 
Reasoning 
1 
1 
 
0 
0 
 
2 
2 
Symbolism 
0 
2 
 
0 
0 
 
2 
2 
Coming of Age 
0 
0 
 
0 
0 
 
0 
1 
Synthesis 
0 
2 
 
0 
0 
 
3 
3 
Organization 
1 
1 
 
0 
1 
 
1 
2 
Language and Syntax 
1 
1 
 
1 
1 
 
1 
2 
 

 
 
15 
To determine if there were differences between scores on pre- and post-assessments, a 
Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank test was conducted for each coding dimension. The low 
frequencies of negative ranks shown in Table 5 indicate that on all dimensions students improved 
or maintained their pretest levels of performance. Improvements were significant for several 
dimensions, including claims, evidence, symbolism, synthesis, organization and language and 
syntax.  
Table 5. Wilcoxon Results for Changes in Dimension Scores for Pre- and Post- Assessmentsa 
 
 
Negative 
Ranks 
Positive 
Ranks 
Ties 
|Z| 
p value 
Claims 
0 
6 
5 
2.21 
0.03* 
Function of Claims 
0 
3 
8 
1.73 
0.08 
Evidence 
1 
8 
2 
2.48 
0.01* 
Reasoning 
2 
3 
6 
0.00 
1.00 
Symbolism 
1 
7 
3 
2.43 
0.02* 
Coming of Age 
0 
2 
9 
1.41 
0.16 
Synthesis 
1 
6 
4 
2.16 
0.03* 
Organization 
0 
4 
7 
2.00 
0.05* 
Language and Syntax 
0 
4 
7 
2.00 
0.05* 
*Significant at p < .05.  
aNegative ranks indicate pre rubric score point greater than post; positive ranks means post 
greater than pre. |Z| indicates these are absolute values of z. 
 
Discussion. The pre-post assessments indicated that the targeted modifications were 
effective for improving some dimensions but others continued to be difficult for students. In 
particular, spending more time on writing literary arguments improved students’ skills at 
supporting their claims with relevant and sufficient evidence. However, few students showed 
gains in connecting their evidence and claims with warrants despite supports and time built into 
the module to help students make reasoning explicit. In synthesizing work, the added scaffolds 
proved successful, helping students make gains in constructing arguments using information 
from multiple texts. Although students showed gains in identification and interpretation of 
symbols, they did not indicate growth in coming of age, suggesting that further supports are 
required to develop skills in writing about how symbolism functions in texts to get at the coming 
of age theme or to explore social or moral issues that reflect the human condition.  
Because the pre/post assessments did not indicate growth in reasoning, we traced the 
opportunities and activities for writing arguments, especially with a focus on warrants, that took 

 
 
16 
place during the nine weeks of the intervention. The sampled student written essays, especially 
those written during the last three weeks of the module, indicated the use of explicit warrants in 
students’ written arguments. However, these assignments continued to be heavily scaffolded. 
When writing without these scaffolds on the posttest, students continued to have difficulty in 
producing warrants. This suggests that a next iteration needed to focus on gradual removal of 
scaffolds. 
 
Analysis of enactment. Similar to analyses of previous enacted modules, this enactment 
indicated student growth and sophistication in whole-class and small-group discussions more 
than in individual written work. The classroom discussions provided evidence of changes in 
reasoning over the course of the module. Specifically, over the course of the enactment, students’ 
increased their facility with, and ownership of, the interpretation process. For example, the 
discussions that took place over the first two weeks of the module were heavily teacher-directed. 
In her questions and statements, the teacher explicitly reminded the students of what a symbol 
was and of the reasoning needed to back up their identification of something as a symbol. The 
teacher also often clarified or asked for clarification of the function of aspects of arguments (i.e., 
what is reasoning?) and of skills or techniques (i.e., what made you think that is a symbol?). 
Through these “moves” the teacher made explicit and emphasized the thinking and reasoning 
necessary to connect possible meanings of symbols to larger thematic understandings of text.  
As the module continued, the discussions became less teacher-directed. As the students 
moved into the canonical text, they no longer relied on the directives of the teacher but were able 
to engage in interpretive processes to make claims, provide evidence, and reason about 
symbolism and its relationship to interpretive meaning. The teacher encouraged elaboration of 
the ongoing discussion rather than setting its direction and encouraged all students to contribute 
to the discussions. Generally, as the students took over more of the intellectual work, the teacher 
took a less directive role in the discussion.  
Iteration 3: 9th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age 
 
Reflection on the iteration 2 implementation surfaced some specific areas that needed 
more focus, including developing criteria for theme but also reasoning about connecting various 
identified symbols to the criteria as well as the gradual removal of scaffolds. However, a more 
general issue emerged: students needed opportunities to revisit symbolic interpretation skills 
over a greater range of texts, both in terms of length and complexity. As well, to enact more 
effective scaffolding and fading, the team decided explore more active monitoring of student 
work samples throughout instruction. Finally, it was generally agreed based on observations of 
the enactment that more emphasis was needed at the beginning of the year on establishing a 
community of readers and learners. Based on these needs, the design team reached the decision 
to construct a year-long implementation plan for 2013 – 2014 as well as identify specific tasks 
across the year that would be used for ongoing assessment of student progress in literary 
interpretation.   
 
The year-long design is provided in Table 6. Instruction began with an orientation to 
building inquiry dispositions, sharing and debating different ideas about the role of literature, and 

 
 
17 
developing ideas about reading as an open dialogue between reader and text. Criteria for 
evaluating arguments, attributing character traits (e.g., heroism), and coming of age were explicit 
foci. In addition, students were introduced to interpretation of identified symbols with respect to 
criteria for different character traits and themes. These reasoning practices were introduced in the 
context of short works, some of which were highly familiar to students and thus reflected cultural 
data sets and others were less familiar (see weeks 7 – 16 in Table 6). Therefore in the context of 
short pieces, students could think about how they knew something was symbolic and what it 
might mean thematically. Then, in similarly short works that were less familiar, students 
attempted to use those same processes to identify symbols and interpret their importance and 
relevance to thematic interpretation.  
Table 6. Year-long design of iteration 3, 9th grade symbolism/coming of age 
Weeks 
Focus/ Texts 
Objectives 
1-­‐2	  
weeks	  
Mini-­‐Argument	  Module	  
 Courageous	  Scenarios	  
 Slip	  or	  Trip	  
	  
 Close	  reading	  encompasses	  meta-­‐
comprehension	  and	  self-­‐regulation	  of	  the	  
process.	  	  
 Examples	  to	  draw	  on	  students’	  knowledge	  of	  
claims,	  evidence,	  and	  reasoning.	  Practice	  
constructing	  claims	  using	  evidence;	  articulate	  
how	  evidence	  supports	  claims	  	  
 Establish	  and	  apply	  criteria	  for	  judging	  the	  
effectiveness	  of	  arguments	  	  
3-­‐6	  
weeks	  
What	  makes	  someone	  a	  hero?	  
 Odysseus	  
	  
	  
 Establish	  criteria	  for	  judging	  interpretations	  
with	  respect	  to	  themes	  for	  connecting	  use	  of	  
language	  to	  theme.	  	  	  
 Draw	  from	  students’	  experience	  and	  practice	  
by	  identifying	  general	  norms	  and	  expectations	  
in	  argument	  forms.	  
7-­‐16	  
weeks	  
Symbolism/	  Coming	  of	  Age	  
 Titanium	  Lyrics	  
 Coming	  of	  Age	  Scenarios	  
 “A	  Song	  in	  the	  Front	  Yard”	  by	  Gwendolyn	  
Brooks	  
 “Linoleum	  Roses”	  by	  Sandra	  Cisneros	  
 “The	  Rose	  that	  Grew	  from	  Concrete”	  by	  
Tupac	  Shakur	  
 “The	  Flowers”	  by	  Alice	  Walker	  
 “Two	  Kinds”	  by	  Amy	  Tan	  
 Multi-­‐text	  analysis:	  close	  reading	  of	  literary	  
texts	  that	  use	  symbolism	  to	  communicate	  
theme:	  read	  to	  identify	  potential	  symbols	  and	  
authors’	  use	  of	  symbolism.	  	  	  
 Construct	  literary	  arguments	  (claims,	  evidence,	  
explanations)	  about	  use	  of	  symbolism	  to	  
communicate	  themes	  within	  and/or	  across	  
texts.	  Draw	  on	  criteria	  for	  specific	  themes.	  
 Build	  on	  past	  modules	  by	  developing	  new	  
criteria	  for	  specific	  devices	  or	  genres	  (e.g.	  
unreliable	  narrator	  or	  coming	  of	  age	  stories),	  
and	  apply	  to	  arguments	  about	  effects	  of	  those	  
elements	  in	  literature.	  
2	  days	  
 Excerpt	  from	  In	  the	  Time	  of	  the	  Butterflies	  by	  
Julia	  Alvarez	  
 CPS	  Mandated	  Reach	  Performance	  Test	  for	  Q3	  
 Close	  reading	  of	  a	  literary	  text	  provided	  to	  the	  
students	  in	  order	  for	  them	  to	  construct	  literary	  
argument	  (claim,	  evidence,	  
warrant/explanation)	  using	  what	  they	  thought	  
to	  be	  the	  theme	  or	  symbol	  of	  the	  excerpt.	  
18-­‐28	  
weeks	  
 The	  Book	  Thief	  by	  Markus	  Zusak	  
	  
 Close	  reading	  of	  literary	  texts	  that	  focused	  on	  
characterization	  and	  identifying	  theme	  and	  

 
 
18 
Supporting	  Texts	  include:	  
-­‐	  Background	  information	  on	  Holocaust,	  
Nazi/Hitler	  rise	  to	  power,	  and	  numerous	  other	  
topics	  covered	  through	  cross-­‐discipline	  
instruction	  during	  the	  English,	  World	  Studies,	  
and	  Reading	  class	  
-­‐	  Article:	  Holocaust	  Survivor:	  Jeannine	  Burk’s	  
story	  
how	  it	  relates	  to	  our	  world	  today	  
 Construct	  literary	  arguments	  (claims,	  evidence,	  
explanations)	  about	  characters	  and	  themes	  
within	  and/or	  across	  texts.	  
	  
 This	  text	  proved	  to	  be	  rather	  difficult	  for	  a	  
good	  number	  of	  students.	  Students	  completed	  
Jigsaw	  activities	  for	  different	  sections	  of	  the	  
book,	  and	  they	  wrote	  a	  final	  argument	  piece	  
on	  (Who	  fostered	  the	  greatest	  relationship	  
with	  Liesel	  in	  The	  Book	  Thief?)	  
29	  week	  
 This	  I	  Believe	  Personal	  Essay	  Unit	  
	  
Sample	  Essays	  included:	  Mohammad	  Ali,	  Elie	  
Wiesel,	  Tony	  Hawk,	  Barack	  Obama,	  and	  other	  
various	  ones	  including	  student	  examples.	  
 To	  give	  students	  a	  break	  before	  continuing	  on	  
to	  the	  next	  unit	  focused	  on	  the	  novel	  Of	  Mice	  
and	  Men,	  a	  week	  was	  devoted	  to	  having	  
students	  build	  their	  own	  “personal	  beliefs”	  
essays	  modeled	  after	  the	  well-­‐known	  NPR	  
program	  “This	  I	  Believe”	  
30-­‐36	  
weeks	  
 “Raymond’s	  Run”	  
 Of	  Mice	  and	  Men	  by	  John	  Steinbeck	  
 “The	  Man	  Who	  Finds	  His	  Son	  Has	  Become	  A	  
Thief”	  by	  Raymound	  Souster	  
 Article:	  Death	  of	  Emmitt	  Till	  
 Letter	  from	  John	  Steinbeck	  to	  Ms.	  Claire	  Luce	  
(actress	  who	  played	  Curley’s	  wife)	  
Continuation	  of	  reading	  literary	  texts	  for	  
symbolism	  and	  creating	  literary	  arguments	  
 Multi-­‐text	  analysis:	  close	  reading	  of	  literary	  
texts	  that	  use	  symbolism	  to	  communicate	  
theme:	  read	  to	  identify	  potential	  symbols	  and	  
authors’	  use	  of	  symbolism.	  	  	  
 Construct	  literary	  arguments	  (claims,	  evidence,	  
explanations)	  about	  use	  of	  symbolism	  to	  
communicate	  themes	  within	  and/or	  across	  
texts.	  
 Develop	  literary	  argument	  for	  overall	  character	  
development	  and	  theme	  of	  the	  text	  (Was	  
George	  justified	  in	  killing	  Lennie	  at	  the	  end	  of	  
the	  novel?)	  	  
o This	  literary	  argument	  was	  built	  on	  
developing	  new	  criteria	  (what	  does	  it	  mean	  
to	  be	  loyal	  to	  someone?)	  
2-­‐3	  days	  
Project	  READi	  EBA	  Post-­‐Test	  
 “Eleven”	  by	  Sandra	  Cisneros	  
 “The	  Butterfly”	  by	  James	  Hanley	  
	  
GISA	  test	  
 Complete	  post-­‐test	  which	  asks	  students	  to	  
compare/contrast/connect	  symbols	  across	  two	  
texts	  
 
 
At the start of the second semester (week 18), the first novel was introduced (The Book 
Thief) and students then spent the second semester working with symbols and themes in longer 
works, concluding the year with the reading of Steinbeck’s Of Mice and Men. For both novels, 
the design included shorter literary pieces that related to the themes of the novels as well as 
informational pieces to provide students with background knowledge about the historical context 
in which the novel was set. 
During the first semester, a tension emerged between the need to have a certain number 
of grades for each student and using student work products more formatively. Thus, student work 
samples became de facto the basis for grade book entries and took on a summative quality that 

 
 
19 
created tension with using the pieces more formatively. Nevertheless, with respect to symbolism, 
over the course of the Fall semester, students showed more proficiency with identifying symbols 
and discussing how the author was using symbols to indicate some larger message about the 
character or the story world. However, although they engaged in these identification and 
interpretation practices with several short pieces over the semester, when they were faced with 
engaging in these activities in the context of a novel, they struggled. Discussions were more 
heavily teacher guided than at the end of the Fall semester and some of the interpretation 
templates that they had left behind by the end of Fall were reintroduced. This helped somewhat 
but introduced another issue. Students were not reading on their own but waiting to come to class 
to “get the answer.” This was perhaps a natural result of the re-introduction of the supports. 
These issues again brought to the fore the delicate balance in the design of modules around 
issues of text complexity, supports for engaging with challenging texts, and classroom contexts 
that supported students to keep them sufficiently invested in doing the work. We observed 
similar trends over the year with respect to intra- and intertext connections and argument writing. 
Students’ proficiency with these processes developed over the Fall semester when short texts 
were in use but they struggled with these same processes in the context of novel-length literary 
works. Thus, the tension between complexity of text, task, and scaffolds remained a relatively 
unresolved issue.   
Phase 3 assessment. Pre/ post assessments. Data were available for 14 students for the 
pre- and post-assessments using the Phase 3 design (see READI Technical Report  #10). This 
version of the assessment used the same two stories at pre and at post (“Eleven” and “The 
Butterfly”) due to the difficulties encountered in early phases of EBA assessment development 
of equating the difficulty of text sets. In addition, this prompt used a graphic organizer to elicit 
student thinking about symbols in the two texts, their meanings, and their comparisons. This was 
preparatory to writing an essay that addressed the following prompt. 
“When writing stories, authors often create symbols that help reveal ideas about the way 
people are and the way the world is. Symbols are words or phrases in stories that stand 
for more than what they seem to be. Symbols can be images, actions, objects, or 
characters (what they do, how they think, their names). In your essay, compare and 
contrast how you think symbols in “Eleven” and “The Butterfly” help reveal ideas about 
the way people are and the way the world is, or help you understand the characters and 
their worlds. Use the information you wrote in the chart and the stories to help you write 
your essay.” 
 
The pre-post assessments were scored with rubrics for nine dimensions: Claims, Function 
of Claims, Evidence, Reasoning, Symbolism, Coming of Age, Organization, Synthesis, and 
Language and Syntax. To determine where there were significant differences between scores on 
pre-and post-assessments, a Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank test was conducted for each 
coding dimension. As shown in Table 7 below, Claims, Function of Claims, Evidence, 
Symbolism, Coming of Age, Synthesis, and Organization showed equal or improved 
performance.  However, only the improvement in Symbolism was significant.   

 
 
20 
Table 7. Wilcoxon signed rank test of significance of change (post – pre) on nine essay 
dimensionsa   
 
Negative 
Ranks 
Positive 
Ranks 
Ties 
|Z| 
p value 
Claims 
0 
1 
15 
1.00 
.32 
Function of Claims 
0 
1 
15 
1.00 
.32 
Evidence 
3 
8 
5 
1.09 
.28 
Reasoning 
3 
2 
11 
  .45 
.66 
Symbolism 
2 
10 
4 
2.58 
.01* 
Coming of Age 
0 
2 
14 
1.34 
.18 
Synthesis 
8 
4 
4 
1.03 
.30 
Organization 
4 
4 
8 
  .00 
1.00 
Language and 
Syntax 
3 
2 
11 
  .45 
.66 
*Significant at p≤.05 
aNegative ranks indicate pre rubric score point greater than post; positive ranks means post 
greater than pre. |Z| indicates these are absolute values of z. 
 
 
Reflection on the year long implementation occurred in the design team context and with 
the 11th grade teacher implementing iterations 2 and 3 at the same school as this 9th grade 
teacher. These are discussed below, following the presentation of iteration 3 with 11th grade 
students.   
 
Iteration 1: 12th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age   
The 12th grade initial iteration of the symbolism and coming of age module emphasized 
affective evaluation of literary works and the words within them and connecting the ways in 
which these feelings related to themes. The emphasis on affective evaluation was intended to lay 
the ground work for focusing on symbolism as connotative meaning evoked by authors choice of 
particular words (e.g., mansion versus house) Texts used in the module reflected texts that the 
12th grade teacher had previously used with her students. Thus, although the goals and 
components of the modules were similar for 9th and 12th grade, the implementation of the 12th 
grade module reflected texts of greater complexity. As well, it was assumed that symbol 
identification was not an issue for these older students but that connecting symbols to themes 
required attention. The module was implemented in one 12th grade classroom during Fall, 2011. 
Table 8 provides an overview of the instructional sequence of tasks, texts, and instructional focus 

 
 
21 
over the course of the 18 days of instruction. 
 
Table 8. Texts and General Activities in symbolism and Coming of Age Unit 
Timeline 
Unit elements 
Instructional activities and texts 
Prestudy 
Prestudy 
assessment 
• Written task in response to the poem “I Ask My 
Mother to Sing” by Li-Young Lee  
 • Think-aloud in response to an excerpt from the novel 
Prisoner’s Dilemma by Richard Powers 
• Phase 1, EBA pretest 
Day 1 
Introduction 
• Discussion of the connection between everyday and 
school interpretation 
• Examination of language that creates specific effects 
Days 2 and 3 
Discussion about 
effects of language 
• Headlines and print ads 
• Short story: Short version of Cinderella (created by the 
teacher) 
Days 4 and 5 
Writing argument 
about effects of 
language 
Argument about symbolism and effects in the short 
version of Cinderella 
Day 6 
Constructing 
interpretations with 
a focus on 
symbolism 
Novel excerpt: Black Boy by Richard Wright 
Days 7 and 8 
Constructing 
interpretations by 
comparing two 
texts with similar 
themes but different 
styles 
Pop songs: 
• “I Will Follow Him” sung by Little Peggy March 
• “I Will Follow You Into the Dark” by Death Cab for 
Cutie 
Days 9 and 10 Writing argument 
about literary 
effects 
Argument about symbol and themes in love songs 
Days 11-13 
Discussion and 
activities for 
interpretation of 
theme of fiction 
Novella excerpt: “Linoleum Roses” from The House on 
Mango Street by Sandra Cisneros 
Days 14–16 
Discussion and 
activities for 
interpretation of 
theme of fiction 
Short story: “Ysrael” by Junot Díaz 
Days 17 and 
18 
Writing argument 
about literary 
effects 
Argument about symbol and theme in “Ysrael” 

 
 
22 
Poststudy 
Poststudy 
assessment 
• Written task in response to the poem “I Ask My 
Mother to Sing”    
• Think-aloud in response to the excerpt from the novel 
Prisoner’s Dilemma 
• Phase 1, EBA posttest 
 
 
The first three days of instruction were focused on making affective evaluation visible as 
a precursor to taking up consideration of how specific words authors included in their texts might 
be intentional and designed to evoke particular connotations and feelings in the reader.  At the 
beginning of the unit, the teacher introduced the affective evaluation heuristic and the concept of 
connotations. She presented students with a list of approximate synonyms for the word house, 
such as domicile, shack, crib, and cottage, and asked students where they would prefer to live. 
Students identified and explained their preferred terms by articulating associations with those 
terms. Students had negative reactions to shack and domicile but positive reactions to crib and 
cottage. For example, one student preferred the word cottage because it sounded more “pure and 
innocent.” The teacher then defined what the students had done as “constructing connotations” of 
language. She pointed out to them that even though all the words they looked at were synonyms 
for house, students knew that each word had different connotations and could have different 
effects on an audience. Next, the teacher pointed out that part of what students were doing when 
they created connotations was making an evaluation of the valence, or positive/negative effects, 
of the words. She explained that individuals often make a very quick evaluation of the positive or 
negative impact of a thing first and then figure out why they made such an evaluation. She 
explained that such a process was a great way to examine the effects of language in all sorts of 
texts. 
This exercise was repeated in small groups with synonyms for woman, such as lady and 
chick, along with other terms that the students called out. Students first evaluated the positive or 
negative valence of each word and then explained their evaluations, generally using abstract 
terms. Comparisons of synonyms for woman led to a discussion about the way concrete words 
embodied abstract concepts and, therefore, had powerful effects in our minds. The teacher then 
reintroduced the idea of connotation and wrote down the three steps of the affective evaluation 
on the blackboard: 
1. Identify language that you feel has strong valence. 
2. Evaluate valence (positive, negative, or both). 
3. Explain or justify your evaluations. 
Students were then provided with time in which to practice applying these three steps of 
affective evaluation with short, popular texts. They compared effects of the stage name Marilyn 
Monroe and Monroe’s given name, Norma Jeane Mortenson. They examined the tones created 
by different word choices in newspaper headlines (e.g., “Police Officer Controls Riot” vs. “Cop 
Suppresses Gathering”) and articulated the connotations that they felt were created by specific 

 
 
23 
words and the headline as a whole. They did similar work with advertisements, making text-
based evaluations of mood and tone and explaining those evaluations through abstractions. The 
teacher led several class discussions in which she reminded students that the process they were 
using was one they used in their everyday lives; now they were carrying that practice into school, 
taking it apart, and trying it on other kinds of texts. 
The next two days (4 and 5) were devoted to exploring coming-of-Age and gender, a 
coupling the teacher was interested in exploring. As well, students applied the affective heuristic. 
She did this by introducing and asking students to define coming-of-age and compare the 
experience for young women and young men. Students then practiced the affective evaluation 
heuristic with a series of literary texts that could be characterized as exploring both gender and 
coming-of-age. The teacher began with simpler, more familiar texts, such as a version of 
Cinderella. The teacher asked students to practice the first step of the heuristic by identifying 
details in the text that seemed particularly affect-laden. For example, after reading the line “It 
was afternoon. Cinderella was left at home, weeping by the ashes,” students identified text that 
they felt was especially valence-laden. In this case, students felt that the second sentence 
(“Cinderella was left at home…”) was more affect-laden than the first and that it was negative in 
tone. Within that second sentence, students pointed to the words “left,” “weeping,” and “ashes” 
as being especially salient to their negative evaluations. Then, the students justified their 
evaluations, agreeing that in context, those words created a sense of abandonment and 
hopelessness. In this way, students moved beyond tracking the action of the story to identifying 
details that were salient to interpretation and constructing abstract connotations. Students 
repeated this process with every phrase or detail that they felt was valence-laden. 
After finishing the story, the students practiced affective evaluation on the cumulative 
effects of this version of Cinderella. Most judged the story to have positive effects, explaining 
their evaluations with simple thematic inferences, such as “Hope will win out in the end,” and 
“Love conquers all.” Notably, a few students judged the overall effect to be negative, justifying 
their evaluation by saying that in Cinderella, “the only way a woman succeeds is through a man.” 
As the students formulated interpretations, the teacher provided them with sentence stems 
designed to support the use of affective evaluation. For instance, one stem read, “This text 
condemns a world in which…,” and another read, “This text celebrates a world in which….” 
Students then wrote a one-paragraph argument about the effects of Cinderella and were 
encouraged to refer to specific elements (e.g., words, phrases) of the text as evidence.  
An additional day of practice with the affective heuristic involved applying it to an 
excerpt from Richard Wright’s novel Black Boy. This text also addressed issues of coming-of-
age. First, students made arguments about whether the narrator had in fact come of age, and then 
returned to the text to use affective evaluation to construct connotation and thematic inferences 
of details and overall effects. 
The next segment of the module (days 7–10) was intended to introduce students to 
comparing across texts and writing arguments about those comparisons. This was introduced 
using two popular love songs, “I Will Follow Him” and “I’ll Follow You Into the Dark.” The 
two songs addressed the same theme, devoted love, but used different styles to do so. Students 

 
 
24 
practiced affective evaluation with both texts. Students then used the school argument template 
to make claims about which kind of love was more mature. They incorporated some of their 
interpretations of the effects of language into those arguments. 
From songs, students moved to short stories as contexts for applying the affective 
heuristic (days 11 – 16). They began with a vignette from Sandra Cisneros’s The House on 
Mango Street, “Linoleum Roses”, and then moved to a short story from Junot Díaz’s DrownI, 
“Ysrael”.  For the Cisneros piece, students practiced the affective evaluation in a teacher-led 
discussion and as a whole class worked to identify and construct connections between 
connotations that they felt were created by the text. Students used the sentence stems to develop 
thematic statements based on connections between abstractions. Students then read the Díaz 
story; about 25% was read in class, and the rest was read for homework. To account for students 
who had not read for homework, the teacher asked class members to review important sections. 
Students then worked in small groups to use affective evaluation with one motif from the text. 
The culminating activity of the module (days 17 and 18) involved students using the school 
argument template to make an argument about the effect of that motif on the themes of the story 
as a whole. 
The 12th grade students took the same version of the Phase 1 EBA as the 9th graders 
during iteration 1, using exactly the same instructions, procedures for counterbalancing, and 
scoring.  Analyses of the rubric scores on each dimension at pre and post module intervention 
were computed for the combined sample of consented students (N = 34). Performance was 
analyzed separately by story set. There were significant improvements in the rubric scores 
regardless of story set, although for the condition where the easier stories were at pre (per the 9th 
graders), fewer dimensions improved significantly at posttest. Wilcoxon signed-ranks tests were 
calculated for each dimension within story set, as shown in Table 9. Note that the lack of 
significant improvement from pre to post for several dimensions in the Eleven/Butterfly First 
condition is due to higher rubric scores at pretest for this story set.  
Table 9. Results of Wilcoxon signed-ranks tests (post/pre) for 12th Grade Iteration 1 
Dimension 
Eleven/Butterfly First 
Flowers/Mulvaneys First 
 
t (13) 
p value 
t (18) 
p value 
Claims 
< 2 
> .07 
3.88 
< .01 
Function of claims 
4.32 
< .01 
3.36 
< .01 
Evidence 
2.01 
.07 
3.11 
< .01 
Reasoning 
2.21 
.04 
4.43 
< .01 
Symbolism 
4.20 
.01 
3.57 
< .01 
Coming of Age 
< 2 
> .07 
3.59 
< .01 
 
The data indicate that the module was effective in enhancing the literary interpretation 
skills of the 12th grade students. Levine (see Levine, 2014. Making interpretation visible with an 
affect‐based strategy. Reading Research Quarterly, 49, 283-303) reports that it was more 
effective than a more traditional approach to symbolism and theme, a basic study related to the 
module design described here. Of interest with respect to concerns about text complexity is that 

 
 
25 
the story set made less of a difference in performance for the 12th grade as compared to the  9th 
grade students. This could reflect more mature psychosocial development, the effects of the 
affective evaluation heuristic, or both. 
Reflection on the implementation underlined the importance of developing criteria for 
coming of age, and themes more generally, as well as the importance of having students become 
aware of the processes they were using to understand nonliteral use of language in everyday 
experiences and cultural artifacts. As well the difficulties students experienced in moving from 
shorter, less complex literary works to longer ones and from discussion to written expression 
reinforced the need to carefully design text sequences and provide opportunities for independent 
but supported writing. Unfortunately due to personal circumstances, the 12th grade teacher could 
not continue with the project and the second iteration the high school symbolism/coming of age 
module was designed and implemented in a different school with an 11th grade teacher. 
Iteration 2: 11th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age 
 
The second iteration of an upper-level high school symbolism/coming of age module was 
implemented over a 9-week period of time during Spring, 2013 (January to March) in an 11th 
grade classroom in an interest-oriented selective enrollment school. Consistent with the 
reflection on the initial implementations of this module, time was allocated to writing as well as 
discussion, and gateway activities specifically oriented toward building criteria for coming of 
age themes. In designing the module, careful attention went into the selection and sequencing of 
texts and developing supports for connecting symbolic meaning to what it says about the 
characters or their world and for synthesis across texts. Thus, over the nine weeks, students 
engaged in various opportunities to develop knowledge of how to recognize and interpret 
symbols and develop criteria for judgments about coming of age experiences, as well as develop 
classroom norms for engaging in knowledge-building discussions and critical analysis of text.  
(For the complete module, see READI Curriculum Module Technical Report CM #4.) 
The text sequence was designed and sequenced to lead up to the chapter “Two Kinds” 
from Amy Tan’s novel, The Joy Luck Club. The sequence began with a younger coming of age 
perspective and with experiences that were expected to be more closely related to students’ 
experiences: “Linoleum Roses” from The House on Mango Street (Cisneros, 1991) and the 
Tupac Shakur poem “The Rose the Grew From Concrete”.  In the 11th grade module, more 
emphasis was placed on connecting symbolic meaning to theme than in the 9th grade where these 
two shorter works were also part of the module design.  The last two texts in this module are 
ones in which the narrator is reflecting on her childhood. Thus these stories introduced 
complexity related to understanding that these are recollections of events and emotions 
experienced as an adolescent but recounted from an adult perspective. First, students worked 
with Eugenia Collier’s short story “Marigolds.” They then went on to read the chapter “Two 
Kinds” from the Tan novel.  
Instructional activities addressed guiding questions regarding theme (e.g., What counts as 
a coming of age experience? What role does family play in coming of age? How is coming of 
age impacted by racism and poverty?), rhetorical tools in literature (e.g., What is a symbol, what 

 
 
26 
does it do, and how do you know? How do authors use symbolism to represent childhood, 
maturity, and coming of age?) and structural generalization (e.g., How does the author use 
language to convey symbolic meaning? How does the author organize details to convey what 
you think the symbol(s) mean?). The module included multiple occasions on which students 
engaged in oral arguments through small-group and whole-class discussions as well as individual 
writing assignments focused on claims about symbolic meanings and the evidence for these 
claims. Table 10 and Figure 4 provide the overall design of the module, including the 
instructional goals, related texts, and opportunities for discussions over the 9-week module 
Table 10. Design of 11th grade symbolism/coming of age module, iteration 2 
 
Module Design 
 
     Simple                                                                                                       
Complex 
 
Weeks 1-2 
Week 3 
Weeks 4-9 
Instructional 
Goals 
• Develop 
strategies for 
interpreting 
symbolic 
meaning 
• Practice 
metacognitive 
strategies for 
interpreting 
theme and 
symbolism 
• Develop 
criteria for 
coming of age 
theme 
• Practice in oral 
and written 
literary 
argumentation 
related to 
coming of age 
and symbolic 
interpretation 
Texts 
• Cultural data 
sets (song 
lyrics, 
images) 
• Coming of age 
scenarios, 
short literary 
texts 
• Longer literary 
texts: 
“Marigolds” 
(Collier, 1969); 
“Two Kinds” 
(Tan, 1989) 
Opportunities 
for Discussion 
• Questions and 
prompts help 
students 
explain and 
provide 
evidence for 
claims 
• Highly 
scaffolded to 
build 
interpretive 
arguments 
• Inquiry 
determined by 
teacher and 
students 
• Students 
provide 
evidence and 
logic 
• Moderately 
scaffolded by 
teacher 
guiding 
questions  
• Inquiry 
determined by 
teacher and 
students 
• Minimum to no 
scaffolding 
during 
discussions—
student to 
student 
interactions 

 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Sequence of module components for 11th grade symbolism/coming of age module, 
iteration 2 
 
Analysis of enactment. This enactment provided evidence of student growth and 
increased sophistication in whole-class and small-group discussions more than in individual 
written work. The module enactment, specifically the classroom discussions, provided evidence 
of changes in reasoning over the course of the module especially students’ increased facility with 
and ownership of the interpretation process. Over the course of the module, the discussions 
became less teacher-directed. As the students moved into the longer literary texts, they no longer 
relied on the directives of the teacher but were able to engage in interpretive processes to make 
claims, provide evidence and reason about symbolism and its relationship to interpretive 
meaning. That is, students took over more of the intellectual work.   
Pre/post EBA for 11th grade symbolism module. This class of 11th grade students took 
the Phase 2 version of the EBA assessment, similar to the 9th grade students on iteration 2. 
Instructions and story sets were identical for the two grade levels. Phase 2 used two story sets 
(“Eleven”and “Butterfly;” “Shaving” and “The Flowers”) counterbalanced across time of test 
and students. The pre-post assessments were scored with the rubrics for the nine dimensions: 
Claims, Function of Claims, Evidence, Reasoning, Symbolism, Coming of Age, Organization, 
Synthesis, and Language and Syntax. Descriptive statistics indicated some improvement from 
pre to post test on maximum score points for Claims, Function of Claims, Symbolism, Coming 

 
 
28 
of Age, and Synthesis dimensions. However, modal scores were largely unchanged, with only 
Claims showing any increase (from 2 to 3). Table 11 shows the number of students whose 
performance was worse (negative ranks), better (positive ranks), or unchanged on post than on 
pre test for each dimension.  Results of significance tests indicated significant improvement on 
only Claims and Symbolism dimensions.      
 
Table 11. Wilcoxon signed-ranks test for Post – Pre Dimension Rubric scoresa 
 
Negative Ranks 
Positive Ranks 
Ties 
|Z| 
Claims 
0 
5 
3 
2.12* 
Function of Claims 
2 
1 
5 
0.00 
Evidence 
4 
2 
2 
1.19 
Reasoning 
3 
0 
5 
1.73 
Symbolism 
0 
5 
3 
  2.04* 
Coming of Age 
0 
1 
7 
1.00 
Synthesis 
1 
2 
5 
 0.82 
Organization 
3 
0 
5 
1.73 
Language and 
Syntax 
1 
0 
7 
1.00 
*Significant at p < .05 
aNegative ranks indicate pre rubric score point greater than post; positive ranks means post 
greater than pre. |Z| indicates these are absolute values of z. 
 
Thus, while the oral small group and whole class discussions suggested that students 
were engaging in more sophisticated literary interpretation and argumentation, the individual 
written assessments failed to reflect much improvement. Analyses of student written work 
indicated that even with various supports and scaffolds, students struggled to write interpretive 
argument essays. Furthermore, during the implementation of the module, students frequently did 
not hand in written writing assignments despite multiple attempts by the teacher to provide 
supports and rewriting/ revising opportunities. Students simply started these assignments but 
typically did not complete them. In reflecting on the module implementation, two conclusions 
with redesign implications emerged: The complexity of what students were attempting required 
more iterations and a classroom norms and expectations that were not present in the class in 
which the implementation occurred. These needed to be established at the beginning of a school 
year and could not simply be switched on (or off) midway through the year – the situation of this 
implementation. The decision was made to move to a year-long design, with a sequence of 
modules/units that revisited interpretive argumentation based in close reading of literary texts. 
This was the form that iteration 3 took. 

 
 
29 
Iteration 3: 11th Grade Symbolism and Coming of Age 
 
The year-long implementation began with a content focus on argument and reading and 
norms and expectations for engaging in argument in the class. These discussions were grounded 
in examples students brought up of arguments “in real life.” There was a lot of emphasis on the 
different functions of argument across different situations in real life. By week 3 of the semester, 
the instructional focus had moved to the use of textual evidence based on close reading of short 
texts that spoke to experiences familiar to them in forming the basis of the claims they argued. 
JC, the 11th grade teacher, selected canonical texts that afforded the exploration of gender and 
power motifs in relation to the coming of age theme. Hence, she selected texts in which these 
motifs manifest during symbolic interpretive work.  
The sequence for the entire year is provided in Table 12 and indicates chronology over 
the course of the year, including weeks of instruction, the objectives targeted, the texts students 
worked with, and the instructional activities in which teacher and students engaged. Most of first 
semester was spent crafting arguments of judgment about gender and power.  Specifically, 
objectives for the first three weeks related to setting norms and expectations for argumentation 
practices in the classroom and criteria for argumentation and arguments, with content focused on 
the everyday rather than literary content. Students began by developing and revising criteria with 
shorter texts such as "Linoleum Roses" and "The Rose that Grew From Concrete" as well as 
several images.  
Table 12. Year long design for 11th grade symbolism/coming of age, iteration 3 
Weeks Focus/Texts 
Objectives 
1-­‐2	  
Introduction	  to	  Argument	  
• 
"Literacy	  Debate:	  
Online,	  R	  U	  Really	  
Reading?"	  
 
Introduce	  close	  reading	  of	  texts	  (including	  images,	  
advertisements,	  and	  other	  short	  texts)	  about	  which	  you	  
can	  make	  arguments	  OR	  that	  themselves	  make	  
arguments	  that	  we	  can	  examine.	  
 
Draw	  from	  students’	  experience	  and	  practice	  by	  
identifying	  general	  norms	  and	  expectations	  in	  argument	  
forms.	  
 
Discuss	  and	  make	  public	  group	  knowledge	  of	  how	  and	  
why	  arguments	  are	  used	  in	  real	  life.	  	  
3	  
Development	  of	  Argument	  
(Gender	  and	  Power)	  
• 
Worldview	  Image	  
(Connotations	  PPT)	  
• 
Linoleum	  Roses	  
• 
Male-­‐dominated	  culture	  
graphic	  
• 
"Afghan	  Boys	  Are	  Prized,	  
So	  Girls	  Live	  the	  Part"	  
(NY	  Times	  article)	  
• 
Burqa/Bikini	  Image	  
 
Close	  reading	  of	  texts	  (including	  images,	  advertisements,	  
and	  other	  short	  texts)	  about	  which	  you	  can	  make	  
arguments	  OR	  that	  themselves	  make	  arguments	  that	  we	  
can	  examine.	  
 
Use	  everyday	  argument	  examples	  to	  draw	  on	  students’	  
knowledge	  of	  claims,	  evidence,	  and	  reasoning.	  Practice	  
constructing	  claims	  using	  evidence;	  articulate	  how	  
evidence	  supports	  claims	  
 
Establish	  and	  apply	  criteria	  for	  judging	  the	  effectiveness	  
of	  arguments	  
4	  
Introduction	  to	  Symbols	  
• 
‘Titanium’	  
• 
Linoleum	  Roses	  
• 
The	  Rose	  That	  Grew	  from	  
 
Draw	  on	  prior	  discussions	  and	  students’	  knowledge	  to	  
identify	  common	  everyday	  or	  literary	  symbols,	  common	  
symbols	  in	  different	  genres	  (e.g.	  hip	  hop,	  romantic	  
poetry).	  

 
 
30 
Concrete	  
	  
 
Multi-­‐text	  analysis:	  close	  reading	  of	  literary	  texts	  that	  use	  
symbolism	  to	  communicate	  theme:	  read	  to	  identify	  
potential	  symbols	  and	  authors’	  use	  of	  symbolism.	  
 
Construct	  literary	  arguments	  (claims,	  evidence,	  
explanations)	  about	  use	  of	  symbolism	  to	  communicate	  
themes	  within	  and/or	  across	  texts.	  Draw	  on	  criteria	  for	  
specific	  themes.	  
5-­‐15	  
Development	  of	  Argument	  
(Gender	  and	  Power)	  
• 
"The	  Portrait"	  by	  Stanley	  
Kunitz,	  	  
• 
A	  Thousand	  Splendid	  
Suns	  
• 
"My	  First	  Afghan	  Burqa"	  
• 
"The	  Freedom	  of	  the	  
Hijab"	  
 
Develop	  practice	  in,	  close	  literature	  reading	  processes,	  
and	  text-­‐based	  discussion	  supporting	  meta-­‐
comprehension	  and	  sense	  making.	  
 
Construct	  literary	  arguments	  (claims,	  evidence,	  
explanations)	  about	  themes	  within	  and/or	  across	  texts.	  
Draw	  on	  criteria	  for	  specific	  themes.	  
 
Develop	  and	  apply	  criteria	  for	  judging	  effectiveness	  of	  
arguments	  about	  literary	  interpretation;	  Draw	  on	  key	  
concepts	  (historical	  context,	  critical	  theory)	  as	  a	  means	  
for	  making	  literary	  interpretations.	  
16-­‐28	  
Chicago	  Lit	  Circles:	  Power,	  
Privilege	  and	  Place	  	  
This	  unit	  was	  designed	  and	  led	  by	  AC,	  University	  Intern.	  The	  
focus	  of	  the	  unit	  was	  on	  examining	  power	  structures	  in	  non-­‐
fiction	  texts	  centered	  on	  Chicago.	  These	  texts	  included	  Our	  
America:	  Life	  and	  Death	  on	  the	  South	  Side	  of	  Chicago,	  There	  
Are	  No	  Children	  Here,	  High	  Rise	  Stories,	  and	  Never	  A	  City	  So	  
Real.	  
29	  
 
	  PSAE	  and	  ACT	  Prep	  
Practice	  	  
	  
30	  	  
Understanding	  Dystopian	  
Fiction	  
 
Video	  clip	  of	  Hunger	  
Games	  
 
Harrison	  Bergeron	  
 
“Haunted	  by	  The	  
Handmaid’s	  Tale”	  article	  
in	  the	  Guardian	  
The	  Handmaid’s	  Tale	  
 
Establish	  criteria	  for	  dystopian	  fiction	  
31-­‐37	  
Analyzing	  Power	  Structures	  
in	  Dystopian	  Fiction	  	  
 
The	  Handmaid’s	  
Tale	  	  
 
Further	  develop	  practice	  in	  close	  reading	  with	  a	  focus	  on	  
elements	  of	  dystopia	  and	  power	  differentials	  	  
 
Construct	  literary	  arguments	  about	  dystopian	  fiction,	  
focusing	  on	  the	  relationship	  between	  power	  and	  agency	  
in	  the	  society	  	  
 
Analyze	  language	  choices	  made	  by	  the	  author,	  including	  
symbols	  and	  attention	  to	  word	  choices	  and	  their	  impact	  
on	  power	  relationships	  	  
 
Construct	  and	  revise	  arguments	  (claim,	  evidence,	  
reasoning)	  to	  convey	  message	  about	  the	  themes	  of	  
power	  and	  dystopia	  in	  Handmaid’s	  Tale	  	  
 
Week 4 marked the introduction of rhetorical tools specific to literature. Students used 
David Guetta's "Titanium" as a cultural data set to elicit discussion of how they recognize and 
engage with symbols in their everyday practices. Then, students revisited "Linoleum Roses", 
which had previously been read to form an argument about power/agency, and then read "The 

 
 
31 
Rose That Grew From Concrete." Students crafted a synthesis that explored how each text used 
the symbol of the rose to communicate a message about an individual's power/agency, the major 
theme of the text. Students then had repeated daily practice with crafting arguments of judgment 
about gender and power as they moved in week 5 to the focal text, A Thousand Splendid Suns. 
For example, they tracked two symbols, the rocks/pebbles and the snow and examined what 
these symbols say about power (or lack thereof). Students completed a chart and a mini-writing 
assignment for each of these symbols. Throughout the 10 weeks of working with Suns students 
crafted paragraphs on a daily basis, both for homework and during class, and used these 
paragraphs as a point of discussion and revision. These activities were intended to support them 
in the culminating assignment - a three-page essay that made an argument about the 
power/agency of a character over the course of the text.  
During the 10 weeks of the semester that were focused on literary analysis and 
interpretation of the focal novel, adjunct shorter texts were used to support understanding the 
cultural and historical context of Afghanistan during the time period of the novel. In the 
culminating task with this novel, students crafted an essay that required them to synthesize the 
different relationships in A Thousand Splendid Suns in terms of the larger theme of gender and 
power. Students had to make an argument about the role of power in these relationships, 
synthesizing multiple relationships that occurred throughout the text. The written work was 
preceded by whole class discussions addressing these syntheses.  Figure 5 summarizes the flow 
of components over the course of the year.  

 
 
32 
 
Figure 5. Sequence of Instructional components for iteration 3 of year-long 11th grade symbolism 
and coming of age emphasis 
Student learning was examined through pre/post EBA assessments and analyses of 
student work throughout the year.  
Phase 3 EBA pre/post assessment. Students completed the Phase 3 version of the EBA 
assessment. This version of the EBA assessment used the same stories (“Eleven” by Sandra 
Cisneros and “The Butterfly” by John Hanley) at pre and post along with a graphic organizer 
chart intended to elicit ideas about the symbols in each story prior to writing the essay. The 
prompt for the assessment task was the following.  
“When writing stories, authors often create symbols that help reveal ideas about 
the way people are and the way the world is. Symbols are words or phrases in 
stories that stand for more than what they seem to be. Symbols can be images, 
actions, objects, or characters (what they do, how they think, their names). In 
your essay, compare and contrast how you think symbols in “Eleven” and “The 

 
 
33 
Butterfly” help reveal ideas about the way people are and the way the world is, or 
help you understand the characters and their worlds. Use the information you 
wrote in the chart and the stories to help you write your essay.” 
 
The pre-post assessments were scored with rubrics for nine dimensions: Claims, Function 
of Claims, Evidence, Reasoning, Symbolism, Coming of Age, Organization, Synthesis, and 
Language and Syntax. To determine where there were differences between scores on pre-and 
post-assessments, a Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank test was conducted for each coding 
dimension for the 14 consented students for whom pre as well as post assessments were 
available. As shown in Table 13, all dimensions showed equal or improved performance but only 
for Reasoning was the improvement significant. This was the first time that students had had to 
write on the same stories at pre and at posttest as earlier phases of the EBA assessment had used 
different story sets. Some of the students expressed thoughts about it being silly to do it again. 
We are therefore concerned about the validity of the scores as indicators of change.      
 
Table 13. Wilcoxon signed rank test for changes in essay dimension scores for (Post – Pre) on 
Phase 3 EBA assessmenta 
 
Negative 
Ranks 
Positive 
Ranks 
Ties 
|Z| 
p value 
Claims 
0 
1 
13 
1.00 
.32 
Function of Claims 
0 
1 
13 
1.00 
.32 
Evidence 
2 
6 
6 
1.35 
1.76 
Reasoning 
0 
6 
8 
2.45 
.01* 
Symbolism 
1 
5 
8 
1.82 
.07 
Coming of Age 
2 
0 
12 
1.41 
.16 
Synthesis 
3 
6 
5 
1.28 
.20 
Organization 
2 
7 
5 
1.73 
.08 
Language and 
Syntax 
1 
6 
7 
1.90 
.06 
*Significant at p≤.05 
aNegative ranks indicate pre rubric score point greater than post; positive ranks means post 
greater than pre. |Z| indicates these are absolute values of z. 
 
 
Student work. Student work samples from across the year were examined specifically to 
trace the evolution of symbolism, synthesis, and argument writing, especially the use of explicit 
warrants. The analyses indicated that year-long design was indeed warranted for development of 
all three areas: Moving from simpler to more complex texts over the course of the year supported 
students efforts to engage in reasoning about the connections between interpretations of coming 
of age themes dealing with gender and power based on close reading of the texts: They 

 
 
34 
repeatedly showed engagement with the work, although they continued to need supports to 
grapple with a text as complex as Handmaid’s Tale. However, their products were much more 
successful when crafting an analysis in the shorter texts with which they began. For example, 
earlier in the year in moving from the shorter texts to A Thousand Splendid Suns students 
experienced difficulty tracking symbols and making decisions about whether or not a symbol 
was contributing to a larger meaning over time or whether it was important only locally for an 
isolated event or character in the story. They were able to articulate the larger meaning of 
symbols in discussion and in small group writing but struggling writers needed support in 
crafting an analysis that explained what a symbol meant. They continued to use those supports 
for Handmaid’s Tale and took on the cognitive work of identifying and tracking possible 
symbols throughout the entirety of the longer text.  
A similar pattern was observed for synthesis: Students began Suns without the frame 
needed to synthesize their thinking about two - character relationships, examining similarities or 
differences in terms of the larger themes of gender and power. The work with Suns was 
supported with explicit teaching, modeling, and language stems to craft syntheses in writing. 
They experienced less of a struggle in classroom discussions. They continued to rely on language 
stems in the second novel. Class discussions also showed integration of information from the 
adjunct informational readings on cultural and historical context with the events and characters 
depicted in the novels.   
Based on the previous iteration of the literature modules, the teacher recognized that 
argument, specifically writing/ explicit warrants, required constant practice and revision for 
students to improve. This included requiring students to revise their writing: to revisit paragraphs 
and analyze them in terms of the strength of the claims, evidence, and reasoning and to rework 
based on this thinking. Students came to each class prepared with evidence and reasoning for 
specific claims. Class discussions of these provided opportunities to practice the language of 
these arguments.  In the second half of the year, longer essays were required more often than the 
short essays of the first semester. Often these included using information in the informational 
texts as part of their arguments. 
Reflection on Iteration 3.  
 
Throughout the year-long implementation of the series of modules around symbolism and 
coming of age from gender and power perspectives the design team debriefed about classroom 
activities. The group discussed students’ uptake of literary interpretation practices, how scaffolds 
and supports were working and for whom, and the challenges for both teaching and learning 
perceived by the teacher and research staff documenting the classroom implementation. The 
ongoing reflections led to modifications in scaffolds, strategies, adjunct texts, and tasks and are 
captured in the design table and flowchart. In addition, during the month prior to the start of the 
next school year, a subset of the design team, including the 11th and 9th grade implementing 
teachers, reflected on the entire year and developed designs for the year starting in Fall 2014. As 
this was the last year of data collection for the larger READI project, the bulk of resources had to 
be diverted to the large-scale efficacy study in Science and the intensity of documentation and 
collection of student work had to be curtailed in 2014-2015 for these two literature classrooms. 

 
 
35 
 
Both the 9th and 11th grade year long sequences were modified to address the challenges 
students faced in moving from class discussion to small group and then independent argument 
writing. As well, substitutions and additions to the ancillary texts were discussed with both 
teachers. However, we focus on the 11th grade revisions due to the fact that the 9th grade teacher 
decided to leave the project after the first semester. 
 
Design of Iteration 4, 11th grade year long symbolism and coming of age. The teacher 
decided to keep the same overall themes, gender and power, as well as the same two major 
novels, A Thousand Splendid Suns and The Handmaid’s Tale. Due to the absence of the student-
teacher the module that he had taught (weeks 16 – 28 Chicago Literature Circles) was deleted, 
allowing more instructional time for work on coming of age gender and power themes. In 
addition, the teacher wanted to move between the microcosms of the worlds within the literary 
texts and the macrocosm of the world in which we live. The deletion of this module increased the 
thematic coherence and opportunities to build the knowledge and skills of literary reasoning 
across the year. As well, it allowed more time for students to complete an in-depth study of and 
write more extensive literary arguments for each novel. One other significant change was the 
timing of the introduction of symbolism to the students. In year four, the students engaged with 
texts and activities around symbolism before reading A Thousand Splendid Suns; however, by 
time major symbolism came into play in the novel (5 to 6 weeks later), students had forgotten 
what they had learned and class time had to be spent reminding students of what they had done 
previously. Because of this, the teacher decided to introduce symbolism when it became relevant 
in the novel, which meant moving symbolism to approximately half way through the first 
semester. Symbolism was then revisited several times throughout the rest of the novel. 
Understanding the symbolism in this case had required that students see the recurrence of certain 
symbols in the text and that they had enough information about the characters and events in the 
novel to attach symbolic meaning to these recurrences. This required reading fairly far into the 
novel. 
 
Finally, the teacher also decided to introduce an additional thematic layer in the reading 
of both novels, which moved beyond gender and power in interpersonal relationships to how 
macrocosmic forces impact gender and power in those relationships. For example, in A 
Thousand Splendid Suns, this meant drawing students attention to how what was happening in 
the government in Afghanistan, the political and social forces, were impacting the intimate lives 
of the main characters. In The Handmaid’s Tale as well, the dystopian government controlled the 
people’s lives by regulating all gender relations and dividing power amongst specific groups of 
people, thereby played a significant role in their interactions.  The intent of introducing a focus 
on larger political, social, and cultural forces was to encourage students to consider how these 
forces impacted the interactions and relationships among the characters in the texts. This was to 
lay groundwork for students’ extrapolating from the worlds inside the texts to their own lives and 
the world outside the texts. The implementation of this design is taken up in the dissertation 
work of Allison Hall (in preparation). 
 
Section 2: Iterative Design of Unreliable Narrator Modules 

 
 
36 
An unreliable narrator is one whose credibility has been compromised for one reason or 
another. In literary texts, the author offers clues to the lack of credibility of the character for the 
reader, and in this way suggests alternate interpretations of the text and the author’s worldview. 
Readers can construct some of the worldviews of texts based on the discrepancies between what 
an unreliable character sees and what the audience sees, creating a basis for interpreting authors’ 
messages and perspectives. These are probabilistic and highlight the multiple meanings afforded 
by literary texts perhaps more so than in the case of symbolism.    
 
The first iterations of the unreliable narrator module were designed and implements in 
Spring, 2012. One version was designed and implemented in the two 9th grade classes that had 
completed the symbolism/coming of age module during Fall, 2011. (See READI Curriculum 
Technical Report CM#5.) The other version was designed for and implemented in the 12th grade 
class that had participated in the symbolism/coming of age module during Fall 2011. The first 
iteration designs were largely based on an instructional sequence developed by Smith (1991, 
1992). Smith’s instructional approach starts with culturally familiar cartoons (Calvin and Hobbs, 
Doonesbury) and then moves to texts, beginning with paragraph – length monologues and 
progressing to short stories of increasing complexity based on length and transparency of 
unreliability of the narrator.  Students are introduced to two strategies, one for identifying 
unreliable narrators and another for making sense of the effect that an unreliable narrator has on 
the meaning of the text. Discussion prompts elicit cues to detecting unreliability by considering 
how likely it is that the narrator would have access to the information (fact, details) being related, 
fact-checking (e.g., Is the narration in accord with what is known about the situation?), and 
reality checking (i.e., Does the narration make sense given what you know about the world?). 
Based on the discussions of the cartoons and monologues, cues to unreliability are generated by 
asking why the narrator might be providing unreliable information. Smith (1992) reported that 
9th grade students generated six types of cues  (self-interest, relevant experience, knowledge, 
morality, emotionality, consistency). Students then apply these questions and strategies to 
literary vignettes and short stories. The READI unreliable narrator module in 9th grade (as well 
as 12th described below) used Smith’s instruction model and was thus designed to build students’ 
skills related to four learning goals.  
•  Detecting unreliable narrators in texts 
• Identifying cues for unreliability and comparing narrator’s worldview to that of author. 
• Reading and developing a reasoned response to a text by reconstructing meanings where 
a narrator’s reliability is arguable 
• Constructing reasoned arguments in support of claims about unreliability and 
constructing arguments about themes/ worldviews offered by texts 
 
Unreliable narrator 9th grade, iteration 1. The four week 9th grade version of the module is 
described and flow charted in Table 14 and Figure 6, including the texts used. The sequence 
provided students with repeated experiences using the two strategies. In the first week, cultural 
data sets and short monologues helped activate prior knowledge of strategies and identify cues 
for unreliability. In each of the following three weeks, students continued to use the strategies 

 
 
37 
and express their evaluations of the narrator and interpretative import in written arguments. 
Writing was supported with graphic organizers for evidence and character maps.   
 
Table 14.  Instructional sequence for 9th grade unreliable narrator, iteration 1    
Instructional Days 
Objectives 
Texts and Supports 
Days 1 - 2 
Build understanding of narrator 
unreliability based on student 
knowledge and experience using 
easily accessible text 
Text: Calvin and Hobbs comic 
strip (cultural data set) 
Supports: Argument template 
Days 3 - 7 
Develop abstract criteria for 
narrator unreliability using short 
scenarios and connect to what it 
indicates about human nature 
Texts: Scenarios of unreliable 
narrators (Smith, 1991) 
Supports: Guided questions 
around narrator unreliability 
 
Days 7 - 14 
Apply abstract criteria to a short 
story, looking for specific textual 
evidence related to the 
development of the character and 
the criteria for unreliability 
throughout the story and connect 
it to human nature 
Text: “The Journal of a Wife 
Beater” by Harry Mark Petrakis 
Supports: Textual evidence 
support sheet & Character map 
Days 14 - 18 
Apply abstract criteria to a short 
story, looking for specific textual 
evidence related to criteria for 
unreliability, connect it to human 
nature, and develop 
counterclaims to refute opposing 
claims. 
Text: “The Jacket” by Gary 
Soto; “Victor” by Danny Hoch 
Supports: Textual evidence 
support sheet & Character map 
 
 

 
 
38 
 
Figure 6. Flow of instruction and learning goals for the 9th grade unreliable narrator module.  
Assessment of Implementation. Students completed a pre/post assessment that was 
similar to the symbolism/coming of age EBA assessment, however the task involved working 
with only one story prior and one story post module implementation. Two different stories were 
counterbalanced across time of test and students so that each student worked with different 
stories at pre and post assessment times. There were 22 consented students who completed both 
pre- and post-assessments across the two periods. Assignment of student to text was 
counterbalanced so that 12 students had text A (“Bigfoot Stole My Wife” by Ron Carlson) as 
their pre and text B (“The Somebody” by Danny Santiago) as their post and the other 10 had text 
A at post and text B at pre.   
The assessment prompt was the following.  
“Write an essay where you show whether you believe the narrator is reliable or not. Use 
evidence from the story and from your own experience when showing the narrator’s 
reliability or unreliability. Then discuss what this story might suggest about human 
nature.”  
The pre-post assessments were scored with rubrics for 6 dimensions: claims, 
counterclaims, evidence, reasoning, human nature themes, and organization of ideas. For human 
nature, essays were scored on whether or not they constructed a supportable interpretation of the 
story’s worldviews of human nature that could be supported by details in the story. The score 
points are defined in Table 15. 
Table 15 
Unreliable Narrator Assessment Dimensions and Rubrics 

 
 
39 
Claims/Subclaims 
0 
Description or summary, restates the question 
0.5 
Claim/s are provided, but are not accurate in terms of being supportable by the stories; 
OR claims are provided, but claims are not about the characters, events, or language of 
the story. For example, “Bigfoot is not real, and here is why” OR “People should not 
drop out of school; it is bad for them”). 
1 
At least one supportable claim about reliability is provided. The claim might simply be 
the thesis (“Chato is unreliable”). Other claims may address other aspects of the story 
as long as they are supportable (e.g. “His wife probably just left him”). Some claims 
may simply be repetitions of the first claim and are not to be “counted” more than 
once., A sentence that reads “Chato is both reliable and unreliable” counts as two 
claims. 
2 
Includes a thesis and at least one subclaim (e.g., “Chato is unreliable because…”). In a 
“2” essay, the subclaims are generally local, specific to the details of the story, and 
closer to evidence than claims (e.g., “Chato is unreliable because he thinks that his 
teacher wants to adopt him”). 
3 
Includes a thesis and at least one subclaim supporting thesis. In a “3” rating, claims are 
more general or abstract (e.g. “Chato is unreliable because he is ignorant”) or (“People 
might say that Chato is reliable because he has experienced life’s obstacles”). 
Counterclaim 
0 
No counterclaim 
1 
Counterclaim that addresses opposing thesis about reliability, but no evidence recruited 
to support counterclaim or rebuttal (e.g. “Some may say that the character is reliable, 
but the evidence shows he is not”). 
2 
Counterclaim and reason that supports counterclaim (e.g., “Some may say that the 
character is reliable, because he talks about wanting to be a writer, but they are wrong”) 
3 
Counterclaim and reason that supports counterclaim, as well as evidence rebutting 
counterclaim (e.g., “Some may say that the character is reliable, because he talks about 
wanting to be a writer, but in actuality all he does is write graffiti all over buildings”). 
Evidence 
0 
No evidence provided (either because student did not support claims with evidence or 
because student had no claims) 
0.5 
Only inaccurate (contradicts the events of the text) or unrelated evidence provided. For 
example, “The Bigfoot narrator is unreliable because his girlfriend took the car when 
she left.” 
1 
At least one piece of accurate, related evidence provided in attempt to support claim/s. 
May include personal or real world knowledge, but must also include text-based 
evidence. May be in addition to inaccurate or unrelated evidence. 
2 
More than one piece of accurate, related evidence provided in attempt to support 
claims. May include personal or real world knowledge, but must also include text-
based evidence. May be in addition to inaccurate or unrelated evidence. 
3 
More than one piece of accurate, related evidence provided. Of that evidence, at least 
two pieces are connected in that they support the same claim (e.g. ‘Chato is unreliable 
because he is too self-centered. For instance, he believes that a girl could fall in love 
with him just because of his writing, and he believes that an old rival gang still cares if 
he exists”). 

 
 
40 
Reasoning 
0 
No explanation as to why evidence supports the claims or claims support the overall 
thesis; connection seems illogical or cannot be inferred (e.g. “Chato is unreliable. He 
wears a jacket when he goes out all the time.”) 
1 
At least one implicit warrant. Claims and evidence could be logically connected 
through an appeal to cultural or literary norms but connection is implicit. For example, 
an implied warrant based on cultural norms might be “The character Chato is unreliable 
because he is constantly destroying people’s property.” Another example:, “The 
protagonist of ‘Bigfoot’ is unreliable. He says that Bigfoot stole his wife. Probably, she 
just left him, and he can’t figure that out because he is in denial.” An implied warrant 
based in literary norms might read, “The bigfoot narrator is unreliable because of the 
way the author has him repeat himself a lot,, making him always say “You gotta 
believe me.” 
2 
More than one implicit warrant. Claims and evidence could be logically connected 
through an appeal to cultural or literary norms but connection is implicit. For example, 
an implied warrant based on cultural norms might be “The character Chato is unreliable 
because he is constantly destroying people’s property.” An implied warrant based in 
literary norms might read, “The bigfoot narrator is unreliable because of the way the 
author has him repeat himself a lot, making him always say “You gotta believe me.” 
3 
In at least one instance, claims and evidence are explicitly warranted, and the warrant 
uses some appeal to cultural norms, (e.g. “The character Chato is unreliable because he 
is constantly destroying people’s property. People who don’t care about other people’s 
rights are not to be trusted”). May include implicit warrants as well. 
3.1 
In at least one instance, claims and evidence are explicitly warranted, and the warrant 
uses some appeal to literary norms, (e.g. “When the author creates a narrator who 
insists that he must be believed, we know his character is not reliable”). May include 
implicit warrants as well. 
Note Students may incorporate language of explicit warranting, like “as a general rule” or 
“usually,” but that language may not actually be linked to reasoning that connects 
evidence to claims of reliability. For example, “Chato is unreliable because he doesn’t 
even know what it means to be a writer. He writes all over buildings. Generally 
speaking, a writer is someone who writes books or stories.” In this case, the student has 
explained why Chato is not a writer by defining criteria for writers, but the student has 
not explicitly explained how this evidence proves Chato’s unreliability. Such writing 
does not “count” as explicit warranting and does not earn a “3.” 
Human Nature 
0 
Doesn’t address ways the story contributes to our understanding of text’s worldview or 
ideas about human nature (thematic statements). Statements about what people should 
do are not equivalent to statements about text’s ideas about human nature. For example, 
“I think that if someone takes your wife, you should try to get her back” would be 
scored as a 0. Such a statement may reflect a student’s worldview, but doesn’t reveal a 
student’s understanding of what the text might communicate. ALSO, students might 
incorporate the words “human nature” into their essay without actually discussing 
human nature. For example, “It is human nature to go after your wife if you think she’s 
been kidnapped” may actually be an example of reasoning or explanation, not an 
interpretation of story’s suggestions about human nature. 

 
 
41 
0.5 
Addresses aspects of human nature specific to characters in the story or universal, but 
unsupported by the text (e.g. “The story shows how it is human nature to face your 
worst fears about yourself”). 
1 
Constructs supportable interpretation of story’s worldviews of human nature that could 
be supported by details in the story. The interpretation is universal (e.g., “The Bigfoot 
story shows how people will believe anything in order to avoid the truth,” or “Denial is 
a hell of a drug”). The writer does not have to use stems like “The story suggests….” in 
order to present an interpretation of story’s ideas about human nature. 
Organization of Ideas 
0 
The response has no clear organization. 
1 
Explicit thesis statement that responds to prompt. Essay may be only one paragraph or 
no logical paragraph breaks. 
2 
Explicit thesis statement. The body of the essay has some organizational framework 
(e.g., response moves chronologically through text or uses different aspects of 
reliability criteria as subclaims). 
3 
Well organized; explicit thesis statement, paragraphs logically separate different claims 
and evidence; transitions between paragraphs or sections of paragraphs are made 
explicit (e.g. with phrases like “also,” “but,” “in contrast,” etc.). 
 
Overall, on the posttest, students showed higher rubric scores for claims/sub-claims, use 
of counterclaims, reasoning, and organization of ideas, but showed little change in their scores 
for use of evidence or human nature dimensions. (See Figures 7a and 7b.) On the pre-tests, only 
one student presented a thesis about the reliability of the narrator and then supported it with sub-
claims that were general or abstract rather than local to the text. On the post-test, 18 students 
included a thesis and general sub-claims about reliability. While none of the students included a 
counterclaim on the pre-tests, five attempted counterclaims on the posttests. The evidence scores 
on the pre-test were high, leaving little room for growth on the post-tests. Regarding the use of 
reasoning, only one student used an explicit warrant on the pre-test, while 11 students used 
explicit warrants on the post-test. Six students attempted to write about human nature on the 
post-test while only two attempted it on the pre-test. Regarding organization, most of the pre-test 
essays were written in one paragraph, whereas eleven of the post-test essays followed an essay 
format with a thesis statement in the introduction and separate paragraphs supporting each main 
sub-claim of the essay. 

 
 
42 
 
Figure 7a. Pre and post test rubric score point distributions for dimensions that showed 
improvement from pre to post test, iteration 1, 9th grade. 
 
 
Figure 7b. Pre and post test rubric score point distributions for dimensions that showed minimal 
change from pre to post test, iteration 1, 9th grade.. 

 
 
43 
Unreliable Narrator Module iteration 2, 9th grade 
The second iteration of the Unreliable Narrator modules for 9th grade was implemented 
during Fall, 2012 in JG’s classroom. Reflection on iteration 1 revealed the need for several 
changes in the implementation of this module as well as the need to accommodate an the 
instructional focus of mandated by the district. Based on the first iteration enactment, we 
identified the need for more opportunities in two areas: moving from oral to written mode and 
articulated the difference between author and narrator of the texts. The iteration 2 design 
included discussion and writing focused on the development of criteria necessary for judgment 
arguments about the reliability of the narrator in a story as well as more discussions and support 
handouts for differentiating author and narrator.  In Fall 2012, the district required that all 9th 
grade students read the novel Persepolis.  The iteration 2 design began with a focus on the 
reliability of the narrator, Marji, in this novel. Marji can be judged unreliable because she lacks 
knowledge and experience , two criteria often used to detect unreliability in narrators.  
The implementation of the module occurred over four weeks, however many of the 
instructional days had to be eliminated or truncated due to school events or changes in schedules. 
As a result, the design could not be enacted as intended.   
 
Assessment. Students (n = 9 consented) completed the same pre/post as used in iteration 
1 and essays were scored using the same dimensions and rubrics. Visual inspection of the rubric 
score point distributions suggested increased sophistication along some of the dimensions but 
little change in others. (Due to the low number of subjects, no statistical analyses were 
conducted.) These distributions are shown for each of the dimensions in two graphs: Figures 8a 
and 8b. 
 
Figure 8a. Rubric score point distributions on claims, counterclaims, and evidence dimensions at 
pre and posttest for Unreliable Narrator, 9th grade Iteration 2  

 
 
44 
 
 
Figure 8b. Rubric score point distributions on reasoning, human nature, and organization 
dimensions at pre and posttest for Unreliable Narrator, 9th grade Iteration 2  
The rubric score point distributions showed upward trends for four dimensions: claims, 
organization of ideas, reasoning, and human nature. For claims, the mode on the pre-test was a 
score point of 2, indicating that students had a thesis and at least one sub-claim, but that the 
claims and sub-claims remained local to the text. The mode on the post-test was a 3, indicating 
that the claims had become more abstract. In organization, the mode moved from a 1 on the pre-
test to a 3 on the post-test. Students’ responses on the pre-test were generally one paragraph, 
while most post-test responses took the form of a logically-organized essay. The change in 
reasoning scores indicates that more students provided explicit warrants on the post-test. For the 
dimension of human nature, almost half of the students attempted to write about human nature on 
the post-test, whereas none had addressed human nature on the pre-test. Score point distributions 
for counterclaims and evidence remained flat. These improvements in performance from pre to 
post were particularly encouraging given the limited duration of the enactment. They suggest that 
the redesign has created a very solid basis for students reasoning about claims and the evidence 
for their support.    
  
Grade 12 unreliable narrator module.  
  
The Unreliable Narrator module for twelfth grade had similar learning goals as the 9th 
grade module. It was developed to help make interpretive processes visible to students and help 
them build literary schema that would allow them to make independent interpretations of texts. 
The module was also developed to help students explore why people might refuse or be unable to 

 
 
45 
see “the truth.” Accordingly, students were given scaffolds both for evaluating narrators in 
literary texts, and developing arguments about those narrators and their connection to themes and 
overall effects of texts.  
Similar to the 9th grade design, the 12th grade module followed Smith’s (1991, 1992) 
instructional process and began with the Calvin and Hobbs cartoon as a cultural data (Lee, 2007) 
that allowed students to publicly articulate their implicit interpretive practices. In the 12th grade, 
students easily evaluated the unreliability of the character Calvin and went on to explain the 
criteria by which they were able to make judgments about reliability of speakers (for example, if 
a speaker is overly emotional or self-interested, he or she may be unreliable). Over the course of 
the unit, students expanded on those criteria for reliability, drawing from their everyday 
knowledge. They then began to apply that knowledge and those criteria to more literary and 
canonical texts. Texts in this unit included cartoons, satirical news articles, dramatic monologues 
by Danny Hoch, and short stories including Gary Soto’s “The Jacket” and Richard Matheson’s 
“Born of Man and Woman.” 
At the same time, students received support for the writing of arguments about reliability. 
They drew from the criteria they had developed about unreliability to construct claims, find 
precise textual evidence to support those claims, and then create warrants (Toulmin) that justified 
the connections between claim and evidence.   
Assessments. We administered the same pre/post assessment to the 12th graders as was 
described for the 9th grade students, using the same counterbalancing process so that each student 
wrote essays on a different story at pre and posttest with about half the students having each 
story at each testing time. Wilcoxon signed ranks tests of the pre/post assessments indicated that 
students made statistically significant gains in the areas of claims, (z = 1.98, p< .05), 
counterclaims (z = 3.58, p < .001), organization (z = 2.14, p < .05),  and thematic inference (z = 
2.12, p < .05). The gains made in the area of claim construction suggest a possible relationship 
between the opportunity to develop criteria for a concept and the ability to make claims about 
that concept.  In addition, the READI module design for the building of criteria included reading 
a short text, and then organizing a claim, evidence, and reasoning about the criteria for 
unreliability. This practice in structuring their arguments may have helped students improve their 
organization during their post-test writing. This suggests that explicit practice in structuring an 
argument, including the use of templates, may transfer to student’s independent writing.  
 
Section 3. Argument Module for 9th grade  
Based on the multiple objectives as specified for the initial modules (developing oral and 
written arguments, developing criteria for theme, and focus on literary device) and the small 
growth noted in the pre/post scores from iteration 1 around the use of evidence and warrants in 
building arguments, we decided to design an argument unit lasting about two weeks in an effort 
to get students oriented to arguments of fact (forensic) and judgment. This module drew heavily 
on Hillock’s (2012) Teaching Argument Writing 6 – 12: Supporting claims with relevant 

 
 
46 
evidence.  (See READI Curriculum Module Technical Report CM #8 for the complete 
module) 
The argument module served as an introduction to arguments of fact and how to reason 
around data to make a forensic claim. The module was also meant as an introduction to 
arguments of judgment, which need criteria as evidence to build a case. The module was 
intended to address several issues, as follows. : 
• Introduce forensic arguments using cartoons and short descriptive write ups of “what 
happened”    
• Introduce arguments of judgment using short scenarios for which students were to 
determine whether the action was courageous. Contrastive cases were depicted in the 
scenarios to facilitate the deduction of criteria for an action to be judged courageous.  .  
• Encourage students to think about the complexities of argument. 
• Establish the importance of weighing evidence in these scenarios as a basis of using this 
practice when moving into judgments about symbolism and unreliable narrators.  
• Engage in oral and written arguments as a means of preparing students for writing longer 
arguments 
 
The organization of the argument module is depicted in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. Flow of the argument module for 9th grade. 
The argument module was designed for and enacted in two 9th grade classrooms in two 
different schools. The first enactment occurred in JG’s classroom in Fall 2012, referred to in this 
section as Site 1. JG had enacted the first iterations of symbolism/theme and unreliable narrator 

 
 
47 
the previous year. The second enactment took place in CM’s classroom in Spring, 2013, before 
she implemented the symbolism/coming of age module and is referred to in this section as Site 2.  
In each case, a pre/post assessment was used; however, there were different assessments at the 
two sites.  
Site 1 argument module. The argument module at Site 1 took place approximately one 
month into the school year and preceded the first literature module by about three weeks. The 
module was implemented in one class. Pre/post data were available for 9 consented students.   
The prompts for the pre/post were taken from previous ACT prompts. Prompt A asked 
should security cameras be installed in the classroom. Prompt B asked should high school be 
extended to five years. The prompts were counterbalanced so that half of the students received 
prompt A and half received prompt B at pre and post. Rubrics were developed for five 
dimensions of argument: claims, counterclaims, evidence, reasoning and organization.  
Scoring System for Argumentation Pre/Post Assessments 
1. Claims/Subclaims: Description or summary, takes no position on question (0); At least 
one supportable claim is provided (1); Includes a thesis and at least one subclaim, claims are 
generally local (2); Includes a thesis and at least one subclaim, claims are more general or 
abstract (3). 
2. Counterargument: No counterargument (0); Counterclaim that acknowledges opposing 
claim/thesis about subject, but no evidence or examples to support opposing claim (1); 
Counterclaim and reason that supports counterclaim (2); Counterclaim and reason that supports 
counterclaim, as well as evidence rebutting counterclaim (3). 
3. Evidence: No evidence provided (0); At least one piece of accurate, related evidence or 
specific example provided in attempt to support claim(s) (1); More than one piece of accurate, 
related evidence or specific example provided in attempt to support claim(s) (2); More than one 
piece of accurate, related evidence provided. Of that evidence, at least two pieces are connected 
in that they support the same claim (3). 
4. Reasoning: No explanation as to why evidence supports the claims or claims support 
the overall thesis; connection seems illogical or cannot be inferred (0); At least one implicit 
warrant. Claims and evidence could be logically connected but connection is implicit (1); More 
than one implicit warrant. Claims and evidence could be logically connected (2) In at least one 
instance, claims and evidence are explicitly warranted (3). 
5. Organization of Ideas: No clear organization (0); Explicit thesis statement that 
responds to prompt. Essay may be only one paragraph or have no logical paragraph breaks (1); 
Explicit thesis statement. The body of the essay has some organizational framework (2); Well 
organized; explicit thesis statement, paragraphs logically separate different claims and evidence; 
transitions between paragraphs or sections of paragraphs are made explicit (3). 
The dimensions, rubrics, and figures showing the score point distribution for pre and post 
module are shown in Figures 10a and 10b. There were no significant changes from pre-to post-

 
 
48 
test. The lack of change in student performance on the pre- and post-tests may be due to the lack 
of alignment of the prompts and scenarios in the assessment with the instruction.  
 
 
Figure 10a. Pre-Post Distributions of Rubric Score Points on claims, counterclaims, and evidence 
for Site 1, Fall, 2012 
 
 
Figure 14b. Pre-Post Distributions of Rubric Score Points on reasoning and organization for Site 
1, Fall, 2012.   
 
Site 2 argument module. The argument module at Site 2 was enacted approximately 
three weeks into the second semester in Spring, 2013. The module was essentially the same as 
the one enacted in Site 1. 

 
 
49 
Assessment. The prompts for the pre/post were revised relative to the prompts that had 
been used at Site 1. This change was based on analyses of the responses to the ACT prompts at 
Site 1: most students provided opinions and there was a noticeable lack of criteria used for 
making a judgment although this was one of the instructional emphases of the module. We 
reasoned that if students were provided with short scenarios, they would be able to deduce 
criteria to use in stating their argument. Thus, we sought better alignment of the assessment task 
and the instructional emphasis. In this case, Prompt A asked students to determine if someone is 
a good friend based on a story about a young man who repeatedly gets into trouble and needs 
help from his friend. Prompt B asked students to determine if a young woman is mature enough 
to get married before finishing high school. Each scenario was two paragraphs and gave details 
about the characters’ situations that were intended to provide them with a basis for developing 
criteria to judge friendship or maturity, depending on the scenario. Prompts were 
counterbalanced across students and testing times, with a total of 10 consented students 
providing data for pre and post module. Responses were scored using the same rubric score 
points for five dimensions as reported for Site 1. 
The results indicated changes on three dimensions: claims, evidence, and reasoning, with 
the most dramatic shifts occurring for reasoning where the mode shifted from a rubric score 
point of 1 to 3, demonstrating students’ increasing use of explicit warrants. The distributions of 
score points are shown in Figures 11a and b.   
 
Figure 11a. Pre-Post Distributions of Rubric Score Points on claims, counterclaims, and evidence 
for Site 2, Spring 2013.  
 
 

 
 
50 
 
Figure 11b. Pre-Post Distributions of Rubric Score Points on reasoning and organization for Site 
2, Spring 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
51 
References 
 
Alvarez, J. (1994).  In the time of butterflies.  New York, NY: Plume Publishing. 
 
Atwood, M. (1998).  The handsmaid tale. New York, NY: Anchor Books. 
 
Atwood, M. (2012). Haunted by the handmaids tale. Retrieved from: 
 
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood  
 
Bieber, J. On My world 2.0 [CD]. Atlanta, GA: Island RBMG. 
 
Booth, W. (1974). A rhetoric of irony. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Booth, W. (1983).  A rhetoric of fiction. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Bortolussi, M. & Dixon, P. (2003). Psychonarratology: Foundations for the study of  
 
literary response. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 
Brooks, G. (1963).  A song in the front yard.  In Selected poems. New York, NY:  
 
Harper Collins. 
 
Burk, J. (1999). Holocaust survivor: Jeannine Burk’s story. Holocaust survivors.org. 
 
Retrieved from: 
 
http://www.holocaustsurvivors.org/data.show.php?di=record&da=survivors&ke=5  
 
Cade Bambara, T. (2014).  Raymond’s run.  New York, NY: Child’s World. 
 
Carleson, R. (1987). Bigfoot stole my wife. The news of the world: Stories.  
New York, NY: Norton & Co. 
 
Cisneros, S. (1991). Eleven. In The house on Mango Street (2nd ed.). 
 
New York, NY: Vintage Contemporaries. 
 
Cisneros, S. (1991). Four skinny trees. In The house on Mango Street (2nd ed., p. 74).  
 
New York, NY: Vintage Contemporaries. 
 
Cisneros, S. (1991). Linoleum roses. In The house on Mango Street (2nd ed., p. 101).  
 
New York, NY: Vintage Contemporaries. 
 
Collier, E. (1969).  Marigolds. Negro Digest, 1969, v.19, November. 
 
Díaz, J. (1997). Ysrael. In Drown (pp. 1–20). New York, NY: Riverhead Press. 
 
Dixon, P. & Bortolussi, M. (2009). Readers’ knowledge of popular genres. Discourse  
Processes. 46. 541-571. 
 

 
 
52 
Gibbard, B. (2006). I will follow you into the dark [Recorded by Death Cab for Cutie].   
 
On Plans [CD]. New York, NY: Atlantic Records. 
 
Goldman, S. R., Britt, M. A., Brown, W., Cribb, G., George, M., Greenleaf, C., Lee, C.   
         D., Shanahan, C., & Project READI. (2016). Disciplinary literacies and learning  
         to read for understanding: A conceptual framework for disciplinary literacy. Educational 
 
Psychologist, 51(2), 219-246. 
 
 
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix:  
Analysis of text on cohesion and language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, 
and Computers, 36, 193-202.  
 
Graff, G. (2003). Clueless in academe: How schooling obscures the life of the mind. New 
  
Haven: Yale University Press. 
 
Guetta, D. (2011). Titanium (song lyrics).  On CD Nothing but the beat. Sung by Shia. 
 
Hanley, J. (1938).  The butterfly. In 75 Short masterpieces: Stories from the world’s literature. 
(1961).  (pp. 116-119).  New York, NY: Bantam Books Press. 
 
Hillocks, G. (2011). Teaching argument writing, grades 6-12: Supporting claims with 
relevant evidence and clear reasoning. New York, NY: Heinemann. 
 
Hillocks, G., & Ludlow, L. (1984). A taxonomy of skills in reading and interpreting  
 
fiction. American Educational Research Journal, 21, 7-24.  
 
History.com. (2013).  The death of Emit Till – August 28, 1955. Retrieved from: 
 
http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/the-death-of-emmett-till  
 
Hoch, D. (1998).  Victor.  In Jails, hospitals and hip hop: and Some people.  New York, NY: 
Villard Books. 
 
Homer The Odyssey, translated by W. H. D. Rouse, 1937. Signet Classics. NY: Penguin 
Random House. 
 
Hosseini, K. (2008). A thousand splendid suns. New York, NY: Riverhead Publishing. 
 
Kunitz, S. (1969).  The portrait. In The poems of Stanley Kunitz, 1928-1978.  NY: Little 
Brown & Company. 
 
Langer, J. A. (2011a). Literature: Literary understanding and literature instruction, 2nd 
edition. NY: Teachers College Press. 
 
Langer, J. A. (2011b). Envisioning knowledge: Building literacy in the academic 
disciplines. NY: Teachers College Press. 
 

 
 
53 
Lee, C. D. (1995). A culturally based cognitive apprenticeship:  Teaching African 
American high school students' skills in literary interpretation. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 30, 608-631.  
 
Lee, C. D. (2007). Culture, literacy and learning:  Taking bloom in the midst of the 
  whirlwind. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
 
Lee, C. D. (2011). Education and the study of literature. Scientific Study of Literature, 
1, 49-58.  
 
Lee, C. D., & Goldman, S. R. (2015). Assessing literary reasoning: Text and task complexities. . 
Theory into Practice, 54, 213-227.  
 
Lee, C. D., Goldman, S. R., Levine, S., & Magliano, J. P. (2016). Epistemic cognition in literary 
reasoning. In J. Green, W. Sandoval, & I. Bråten (Eds.), Handbook of epistemic cognition 
(pp. 165-183). NY: Routledge. 
 
Lee, C. D., & Spratley, A. (2010). Reading in the disciplines: The challenges of 
adolescent literacy. New York, NY: Carnegie Corporation of New York. 
 
Lee, H. (1982). To kill a mockingbird.  New York, NY: Warner Books. 
 
Lee, L. Y. (1986). I ask my mother to sing. In Rose (p. 50). Rochester, NY: BOA 
            Editions. 
 
Matheson, R. (1954).  Born of man and woman: Tales of science fiction and fantasy. 
New York, NY: Chamberlain Brothers. 
 
Nash, T., Stewart, C., Bieber, J., Milian, C., & Bridges, C. (2010). Baby [Recorded by J.  
 
Beiber] 
 
National Public Radio (NPR).  Special Series: This I believe. 
http://www.npr.org/series/4538138/this-i-believe/archive  
 
Nordberg, J. (2010). Afghan boys are prized, so girls live the part. The New York Times, 
 
September 20, 2010.  Retrieved from: 
 
http://www.cfr.org/afghanistan/nyt-afghan-boys-prized-so-girls-live-part/p22981  
 
Nusrat, A. (2012). The freedom of the hijab. The New York Times, July 13, 2012. Retrieved 
from: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/14/opinion/the-freedom-of-the-hijab.html  
 
Petrakis, H. M. (1983). The journal of a wife beater. In Collected stories, (pp. 28-36). Chicago, 
IL: Lakeview Press. 
 
Plante, J. (1963). I will follow him [Recorded by Little Peggy March; N. Gimbel, Trans.].  
 
On Wind up doll. Nashville, TN: RCA Victor. 

 
 
54 
 
Powers, R. (1996). Prisoner’s dilemma. New York, NY: Harper Perennial. 
 
Rabinowitz, P. J. (1987). Before reading: Narrative conventions and the politics of  
 
interpretation. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
 
Rich, M. (2008).  Literacy debate: Online, R U really reading? The New York Times, July 27, 
2008. Retrieved from: http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/27/books/27reading.html  
 
Rubin, A. (2011).  My first Afghan burqa. The New York Times, May 5, 2011. Retrieved from: 
https://atwar.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/05/05/my-first-afghan-burqa/?_r=0  
 
Santiago, D. (1970). The somebody.  Redbook magazine, v. 134, #5, February. 
 
Santiago, E. (1993). When I was Puerto Rican. New York, NY: Vintage Books. 
 
Shakur, T. (1996). The rose that grew from concrete. Retrieved from:  
 
https://www.poetrysoup.com/famous/poems/best/tupac_shakur  
 
Smith, M. (1989). Teaching the interpretation of irony in poetry. Research in the Teaching 
of English, 23, 254-272.  
 
Smith, M. (1991). Understanding unreliable narrators: Reading between the lines in the 
literature classroom. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
 
Sosa, T., Hall, A. H., Goldman, S. R. & Lee, C. D. (2016). Developing symbolic  
interpretation through literary argumentation. Journal of Learning Sciences, 25:1, 93-
132. 
 
Soto, G. (1986).  The jacket.  In Small faces, Arte Publico Press, U.S 
 
Steinbeck, J. (1937). Of mice and men. NY: Covici Friede, Inc. 
 
Steinbeck, J. (1938).  Letter to Claire Luce.  Retrieved from:  
 
http://hellesdon.org/documents/missluce.pdf  
 
Souster, R.  The man who finds his son has become a thief.  In Collected poems. 
 
Oberson Press.  Retrieved from:  
 
http://writersalmanac.publicradio.org/index.php?date=2001/09/10  
 
Tan, A. (1989). Two kinds. In The joy luck club (pp. 132–148). New York, NY: Putnam. 
 
Vonnegut, K. (1961). Harrison Bergeron. In Welcome to the monkey house (1968). 
 
New York, NY: Delacorte Press. 
 
 

 
 
55 
Walker, A. (1984). The flowers. In E. Proffitt (Ed.), Reading and writing about short 
fiction. (pp. 404-405). New York, NY: Harcourt Press. 
 
Wright, R. (2005). Black boy. New York, NY: HarperCollins. 
 
Zusak, M. (2005). The book thief.  New York, NY: Random House. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

