A REAPPRAISAL OF THE CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE*t
PETER CAWS
Michigan State University
1. Argument. Questions that have arisen about the "existence" of elementary
particles and other entities of physics have often been dismissed as unprofitable,
with the tacit assumption that the categories suitable for the discussion of
everyday knowledge are not suitable for the discussion of physical knowledge,
which requires mathematical treatment. But for the layman who stumbles at
the discontinuity between his world and that of mathematical physics, and for
the physicist who wishes his knowledge of the world to have some kind of unity,
a scheme which will embrace both kinds of knowledge is essential. Such a scheme
is developed from a consideration of the dependence on mind, and conceptual
modes of thought, common to science and all other intellectual approaches to
the world, which is seen clearly in the growth of science from more primitive
concepts. It begins with the concept as the most elementary category of the
organization of experience, and moves to the construct, a distinctly scientific
category arising out of the concept, and the isolate, corresponding to elements of
reality not directly perceived. An escape from certain paradoxes generated by
the incomplete nature of perceptual experience is thus provided.
The preoccupation with analysis that characterizes much of recent scientific
philosophy has been very fruitful, but it has left the subject with certain more or
less serious deficiencies. So much has been said about relations between entities
and the manipulations of symbolic languages that the question of what the
entities are that the relations relate or the symbols symbolize has been almost
entirely neglected. This is due in part to a timidity in making existential com-
mitments; if one is to be pursued with questions about the "existence" of electrons
it is understandably easier to confine oneself to determining when a statement
about the electron has meaning than to attempt a definition of the electron it-
self. But the latter question must not always be left aside, and it is time for atten-
tion to be turned once more to the nature of the entities that originally provide
the material on which logical analysis can be practised. The undertaking is not
new; Whitehead', Cassirer", Margenau" and others have worked out more or less
complete theories, and it is the intention of this paper to supplement and reor-
ganize, rather than to discount and replace, the work of these men.
* Received January, 1957
t Part of a dissertation for the Ph.D. degree in philosophy presented to the faculty of
the Graduate School of Yale University, aided by a grant from the National Sci-
ence Foundation.
1 A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, N. Y., Macmillan, 1929, etc., passim.
2 Ernst Cassirer, Substance and Function, Chicago, Open Court, 1923, etc., passim.
3 Henry Margenau, The Nature oj Physical Reality, N. Y., McGraw Hill, 1950, etc.,
passim.
221
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

222
PETER CAWS
The question of whether these entities of science exist in the given, external
world is one to which no answer can be found at the beginning of an enquiry
of this sort. The starting-point must rather be where they do, without challenge,
have their existence, namely in the mind. It is thus necessary to begin by dis-
cussing the nature of the concept, and from this consideration to develop a theory
of the relationship between it and the given. The word "concept" occurs fre-
quently in the literature of scientific philosophy-we read of the hierarchy of
concepts, and the reduction of concepts, and so on-but the attempt to say
what a concept is is avoided or dismissed as psychology. I find it an essential
preliminary.
2. The Conceptual Basis of Science. Concepts mediate between perception and
description; the formulation of a statement about sense-data involves their use.
Thus they do not exist at all for the behaviourist. It is clear that they cannot be
identified with external objects, which by definition lie on the other side of per-
ception, and it is clear too that the nature of the concept cannot be illuminated
by reduction or other syntactical manoeuvring. When a sentence has been re-
duced to terms suitable for inclusion in the verification basis the concept has still
to be reckoned with in the passage from the sentence to the data it describes; to
maintain the contrary is to commit what might be called the fallacy of sophisti-
cation. It is true that in simple cases we have no hesitation in assigning terms to
perceived events, but what enables us to do this is a complicated implicit con-
ceptual system, whose existence, once it is acquired, is easily forgotten. That
animals and savages recognize previously-encountered objects without difficulty
shows that the concept need have nothing to do with semantics.
The basis of the concept, then, is in mind. Discussions of its function reveal
an unavoidable duality. On the one hand there is its active function, as it were,
in correlating experiences,' integrating the complexities of perception and imagi-
nation into a coherent unity," forming the common element in a series of similar
particular things." In this aspect the concept is clearly not "like" the thing con-
ceptualized-if it were, the recognition of a thing as belonging to a particular
class would be no more than a process of comparison, and the concept would not
differ from a Platonic form. Cassirer makes this point clear:
There is no danger of hypostasizing the pure concept, of giving it an independent
reality along with particular things. The serial form F (a, b, c ...) which connects
the members of a manifold obviously cannot be thought after the fashion of an
individual a or b or c, without thereby losing its peculiar character."
Yet if the concept is to be regarded as the substantial element of scientific theory
-a position that is maintained throughout this paper-it must be something
more than this. Theory, built out of concepts that merely specified criteria for
recognizing things or characteristics, would be rather like a house built out of
4 Herbert Dingle, Through Science to Philosophy, Oxford, 1937, appendix.
5 Werkmeister, A Philosophy of Science, N. Y., Harper, 1940, p. 516.
6 Cassirer, op. cit., p. 9.
7 Ibid., p. 26.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE
223
criteria for recognizing bricks. There is a sense in which the concept must be
able to be manipulated, having itself a certain objectivity, and not merely pro-
viding the condition of the objectivity of the thing conceptualized; it must have
"thing-like" properties.
Thus on the other hand, along with the sense meaning of a term," which is the
concept as a criterion of recognition, there goes a "representative meaning",
which is the concept as an image or representative-not necessarily, of course,
visual or verbal. This representative does not "exist" in mind in the sense in
which a form "existed"-at least it is not always in the conscious mind; it is
created only when it is needed, but then it is created so as to satisfy the criterion.
One is thereby equipped for two kinds of situation: the kind in which one sees
a dog and says "There's a dog!" although one had not been thinking of dogs,
and the kind in which someone says "Think of a dog!" or implies this when there
are no dogs in the vicinity. The mind is freed from its dependence on immediate
perception and yet not left without material on which to work. An understanding
of this dual nature of the concept is essential to the solution of some key prob-
lems of definition.
The foregoing discussion applies, of course, equally to scientific and non-
scientific concepts; about the special problem of the scientist nothing has so far
been said. Amplification is needed in two directions, for not only does the scien-
tist have to be particularly careful about the kinds of concept he uses and the
definition of them, but also he tries to put them together into a coherent scheme.
It will be convenient to deal with the latter point first.
Discussion of scientific theory, even by empiricists, often gives the impression
that a theory is a unitary, independent entity of some kind; and while the im-
pression is obviously not intended, and arises only because the writers in ques-
tion are mainly concerned with other aspects of the subject, it is important that
it should be corrected. It is certainly true that theoretical propositions do not
stand by themselves, and if shown to be wrong invariably bring other propo-
sitions into disrepute, but this does not mean that the disproof of one propo-
sition, unless in very exceptional cases, leads to anything as drastic as the down-
fall of a theory. I question whether it is even useful to think of scientific theory
either as autonomous or as monolithic, in spite of Bachelard's ingenious case for
the "bibliomenon"," for without the comprehending attention of a mind even a
recorded theory remains a series of meaningless marks.
But if the monolithic theory of theories be discarded in favour of a principle
of limited or independent confirmation, still it may not be understood how com-
pletely dependent on mind theories are, since scientists still speak of the "whole
theory" as if it were a unit. This is permissible only if what is understood by the
phrase is either a conceptual scheme as it exists for some particular scientist, or
a set of partially isomorphic conceptual schemes existing for a number of scien-
8 C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, La Salle, Open Court, 1947, ch.
VI, passim.
9 Gaston Bachelard, L'Actiuite Rationaliste de la Physique Contemporaine, Paris, Presses
Universitaires de France, 1951, p. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224
PETER CAWS
tists. The latter interpretation is to be preferred; to the former it might be ob-
jected that a statement like "The quantum theory exists" is usually false, since
there are very few people capable of holding the whole of the quantum theory in
mind at once, and those few are not often likely to be doing it. But even this is
not without answer, for anybody who was interested enough to make the state-
ment would presumably have some idea of what the quantum theory was, and
it would exist in that way for him, while if he replied to this that what he meant
was the complete and fully established quantum theory, all physicistswouldagree
that to say of it "it exists" would at this time be false. Such incidental arguments
apart, the contention remains that when the conceptual schemes of scientific men
are exhausted, no science remains. And all this makes no commitment to ideal-
ism-if science as we know it consists of mental relations, there may still be
corresponding relations, that are independent of mind, in the external world.
The criteria of coherence in such conceptual schemes constitute a problem not
only for science but for the whole of philosophy, and will not be discussed further
at present. What is necessary is to examine how a scientific scheme can arise
from such beginnings-what concepts were in fact used by the early scientists.
The retention of the vague word "concept" thus far may offendthose who believe
that the demonstration of vagueness in a term marks the end of its philosophic
usefulness. But there can be vagueness withoug ambiguity; in searching for
something that the understanding can grasp, such a term can be extremely
valuable-we are not, after all, entirely ignorant as to what we mean by it, and
a broad characterization serves to concentrate attention in a particular area,
when to fine a definition might make the idea elusive.
3. The Passage from Concept to Construct. The term "concept", in scientific
philosophy, has been in many cases superseded by "construct", and I think that
too often the change has been made uncritically, without an understanding of
the relation between the two terms. The need for a new term is clear from the
preceding discussion. It must designate an element in a conceptual scheme
adapted to scientific requirements and constructed with scientific rigour, but
unless it is made clear what the requirements are nothing will have been accom-
plished in changing the name.
All scientists begin life as ordinary men, and, like other men, acquire a large
number of concepts, most of them completely unsuitable for development as
components of a scientific theory. Still it is among these concepts common to
most non-scientific men that we must look for the beginnings of the scientific
enterprise, both historically and in the education of the individual. And his-
torically at least it is necessary to pay some attention to the names of quantities.
A detailed philological analysis would be out of place here, but it is possible by
looking at a few examples to follow the development characteristic of concepts.
The one essential concept necessary for the beginning of the science of mechan-
ics (apart from concepts of logic and pure mathematics, which will not be dealt
with) was that of motion; the word "mechanics" is cognate with our "machine"
but the present German form Bewegungslehre still indicates exactly the concern
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE
225
of the subject. In earlier times the word had different currency: "Astronomy
handles the quantity of heavenly motions, Musick of sounds, and Mechanicks
of weights and powers.t"" The reason for this change can, I think, be found in an
examination of the history of the word "motion." Originally it was applied almost
exclusively to heavenly motions, and was not interpreted in the sense of massive
movement-it was the sort of motion that a spot of light has when it moves
across a screen, and to most students of mechanics might not seem a true motion
at all.
The grete Tholome ... teIleth the cause why
Both of Eclips and coniunccioun
And whi thei falle by natural mocioun.!-
But for terrestrial phenomena the common word was "movement"; and in
French, although the word motion exists, it is less often used, and mouvement is
the proper translation of our "motion".
Before motion could be established as a construct it went through a troubled
period. The beginnings of mechanics as we know it-to be found with Newton
rather than Kepler, since the former made the great step of identifying astro-
nomical motions as the same in kind with terrestrial movements, that is obeying
the same laws-brought the necessity of some sort of quantification, and "mo-
tion" was for a time of very uncertain meaning. "Motion, in as much as a certain
length may in a certain time be transmitted by it, is called Velocity or swift-
ness,"12 said Hobbes, but another writer identified the "quantity of motion"
with momentum." Newton's own preference is for the latter usage: "The Quan-
tity of Motion is the measure of the same, arising from the velocity and quantity
of matter conjunctly.l'" The quantity of matter he defines elsewhere as mass,
and this makes it clear that motion without mass is for him no motion-it is
no use to talk of the product of these elements if one of them is zero. For the
contemporary scientist the word still has a definite meaning, but the concept
has never become quantitative-insofar as it has, other names have been given.
Still it may be useful to look at the concept further. The criterion of recog-
nition-Lewis's "sense meaning'-has already been spoken of; the question
then is what criterion is in mind when motion is recognized? Is the concept to be
analyzed into change of place with change of time? This is a perfectly tenable
position, especially in view of the fact that "motion" used to refer exclusively to
the stars. One can look at a star for a long time without detecting any active
movement; but if one goes away and comes back in a few hours, and sees, that
whereas the star had previously been high in the south, it is now low in the west,
one is justified in saying "Why, it's moved!" Here the different positions, and
not the transit between them are important, just as in "moving from one house
10 Bishop Wilkins, Mathematical Magick, 1648.
11 From a minstrel poem c. 1630.
12 Hobbes, Elementary Philosophy, 1656.
13 Keill, Examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, 1699.
a Newton, Sir Isaac, tr. Motte, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
London, Motte, 1729, book I, def. II.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226
PETER CAWS
to another"it is the getting out of one and into the other that we think of, and
not the journey between. But when an aeroplane fliesby very fast, and we catch
a single glimpse ofit, is it still the place-to-place quality of motion that we think
of, rather than some sense of being "in transit" as a unitary fact? "In transit"
betrays us here-we might say that we should not know that the aeroplane was
in motion if it were not for the trees and houses that it passed, or the frame of
vision such as a window that it crossed. But motion, as we know, is relative, and
the relation need only be between the moving object and ourselves. Any motion
can be analyzed afterwards into change of place with change of time, but con-
ceptually speaking, since the egocentric nature of our universe is inescapable, we
have one fixed point in space before any analysis. From this fixed point we may,
and I think often do, regard the motion of other bodies under a concept that is
unitary, self-contained, and unanalyzed.
On a different level from the star and the aeroplane is the case of a person
watching a snake that he had thought wasdead: he suddenly says "It's movingI"
-what provokes the exclamation? A change in spatial configuration, surely. But
does he have time to think of that? The word here has far more than a sense
meaning-it has an emotive meaning of an acute kind, and if he is very frightened
and has a vivid imagination hemay cry out "It's moving!" although it is dead
after all. Here we are thinking in terms of the visual image, but the man might be
blind, and a rustle in the grass produce the same exclamation. He knows the
snake is moving, but it seems more than ever unlikely that he thinks of change
of place with change of time.
The reader who is becoming impatient may be reminded at this point that
what is under discussion is the concept still and not the construct. It is quite
obvious, even painfully so, that the subjectivity and vagueness of the concept
make it quite unsuitable for science; and yet it is the only foundation for science.
Clearly something has to be done; but what cannot be done is to replace the
concept by a construct or some other entity, for in spite of himself the scientist,
when he thinks of this new entity, will be employing conceptual modes of thought.
Herein liesthe error of very much recent scientific philosophy. It is like the inven-
tion of logical languages, and the discovery that in order to do anything useful
one has to use a metalanguage, and sometimes even another metalanguage for
that. Non-conceptual modes of thought in science are useful only for retrospec-
tive analysis, which, while important enough, can never function in the search
for new knowledge or the solution of new problems. There is a comparable situ-
ation in literature; training in philology alone will never make a man a good
creative writer or critic.
The kind of construct we need then is one which has a close genetic connection
with the concept. Many constructs indeed differ very little from the concepts
still widely used by non-scientists, many of which, indeed, have quantitative
aspects. The plan preferred here is to use the word "construct" to designate only
those conceptual entities that have been submitted to scientific discipline with a
view to functioning in a theory, including those whose life began after the erec-
tion of the theory, butin some cases this submission involves only a slightchange.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL SCI-IEME OF SCIENCE
227
A division along similar lines has been attempted by Northrop,'! who speaks of
"concepts by intuition" and "concepts by postulation", the latter resting on a
deductively-formulated scientific theory; the division is made the basis for a
penetrating comparison of Eastern and Western modes of thought. But the two
categories run into one another, and it seems more useful from our point of view
to put some restriction on the use of the word "theory" and admit that plain
men in West and East rely mainly on concepts by intuition. Consider for instance
the concept "speed". For the plain man this is usually something that a moving
object acquires only if it goes fast; the stage is thus set for a quantitative expres-
sion. "A sudden increase of speed" is immediately intelligible to every literate
person, and many would understand what was meant if "velocity" were sub-
stituted; "twice the speed" is easy too. If it is claimed that this involves a deduc-
tively-formulated theory, I must disagree. As soon as the exigencies of theory
construction begin to circumscribe the concept it becomes a construct; if it is
true that "the meanest of men has his theory, and to think at all is to theorize"16
then there are no concepts-they are all constructs. This position-which I
judge to be close to Margenau's't-e-seems to me to destroy an easily available
distinction making for clarity.
It may help, perhaps, to insert a remark on the self-reference of this discus-
sion. If the treatment of the conceptual system given here may assume the dig-
nity of a theory of concepts, then the terms "concept" and "construct" denote
constructs, in that the definitions of them are designed to make that theory coher-
ent and clear. And it ought to be made plain in what ways the construct, "con-
cept", is circumscribed in order to achieve this. The most important factor is
this: that the concepts dealt with here are such as would be likely to form part of
the conceptual system of an educated man, in the Western sense of "educated."
Thus while a primitive man with rudimentary understanding of the concepts
"fast" and "slow" could understand "acceleration", if at all, only as a construct,
in that he would have to be taught explicitly a theory that was new to him before
he could grasp its meaning, yet for the educated person in our society it is easily
understandable as a concept. The position is continually being modified in two
directions with the advance of scientific knowledge-on one hand the level of
popular education is constantly rising, so that constructs are introduced into
the system of concepts of the average man, where they are understood as con-
cepts without the theory they were designed to fit, and on the other the com-
plexity of science is constantly growing, so that new restrictions have to be
placed on elements of this enriched system of concepts to make them suitable
for use in more advanced theories. Of course these fluctuations of the boundary
between concept and construct are slow, and it is not usually very difficult to
decide in which class a particular entity comes.
15 F. S. C. Northrop, The Logic of the Sciences and Humanities, N. Y., Macmillan, 1947,
p.62.
16 Coleridge, The Friend, 1865.
17 Margenau, Ope cit., p. 70: "Clearly, the tree is the construct; the unitary experience of
the tree is summed up in that way."
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228
PETER CAWS
4. The Requirements on Constructs. The first task in the formation of constructs
is the removal of ambiguities-making stipulations about the use of terms such
as that "length" in science shall be used to refer to spatial quantities only and
not to temporal ones. This is all that needs to be done in some cases where con-
cept and construct are very close, but in general the work is only just begun
when extraneous meanings of the name have been eliminated. Since constructs
are intended to function in theories the nature of theories will, in part, dictate
what is required of them. Margenau lists six "requirements on constructs" which
he calls "metaphysical" because "they are not conveyed by sensory data and
yet function in guiding experience" ;18 they are the requirement of logical fer-
tility, the requirement of multiple connections, the requirement of permanence
and stability, the requirement of causality, and simplicity and elegance. All
these are certainly valid, but they could equally well be called metaphysical
requirements on theory; the constructs are considered teleologically, as it were,
with an eye to what they will have to do in the theory.
There are some other requirements that relate more particularly to the con-
struct as an entity: most important are the requirement of epistemic connection
and the requirement of measurement. The first demands that there be something
in the world of perception to which one can point as the counterpart of the con-
struct, the second that the construct must submit in some sense to measurement.
This measurement might be no more than a determination of equivalance be-
tween two occurrences of the construct, or it might be a determination of direc-
tion, or it might be a comparison of magnitudes." Certainly it may be consider-
ably less complicated than the process whereby a number can be assigned to
every occurrence. This may never be possible in some cases, if the mathematical
basis of a particular science is topological rather than metrical. It might very well
be that measurement entered a discussion of a construct only to the extent that
it was said to be metrically indefinite.
The requirement of measurement arises because of the mathematical nature
of scientific theory; it has to be handled carefully, but I think it can legitimately
be added to the list. It must not, however, be taken to mean that a technique
of measurement actually exists-one of the recurring problems in the advance
of experimental physics is to devise means for measuring qualities that are already
very well understood to occur. Nor must it be assumed that, when such a tech-
nique is developed, it must necessarily be single or of a single type. The diffi-
culties that operationism has encountered over this question are well known. It
is true that sometimes the epistemic connections may be provided by the process
of measurement, and certainly any such process is one possible connection, but
there are many which are more direct.
The requirement of epistemic connection preserves the empirical character of
the construct; it is one that can be insisted on only if a further division of the
conceptual scheme is admitted. In the clarification of the construct all the tech-
niques ofmeasurement are invoked, and every available mathematical device may
18 Ibid., p. 81.
19 cf. Henri Poincare, Science and Method, pp. 138-141.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE
229
be used towards its definition. When all the constructs have been defined, all
the experimental data accommodated, and all the mathematics checked, the result
ought to be a coherent, practical, confirmed, and intelligible theory, with laws
and principles and all the rest. On the whole that end is achieved with remarkable
success. But there are some cases in whicl difficulties arise, and in which it seems
that if one puts one's faith in the constructs, the theory is nonsense, while if one
chooses to believe the theory, the constructs are impossible. Such cases arise
most often when the constructs are not those derived from concepts before being
put into a theory, but have been invented or inferred in order to make the theory
complete; such conceptual basis as they have can only be by analogy. The most
celebrated is the electron. The conceptual basis for the construct "electron" was
originally a particle; the construct was a "charged particle" with certain prop-
erties. Experimental evidence later compelled the introduction of an electron
which was a "wave". Theory said the electron was both, and the best physicists
could do by way of reconciling the constructs was to speak of a kind of dualism
and coin portmanteau-words.
It is at this point that the third of the conceptual elements proves useful, if
not in fact necessary. It is called here the "isolated construct", or more simply
the "isolate",20 and is, in effect, the construct regarded purely as a function of the
theory of which it forms part. Theory having been established as a system the
validity of any part of which is judged on the basis of its coherence with the rest,
the conceptual basis of the construct can be discarded if it leads to conflict. The
answer in the case of the electron is clear. In the quarrel between concept and
theory, theory wins if it can be validated as a consistent structure, provided it
fulfils the requirements of successful prediction and the like; and if theory says
that the "isolate" electron can be described by the equations characteristic of
particles and also of those characteristic of waves, we accept its finding, and do
notdistress ourselves over the fact that the two are conceptuallyirreconcilable. We
have to trust theory and let the isolate hang from it, as it were, not expecting it
to have a direct foundation in concepts. The theory as a whole will still have
conceptual bases-otherwise it could never have become intelligible. But a sur-
prising number of them can be and have been done away with principally because
all our concepts have their genesis in the macroscopic world, and it turns out that
there is not strict isomorphism between processes in that world and in the micro-
scopic or astronomical worlds.
The division between constructs and isolates, then, hinges on epistemic con-
nection. Reverting to the construct, we may consider this requirement further.
Operationism has identified it with the requirement of measurement, saying in
effect that the construct is no more than the set of operations involved in its
measurement. But this leads to a very poor understanding of science. Measure-
ment, for nearly all constructs, comes down eventually to the determination of
space-time relations-needles on dials, spots on screens, angular displacements on
the faces of clocks. Does this mean that all other constructs are in some way
20 cf. Hyman Levy, The Universe of Science, N. Y., The Century Co., 1933, passim.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230
PETER CAWS
merely combinations of space and time? On the contrary; space and time, them-
selves difficult ideas enough, give us no clue to the nature of other constructs.
Joseph says:
... the velocity of a moving body is not defined, in the sense that what it is is
explained, by saying that it varies directly as the distance and inversely as the
time of movement.... An independent act of the understanding is involved,
when we speak of that as velocity which so varies."
The requirement of epistemic connection enters here as complementary to
that of measurement-the "independent act of the understanding" is provided
by the link between construct and concept, or between construct and perception.
What must be guarded against is the substitution of the number, that is used to
represent the quantitative expression of the construct, for the construct itself-
the concentration of attention upon the requirement of measurement, to the
exclusion of what at the level of constructs is undeniably still a "thing-like"
property similar in kind to that which we saw was present for the concept.
The "thing-like" nature of our conceptual entities is not to be interpreted as
a possession of metaphysical "substance"; it is however the possession of some-
thing that takes the place of substance, namely invariance in measurement."
Constructs that are adjectival, such as "mass', have a repeatable value under
the same conditions, while constructs that are substantive, such as "particle",
have constant values of their adjectives, again under the same conditions.
5. The Isolates. Isolates too have this "thing-like" quality; they too have to
submit to the requirement of measurement. But as long as they remain isolates
they cannot satisfy the requirement of epistemic connection. There may be two
reasons for this: connections to the plane of perception may be impossible because
of the absence of a conceptual basis, in which case the isolate is thoroughly iso-
lated from experience, or it may be impossible to establish connections because of
the inaccessibility of phenomena, in which case what would normally be a con-
struct would be circumstantially isolated. Entities in the first situation I call
"pure isolates", those in the second "partial isolates". The latter are easier to
deal with; examples of both kinds will be given.
Cosmological studies have shown with a good degree of conclusiveness that
the extra-galactic nebulae are receding from our galaxy with speeds proportional
to their distances from it. The conclusiveness of the evidence, however, comes to
us entirely by way of the theory of the Doppler shift in spectral lines; if a light
source is receding with velocity v, then there will be a displacement d'A in a spec-
tralline of wavelength X, given by the relation
d'A
v = cx'
where c is the velocity of light. The measurement of the velocity reduces in
this case, as we might expect, to a determination of relations between space-
21 H. W. B. Joseph, Lectures on the Philosophy of Leibnie, Oxford, 1949, p. 34.
22 cf. Victor Lenzen, Physical Theory, N. Y., Wiley, 1931, p. 277: "The search for sub-
stance becomes the search for constants and invariants."
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE
231
time points-the distance apart of the corresponding elements of spectral series
from the star in question and from a laboratory source. The telescopic observation
of the star by a human observer gives no clue either to its movement or even to
the red-shift, since the latter is too slight to produce a perceptible colour differ-
ence, and in any case one could not tell that there was a "difference" without
detailed comparison of various members of the family of spectral lines. The
velocity of recession is therefore classed as a partial isolate.
At the other end of the scale of magnitude is the photon, the elementary unit
of light energy. By virtue of the relativistic principle of the inertia of energy it
is possible to assign a mass to the photon. Planck's quantum principle says that
the energy of a photon is given by
E = hv
and the principle of the inertia of energy says that energy has a relation to mass
of the form
E = me'
where c again is the velocity of light. This gives a purely theoretical value for
the mass of the photon, namely
The attribution of this mass to the photon is of service in working out the theory
of the Compton effect, which is thought of as analogous to collisions of macro-
scopic particles. But again, there is no way of becoming aware of this quality
in the photon, or indeed (as we shall see shortly) of the photon itself; its mass
is regarded therefore as another partial isolate.
Both these partial isolates are adjectival. The velocity of the star is adjectival
to the star, which is a construct having its own epistemic connections; but the
photon itself has no such connections, and is in fact a pure isolate. Most pure
isolates are substantive-they are postulated entities upon which Joseph's
"independent act of the understanding" focuses. Those most commonly known
are the subatomic particles, electrons, mesons, neutrons, protons, neutrinos and
the rest. There are others-the four-dimensional continuum of relativity theory
is one, phase space in thermodynamics is another, quantum indeterminacy
another, wave-packets still another. The partial isolates associated with them
are mass, momentum, spin, charge, wavelength-in fact nearly all constructs
are eligible. Motion, to which reference was made in the discussion of concepts
(and which also exists as a construct), appears as a partial isolate, since the
continuity that is characteristic of the construct can no longer be guaranteed in
the case of sub-atomic particles. The mathematics that is used in determining
states of the partial isolates is a good deal more complicated than that associated
with most familiar macroscopic problems, but the fact that instead of the Ham-
ilton-Jacobi equation in particle dynamics one has the fundamental Schrodinger
equation in quantum mechanics does not really point to any greater degree of
complexity in the isolate itself. Eigenfunctions are mathematical devices whose
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232
PETER CA'VS
application is by 110 means restricted to atomic physics; the method of matrices,
and wave mechanics, are similarly imports from mathematics, and they need
not be intimidating simply because they are unfamiliar.
None of these pure isolates has any direct connection with perception. The
electron produces a cloud-chamber track; but the track in fact consists of small
drops of water that have condensed on ionized gas molecules. The passage of the
electron is only a deduction from a knowledge of the process of ionization.
Similarly the other fundamental particles and the rest of the pure isolates make
themselves known to us only in terms of macroscopic processes quite different
in kind from those in which they participate directly.
But there are two ways of rendering intelligible by analogy processes involving
isolates. The first is the establishment of epistemic correlations. Northrop speaks
of an epistemic correlation as the link between a concept by postulation and its
associated concept by intuition;" it therefore differs from Margenau's epistemic
connection, which is the link between a concept or construct and an element of
sense perception. Epistemic correlations are essentially posited by the scientist;
not arbitrarily, it is true, but by a conscious act. The electron is given a link to
perception by the decision to say that the cloud-chamber track is the epistemic
correlate of its passage.
The other method is the provision of models for systems of isolates. This is
far more common than is generally recognized: for in fact waves and particles
are models for the "waves" and "particles" of atomic physics. The most familiar
model for atomic phenomena is that of Bohr, whose hypothesis of the planetary
system of electrons formed the starting-point for modern spectroscopy. The
model is, in effect, an extensive analogue of the system of isolates, composed of
constructs that do have epistemic connections. The relations holding between
the elements of the model, if it is a valid one, are of the same type and can be
described by the same equations as those holding between the elements of the
original system. But as Braithwaite says:
Hydrogen atoms are not solar systems; it is only useful to think of them as if they
were such systems if one remembers all the time that they are not. The price of
the employment of models is eternal vigilance.s'
Models are unquestionably of great value in making vivid the form of the micro-
scopic world, but it is better if possible to do without them-the analogy, however
close, is bound to break down eventually. To revert to the case of the wave-
particle problem, for instance, one finds that as long as the models ("wave"
and "particle") are clung to, difficulties remain; but as soon as they are discarded
in favour of the electron as an isolate the difficulties disappear.
6. The Conceptual Scheme and Reality. The absence
of conceptual bases
for pure isolates may make it appear that they are less "real" than constructs
or concepts, and this is confusing when it is realized that the last half-century's
23 F. S. C. Northrop, The Meeting of East and West, N. Y., Macmillan, 1946, p. 443.
24 R. B. Braithwaite, Scientific Explanation, Cambridge, 1953, p. 93.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REAPPRAISAL OF
CONCEPTUAL SCHEME OF SCIENCE
233
work in physics points overwhelmingly to the conclusion that electrons, protons,
mesons and so on are the ultimate constituents of the whole physical world.
The answer to this problem lies in the differentiation of meanings of "reality".
Isolates are certainly less real than constructs, if by "real" is meant intelligible
in terms of sense-data; they are equally real if by "real" is meant fitting co-
herently into the scheme of physical reality. Perhaps a review of the relation of
these kinds of reality to "natural reality" will, in conclusion, put the scheme
outlined here into perspective.
Of course the isolate is not new; many writers have recognized a similar entity.
It may be questioned whether the introduction of a new name is of any value.
The isolate here however differs from the conceptions of other writers in several
respects. First of all the emphasis here is on the mind-dependent nature of
scientific theory. Theory is in the minds of scientists, and the concepts, constructs
and isolates are there too, not in the external world. The word "external" is
used in this paper to mean the given, independent character of events-the
external object, and the external characteristic, are thought of as presented to
the scientist and not as conceptualized by him. But confusion may arise here,
also, because it is possible to use "external object" as a technical term itself
denoting a constructed entity. It is not so used here. Of course to speak of
"object" and "characteristic" as external in our sense is to take liberties with
the words; but, as we shall see, there is a way of extending language to that
domain.
What is external I call "natural reality" ;25 we are part of it, but unless we are
idealists we do not know it directly. There the metaphysical entities reside-
being, and process, and cause, and order. In the realm of perception some of the
activity of natural reality is reflected-not all of it, by any means. Perception is
thus isomorphic with natural reality, but it is a partial isomorph. The mind
makes out of the elements of perception another isomorphic structure, casting
its concepts now in a distinctly human, and to that extent distorted, mould.
The scientific mind refines and clarifies this conceptual structure, and makes of
part of it a scheme of constructs, or theory. And finally in the interstices of the
framework of constructs the isolates appear, having no corresponding elements
in the domain of perception, but corresponding nevertheless to something in
natural reality, if the theory is a valid one.
The order of natural reality is reflected in the order of our conceptual schemes;
causality is its driving force. For as we make further contact with the external
in perception (and perception will not do as a seat of causality, for it is constantly
interrupted; besides which, as Hume showed, causality there alone would have
to be regarded as a constant miracle) we find that it has kept pace with us. We
make predictions on the basis of theory, and they are fulfilled. The pattern of
prediction is that one perceptual event is observed, and another prophesied on
the basis of it; the links between the events are then dual-one goes through
theory, the other through natural reality, and their meeting in the second event
25 cf. Leon Chwistek, tr. Brodie and Coleman, The Limits of Science, London, Kegan
Paul, 1948, p. xliv.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234
PETER CAWS
is our guarantee that the pattern of theory is still conforming to the pattern of
natural reality. The two perceptions need not be separated in time, except as a
separation in space involves this, hut the link between the states of natural
reality that give rise to them is nevertheless causal. This seems to me the only
satisfactory use of the word.
The scheme outlined then appears as an underlying reality dictating the
broad outline of the conceptual scheme, but not the nature of the individual
concepts. On another plane, parallel to natural reality, lies perception, an in-
complete formal replica of natural reality, reinforced with data from scientific
instruments. Parallel to this lies the conceptual world, and parallel again a num-
ber of more or less selective systems of constructs, all partial isomorphs of
natural reality, or all aspiring to be such. One more isomorphism needs to be
pointed out, and that is the isomorphism of all these realms, in some sense, with
language.
Theory can be approached through language alone-Carnap for instance
covers much of the ground that I have been exploring in terms of two languages,
the observational and the theoretical." This work is of the utmost value. But
terms in a language cannot populate a world; they can only denote elements of
natural reality or of some other system. Language as written or even thought is
in itself an epiphenomenon; the relations between its elements that give it life
exist on another plane. In practice it is not possible in most cases to have a
different language for elements of each conceptual scheme, and hence it comes
about that the same word may be used to mean a perception, a concept, a con-
struct, or an element of natural reality. This is not a drawback as long as one is
aware of it; to avoid trouble one must know which among the isomorphic realms
is referred to by any statement. For such a clarification we must of necessity
look outside language to a conceptual scheme such as the one outlined here, or
to a better one.
26 Rudolf Carnap, The Methodological Character of Theoretical Concepts, in Vol. I of
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Minneapolis, U. of Minnesota Press, 1956.
https://doi.org/10.1086/287538 Published online by Cambridge University Press

