22
Reﬂections on INRIA
and the role of Gilles Kahn
Alain Bensoussan
Former president of INRIA, 1984–1996
22.1 Introduction
I have spent 29 years of my life with INRIA. I had seen the beginning of
the institute in 1967. I was appointed president of the institute in 1984
and I left it in 1996, after 12 years as president.
Gilles Kahn joined IRIA in the late 1960s and made his entire career in
the institute. He passed away while he was president, after a courageous
ﬁght against a dreadful illness, which unfortunately did not leave him any
chance. I knew him for more than 35 years and I have an accurate vision
on the role he played in the development of the institute. More globally,
I have seen his inﬂuence in the computer science community in France
and in Europe. This article gives me the opportunity to understand what
was behind such a leadership and to recall some of the challenges that
INRIA has faced during more than three decades. What we can learn
from the past and from the action of former great leaders is extremely
helpful for the future.
This is probably the best way to be faithful to Gilles and to remain
close to his thoughts.
22.2 Historical IRIA
22.2.1 Why IRIA?
INRIA was born as an evolution of IRIA.
IRIA was created in 1967 as a part of a set of decisions taken under the
leadership of General de Gaulle. It was a time of bold decisions towards
research at large, based on clear political goals.
General Charles de Gaulle wanted to strengthen France and wanted
a country inspiring respect and inﬂuence worldwide. Such a role could
From Semantics to Computer Science Essays in Honour of Gilles Kahn,
eds Yves
Bertot, G´erard Huet, Jean-Jacques L´evy and Gordon Plotkin. Published by Cambridge
University Press.
c
⃝Cambridge University Press 2009.
507
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

508
A. Bensoussan
not become a reality without France being an advanced technological
country, and research was the indispensable step towards this objective.
IRIA was a part of the “Plan Calcul” whose objective was to provide
the country with the capability of being autonomous in producing
computers.
IRIA was the research component of the package. Certainly the main
element was the industrial decisions concerning the Bull Company. It is
interesting to see that while this plan has been globally a failure, the
research decisions concerning the creation of IRIA have remained as a
signiﬁcant step forward.
It is fair to say that Bull has survived in a niche activity. Obviously
the goal to provide France with an autonomous capability in computer
manufacturing was a dream which today looks incredibly unrealistic.
However, in the late 1960s the role of software was not so overwhelming.
Computer science was concentrated in building computing machines.
The government of General de Gaulle had suﬀered from a setback in
acquiring a CDC computer from the US intended for the CEA, the
French Atomic Energy Agency, to be used for developing the French
nuclear program. This decision had been vetoed by the US government,
accelerating the will of the French government to look for autonomy.
The politicians must be commended not to have forgotten research
and science in the plan, in spite of the urgency of short-term decisions.
However, the role of IRIA has been debated. Was it just the research
and development center of the manufacturer, or a long-term government
research organization?
Fortunately, the latter format prevailed, thanks to the tenacity of great
scientists, J. L. Lions being certainly one of the main leaders defending
this orientation. Although Gilles Kahn was a junior scientist in those
days, he represented the voice of the young generation and J. L. Lions
could be sure to represent them.
22.2.2 Gilles at the beginning?
Interestingly Gilles was an employee of CEA, so he was sensitive to
the debate on computing means. In those days the computer science
community in France was very limited, with the exception of the
talented M. P. Schutzenberger, although a very diﬀerent personality in
comparison to the modern computer scientists. Since also computer
science was strongly motivated by performing scientiﬁc computations,
it is not surprising that the applied mathematicians, the numerical
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Reﬂections on INRIA and the role of Gilles Kahn
509
analysts and the combinatorists held the leadership. The fact that a
charismatic leader like J. L. Lions was in full activity in those days
accelerated this state of aﬀairs.
IRIA played a signiﬁcant role in preparing a new generation of French
computer scientists, providing scholarships to study in the US.
To be trained in Stanford was the most prestigious path for these
motivated young and talented students (unfortunately no women among
them). Gilles Kahn was one of them. The Stanford connection played
an important role in building the base of the present French school of
computer scientists. Most of them made at least part of their career at
INRIA, and certainly contributed a lot to the orientation of the institute,
in particular towards long-term research and science.
Although composed of strong personalities, this community always
accepted Gilles Kahn as their leader and their spokesperson. Of course,
this pre-eminence did not have any oﬃcial status, but it was clear that
the inﬂuence of Gilles Kahn was prevalent.
To a large extent, this was also obvious for the other participants to the
IRIA and INRIA adventure, starting with J. L. Lions, who always relied
on Gilles Kahn to be aware of the opinion of computer scientists within
IRIA and INRIA, to give suggestions on speciﬁc aspects of the ﬁeld or
to discuss strategy at large. The same was true with the representatives
of the other INRIA communities, those representing control like Pierre
Faurre or me, and those representing scientiﬁc computing like Roland
Glowinski. If I can speak for myself, I have always been impressed by
the fact that Gilles was capable of understanding what I was doing, and
I know this was true for my colleagues. He was clearly interested by the
applications of computer science and he always had the vision that they
were the driving force of the importance of computer science at large.
This might look obvious, especially now. However, in those days, the
key objective of computer scientists was to develop their science and
the tools necessary to build good computing machines. Basic software
was one of the main preoccupations. Applications were not so much
the concern. The need of good machines and operating systems was
prevalent. There was no reason to consider applications directly, that was
left to specialists. Probably the fact that Gilles started his career at the
CEA helped him to have consciousness of the need of understanding the
user’s point of view. But, certainly his aptitude to strategic considera-
tions played an essential role. It was always one of Gilles’ strong points.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

510
A. Bensoussan
22.3 Creation of INRIA
22.3.1 Why INRIA?
INRIA was created in 1980. The transformation of IRIA into INRIA
was not the consequence of the considerable evolution of research after
the election of President Mitterrand in 1981. It was rather for reasons
linked to urgent political considerations, just as at the creation of IRIA
in 1967.
The concern of the government was that the country was lagging
behind major industrialized nations in terms of using computer facilities.
Consequently, the competitiveness of industry was at stake. The
government decided to push demand and its major decision was to
create an agency to promote the use of computer means in all activities
of society. This was ADI, the Informatics Development Agency. Research
was left outside and was supposed to be an activity in regions, leaving
a strict minimum at Rocquencourt, the location of IRIA.
Fortunately, J. L. Lions, backed by all IRIA researchers, was inﬂuential
enough to obtain the creation of a national institute for research
in computer science and control called INRIA, with strength in
Rocquencourt as well as in regions. The region chosen was Sophia-
Antipolis, and the existing IRIA personnel in Rennes, within IRISA,
could also constitute an INRIA center. I remember very well the great
momentum behind the creation of ADI, obviously the government idea,
whereas INRIA was more the result of a compromise between the will of
the government and that of the researchers headed by J. L. Lions, who
was appointed President of INRIA. It is interesting to see that once
again science and research prevailed. In 1987, ADI disappeared while
INRIA was reinforced. Research remains a stable and essential need
for all nations. Other preoccupations, driven by political considerations
rarely survive their political backers.
22.3.2 Gilles Kahn, a scientiﬁc leader
Gilles was in charge of software engineering at INRIA. To a large extent,
software engineering represented the natural extension of the major
domain of operating systems in the previous years. But it is certainly
much more than a continuation. It was the evidence that software
was becoming the key element of computers, and more importantly of
computer systems and networks. Of course, many other great computer
scientists at INRIA were also contributing to software engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Reﬂections on INRIA and the role of Gilles Kahn
511
through artiﬁcial intelligence, formal methods, complexity, algorithms,
parallelism.
I can give only my impression, which is not that of a computer
scientist, but that of someone observing the evolution of the ﬁeld with
a direct interest, since I became President in 1984.
I had the impression that the ambitious vision of Gilles was really
overwhelming. He certainly was the best to foresee the fantastic evolution
of computer science towards what we call now information technology
or information science.
Being fully user driven, he anticipated the future needs arising from
applications and consequently the types of tools that software developers
would require. He was motivated by the fact that software production
should be automatized and governed by quality control, as any other
production. However software is much more subtle and remains very
speciﬁc. The quality of software cannot be considered in an intrinsic way.
It is system dependent. It is not just the fact that there are no ﬂaws.
That is why Gilles Kahn was perfectly aware of the more focused
contributions of his colleagues and he was capable of directing them
towards his ambitious objectives. This explains probably his scientiﬁc
leadership with respect to scientists who were also stars in their domain.
When INRIA was invited to cooperate in the Japanese program of
ﬁfth generation computers, President J. L. Lions asked Gilles Kahn to
coordinate the actions of INRIA. Again, nothing could appear more
natural.
Pierre Haren is also a good example. He was motivated by the
application of artiﬁcial intelligence in speciﬁc areas like transport,
shipping, and building, more generally in activities requiring fast access
to various expertises. He settled in Sophia-Antipolis, to be close to
Gilles Kahn, to learn from him, to beneﬁt from his tools and maybe
more importantly to beneﬁt from his advices.
22.3.3 Gilles Kahn, a global leader
Pierre Bernhard became the ﬁrst director of the INRIA centre at
Sophia-Antipolis. He had met Gilles Kahn at Stanford, while himself
getting a PhD in automatic control. He convinced Gilles to come to
Sophia, and there started really a team directorship. Pierre Bernhard
was the director, running the center on all matters but relying fully on
the scientiﬁc leadership of Gilles concerning the research orientations,
the new projects and the scientiﬁc discussion with the project leaders.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

512
A. Bensoussan
That is where Gilles was so excellent. He was marginally interested
by administrative duties, although certainly capable of handling them.
He was excellent in his dialogue with researchers and project leaders.
His knowledge exceeded his own ﬁeld and his own research. He liked to
learn, to understand and to guide scientists.
His scientiﬁc leadership was accepted without any reservation, even
by strong personalities who could have a longer list of publications.
This explains why Gilles Kahn became the ﬁrst computer scientist
elected at the French Academy of Sciences, without the slightest
reservation from the community of computer scientists or the scientiﬁc
community at large. Since then, he showed a strong inﬂuence in the
Academy. He was at the origin of the election of all computer scientists
and was listened with authority by all academicians.
I really would like to insist on Gilles Kahn’s exceptional charisma. It
is not easy to explain such a power, certainly a successful combination
of many human qualities: deep intelligence, deep vision, broad interests,
large open-mindedness, natural leadership. Probably also important is
the fact that Gilles had a goal, I could even say a mission: to obtain for
Computer Science the status of a major science, to which the French
scientiﬁc community would bring the brightest discoveries.
22.4 My personal interaction with Gilles Kahn
22.4.1 Before I became president of INRIA
I was recruited at IRIA at the very beginning in 1967. I made my
doctorate, and then became a project leader. At INRIA, under the
presidency of J. L. Lions, I became chairman of the project committee,
in charge of evaluating current projects and deciding new ones.
I was constantly in contact with Gilles Kahn, ﬁrst as a colleague
then as an essential element of decisions concerning projects. Candidates
to new project leadership knew that the position of Gilles Kahn was
indispensable. It may look strange, but to create a project without the
approval of Gilles Kahn was unthinkable. At the same time everybody
was conﬁdent that he was fair, positive and helpful. So this situation
was completely natural and never challenged.
22.4.2 After I became president of INRIA
I had been appointed President of INRIA in 1984, after J. L. Lions left
to become President of CNES. I left INRIA in 1996. In these 12 years
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Reﬂections on INRIA and the role of Gilles Kahn
513
I had so many opportunities to appreciate the intelligence, the strategic
vision and the dedication of Gilles Kahn to collective interest.
Gilles himself was not so much interested in becoming president. A
President has many solicitations and has to accept many constraints.
Gilles Kahn wanted to remain free. It does not mean that Gilles Kahn
disliked having power, but he was much more interested by his power of
inﬂuence than by what is attached to the status of president.
In addition we were on excellent terms, and he knew my admiration
for his personality.
I appointed him as scientiﬁc director, a position which was fully
coherent with his aspirations and interests.
He was a remarkable scientiﬁc director, but beyond that he was instru-
mental in helping me to confront, debate and implement important
strategic decisions, in which I was always impressed by the depth of his
thoughts and the sharpness of his analysis.
Let me give an example which remains for me striking. In 1993 we
suﬀered what was called the “crisis of informatics”, the ﬁrst one, since
later there was the famous Internet Bubble.
All of a sudden, nothing was working well in the informatics sector.
A great confusion prevailed, resulting in a serious drop in the economic
activity and unfortunately many layoﬀs. For the ﬁrst time, this
constantly growing sector suﬀered from lack of jobs, compared to the
supply. One year before we had just celebrated our 25th anniversary
and the mood was euphoric.
Of course a government research organization is not responsible for
economic problems, and is protected from the loss of jobs by its statute.
Nevertheless I was feeling that an essential asset of the country like
INRIA could not just continue business as usual and at the very least
should give its vision on the best way to contribute to the information
society and its economic repercussions. I decided to launch the ﬁrst
strategic plan of the institute. This may seem common now, but was
much less so 13 years ago. I thought it essential to refer to some model
and to discuss the one most suitable for INRIA to have a signiﬁcant
impact on the economy.
I proposed to center the debate between what I called the Stanford
model versus the Fraunhofer model. I clearly expressed my preference
for the Stanford model. The point is not to enter into the discussion. I
must admit it appeared a little bit abstract to the personel of INRIA,
and did not raise much passion. Probably my objectives had not been
well understood but my position did not upset anybody.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

514
A. Bensoussan
If I mention this story, it is because the debate appeared important
to Gilles Kahn, and I was surprised to see the interest he expressed in
considering the implementation of these two models.
Fortunately we were in complete agreement (he was himself trained
at Stanford, which was not true in my case), but I was impressed to
see his deep interest in the discussions on strategy. When he became
President, he recalled to me this discussion that was more than a
decade old. In retrospect, to have raised the interest of Gilles Kahn and
fortunately of some more at INRIA compensates the feeling of approval
with indiﬀerence. I guess the interest in strategic discussions has risen
as INRIA evolved in size, in importance and in the choice of domains.
Gilles Kahn played a key role in this evolution.
We had many more interesting initiatives, in which the support and
help of Gilles Kahn was instrumental. I can list the creation in 1987
of ILOG, and later the development of spin-oﬀcompanies, in coherence
with the Stanford model, the creation of ERCIM a little bit later, after
the single European Act. At that time Europe was progressing fast on
common institutions. An important question for research entities like
INRIA was to contribute to the construction of the Europe of innovation.
A signiﬁcant initiative occurred in 1994, when we agreed to form the
European branch of the W3C. INRIA has always been at the forefront
of the Internet, even at a time when many strong players were opposed
to it. Gilles Kahn was a visionary of the role of the Internet, and was
himself making the greatest use of it, from the very beginning when the
search engines did not exist.
When I left INRIA to become President of CNES, I had unfortu-
nately to face, in June 1996, the failure of the inaugural ﬂight of the new
launcher Ariane V. The failure was related to software. I asked the help of
INRIA and Gilles Kahn not only participated to the inquiry committee,
but also organized a team to work on the validation of software, in similar
contexts. A new spin-oﬀwas created as a consequence of the successful
work of INRIA experts. Gilles Kahn immediately understood what was
at stake for the country. He naturally agreed to help. He also understood
the importance for INRIA to be involved in the solution of such essential
problems. He agreed also to be a member of the technical committee I
put in place in CNES.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Reﬂections on INRIA and the role of Gilles Kahn
515
22.5 Concluding comments
After I left INRIA in 1996, and after P. Bernhard decided not to compete
to become my successor, Gilles Kahn was the natural person to become
President. Again he preferred not to run and Bernard Larrouturou
became President. He naturally conﬁrmed Gilles Kahn as scientiﬁc
director. Gilles continued in this role until Bernard Larrouturou left.
At some point Gilles could no longer refuse to become president. He
was deeply attached to INRIA and he could not remain scientiﬁc director
after so many years in this position.
Unfortunately, he did not have a long time as president as illness came
soon without recovery. Nevertheless Gilles Kahn showed a courage which
was beyond belief. I know what the workload of the President of INRIA
is, and this can only increase with time. To assume it, while being ill and
having intensive care is something which is hard for me to imagine. Once
again Gilles Kahn had surprised me. He remains for me an exceptional
personality, to whom very few can compare.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511770524.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

