FEMS Microbiology Reviews, fuw033, 40, 2016, 798–806
doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuw033
Advance Access Publication Date: 29 August 2016
Review Article
REVIEW ARTICLE
Collective behaviour and swarm intelligence
in slime moulds
Chris R. Reid1,2 and Tanya Latty2,∗
1Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109 and 2School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2015, Australia
∗Corresponding author: School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Macleay Building A12, Sydney, NSW 2015, Australia.
Tel: +61 2 8627 1122; E-mail: tanya.latty@sydney.edu.au
One sentence summary: Slime moulds are powerful model systems for studying collective behaviour and swarm intelligence.
Editor: Karine Gibbs
ABSTRACT
The study of collective behaviour aims to understand how individual-level behaviours can lead to complex group-level
patterns. Collective behaviour has primarily been studied in animal groups such as colonies of insects, flocks of birds and
schools of fish. Although less studied, collective behaviour also occurs in microorganisms. Here, we argue that slime
moulds are powerful model systems for solving several outstanding questions in collective behaviour. In particular, slime
mould may hold the key to linking individual-level mechanisms to colony-level behaviours. Using well-established
principles of collective animal behaviour as a framework, we discuss the extent to which slime mould collectives are
comparable to animal groups, and we highlight some potentially fruitful areas for future research.
Keywords: Physarum polycephalum; Dictyostelium discoideum; unicellular communication; problem solving
COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOUR AND SWARM
INTELLIGENCE
The field of collective behaviour aims to understand how
simple behavioural interactions between group members lead
to coherent, sophisticated behaviour at the collective level.
Collective behaviour is apparent at all levels of biological organ-
isation; bacteria act together to form rafts (Kearns 2010),
plague-locusts
march
cohesively
in
bands
(Bazazi
et
al.
2008), tiny termites build immense, sophisticated structures
(Bonabeau et al. 1997; King, Ocko and Mahadevan 2015), swarms
of honeybees ‘vote’ democratically for the location of their new
home (Camazine et al. 1999; Seeley 2010; Diwold et al. 2011) and
flocks of starlings collectively sense the direction of a predator’s
attack by compression waves propagating through the group
(Procaccini et al. 2011). All of these groups are governed by
the principles of self-organisation; control of the system is
distributed, there are no leaders to command the group or
pre-designed blueprints to guide their actions and individuals
possess only information from the local area around them
(Camazine et al. 2001). Communication is the key that allows
the group to transfer information in order to collectively sense
its environment, navigate through space and build structures
in ways that would be impossible for individuals to achieve on
their own.
Swarm intelligence is the collective intelligence that emerges
at the group level from the interactions between individuals, al-
lowing the group to generate solutions to cognitive problems
that are not available to individuals (Bonabeau, Dorigo and
Theraulaz 1999; Krause et al. 2011). In swarm intelligent sys-
tems, problem solving and decision making are decentralised
– there is no centralised information processing centre. Swarm
intelligence has perhaps been best studied in the social insects
where there are many examples of collective problem solving.
The example of an ant colony solving a maze is a perfect il-
lustration of swarm intelligence at work (see Box 1). The same
Received: 15 March 2016; Accepted: 19 July 2016
C⃝FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
798
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

Reid and Latty
799
Box 1. Ant colonies solve mazes using swarm
intelligence
Swarm intelligence allows groups of organisms to solve
problems that exceed the cognitive capabilities of individu-
als. Consider the case of an ant colony solving a maze. Many
ants begin to walk the maze at random, depositing a trail
of volatile pheromones behind them. The ant traffic which
happens to flow along the shortest path of the maze can
make more return trips (and hence lay more pheromone)
over the same time period than ants which happen to walk
longer paths. Ants follow the strongest pheromone trail, de-
positing their own trail as they go, leading to a process of
positive feedback that focuses the colony’s traffic on the
shortest path. At the same time, the volatile pheromone
evaporates at a constant rate, allowing the colony to ‘forget’
the other paths in the maze. A single ant in a large maze is
incapable of zeroing in on the shortest path—as it walks the
maze randomly, its pheromone trail evaporates before it can
be followed and reinforced by future visits (Sumpter 2006).
Even small colonies of ants can be unable to establish an
effective pheromone trail (Beekman, Sumpter and Ratnieks
2001). Only by coordination as a large group, mediated
by communication through chemical signals, can the ants
solve the problem, thereby exhibiting swarm intelligence.
phenomenon is observed in slime moulds. The interest in slime
moulds as model organisms for studies of collective behaviour
and swarm intelligence initiated largely from work by Nakagaki,
Yamada and T´oth (2000) and Nakagaki (2001) demonstrating that
the slime mould Physarum polycephalum was capable of finding
the shortest path through a labyrinth maze. When a large slime
mould was allowed to build a network covering all surfaces of a
maze, with food sources placed at the entrance and exit of the
maze, the slime mould redistributed its biomass to allow it to ef-
ficiently colonise and exploit the resources. Via communication
between all of its parts, the slime mould withdrew from dead
ends and longer paths until a single tubule connected the food
sources along the shortest path through the maze. This path was
one of the four possible solutions, and since Nakagaki and col-
leagues pioneering work, subsequent studies have dramatically
increased the complexity of the maze problem. Using a Tow-
ers of Hanoi-inspired maze of 32 678 unique solutions, only 2
of which were optimal paths, Reid and Beekman (2013) showed
that Physarum could find the optimal solution to mazes of ex-
treme difficulty. In these cases just as in ant colonies, the slime
mould as a whole begins with global knowledge of all paths
through the maze and settles on the maze solution by interac-
tions between its constituent units. Though it has never been ex-
plicitly tested, it is unlikely that a small slime mould, in the ab-
sence of any navigational cues, could begin to explore the maze
at random and eventually settle upon the shortest path. Thus,
slime moulds too exhibit swarm intelligence.
Here we discuss collective behaviour and swarm intelligence
in two slime mould taxa: cellular and plasmodial slime moulds.
While both groups are formally classified as slime moulds
(Mycetozoa), they differ substantially in their organisation, com-
munication mechanisms and life history (each outlined in Figs 1
and 2). They also differ in the way in which collective behaviour
manifests. In the cellular slime moulds, collective behaviour
refers to cooperation between individual cells within a swarm,
while in plasmodial slime moulds, collective behaviour refers
Figure 1. Life cycle of a cellular slime mould such as D. discoideum. (a) Free-living,
individual haploid amoebae. (b) Aggregation of amoebae. (c) Mound formation.
(d) Emergence and elongation of the tip section. Elongation continues until the
structure falls over to form the migrating slug in (e). (f) ‘Mexican hat’. (g) Develop-
ing fruiting body. (h) Mature fruiting body with live spore cells atop the dead cells
forming the stalk. (i) Dispersing spores. (Drawing courtesy of E.J.T. Middleton)
to communication and cooperation between parts of the same
multi-nucleate cell.
CELLULAR SLIME MOULDS (CLASS
DICTYOSTELIA)
Cellular slime moulds spend the majority of their life cycle as
independent, single entities capable of foraging, growing and
dividing. If conditions deteriorate, individual cells aggregate to
form a mobile multicellular ‘slug’ that can crawl to the soil
surface before undergoing a remarkable transformation into a
fruiting body containing many spores. Collective behaviour is
a vital component in the migration and reproduction of cellu-
lar slime moulds. Formerly free-living individuals communicate
with each other and coordinate towards a specific goal: to find
and sporulate in conditions favourable to spore survival and dis-
persal. The process is coordinated primarily by cAMP signalling;
although each cell is initially a free-living individual, waves of
cAMP coordinate and synchronise amoeba behaviour.
PLASMODIAL SLIME MOULDS (CLASS
MYXOGASTRIA)
Plasmodial slime moulds are multinucleate unicells capable of
growing to over 900 cm2 in size during their vegetative life stage,
which is known as a plasmodium. These giant cells move in
an amoeboid fashion, extending pseudopodia to explore the
environment at speeds of up to 5 cm/hr (Kessler 1982). The
general morphology of the most commonly studied plasmodial
slime mould Physarum polycephalum is shown in Figs 2 and 3,
where the exploratory ‘search front’ advances in a dense fan
shape (Dove and Rusch 1980). Cell morphology behind the search
front, and between multiple colonised food sources, is self-
organised into a system of intersecting tubules where cytoplasm
is rhythmically streamed back and forth to circulate chemical
signals, nutrients and information (Collins and Haskins 1972).
Plasmodial and cellular slime moulds offer insight into two
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

800
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 6
Figure 2. Life cycle of a plasmodial slime mould such as P. polycephalum. (a) Germinating spore. (b) Flagellated ‘swarm cell’. (c) Amoeboid cell. Both (b) and (c) are free-
living haploid stages. (d) Fusion of haploid cells to form diploid microplasmodium. (e) Microplasmodium grows via mitosis without cell fission to produce a macroscale,
mature plasmodium in (f). (g) Sporangia fruiting from a starved plasmodium. (h) Spores for dispersal. (Drawing courtesy of E.J.T. Middleton)
Figure 3. A P. polycephalum amoeba engulfing food sources as part of a problem-
solving experiment. The white cylinders are food sources.
distinct strategies that have evolved to exploit the benefits of
collective behaviour at the unicellular level.
SLIME MOULDS AS MODELS FOR COLLECTIVE
BEHAVIOUR
Most of the theoretical and experimental work on collective
behaviour has focused on animals. The conventional theory
behind collective animal behaviour is based on the idea that
individuals follow relatively simple behavioural rules that ul-
timately lead to patterns at a collective level. It is increas-
ingly apparent, however, that even relatively small brained an-
imals, such as ants, are capable of complex behaviours and
have multiple, complex communication systems that are poorly
understood. Ultimately, a complete understanding of collective
behaviour would benefit tremendously from systems in which
we could trace behaviour from intraindividual processes to in-
dividual behaviour to group-level behaviour. We are a long way
from realising this in animals, where the neural basis of collec-
tive behaviours is scarcely studied. Slime moulds could bridge
the divide between mechanisms (intercellular processes) and
macroscopic collective behaviours. Both plasmodial and cellular
slime moulds have been extensively used as model systems in
microbiology; Physarum as a model for cellular locomotion and
cytoplasmic streaming and Dictyostelium as a model for cellular
signalling and development. As a consequence, there is a large
body of available literature detailing the cellular and molecular
processes that underlie cell behaviours.
Collective animal behaviour has conceptual roots in the
study of self-organised physical systems where individual en-
tities (particles, for example) are essentially interchangeable. In
animals, however, individuals are shaped by a complex interplay
of genetic and environmental factors. Here again, slime moulds
have an advantage as a model system because it is possible to
strictly control the influence of genetics and environment. In
Dictyostelium, it is possible to create populations with precisely
controlled genetic backgrounds. In Physarum, experiments are
typically done using plasmodial fragments that share a common
cell of origin and are thus genetically indistinguishable.
The experimental tractability of slime moulds combined
with the relatively advanced understanding of the intercellular
mechanisms driving cell behaviour makes slime mould a po-
tentially powerful system for the study of collective behaviour.
The aim of this manuscript is to develop cellular and plasmodial
slime moulds as potential model systems for a holistic under-
standing of collective behaviour. To do so, we must first answer a
crucial question: Are the collectives of slime moulds fundamen-
tally different from animal collectives? Our opinion is that while
they may differ in the specifics, slime moulds share many over-
arching features with animal groups. To illustrate this, we refer
to the seminal work of Sumpter (2006), which outlines eight key
‘principles’ of collective animal behaviour. In the following sec-
tion, we discuss the extent to which these principles are present
in cellular and plasmodial slime moulds. It should be noted that
these principles are neither exhaustive nor mandatory. Rather,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

Reid and Latty
801
they provide a way to model and compare different types of col-
lective systems.
PRINCIPLES OF COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOUR
Synchronisation
Synchronisation of behaviour is a key hallmark of many col-
lective systems. In the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium dis-
coideum, starvation causes cells to secrete the signal molecule
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). At the same time, they
become sensitive to cAMP through the expression of cAMP re-
ceptors on the cell surface. Nearby cells respond to cAMP by
migrating towards the area of highest cAMP concentration, and
begin secreting cAMP themselves. These behaviours create a
positive feedback loop, whereby the secretion of cAMP attracts
more amoebae, who themselves react by amplifying the aggre-
gation signal by secreting more cAMP. Whenever levels of cAMP
increase, cells respond by temporarily producing more cAMP, fol-
lowed by a brief refractory period during which they temporar-
ily become insensitive to cAMP stimulation (Dormann, Vasiev
and Weijer 2000; Gregor et al. 2010). The overall effect of these
behaviours is the creation of unidirectional, outwardly propa-
gating waves of cAMP that guide other cells. When cAMP lev-
els are low, cells produce cAMP in random, non-synchronised
pulses. Cells in close spatial proximity to one another eventu-
ally synchronise, resulting in multiple ‘competing’ pulse centres.
As some oscillatory centres accumulate more cells by chance,
cAMP concentrations in the surrounding areas increase, caus-
ing oscillatory centres to pulse at a faster rate, thereby releas-
ing more cAMP into the environment. High pulse rate centres
are able to entrain slower pulsing centres until, via a process of
competition, a single oscillatory centre remains. Cells initially
move towards the oscillatory centre as independent individu-
als, but as they encounter more cAMP waves they align and ad-
here to one another along their long axes resulting in distinct
streams (Weijer 2004). Aggregation towards the main oscillatory
centre continues until between 104 and 106 cells have joined
the swarm. Cells entering the oscillatory centre begin to pile up
forming a three-dimensional mount. Collective waves of move-
ment still occur in the mound phase but the specific type and
shape of waves (concentric rings, single and multi-armed spi-
rals) depends on the strain (Dormann, Vasiev and Weijer 2000).
At this stage, the individual amoebae have combined to create a
multicellular ‘slug’ that is capable of directed movement.
The chemical waves of aggregating Dictyostelium are an ex-
cellent example of collective pattern formation. Waves induce
chemotaxis towards their centres and can be either circular or
spiral in shape; cells aggregating at the centre of each shape
will ultimately form a spore body. In the early stages of ag-
gregation, circular waves form as one or a group of synchro-
nised cells (pacemakers) send out periodic pulses of cAMP;
these waves tend to emerge and die out (Lauzeral, Halloy and
Goldbeter 1997; P´alsson et al. 1997). Later in the aggregation pro-
cess, circular waves can interact with one another, breaking up
into spirals. Spirals do not require a pacemaker and are not ex-
tinguished once they arise. Circular waves compete with spiral
waves; at low population densities, circular waves are favoured
while high population densities favour spiral waves (Lee,
Goldstein and Cox 2001). Spirals that ultimately win the compe-
tition go on to entrain the pacemakers responsible for the circu-
lar waves, thereby extinguishing them (Lee, Goldstein and Cox
2001). In contrast to the cellular slime moulds, which achieve
collective behaviour through the aggregation and coordination
of multiple organisms, plasmodial slime moulds are single indi-
viduals, yet each is a collective of miniscule pulsing parts known
as oscillators. Each tiny oscillator is a segment of tubule network
or search front, which is actively expanding and contracting. The
frequency of oscillation is determined by both local environmen-
tal conditions, such as the detection of food and interactions
with adjacent oscillators (Durham and Ridgway 1976). When cell
surface receptors recognise attractants such as food, the oscilla-
tion frequency in the cell area nearest to the attractant increases
and cell surface tension decreases (Ueda, Hirose and Kobatake
1980). This response causes cytoplasm to flow in the direction
of the attractant and leads to amoeboid movement in that direc-
tion. The opposite response is induced by repellents such as light
and certain salts (Ueda, Hirose and Kobatake 1980). The physical
coupling of adjacent oscillators means they become entrained to
the frequencies of their neighbours, and information about the
quality of local environments, encoded in oscillation frequen-
cies, can be transferred to distant parts of the cell. Communi-
cation between, and recruitment by, individual oscillators is a
form of distributed, collective behaviour that allows the slime
mould to make complex decisions about how best to exploit its
environment.
Positive feedback
When events in a system are amplified through reinforcement
or recruitment, we call this phenomenon positive feedback
(Bonabeau et al. 1997; Camazine et al. 2001). Once again, ants
provide the classical example of positive feedback in collective
behaviour (Box 1), as the isolated behaviour of a single ant (its
pheromone trail) initiates a feedback loop that amplifies the sig-
nal and normalises the behaviour of the rest of the group. Pos-
itive feedback is evident in the oscillatory cAMP signalling ob-
served in the aggregation of Dictyostelium amoebae, and also in
the construction of efficient networks in the plasmodial slime
mould Physarum polycephalum. In the latter case, attractants such
as food increase the local oscillation frequency and initiate con-
traction waves propagating outwards. Tubes within the network
that lie parallel to the direction of propagation are reinforced, as
cytoplasm moves towards them, while perpendicular tubes de-
cay. The reinforced tubes become thicker, the tubes that link the
network via the shortest path accommodate the highest flow per
unit time and the network length becomes optimised by positive
feedback (Nakagaki, Yamada and T´oth 2000; Tero, Kobayashi and
Nakagaki 2006). As emphasised by Sumpter (2006), strong pos-
itive feedback can be detrimental in environments where con-
ditions change—swift and complete focus on the best option by
the group can lead the group to be stuck with that option, even
if it becomes the suboptimal choice at a later time. A compari-
son of the collective behaviour of slime mould and ants in the
same maze problem by Reid and Beekman (2013) revealed that
the positive feedback in Physarum was weaker than in the ant
colonies, preventing absolute convergence on the single best so-
lution, but allowing the slime mould to discover and utilise new
solutions when they presented themselves.
Negative feedback and inhibition
Negative feedback mechanisms act to suppress positive feed-
back, and in doing so can help to stabilise behavioural responses,
and prevent collective systems from converging on subopti-
mal solutions. Negative feedback is therefore vital to maintain-
ing homeostasis in the face of fluctuating environments. De-
spite their key role in organising collective decision making,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

802
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 6
negative feedback mechanisms have received far less attention
than positive feedback mechanisms [a few examples include the
‘no-entry’ pheromone signal in Pharaoh’s ants (Robinson et al.
2005) and the ‘stop’ vibratory signal in honeybees (Seeley et al.
2012)]. Negative feedback can also take the form of downregu-
lation of a positive feedback signal (Czaczkes, Gruter and Rat-
nieks 2013). In Physarum, positive feedback generated through
increased oscillation rate and tube size results in the engulf-
ment of profitable food sources, while negative feedback likely
generated by crowding at the food source causes engulfment to
stop once the entire surface is covered (Latty and Reid, pers.
obs.). Modelling studies strongly suggest that a negative feed-
back loop, driven by the production of the enzyme phosphodi-
esterase (PDE), ‘turns off’ intercellular cAMP production in ag-
gregating Dictyostelium cells, ultimately giving rise to the charac-
teristic cAMP oscillations observed during aggregation (Iglesias
2003; Sgro, Schwab and Noorbakhsh et al. 2015). Starving cells
produce PDE that degrades extracellular cAMP and helps lower
PDE concentrations in the interval between cAMP pulses (Jang
and Gomer 2008).
In Dictyostelium, inhibition also plays a critical role in con-
trolling the number of cells that ultimately make up the fruit-
ing body. Fruiting body size is strongly shaped by natural selec-
tion; large fruiting bodies will collapse under their own weight,
while in fruiting bodies that are too small, the spore mass will be
too close to the ground, thus preventing optimal dispersal. Dur-
ing the initial aggregation phase, a large number of cells stream
towards oscillation centres and in order for appropriately sized
slugs to develop, this stream needs to break into smaller groups.
The breakup of the stream is controlled by a protein complex
called ‘ countin’ which acts as a ‘counting factor’ such that cells
can assess the number of cells in their immediate vicinity by se-
creting and measuring the concentration of ‘countin’ (Brock and
Gomer 1999). ‘Countin’ works primarily by inhibiting cell-to-cell
adhesion through the downregulation of cell adhesion proteins
(Roisin-Bouffay et al. 2000) and by increasing cell motility. Fruit-
ing body size is also modulated by PDE, which at high concen-
trations decreases the size of cAMP pulses, in turn decreasing
the range of communication and ultimately leading to smaller
aggregations (Brock and Gomer 1999).
Leadership
In animal groups, certain individuals can be leaders of the group
through age, social status or possession of specific information.
In the early stages of Dictyostelium aggregation, the waves of
cAMP that give rise to the distinctive spiral and circular wave
patterns are controlled by small numbers of ‘pacemaker cells’
that send out coordinated pulses of cAMP. These cells play a key
role in organising collective behaviour in Dictyostelium. Growing
evidence suggests that these leaders arise by chance, with no
cells intrinsically destined to be leaders (Noorbakhsh et al. 2015).
As the individual cells aggregate, they begin to differenti-
ate into those destined to form the stalk (prestalk cells) and
those destined to form spores (prespore cells). The cells eventu-
ally form a mound with the prestalk cells self-assorting to form
a nipple-shaped structure on top of the mound called the tip
(Dormann and Weijer 2001)(see Fig. 1). The mound elongates
until the entire structure falls over, forming the cylindrical slug
with the prestalk cells in the anterior section. The prestalk cells
act as leaders, inducing the rest of the cells to follow by releas-
ing waves of cAMP that propagate backwards through the slug
(Dormann and Weijer 2001). When the tip is transplanted into
another slug, the prestalk cells maintain their role as leaders,
inducing a secondary axis to form as they commandeer some
of the prespore cells from the host slug (Raper 1940; Rubin and
Robertson 1975). Thus, leadership is a characteristic of prestalk
cells that develops during their differentiation during the first
stages of aggregation.
Integrity and variability
Unlike many self-organised physical systems, where compo-
nents are thought to be functionally identical, the underlying
components of self-organised biological systems tend to be vari-
able. In an ant colony, for example, different individuals dif-
fer in their propensity to undertake certain kinds of work. In-
tegrity refers to the fact that individuals will tend to ‘stay true’
to a particular behaviour. In Dictyostelium, individual cells dif-
ferentiate into prestalk and prespore cells during the mound
phase, and thereafter do not switch roles (except under special
circumstances outlined in ‘Redundancy’ below). Since ‘individ-
ual’ Physarum components are difficult to work with experimen-
tally, the extent to which subunits display integrity or variabil-
ity is unknown. However, several studies have found that equal
sized fragments of the same source plasmodium display differ-
ent food preferences, potentially indicating some degree of in-
traplasmodium variation (Latty and Beekman 2010, 2011a,b).
Stochasticity also allows a behaviourally homogeneous pop-
ulation to obtain behavioural variability. For example, in the
early phases of Dictyostelium aggregation, when levels of cAMP
are low, individual cells fire randomly, with no particular indi-
viduals acting as leaders (Gregor et al. 2010). By chance, some
cells end up in areas with higher levels of cAMP; these become
the pacemakers and drive subsequent aggregation dynamics
(Gregor et al. 2010; Sgro et al. 2015). Thus, different behavioural
roles arise from a behaviourally homogeneous population due
to noise in the early aggregation period. The role of noise in de-
termining behavioural ‘roles’ within Physarum subunits is un-
known, but would be a potentially interesting area for future
research.
Response thresholds
In animal collectives, individuals within the group can change
their behaviour when the level of a stimulus exceeds some
threshold, known as a ‘response threshold’. In honey bee
colonies, for example, individual bees will start fanning their
wings to cool the nest when temperatures exceed their individ-
ual temperature thresholds. Having a population with a variety
of individual response thresholds can promote graded (rather
than precipitous) responses to changing conditions (Jones et al.
2004). In Dictyostelium, cells make several behavioural transi-
tions. For example, increasing cell density leads to transitions
from random oscillation by single cells to coordinated pulses
when densities exceed a set threshold (Gregor et al. 2010; Sgro
et al. 2015). While it is likely that these transitions are gov-
erned by response thresholds, to the best of our knowledge, such
thresholds have not yet been characterised at an individual cell
level. Individual Dictyostelium amoebae differ in their sensitivity
to cAMP, and it has been suggested that it is a small population
of hypersensitive cells that drive the self-organisation process
(Wang et al. 2012, but see Gregor et al. 2010 and Sgro et al. 2015
for an alternative view).
Selfishness
By aggregating, individual Dictyostelium cells may gain the same
benefits as ‘selfish herds’ of animals—individuals move towards
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

Reid and Latty
803
each other to lower their risk of predation (Hamilton 1971). A ma-
jor protective component of the slug is the slime sheath—a mu-
copolysaccharide exudate, rich in protein and trilamellar cellu-
lose that encloses the cellular core (Kessin et al. 1996). This slime
sheath prevents nematode predators from eating the amoebae.
The protective slime is exuded by the individual cells, but it is
hypothesised that isolated cells cannot produce enough slime
to provide a protective function (Kessin et al. 1996). As such, the
individuals that aggregate to form slugs act selfishly but never-
theless gain the benefits of grouping.
The collective phase of Dictyostelium’s life cycle, the slug, acts
to bring the group of cells to the soil surface to form the fruit-
ing body and release spores for dispersal. This final stage in the
collective process, known as culmination, produces a fruiting
body consisting of around 80% spore cells and 20% stalk cells
(Loomis 1982). The stalk cells elongate and form strong cellu-
lose walls, eventually acting to hold the spore cells aloft, and
dying in the process without producing spores of their own.
Hence, altruism is a necessary aspect of collective behaviour in
cellular slime moulds. Slugs often contain unrelated cells from
multiple clones (Strassmann and Queller 2011), which allows
for the prospect of selfish behaviour known as cheating. Cheat-
ing occurs when the frequency of a clone among the spores
is greater than it was in the original mixture of aggregated
cells. Cheating has been found to occur in mixed populations
of wild clones (Strassmann, Zhu and Queller 2000; Fortunato,
Queller and Strassmann 2003; Buttery et al. 2009), and slugs
made from mixtures of clones do not move as far as slugs con-
sisting of only one clone type, which may result from increased
competition between the cells to remain in the posterior re-
gion of the slug (the only part to produce spores)(Foster et al.
2002). The fact that cheating genes have not completely outcom-
peted their non-cheating counterparts is most likely due to a
suite of cheating control strategies (outlined in Strassmann and
Queller 2011).
Redundancy
Physarum plasmodia are the epitome of redundancy; when sev-
ered from the main cell, fragments can become fully indepen-
dent individuals within minutes. Although not tested, it appears
that small cell fragments are capable of all the behavioural func-
tions of a larger intact cell (Reid and Latty pers. obs.). This incred-
ible redundancy is partially due to the syncytial nature of the
plasmodium which can contain hundreds of thousands of inde-
pendent nuclei (Martin and Alexopoulos 1969). Physarum plas-
modia also display redundancy in the shape of their foraging
networks. When foraging, Physarum can engulf and connect food
sources to one another to form a foraging network. When given
36 food sources, Physarum built a network that included multi-
ple links to each food source, thereby creating a network with
built-in redundancy (Tero et al. 2010). Should any one tubule be
severed, the plasmodium would not lose contact with the food
source in the majority of instances.
Similarly, when slugs of Dictyostelium are cut into several
sections of uniform cell types, the cells will reorganise to pro-
duce new slugs with both posterior and anterior characteris-
tics, and each will contain both spore and stalk cells upon cul-
mination (Raper 1940; MacWilliams and Bonner 1979). Thus,
the individual amoebae that constitute slugs show a level of
redundancy that allows them to maintain their collective be-
haviour, even when faced with the loss of a large part of their
population.
BENEFITS OF COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOUR
The collective behaviour observed in plasmodial slime moulds
is a result of communication and interaction between individual
units that are spatially separated, yet genetically and physically
interchangeable. Being a single organism, individual units do not
have a ‘choice’ to behave selfishly, and individual units cannot
exist on their own—collective behaviour is as much a part of the
organism as its nuclei and mitochondria. As such, plasmodial
slime moulds provide excellent models for mechanistic studies
of how many simple, identical units can exhibit emergent, com-
plex behaviour at the group level. The main benefit bestowed by
collective behaviour to the plasmodial slime moulds (or at least
to the focus species Physarum polycephalum) is the ability to solve
complex problems (Fig. 3), such as making complicated trade-
offs between speed and accuracy (Latty and Beekman 2011b),
food quality and risk (Latty and Beekman 2010), exploration and
exploitation (Reid et al. 2016) and risk and efficiency (Nakagaki
et al. 2007). Physarum also anticipates periodic events (Saigusa
et al. 2008), uses its slime trail as a spatial memory system (Reid
et al. 2012) and constructs transport networks with similar effi-
ciency to those designed by human engineers (Tero et al. 2010).
The basal phylogeny of plasmodial slime moulds supports the
hypothesis that ancient organisms, prior to the advent of multi-
cellularity, used collective behaviour to solve complex environ-
mental challenges, as a prelude to the evolution of nervous sys-
tems (Chung and Choe 2009; Chung, Kwon and Choe 2009). It is
likely that the ancestors of today’s slime moulds were capable
of swarm intelligence before animals and fungi split from their
common ancestor (Baldauf and Doolittle 1997), long before neu-
rons even existed, let alone were concentrated to form anything
that could be called a brain.
The case of collective behaviour in the cellular slime moulds
provides a useful platform for further studies of ‘selfish herd’ be-
haviour, which has been studied exclusively in large metazoans.
Dictyostelium discoideum cells live completely independent and
successful lives during the solitary growth phase, so long as the
environment provides them with enough bacterial prey. Food
scarcity is the trigger that initiates their collective behaviour.
In other swarming systems, such as zooplankton (Jakobsen and
Johnsen 1988), food scarcity via conspecific competition is actu-
ally a cost imposed by aggregation, so the natural expectation
would be for slime mould cells to show the opposite of collec-
tive behaviour when resources in their environment become de-
pleted. Nor are the individuals coming together to reproduce,
as sporulation is a form of encystment, with no genetic trans-
fer between individuals or multiplication of individual units.
Sporulation therefore serves primarily as a dispersal strategy to
escape unfavourable conditions. Since individual cells are inde-
pendently competent, and aggregation in resource-poor envi-
ronments should only be detrimental, what benefits do cellular
slime moulds gain from collective behaviour?
The main benefit is enhanced locomotory potential. Individ-
ual amoebae are capable of migrating short distances, travel-
ling at most 1 cm when aggregating (Rifkin and Goldberg 2006).
Migrating collectively as slugs allows the cells to travel up to
twice as fast and cover distances of 10–20 cm within a few days
(Kessin 2001). The massive size of slugs compared to their in-
dividual amoebae allows the group to traverse environmental
obstacles such as air gaps in the soil, and detect gradients of
light and heat that point towards the soil surface (Kuzdzal-Fick
et al. 2006)—feats that would be impossible for individual amoe-
bae to accomplish on their own. Amoebae can even disperse
via slugs without following the remaining cells fate through
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

804
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 6
to sporulation, as slugs shed live cells as they move through
the environment (Kuzdzal-Fick et al. 2006). These piggy-backing
cells get a free ride via the collective navigation of the slug,
arriving in new environments they could not have reached on
their own, enabling them to acquire new prey, multiply and ulti-
mately generate new slugs once the new environment has been
exploited.
FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS
We have argued that slime moulds present a unique opportu-
nity to link individual interaction mechanisms to emergent col-
lective patterns. However, there is still much work to be done
before we achieve this goal. For Physarum, the main area of fu-
ture research will be in linking established cellular mechanisms
to collective problem solving. We suspect that most, if not all,
of the information needed to achieve this already exists, since
Physarum has been a long-standing model organism for cyto-
plasmic streaming and cellular motility. At the same time, a
growing body of knowledge details Physarum’s remarkable infor-
mation processing abilities. A synthesis linking mechanisms to
behaviour will likely require close collaboration between cellu-
lar and molecular biologists, who have an intimate understand-
ing of the cellular mechanisms, behavioural ecologists familiar
with the principles of collective behaviour and mathematicians
familiar with modelling collective behaviour. It is our hope that
this manuscript will stimulate collaboration and communica-
tion between these fields of research.
In cellular slime moulds, the picture is a little different. While
we have a relatively good understanding of the mechanisms un-
derlying collective behaviour in Dictyostelium, we know far less
about whether or not the system is capable of the kind of com-
plex decision making we observe in Physarum. Can Dictyostelium,
for example, make trade-offs between conflicting cues? How
do migrating slugs deal with noisy information? It may well be
that the relatively limited function of slugs (‘find an appropriate
place to sporulate’) limits the extent to which the system has
evolved complex information processing. Nevertheless, future
work would do well to probe the information processing abili-
ties of migrating slugs by challenging them with more complex
decision-making tasks.
Although the term ‘swarm intelligence’ is frequently used
throughout the collective behaviour literature, there is no
universally accepted definition. Here, we consider swarm in-
telligent systems to be those where the intelligence of the
collective exceeds that of the individual. While ant colonies and
beehives are often referred to as having ‘swarm intelligence’, the
underlying assumption that the collective is better able to solve
problems than the individual is rarely tested (but see Sasaki
et al. 2013 for a notable exception). In practise, studying prob-
lem solving in individuals and collectives is often hampered by
the fact that those systems that have highly organised collec-
tives (such as social insects) are composed of individuals that
evolved to function as part of a colony. When isolated, they of-
ten have difficulty performing individual tasks, similar to the
way an individual neuron is not equipped to solve problems on
its own. Dictyostelium’s transition from individuals to collectives
offers an interesting way to study the differences between in-
dividual and group-level information processing. Unlike social
insects, individual Dictyostelium amoebae have evolved the be-
havioural mechanisms necessary to function as individuals; as a
result, meaningful comparisons between individuals and collec-
tives are possible. Since individuals and collectives have differ-
ent ‘goals’ (individuals are concerned primarily with finding and
consuming food, whereas collectives are searching for sporula-
tion sites), the challenge will be to identify a problem-solving
task that is appropriate for both individual cells and collectives.
One possibility might be to devise situations where cells and col-
lectives need to make choices between conflicting chemosen-
sory information (food cues for individuals, sporulation site cues
for collectives). Another option is to provide individuals and col-
lectives with choices between resources that differ in quality
and determine whether there are differences in either the speed
or accuracy of decision making.
In Physarum, it should be relatively easy to study individ-
ual versus collective choice, as the organism can easily be frag-
mented into groups of varying size. The conceptual challenge is
that it is unclear what would constitute an ‘individual’ Physarum
(a single oscillating region? A single nucleus?). Nevertheless, it
should be at least possible to examine the effect of group size
on the speed and accuracy of decision making, even if we can-
not directly assess individual versus collective problem solving.
A battery of behavioural assays have already been devised for
Physarum (Nakagaki, Yamada and T´oth 2000; Nakagaki et al. 2007;
Latty and Beekman 2009, 2011a,b, 2015; Tero et al. 2010; Reid et al.
2012, 2013; Reid and Beekman 2013), so future work can take
advantage of these protocols to test how group size influences
problem solving.
Since plasmodial and cellular slime moulds belong to dif-
ferent taxonomic classes, it is perhaps unsurprising that re-
searchers tend to limit their work to one or the other group.
Both slime moulds have evolved different forms of collective be-
haviour, and much could be gained from a cross-fertilisation of
ideas. For example, the slime trail of Physarum serves as a form
of externalised spatial memory, allowing it to ‘remember’ areas
it has already explored and avoid these in the future. This simple
strategy not only increases the efficiency of its search behaviour,
but also allows it to effectively navigate complex environments
such as mazes (Reid et al. 2012). Migrating slugs of Dictyostelium
discoideum leave a similar slime trail, but its function as a poten-
tial source of navigational information has not yet been investi-
gated.
Almost all the research on plasmodial slime moulds has
focused on Physarum polycephalum, while most cellular slime
mould research has focused on Dictyostelium discoideum. There
are many advantages to a single-species model system ap-
proach, not the least of which is the availability of species-
specific tools and protocols. While we certainly think that
targeted research should be aimed at these two well-known
species, we also advocate that future researchers begin to in-
vestigate collective behaviour in other slime mould species. It
will be very interesting to determine the extent to which differ-
ent species have evolved different forms of collective behaviour,
and to find out how differences in underlying mechanisms ulti-
mately influence group-level behaviours.
CONCLUSION
Although they were initially developed for the study of animal
collectives, plasmodial and cellular slime moulds embody many
of the key principles of collective behaviour. At a macroscopic
level, many of the behaviours we observe in slime moulds have
analogues in animal groups. For example, locusts transition
from a solitary phase to a gregarious phase that migrates collec-
tively; as in Dictyostelium, the transition from solitary to gregar-
ious is triggered by a lack of food (Guttal et al. 2012). Physarum
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

Reid and Latty
805
polycephalum exhibits the same kind of economically irrational
behaviour as has been described in humans (Latty and Beek-
man 2011a). The strong similarities between disparate systems,
representing different kingdoms of life, and different levels of
biological organisation, suggest that collective biological sys-
tems may follow common design features.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Eliza J. T. Middleton for her drawings
of the slime mould life cycles. We would also like to thank the
Branco Weiss Society in Science Fellowship and the Australian
Research Council for funding (both to TL).
Conflict of interest. None declared.
REFERENCES
Baldauf SL, Doolittle WF. Origin and evolution of the slime molds
(Mycetozoa). P Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:12007–12.
Bazazi S, Buhl J, Hale JJ et al. Collective motion and cannibalism
in locust migratory bands. Curr Biol 2008;18:735–9.
Beekman M, Sumpter DJ, Ratnieks FL. Phase transition between
disordered and ordered foraging in Pharaoh’s ants. P Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001;98:9703–6.
Bonabeau E, Dorigo M, Theraulaz G. Swarm Intelligence From Nat-
ural to Artificial Systems. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
1999.
Bonabeau E, Theraulaz G, Deneubourg J-L et al. Self-organization
in social insects. Trends Ecol Evol 1997;12:188–93.
Brock DA, Gomer RH. A cell-counting factor regulating structure
size in Dictyostelium. Gene Dev 1999;13:1960–9.
Buttery NJ, Rozen DE, Wolf JB et al. Quantification of social be-
havior in D. discoideum reveals complex fixed and facultative
strategies. Curr Biol 2009;19:1373–7.
Camazine S, Deneubourg J-L, Franks NR et al. Self-Organization in
Biological Systems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2001.
Camazine S, Visscher PK, Finley J et al. House-hunting by honey
bee swarms: collective decisions and individual behaviors.
Insect Soc 1999;46:348–60.
Chung JR, Choe Y. Emergence of memory-like behavior in re-
active agents using external markers. 2009 21st IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence. Newark,
New Jersey, USA, 2009, 404–8.
Chung JR, Kwon J, Choe Y. Evolution of recollection and predic-
tion in neural networks. International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2009, 571–7.
Collins OR, Haskins EF. Genetics of somatic fusion in Physarum
polycephalum: the Ppii strain. Genetics 1972;71:63–71.
Czaczkes TJ, Gruter C, Ratnieks FLW. Negative feedback in ants:
crowding results in less trail pheromone deposition. J R Soc
Interface 2013;10:20121009.
Diwold K, Schaerf TM, Myerscough MR et al. Deciding on the
wing: In-flight decision making and search space sampling
in the red dwarf honeybee Apis florea. Swarm Intell 2011;
5:121–41.
Dormann D, Vasiev B, Weijer CJ. The control of chemotactic cell
movement during Dictyostelium morphogenesis. Philos T R
Soc B 2000;355:983–91.
Dormann D, Weijer CJ. Propagating chemoattractant waves co-
ordinate periodic cell movement in Dictyostelium slugs. De-
velopment 2001;128:4535–43.
Dove WF, Rusch HP. Growth and Differentiation in Physarum poly-
cephalum. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980.
Durham A, Ridgway E. Control of chemotaxis in Physarum poly-
cephalum. J Cell Biol 1976;69:218–23.
Fortunato A, Queller DC, Strassmann JE. A linear dominance hi-
erarchy among clones in chimeras of the social amoeba Dic-
tyostelium discoideum. J Evol Biol 2003;16:438–45.
Foster KR, Fortunato A, Strassmann JE et al. The costs and bene-
fits of being a chimera. Proc Biol Sci 2002;269:2357–62.
Gregor T, Fujimoto K, Masaki N et al. The onset of collective be-
havior in social amoebae. Science 2010;328:1021–5.
Guttal V, Romanczuk P, Simpson SJ et al. Cannibalism can drive
the evolution of behavioural phase polyphenism in locusts.
Ecol Lett 2012;15:1158–66.
Hamilton
W.
Geometry
for
the
selfish
herd.
J
Theor
Biol
1971;31:295–311.
Iglesias PA. Feedback control in intracellular signaling pathways:
Regulating chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum. European
Journal of Control 2003;9:227–36.
Jakobsen PJ, Johnsen GH. The influence of food limitation on
swarming behaviour in the waterflea Bosmina longispina.
Anim Behav 1988;36:991–5.
Jang W, Gomer RH. Combining experiments and modelling to
understand size regulation in Dictyostelium discoideum. J R
Soc Interface 2008;5:S49–58.
Jones JC, Myerscough MR, Graham S et al. Honey bee nest
thermoregulation:
diversity
promotes
stability.
Science
2004;305:402–4.
Kearns DB. A field guide to bacterial swarming motility. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2010;8:634–44.
Kessin RH. Dictyostelium: Evolution, Cell Biology, and the Develop-
ment of Multicellularity, 38th edn. London: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2001.
Kessin RH, Gundersen GG, Zaydfudim V et al. How cellular slime
molds evade nematodes. P Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:4857–61.
Kessler D. Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium. Sydney, Aus-
tralia: Academic Press, 1982.
King H, Ocko S, Mahadevan L. Termite mounds harness diurnal
temperature oscillations for ventilation. P Natl Acad Sci USA
2015;112:11589–93.
Krause S, James R, Faria JJ et al. Swarm intelligence in humans:
diversity can trump ability. Anim Behav 2011;81:941–8.
Kuzdzal-Fick JJ, Foster KR, Queller DC et al. Exploiting new
terrain: an advantage to sociality in the slime mold Dic-
tyostelium discoideum. Behav Ecol 2006;18:433–7.
Latty T, Beekman M. Food quality affects search strategy in the
acellular slime mould, Physarum polycephalum. Behav Ecol
2009;20:1160–7.
Latty T, Beekman M. Food quality and the risk of light exposure
affect patch-choice decisions in the slime mold Physarum
polycephalum. Ecology 2010;91:22–7.
Latty T, Beekman M. Irrational decision-making in an amoeboid
organism: transitivity and context-dependent preferences. P
R Soc B 2011a;278:307–12.
Latty T, Beekman M. Speed-accuracy trade-offs during forag-
ing decisions in the acellular slime mould Physarum poly-
cephalum. P R Soc B 2011b;278:539–45.
Latty T, Beekman M. Slime moulds use heuristics based on
within-patch experience to decide when to leave. J Exp Biol
2015;218:1175–9.
Lauzeral J, Halloy J, Goldbeter A. Desynchronization of cells
on the developmental path triggers the formation of spiral
waves of cAMP during Dictyostelium aggregation. P Natl Acad
Sci USA 1997;94:9153–8.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

806
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 6
Lee KJ, Goldstein RE, Cox EC. cAMP waves in Dictyostelium terri-
tories. Nonlinearity 2001;15:C1.
Loomis WF. The spatial pattern of cell-type differentiation in
Dictyostelium. Dev Biol 1982;93:279–84.
MacWilliams HK, Bonner JT. The prestalk/prespore pattern in
cellular slime molds. Differentiation 1979;14:1–22.
Martin GW, Alexopoulos CJ. The Myxomycetes. Iowa City: Univer-
sity of Iowa Press, 1969.
Nakagaki T. Smart behavior of true slime mold in a labyrinth. Res
Microbiol 2001;152:767–70.
Nakagaki T, Iima M, Ueda T et al. Minimum-risk path finding by
an adaptive amoebal network. Phys Rev Lett 2007;99:068104.
Nakagaki T, Yamada H, T´oth A. Maze-solving by an amoeboid
organism. Nature 2000;407:470.
Noorbakhsh J, Schwab DJ, Sgro AE et al. Modeling oscillations
and spiral waves in Dictyostelium populations. Phys Rev E
2015;91:062711.
P´alsson E, Lee KJ, Goldstein RE et al. Selection for spiral waves
in the social amoebae Dictyostelium. P Natl Acad Sci USA
1997;94:13719–23.
Procaccini A, Orlandi A, Cavagna A et al. Propagating waves in
starling, Sturnus vulgaris, flocks under predation. Anim Be-
hav 2011;82:759–65.
Raper KB. Pseudoplasmodium formation and organization in
Dictyostelium discoideum. J Elisha Mitch Sci S 1940;56:241–82.
Reid CR, Beekman M. Solving the Towers of Hanoi—how an
amoeboid organism efficiently constructs transport net-
works. J Exp Biol 2013;216:1546–51.
Reid CR, Beekman M, Latty T et al. Amoeboid organism uses ex-
tracellular secretions to make smart foraging decisions. Be-
hav Ecol 2013;24:812–8.
Reid CR, Latty T, Dussutour A et al. Slime mold uses an external-
ized spatial ‘memory’ to navigate in complex environments.
P Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109:17490–4.
Reid CR, MacDonald H, Mann RP et al. Decision-making without
a brain: how an amoeboid organism solves the two-armed
bandit. J R S Interface 2016;13:20160030.
Rifkin JL, Goldberg RR. Effects of chemoattractant pteridines
upon speed of D. discoideum vegetative amoebae. Cell Motil
Cytoskel 2006;63:1–5.
Robinson EJH, Jackson DE, Holcombe M et al. Insect communica-
tion: ‘no entry’ signal in ant foraging. Nature 2005;438:442.
Roisin-Bouffay C, Jang W, Caprette DR et al. A precise group size
in Dictyostelium is generated by a cell-counting factor mod-
ulating cell-cell adhesion. Mol Cell 2000;6:953–9.
Rubin J, Robertson A. The tip of the Dictyostelium discoideum
pseudoplasmodium as an organizer. J Embryol Exp Morph
1975;33:227–41.
Saigusa T, Tero A, Nakagaki T et al. Amoebae anticipate periodic
events. Phys Rev Lett 2008;100:018101.
Sasaki T, Granovskiy B, Mann RP et al. Ant colonies outper-
form individuals when a sensory discrimination task is dif-
ficult but not when it is easy. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2013;110:
13769–73.
Seeley TD. Honeybee Democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
Seeley TD, Visscher PK, Schlegel T et al. Stop signals provide
cross inhibition in collective decision-making by honeybee
swarms. Science (80-) 2012;335:108–11.
Sgro AE, Schwab DJ, Noorbakhsh J et al. From intracellular signal-
ing to population oscillations: bridging size- and time-scales
in collective behavior. Mol Syst Biol 2015;11:779.
Strassmann JE, Queller DC. Evolution of cooperation and control
of cheating in a social microbe. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108
(Suppl):10855–62.
Strassmann JE, Zhu Y, Queller DC. Altruism and social cheat-
ing in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Nature
2000;408:965–7.
Sumpter DJT. The principles of collective animal behaviour. Phi-
los T Roy Soc B 2006;361:5–22.
Tero A, Kobayashi R, Nakagaki T. Physarum solver: A biolog-
ically inspired method of road-network navigation. Phys A
2006;363:115–9.
Tero A, Takagi S, Saigusa T et al. Rules for biologically in-
spired adaptive network design. Science (80-) 2010;327:
439–42.
Ueda T, Hirose T, Kobatake Y. Membrane biophysics of chemore-
ception and taxis in the plasmodium of Physarum poly-
cephalum. Biophys Chem 1980;11:461–73.
Wang CJ, Bergmann A, Lin B et al. Diverse sensitivity thresholds
in dynamic signaling responses by social amoebae. Sci Signal
2012;5:ra17.
Weijer CJ. Dictyostelium morphogenesis. Curr Opin Genet Dev
2004;14:392–8.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/6/798/2400841 by guest on 07 November 2019

