Relationality in the Thought of Mary
Midgley
GREGORY S. MCELWAIN
Abstract
For over 40 years, Mary Midgley has been celebrated for the sensibility with which
she approached some of the most challenging and pressing issues in philosophy. Her
expansive corpus addresses such diverse topics as human nature, morality, animals
and the environment, gender, science, and religion. While there are many threads
that tie together this impressive plurality of topics, the thread of relationality
unites much of Midgley’s thought on human nature and morality. This paper ex-
plores Midgley’s pursuit of a relational notion of the self and our connections to
others, including animals and the natural world.
1. Introduction
One of the more central themes in Mary Midgley’s work is her em-
phasis on integrated notions of human nature and the self. These
notions can become disintegrated or fragmented when central ele-
ments of our lives – reason and emotion, mind and body, self and
others, human and animal – are isolated and divided against each
other as warring alternatives. Throughout her career, Midgley endea-
voured to reintegrate these and other aspects of human nature and the
self as complementary, rather than oppositional. She long argued for
the practicality of philosophy, showing that the ways in which we
think of ourselves and the world around us greatly impact how we
live. She argued, in particular, that our visions of human nature
and the self – how we imagine ourselves and our place in the world
– shape our moral principles, attitudes, and actions. For this
reason, these visions should be scrutinized regularly and refined.
One significant component of these visions is how we picture
human sociality and relationality. In this paper, I will focus on this
relatively underexplored aspect of Midgley’s work.1 Relationality in-
volves our intrinsic connections to others, human and nonhuman
alike. Throughout her work, Midgley makes the case that this
central element of human life should feature more prominently in
1
This paper is adapted from portions of Gregory S. McElwain,
Mary Midgley: An Introduction (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019).
235
doi:10.1017/S1358246119000225
© The Royal Institute of Philosophy and the contributors 2020
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 87 2020
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

our imaginative visions of the world. In what follows, I will first focus
on Midgley’s critique of individualistic visions – primarily atomistic
ones – that fragment our notions of human nature and the self by un-
realistically emphasizing the isolated individual (or ego) over more re-
lational or holistic visions of ourselves and our place in the world.
From there, I will trace the more constructive elements of
Midgley’s relational account, which ultimately run throughout her
influential approach to animals and the natural world.
2. Critique of individualism
Midgley’s emphasis on the relational aspects of the self emerges from
her critique of atomistic individualism, which unrealistically isolates
individuals and threatens to fragment our understandings of the self,
society, and our place in nature. Social atomism, in brief, is the idea
that people are distinct individuals. Like atoms or billiard balls,
people are envisioned as discrete, self-contained units. Society, in
this sense, is nothing more than the aggregate of individual units.
Within this atomistic framework, which is often assumed within a
contract framework, people are originally separate and isolated
individuals.
Thomas Hobbes is perhaps the most vivid and influential propon-
ent of this approach. Hobbes claimed that, in the state of nature, we
are originally atomistic and egoistic – that is, inherently solitary and
motivated primarily, if not entirely, by self-interest and self-preserva-
tion. These assumptions underlie his influential formulation of the
social contract, in which he argued that it is in our best interest to
strike a collective bargain with each other in order to escape the ruth-
less and destructive state of nature. Otherwise, there is little stopping
us, in the ‘war of all against all’, from pursuing our own individual
interests to the destruction of others. Life, if our egoist natures
were to prevail, would be ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and
short’.2 Thus, we contract with each other in order to live – rather
than merely survive – in a lawful society. Here, under the power
and protection of the sovereign, we then give up some of our more
dangerous freedoms – for instance, the freedom to kill and steal – to
live in a lawful world that is, in the end, more conducive to other free-
doms and, ultimately, self-preservation. Thus, Hobbes’s vision offers
an account of why originally solitary and egoistic individuals are able
2
Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan: With Selected Variants from the Latin
Edition of 1668, ed. E. M. Curley (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1994), 76.
236
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to come together and live in society: the contract is, ultimately, a
bargain of calculated self-interest in which we are much better off
than the cutthroat alternative.
Hobbes’s vision, and others that followed, involved real efforts to
allot more significance, protection, and self-determination to indivi-
duals in the face of tyrannical and oppressive social and political
forces. Midgley does not question or disregard these significant
contributions to individual autonomy and political reform. Her
concern is with the wider impacts of such visions, which have re-
mained influential over time and variously emerged in aspects of
Social Darwinism, sociobiology, and free market idealism (these
were significant targets of Midgley’s criticism in her early writings).
She argues that an emphasis on atomistic egoism, the social contract,
and correlated notions of individual freedom, though often politically
useful, are not necessarily representative of or conducive to the types
of lives that people want (and perhaps need) to live. They can,
perhaps even more significantly, distort our moral visions by obscur-
ing our connection with each other and the natural world.
2.1 Atomist and egoist visions
Midgley argues that atomist and egoist visions of the world tend to
paint a somewhat bleak and isolationist view of others. These vivid
dramas misconstrue our social landscape, portraying the illusion
that we are much less connected and interdependent than we are
(and always have been) as social animals. We are depicted, first and
foremost, as selfish, disconnected individuals struggling for limited
resources. In this competitive climate, we need a strong, self-inter-
ested reason to come together and live peaceably with each other
(i.e., the contract for self-preservation). Rather than recognizing
our intrinsic social natures and bonds – which are prior to, as
opposed to consequences of, the contract – and the wider communi-
ties of significance to which we belong, atomistic visions chop the
world up into separate agents and entities. Other people become ex-
ternals – things out there that may be more or less useful but not really
necessary. Relationships, in turn, appear provisional and instrumen-
tal, things we do not necessarily seek out and need, but things we use
and easily dissolve.
Midgley argues that this vision of the world and its offshoots are
unrealistic and undesirable. Hobbes’s theory relies too heavily on
the assumptions that we are inherently isolated and egoistic.
Midgley points out that, while these may be aspects of our nature,
237
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this is not the whole picture. Hobbes’s vision, in other words, exagge-
rates and hyperbolizes these aspects of our nature to the exclusion of
much that makes our species. ‘Far from being originally solitary’,
Midgley writes, ‘the earliest human beings were heirs to a long,
complex tradition of group life, deep social affection and inter-
dependence, a tradition which dates from many ages before their
emergence as a separate species and their famous rise in intelligence’.3
To even exist as a social species today – with the hindsight of a
Darwinian worldview unavailable to Hobbes – we required much
in our evolutionary development besides isolation, competition,
and selfishness. The requirement for social connection and depend-
ence is intrinsic to our species and much less calculated and intellec-
tual than it may at first appear. Midgley explores our social
development in a Darwinian context:
Early theorists as well as Hobbes often gave this strictly intellec-
tual explanation of human sociability. Assuming that people had
once been solitary, they asked: how, then, did they ever get to-
gether? They too thought this must have been due to intelligent
planning, assuming that, as somebody once put it, language had
been invented by a congress of hitherto speechless elders who
had agreed to assemble and determine the rules of grammar. But
this does not sound very plausible. If, however, you look at the
issue zoologically instead, as Darwin did, these difficulties
vanish. It becomes clear that the human species did not arise as
an isolated miracle but as just one in a wide spectrum of other
social creatures. The inborn sociability that these creatures all
share actually providesthe only possible context in which language
could ever have developed. Speech only makes sense as a device for
creatures who were already intensely sociable, creatures interested
in each other who already communicated eagerly, but who needed
to do it better. And, suitably enough, our immediate neighbours
on that spectrum are indeed the great apes, who, like other pri-
mates, are well known for their rich variety of social interaction.
It would have been an extraordinary evolutionary step if, in this
situation, our species had reverted to the simpler, ego-bound emo-
tional constitution that suits a crocodile. This, however, has im-
portant consequences. It means that the intellect of which we
are so proud is not really our prime mover. It is not the inventor
of our social nature. Instead, it is a later, benign outgrowth and
3
Mary Midgley, The Ethical Primate: Humans, Freedom and Morality
(London: Routledge, 1994), 119.
238
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

instrument of that nature. Before we are thinkers, we are lovers and
haters, creatures deeply aware of those around us and fully inte-
grated into their life. As soon as we start to think, our thoughts
draw their force from those rich flows of natural feeling.4
This original connectivity and dependence, moreover, goes much
further in contextualizing motives and behaviours that span beyond
self-interest, including altruism, care, friendship, and so on. In
fact, as Midgley notes, ‘selfish’ itself is one among many human
traits, which indicates a lack, rather than the rule:
If this bizarre story [of overriding selfishness] had been true, the
notion of selfishness could never have arisen. Had regard for others
really been impossible, there could have been no word for failing to
have it. And it needs to be stressed that the word “selfish” in its
normal use is essentially a negative word. It means a shortage of
this normal regard for others. Calling somebody selfish simply does
not mean that they are prudent or successfully self-preserving. It
merely says that they are exceptional – and faulty – in having too
little care for anybody else.5
We have many traits and needs, some of which, such as solitude, are
more self-contained. But many or most of our deepest and overarch-
ing needs require other people: bonds, love, attention, help, compan-
ionship, sex, and so on. Without these, the very self that egoist visions
emphasize risks being fragmented and disintegrated from the social
landscape that makes individuals possible.
2.2 Relational visions
Midgley maps an alternative social landscape to the egoistic atomist
picture. Her approach highlights our natural relationality and social-
ity, emphasizing the interdependence of the self and others. We are
parts of networks of relationships and dependencies that mold and
shape us throughout our lives, making any vision of intrinsic isolation
largely unrealistic. However active or passive we are in this dynamic
process – for instance, we are completely dependent on others as
young children – we are almost certainly never, really, as originally
free or self-determined as egoistic atomism would lead us to
4
Mary Midgley, The Solitary Self: Darwin and the Selfish Gene
(Durham: Acumen, 2010), 130–131.
5
Mary Midgley, Evolution as a Religion: Strange Hopes and Stranger
Fears (London: Routledge, [1985] 2002), 136–7.
239
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

believe.6 We do, of course, have freedom and agency in the world.
Yet, the paths we wish to forge are never in isolation or without a
wider map or landscape of relationships and dependencies, many of
which are unnoticed or overshadowed in visions of individual
choice and freedom (she points out the extent to which male
freedom has historically relied on the support of ‘non-automous
females’7). Much like LEGO blocks, people are here imagined as sep-
arating with ease. Midgley resists this plastic vision, arguing that we
cannot snap so easily in and out of each other’s lives. We are, rather,
intrinsically ‘members one of another’.8 With this context in mind,
she writes, ‘It may even become possible for our species to admit
that it is not really a supernatural variety of Lego, but some kind of
an animal. This ought to make it easier to admit also that we are
not self-contained and self-sufficient, either as a species or as indivi-
duals, but live naturally in deep mutual dependence’.9
Midgley argues that the history of Western philosophy displays
much of this strange negligence toward meaningful relationships.10
Bonds and dependencies are regularly portrayed as weaknesses
rather than strengths, as dangers that may bring pain and sorrow
(thus, the Stoic advice not to become too attached to others and
their well-being). Midgley faces the other direction, suggesting that
our visions of the self should integrate our need for others and em-
phasize ‘all the riches around us, the great stores of otherness in
which we need to live’. She continues: ‘Of course, our dependencies
are dangerous, but who wants to live safely like a billiard ball or a doll
that never leaves its package?’11 She argues that there are realistic ways
6
Midgley sees connections between notions of the radically free agent
and Hobbesian atomism. These notions – which often grow out of the
vivid visions of heroic individualism in Nietzsche and Sartre – imagine
the self to be radically shaped and determined by the active will. This
agent forges its way in the world, independent of the connections and depen-
dences of the outside world.
7
Mary Midgley, The Myths We Live By (London: Routledge, [2004]
2011), 132. This coincides with her critique of traditional individualist con-
ceptions of the self as largely masculinist (see McElwain, Mary Midgley,
107–20).
8
Mary
Midgley,
‘Philosophical
Plumbing’,
in
The
Impulse
to
Philosophise: Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 33, ed. Phillips
Griffiths (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 145, italics
mine.
9
Op. cit. note 8, 146–47.
10
Midgley, The Solitary Self op. cit. note 4, 64–65.
11
Op. cit note 4, 64.
240
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of balancing this picture of individuality and sociality, and that phi-
losophers too often have followed their visions far away from the
reality of our social nature and needs. ‘I am suggesting’, she chal-
lenges, ‘that this extreme individualism is itself just a local and
limited point of view, like other cultural world-pictures … it is one
of the many partial visions that we must use in our attempt to forge
a workable worldview’.12
Thus, Midgley implores us to reimagine our place and connectivity
in the world. Rather than envisioning ourselves as isolated atoms or
billiard balls bouncing off each other, we can picture ourselves in
any number of interconnected and holistic ways. We might, for in-
stance, think of ourselves as dancers: ‘Our life’, she writes, ‘is not a
collection of solo performances but an immensely intricate large-
scale dance in which solos take their place among figures performed
by groups of the most varying sizes’.13 Our places and roles in this
dance may shift and change, but our unique expressions as soloists
are cultivated within the larger dance itself. The dance and the
dancer need and complete each other. And, in the more holistic
sense, this dance is embedded in a larger whole still, composed of
many other entities and collectives, from our local communities to
the global ecological networks of which we are part. If we abstract in-
dividuals away from this setting, we again lack the total picture
through which we can envision the integrated or ‘whole’ self:
This “whole person” of whom we have been talking is not, then, a
solitary, self-sufficient unit. It belongs essentially within a larger
whole, indeed within an interlocking pattern formed by a great
range of such wholes. These wider systems are not an alien inter-
ference with its identity. They are its home, its native climate, the
soil from which it grows, the atmosphere which it needs in order
to breathe. Their unimaginable richness is what makes up the
meaning of our lives. The self’s wholeness is not, then, the
wholeness of a billiard ball but that of an organism, a transient,
struggling creature which has, of course, its own distinct shape
but which still belongs in its own context and background.14
In this context, though we value our freedom and individual pursuits,
they are embedded within these inescapable connections to the wider
whole. This does not, to be sure, mean that we are subsumed to
12
Op. cit. note 4, 125.
13
Op. cit. note 4, 140.
14
Mary Midgley, Science and Poetry (London: Routledge, [2001]
2006), 20.
241
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

society or other collectives. Rather, it means our visions should nego-
tiate
the
interplay
of
collectives
and
individuals
and
resist
‘compressing individuals into a homogenous mass and isolating
them completely; between lumping and splitting’.15
3. Animals and the natural world
This general overview of Midgley’s relational (and holistic) emphasis
helps in understanding other aspects of her work, particularly her in-
fluential animal and environmental thought. Our many connections
and interdependencies simply do not stop at the species or even sen-
tience barrier. Rather, our dynamic embeddedness in the world in-
volves relations and networks that stretch far beyond the human
realm, reminding us of our animality in context. Midgley’s refrain
is that we should take this wider natural context more seriously in
scrutinizing our moral visions.
3.1 The mixed community
Midgley’s philosophy grows out of the statement that ‘we are not just
rather like animals; we are animals’.16 Her thought locates humans
alongside other animals in the natural world and takes the reality
and implications of this picture seriously. This is apparent in
Midgley’s emphasis on human-animal relations. In focusing on our
innate sociality, she draws attention to the fact that relationality is
not exclusive to our own species. Animals are significant members
of our ‘mixed communities’, locally (in our homes and neighbor-
hoods) and globally (in our ecosystems and on our planet). All of
these connections and communities matter, from the particular and
local to the general and global. However, localized human-animal
communities – typically the ‘domestic’ settings with which we are
most familiar – are especially unique. These communities are mani-
festations of the wider human impulse to connect to the world
around them. ‘All human communities have involved animals’, she
observes, and it is ‘one of the special powers and graces of our
15
Mary Midgley, Can’t We Make Moral Judgements? (London:
Bloomsbury, [1989] 2017), 111.
16
Mary Midgley, Beast and Man: The Roots of Human Nature, revised
ed. (London: Routledge, [1979] 2002), xxxiii.
242
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

species not to ignore others, but to draw in, domesticate and live with
a great variety of other creatures’.17 Such domestication was achieved
largely because many animals (dogs, horses, pigs, etc.) share a
number of social and emotive characteristics with us. They were, in
turn, able to form bonds, understand social signals, learn to obey par-
ticular persons, and so on. These shared traits and behaviours made
possible the historical development of complex human-animal com-
munities that have taken innumerable shapes and forms over time and
space.
Though animals may not be equivalent to ‘persons’ in these com-
munities – a term Midgley argues is too loaded with legal baggage – as
members of our mixed community, they are certainly fellow subjects,
not objects or things. That is, the simplistic Kantian antithesis of
‘persons versus things’ is unhelpful here and obscures our recognition
of animal subjectivity and relationality.18 We have long recognized
the subjectivity of animals – indeed, animal cruelty paradoxically un-
derscores this fact.19 Yet, we need not dwell on the negative. Genuine
interspecies love and care are pervasive, from intense bonds of com-
panionship – many of which are held to be as important as human
bonds – to altruistic acts toward animals (rescuing injured animals,
animal welfare charities). Instances of cruelty do arise, but these are
unfortunate episodes in a long history of coexistence and community.
In fact, animals are typically seen as significant elements of human
life. They are featured prominently in our imagination, identity,
and social worlds. It is hard to even imagine life without animals,
be they companion animals, songbirds and squirrels, or characters
in books and films. In this mixed-species context, in which our
very language is reflective of our history and coexistence with other
animals, most of us are imprinted by interspecies sociality from a
17
Mary Midgley, Animals and Why They Matter (Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press, 1983), 111 and 112.
18
Mary Midgley, Utopias, Dolphins and Computers: Problems of
Philosophical Plumbing (London: Routledge, 1996), 111–12.
19
Midgley, Animals and Why They Matter, op. cit. note 17, 114.
Cruelty involves a belief that something is a subject capable of suffering.
Dogs are kicked and horses are beaten not because they are things (like ma-
chines and stuffed animals), but because they are beings that feel and experi-
ence pain in a significant way. In other words, belief in animal sentience is
essential ‘for exploiting them successfully’. In fact, Midgley points out, ‘ex-
ploitation requires sympathy’ (114 and 116). Abuse and cruelty to animals is
an outcome of our ability to understand and relate to the ‘inner’ as well as the
‘outer’ states of other animals, coupled with the tendency to devalue or dis-
regard these states.
243
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

young age. We crave animal contact from our youth, and it is a foun-
dational element of our early lives along with song, dance, and play.20
Bonds with animals work alongside our bonds with people as part of a
‘full human life’.21 They are, in other words, significant parts of our
intrinsic relationality with the world. Human and animal worlds
intermix and overlap in powerful ways, especially in our youth,
which shapes and influences how we view life from the beginning:
The species-barrier, imposing though it may look, is rather like
one of those tall wire fences whose impressiveness is confined
to their upper reaches. To an adult in formal dress, engaged in
his official statesmanly interactions, the fence is an insuperable
barrier. Down below, where it is full of holes, it presents no obs-
tacle at all. The young of Homo sapiens, like those of the other
species present, scurry through it all the time. Since all human
beings start life as children, this has the quite important conse-
quence that hardly any of us, at heart, sees the social world as
an exclusively human one.22
This childlike wonder and curiosity motivates us, throughout our
lives, toward ‘otherness’ in the world, human and nonhuman alike.
That is, we are drawn to and capable of appreciating the world and
its many inhabitants in affective and moving ways. In this intra-
and interspecies community, bonds with animals and the nonhuman
world complement and enrich our connection with humans. By
caring more, we widen our horizons.
Thus, Midgley argues that our community with animals – and the
sympathy, compassion, and care therein – is a significant aspect of our
existence and must feature more prominently in our moral visions.
Yet, these features can be easily overlooked in approaches to animal
ethics that favor sweeping moral principles. Principles that promote
equal consideration of the interests of sentient beings or respect for
subjects-of-a-life make sense in devising compelling and consistent
reasons to treat animals better in accordance with our general
notions of moral worth.23 Here, animals are shown forcefully to
meet at least some of our prevailing standards for moral consideration
20
Op. cit. note 17, 118.
21
Op. cit. note 17, 119.
22
Op. cit. note 17, 118.
23
These positions are presented influentially, respectively, by Peter
Singer (Animal Liberation, 2nd ed. [New York: New York Review of
Books, (1976) 1990]), and Tom Regan (The Case for Animal Rights
[Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983]).
244
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(possessing certain capacities, for instance). In charting a more plur-
alistic moral map, Midgley argues that this account is incomplete
without the relational element: ‘If we ask what powers can give a
higher claim, bringing some creatures nearer to the degree of consid-
eration which is due to humans, what is most relevant seems to be
sensibility, social and emotional complexity of the kind which is ex-
pressed by the forming of deep, subtle and lasting relationships’.24
3.2 Our connection to nature
These threads of relationality and community extend beyond humans
and animals and continue further still to the whole of nature, or to
what Midgley often refers to as ‘the biosphere’. She envisions our
connections to each other and the natural world in terms of ‘whole-
ness and separateness’.25 As we have already seen, we do indeed
exist as individuals, but we are also deeply entangled with wider,
overlapping collectives of varying types and intensities: families,
communities, cultures, ecosystems, and so on. Utilizing another
vivid image, this time a tree, she writes of the ‘variety of asymmetrical
relations found within a whole. Leaves relate not only to other leaves,
but to fruit, twigs, branches, and the whole tree. People appear not
only as individuals, but as members of their groups, families,
tribes, species, ecosystems and biosphere, and have moral relations,
as parts, to these various wholes’.26 She reminds us:
Of course, human beings are distinct individuals. But they are
also tiny, integral parts of this planet – framed by it, owing every-
thing to it, and adapted to a certain place among its creatures.
Each can indeed change its life, but does not organically invent
it. Each receives life in a family (as a petal does in a flower), in
a country (as the flower does on the tree), and in the biosphere
(as the tree does in the forest). Our environment gives us nearly
everything we have.27
Our environments are not alien entities or mere aggregates of
competitors, but the vibrant contexts of the self, a self which ‘un-
avoidably looks for its fulfilment to horizons far beyond its private
24
Mary Midgley, Utopias, Dolphins and Computers, op. cit. note 18,
116.
25
Mary Midgley, The Ethical Primate, op. cit. note 3, 102–3.
26
Mary Midgley, Evolution as a Religion, op. cit. note 5, 178.
27
Op. cit. note 5, 170.
245
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

destiny’.28 This more relational and holistic way of thinking may not
always be forefront in our visions. Yet, she believes it is essential to
replace atomistic visions with more holistic and connective ones if
we wish to alter our treatment of the nonhuman world. This, again,
is because our visions are ‘crucial for our moral attitude. When this
larger imaginative vision changes, the light in which we see all our
various concerns is altered. Priorities shift, carrying a corresponding
change in duties’.29
People can and often do look to this wider horizon. As parts of the
wider community of life, the fates of other beings need not be a matter
of indifference to us. In fact, we often feel and express this connection
to the greater whole. Midgley expands:
You feel akin to the whole thing. And that, I think, is probably a
central point. We rejoice in the whole of nature and being part of it,
as something to which we belong. It follows that if some important
part of it is threatened, then we take alarm, as if for ourselves, so to
speak, but presumably in proportion. Nature is a whole of which
we are quite a small part. … If we hear news of the destruction of a
forest, the point is it is not something totally alien to us. It’s not
something to throw away like last month’s newspapers. It concerns
us. It’s how we identify ourselves, isn’t it? What we feel ourselves
to be. People, surely, mostly, have thought of themselves as a small
part of something much larger.30
Given this relational and holistic emphasis, Midgley gravitates
toward more ecosystemic ways of envisioning nature. These ap-
proaches, which focus on the interconnection and interdependence
of organisms, positive feedback mechanisms, and local and global
patterns of natural systems, tend to go much farther than atomistic
and mechanistic approaches in capturing the dynamism and vitality
of the natural world and its entangled constituents.31 And,
28
Midgley, Science and Poetry, op. cit. note 14, 20.
29
Mary Midgley, Utopias, Dolphins and Computers, op. cit. note 18,
124.
30
Mary Midgley, Interview by Gregory S. McElwain, March 6, 2011,
in Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
31
Donald Worster examines the extent to which organicist visions of
nature influence ethics in Nature’s Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas
(Studies in Environment and History), 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, [1977] 1994). See also C. J. Glacken, Traces on the
Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought from Ancient
Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1967).
246
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

significantly, rather than treating wholes and collectives as mere ag-
gregates of individuals, holistic and ecosystemic approaches recognize
that ‘wholes and parts are equally real’, and that each is unintelligible
without the other.32
One such vision that integrates ecosystemic thinking on the largest
scale is the notion of Gaia. Originally advanced by James Lovelock,
Gaia is a scientific vision that sees ‘Earth and the life on it as an
active, self-maintaining whole’.33 Gaian theory, which draws its
name from the ancient Greek earth goddess, maintains that this
great whole is constituted by the totality of systems and their
organic and inorganic parts, all of which are connected to all others
through complex webs of interactions and dependencies. From
local interactions between organisms and their environments to
global weather patterns and currents (such as the massive flows of
Saharan dust to the Amazon basin and the Amazon’s ‘Rivers in the
Sky’), the earth can seem like a vibrant, active organism. Life, in
this picture, is not simply ‘a loose, chance jumble of competing en-
tities but an interdependent system, a symbiotic whole that keeps
itself going by a constant interchange of benefits between its parts’.34
Midgley employs the concept of Gaia as a metaphor for understand-
ing the interconnections of the earth as a whole. She argues that Gaian
thinking, as something of a readymade holistic vision, is one way
among many – including atomistic and mechanistic models – of pictur-
ing the world. And, given the global climate crisis, she suggests that
this type of vision might help us in understanding our role and
impact on the earth. That is, the whole system, in these approaches,
is vulnerable. This vulnerability does not mean that the system can
be destroyed, but rather that it can, in its current state, be damaged
or altered in response to stimuli (i.e., human intervention and harm).
And, on a more ominous note, will carry on in whatever state, with
or without us. Thinking in these more global, interdependent terms
is a direct counter to the hubristic view that humans – and, further-
more, individuals – are at the center of the cosmos.
32
Mary Midgley, Science and Poetry, op. cit. note 14, 258. Emphasis
removed.
33
Mary Midgley, ‘Introduction: The Not-So-Simple Earth,’ in Earthy
Realism: The Meaning of Gaia, ed. Mary Midgley (Exeter: Imprint
Academic, 2007), 3. See James Lovelock, Gaia: A New Look at Life on
Earth, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, [1979] 2000).
34
Mary Midgley, ‘Visions, Secular and Sacred’, The Hastings Center
Report 25, no. 5 (1995), 26.
247
Relationality in the Thought of Mary Midgley
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Holistic thinking, in this way, might help us out of some of our
more abstractionist and exploitative visions. ‘I regard [Gaia]’,
Midgley reiterates, ‘as a myth about the earth, and a good myth, that
the Greeks and many others have had of the earth as a parental relation
to us. This means that we owe it a great deal. … It’s not just something
that we have been given to work with’.35 This relational view of the
earth, she emphasizes, is ‘pretty important because people really do
need this sort of inclusive place within which everything takes place.
We really do need the unity’.36 There are, of course, a number of
ways to conceive of this wholeness and connectivity, but, regardless
of the exact language or metaphors used, Midgley argues that these hol-
istic concepts better capture the collectives or wholes in which we live,
as well as our interdependence with them. Nature is not our ‘static
background’, but the whole of which we are part. Seeing ourselves as
part of this larger community is not fantasy, but a reasonable under-
standing of the earth’s systems and inhabitants.
4. Conclusion
Given the length and scope of this paper, I cannot offer an exhaustive
account of Midgley’s relational account of human nature and the self.
My goal has been to provide an overview of her critique and construc-
tion in such a way that makes apparent the unity of her expansive
work without forcing it into one simple narrative. The relational
(and holistic) element is, again, one of many unifying threads in
her thought. Yet, it is an influential thread that grows out of her re-
sistance to visions that unrealistically fragment notions of human
nature, the self, and our place in the world. As such, she emphasizes
our intrinsically relational nature as social animals as a sort of antidote
to these imbalanced visions. This approach, consequently, has the
added benefit of encouraging us to re-envision, re-think, or maybe
even discover significant features of our moral landscape. Midgley’s
animal and environmental thought, with its relational and holistic
overtones, does just this by encouraging us to revise our visions in
ways that more fully account for what matters in the world.
The College of Idaho
gmcelwain@collegeofidaho.edu
35
Mary Midgley, Interview by Gregory S. McElwain, May 26, 2015, in
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
36
Mary Midgley, Interview by Gregory S. McElwain, October 23,
2017, in Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
248
Gregory S. McElwain
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000225 Published online by Cambridge University Press

