‘Removing the Barriers’: Mary
Midgley on Concern for Animals
DAVID E. COOPER
Abstract
This paper focuses on Mary Midgley’s influential discussions, over more than thirty
years, of the relationship between human beings and animals, in particular on her
concern to ‘remove the barriers’ that stand in the way of proper understanding and
treatment of animals. These barriers, she demonstrates, have been erected by
animal science, epistemology and mainstream moral philosophy alike. In each case,
she argues, our attitudes to animals are warped by approaches that are at once exces-
sively abstract, over-theoretical and guilty of a collective hubris on the part of human-
kind. In keeping with Midgley’s own position, it is argued in this paper that, to
remove these barriers, what is required is not yet another theory of how and why
animals matter, but attention to actual engagements with animals and to the moral
failings or vices that distort people’s relationships with them.
1. Introduction
‘We are animals’.1,2 ‘No human has ever been anything but an
animal’.3 These two remarks are, respectively, from the beginning
of Mary Midgley first book, Beast and Man, published in 1978,
and the start of the last paper she wrote on animals thirty-four
years later. They serve as bookends, as it were, to the many writings
in-between that indicate Midgley’s abiding interest in the relation-
ship between human beings and non-human animals. These writings
1
References are to the following writings of Mary Midgley: Beast and
Man: The Roots of Human Nature (BM) (London: Methuen, 1980);
Animals and Why They Matter (AWM) (London: Penguin, 1983);
‘Persons and Non-Persons’ (PN), in P. Singer (ed.), In Defence of Animals
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1985), 52–63; ‘Should We Let Them Go?’ (SW), in
F.
Dolins
(ed.),
Attitudes
to
Animals:
Views
in
Animal
Welfare
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 152–63; ‘Why Farm
Animals Matter’ (WF), in M. Dawkins and R. Bonney (eds.), The Future
of Animals Farming: Renewing the Ancient Contract (Oxford: Blackwell,
2008), 21–32; ‘On Being an Anthrozoon: How Unique Are We?’ (OBA),
Minding Nature 5 (2012), 1–16.
2
Op. cit. note 1, BM, xiii.
3
Op. cit. note 1, OBA, 1.
249
doi:10.1017/S1358246119000213
© The Royal Institute of Philosophy and the contributors 2020
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 87 2020
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ranged widely over a great variety of topics. These range from such
general philosophical questions as ‘Why do animals matter?’ and
‘Are animals persons?’ to specific issues of animal welfare – those
raised by factory farming, for example, or by the confinement of
animals in zoos.
Midgley’s attention to questions surrounding animals was not in-
cidental to, or hived off from, her wider philosophical concerns.
Indeed, it will become apparent in this paper, I hope, that her criti-
cisms of various distorted views about animals are of a piece both
with her powerful rejection of scientism and other ‘myths we live
by’, and with her repeated lament for the atrophy in the modern
world of wonder and a sense of cosmic humility.
The clarity and forcefulness of Midgley’s writings on animals have
ensured their considerable influence, both in the world of animal
welfare and upon many philosophers, myself included, whose thinking
about animals has been decisively shaped by these writings. The envir-
onmental philosopher, J. Baird Callicott, for example, refers to
Midgley’s ‘marvellous insight’ into the ways humans and animals
form ‘communities’ together, and to the promise this insight offers
for a rapprochement between the typically individualistic aims of
‘animal liberation’ and the more holistic ones of environmental ethics.4
Despite such testimonies to Midgley’s influence, however, she has
not been cited and discussed in the professional literature of animal
ethics with anything approaching the frequency of some other con-
temporary philosophers, such as Peter Singer and Tom Regan. The
reason for this, as I intend to demonstrate, is that she critically dis-
tances
herself
from
the
mainstream
or orthodox
approaches
adopted by such authors.
I shall be focusing on two themes that are central in Midgley’s writ-
ings on animals, each of them belonging to her abiding ambition to
‘remove the barriers’ that, as she sees it, have been ‘erected against
concern for animals’.5 The first theme is an epistemological one, relat-
ing to the understanding of animal lives. It consists of a critique of be-
haviourism, ‘ritual scepticism’ and other refusals to accept that many
animals indubitably enjoy a rich subjective life that we are able at least
partly to understand. The second theme is an ethical one, and takesthe
form of a rejection of what deserve to be called ‘mainstream’ ap-
proaches in animal ethics, including utilitarianism and moral theories
in which the central notions are rights, justice and equality.
4
J. Baird Callicott, ‘Animal liberation and environmental ethics: back
together again’, Between the Species 4 (1988), 163–9.
5
Op. cit. note 1, AWM, 144.
250
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I speak of there being two themes in Midgley’s writings, but it is
important, I shall argue, to recognise how closely connected they
are for her. Both behaviourism and its relatives and mainstream
moral theories are made possible and encouraged by similar mind-
sets, and it is these that must be exposed and rejected if progress is
to be made in our understanding and treatment of animals.
2. Are human beings animals?
Before turning to these two themes, however, I want to respond to the
worry some people might have that, in highlighting these themes, I
am ignoring what they might regard as the paramount claim that
Midgley makes in her writings on animals. This is the claim, encoun-
tered in the two remarks of hers with which I began, that human
beings are – or are not ‘anything but’ – animals. In responding to
this worry, I am, in effect, registering one of the very few points on
which I disagree with Midgley.
In my judgement, the question of whether humans are animals is
best left aside. Coolly regarded the question is a dull one. In one
obvious sense, human beings are indeed a kind of animal. They
ingest food, they metabolise, they move themselves around, and so
on. They have the kinds of properties, that is, that biologists identify
when distinguishing animals from vegetables. But, in an equally
obvious sense, human beings are not animals. This is the familiar
sense, as it is defined in the OED, of being ‘a brute or beast, as dis-
tinguished from man’. Clearly, too, it is this second sense that is op-
erative in many, perhaps most, ordinary conversational contexts. If I
tell you that there are some animals in my neighbours’ garden, then
you’ll immediately judge that I was not speaking literally – but jok-
ingly, perhaps insultingly – when you realise I am referring to the
neighbours’ children.
‘Humans are (just) animals!’ is, in effect, a slogan, and the only
question is whether it is a good one. It is surely wrong to suppose,
as many champions of it do, that by endorsing the slogan one indi-
cates that our differences from animals are vastly outweighed by
our similarities to them. Peter Hacker begins his book, Human
Nature, with the words ‘Human beings are animals …’, but immedi-
ately adds the qualification ‘… with a distinctive range of abilities’.6
His book then focuses on just these distinctive abilities, including
6
Peter Hacker Human Nature: The Categorial Framework (Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 1.
251
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cognitive and linguistic ones, and argues that the differences between
us and any other animals are, in fact, much greater than many scien-
tists and philosophers imagine.
It is a mistake, too, to suppose, as its champions usually do, that the
slogan must register and inspire a tender moral concern for animals in
a way that the counter slogan, the denial that humans are animals,
cannot. Social Darwinists thought that, as just one species of
animal among others, humankind was engaged in a red in tooth
and claw struggle for survival and supremacy with other species.
Nothing tender-hearted here. Conversely, The Buddha and St
Francis of Assisi emphatically denied that human beings are just a
kind of animal, but are rightly esteemed for their compassion for
animals.
Probably, we are better off without any slogans and counter slogans
here. But if someone is wedded to the claim that human beings are
(just) animals, then he or she should not be blinded to the salient
and deep differences that exist between people and (other) animals.
An important reason for being alert to these differences is that
some uniquely human capacities need to be emphasised in any
proper appraisal of our treatment of animals – the capacities, for
example, for hubris, wilful ignorance, hardness of heart, vanity,
self-deception, and the recreational enjoyment of killing other
creatures.
To be sure, these are not distinctive aspects of humankind that
Mary Midgley pastes over. On the contrary, as we shall see, she con-
stantly reminds us of them. But this, it seems to me, is despite, and
not because of, her insistence that humans are nothing but animals.
So let’s return, with slogans set aside, to what I identified as the
main themes in her writings on animals.
3. Animals and epistemology
When I sketched those two themes earlier, I indicated that, for
Midgley, they are closely related. Each of her critical targets – epis-
temological and ethical – exhibits, in her view, the same general
defects. They are both, for a start, overly theoretical and abstract,
the products of a failure of attention to the actual engagements
people have with animals in real life. Second, they are both guilty
of hubris, of an unwarranted elevation of humankind over other
species. Midgley was well aware of the connection between her two
themes. It is through engaging with animals that we can ‘grasp
more fully how their lives work’, and doing so also and ‘inevitably
252
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

gives us a sense of fellowship with them’ – an acquaintance that is not
only incompatible with hubris but inspires further engagement with
animals and hence deeper understanding of them.7
Let’s begin with the epistemological theme – with, that is,
Midgley’s criticisms of the behaviourist or sceptical ‘idea that the
subjective feelings [and mental life, more generally] of animals are
… quite hidden from us, cannot concern us and may not even
exist’.8 In two ways, she argues, this idea betrays a surfeit of theoris-
ing and a corresponding deficit of common sense realism. First, the
idea typically relies on loading ordinary concepts – including those
of understanding, belief, hope, and concept itself – with theoretical
baggage that they do not carry in everyday talk and practice.
Midgley singles out for special criticism the insistence that no crea-
ture can count as believing or hoping for anything unless it can
give linguistic expression to the belief or hope.9 From this insistence,
together with a suitably demanding notion of what counts as lan-
guage, it follows that animals cannot believe or hope – or at any
rate, that we can have no good reason to think they do.
Midgley’s response to this idea is blunt. ‘Neither with dog nor
human do we need words to reveal to us what expressive and inter-
pretative capacities far older and far deeper than words make clear im-
mediately’.10 Put differently, the abilities of humans and animals
alike both to express and to recognise beliefs, hopes and many
other ingredients of mental life predate and are presupposed by the
use of a psychological vocabulary. More generally, she argues that
the application of everyday mental concepts is determined not by the-
oretical accounts of, say, understanding or emotion, but in and
through practices of engagement with people or animals.
Second, Midgley argues that the scepticism of behaviourists and
their cousins towards the mental life of animals is a ‘ritual scepticism’
– an ‘artificial’, ‘hollow’ and ‘unreal’ one to which no more than lip-
service can be paid.11 It is not a stance that people who actually
engage with animals – vets, trainers and the like – can genuinely
adopt. She points out that even ethologists and biologists, like
Nikolaas Tinbergen, who seem to feel obliged to proclaim a ritual
scepticism in the prefaces to their books soon put it aside when
they get down to recording their experiences of and with animals.
7
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 14.
8
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 115.
9
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 57.
10
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 59.
11
Op. cit. note 1, SW 157–9.
253
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This scepticism, Midgley continues, is not only incompatible with
what people who live with animals surely know, for example that
cutting off the tail of a puppy hurts it. It is incompatible as well
with any skilful intercourse with animals. A sceptical mahout who
decided that it was a matter of mere speculation whether his elephant
could really be angry, suspicious, pleased or excited would soon
either be out of a job or dead.12 Attributing subjectivity to animals
– seeing their behaviour as, for instance, manifesting emotions and
understanding – is a precondition of intelligent practical dealings
with them. Proclamations of scepticism are possible only for detached
observers for whom the movements, gestures, cries and faces of
animals – or, indeed, of men and women – are ‘data’ from which it
is problematic to infer to the presence of emotions, moods, beliefs
and so on. By contrast, for the vet, the pet owner, the dog trainer –
for people, that is, whose lives are spent in the company of animals
– the thought that there is anything problematic here is an idle one.
Midgley has another, and morally-charged, criticism of behaviour-
ism and its cousins. In her judgement, they betray a kind of collective
hubris on the part of humankind. They both feed and feed on a sense
of a human uniqueness and separation from the rest of life on earth
that places us far above the animals. This is a sense that, for some
people, may in itself be gratifying, serving to boost their self-
image. But it serves as well to help ‘establish that we have a right to
exploit other creatures’13, and to encourage a perception of them as
‘things’ or ‘products’ for human use.14
There are, of course, striking examples from the history of religion
of the elevation of human beings over all other creatures. They alone
are made in the image of God, we hear, or are the very purpose of His
creation, or are uniquely capable of liberation from the cycle of
rebirth – and so on. But Midgley’s focus is on a more modern form
of hubris. Science, as she sees it, has inherited the hubris of religion,
to the degree indeed that, as she notes with some irony, such cham-
pions of the sciences as Auguste Comte and Julian Huxley actually
commandeer the term ‘religious’ to express the unbounded enthusi-
asm they want to arouse in us for the scientific enterprise.
For Midgley, this ‘anthropolatry’ or human ‘self-worship’ – this
faith in the humankind as the culmination of evolution and masters
of the universe who, as J.D. Bernal anticipated, will turn the stars
into ‘efficient heat-machines’ – represents an ‘absurd over-estimate
12
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 115.
13
Op. cit. note 1, OBA 10.
14
Op. cit. note 1, WF 12.
254
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of human separateness and superiority’.15 It is an exaggeration that
behaviourism and its allies exploit and reinforce. For how better to
relegate the beasts than to insist that, even if they are possessed of
some feelings and intelligence, their mental or subjective life is
meagre and impoverished? This is a relegation that serves, in turn,
to justify what would otherwise seem to be cruel treatment of
animals.
It is no accident, Midgley argues, that it is in technologically and
scientifically informed practices involving animals – animal experi-
mentation, genetic engineering of farm animals, and so on – that
we most frequently encounter the many ‘distancing devices’ that
people employ to disguise, perhaps from themselves, the reality
and import of these practices. It is much easier, she implies, to run
a battery farm or work in an animal research laboratory if you think
of a chicken as ‘a very efficient converting machine’ or of a rat as ‘a
standardised
biological
research
tool’16.
And,
as
Michel
de
Montaigne for one would agree, it is only a vainglorious, hubristic
species that could describe other creatures in these terms.
4. Animals and ethics
The second main theme I identified in Mary Midgley’s writings on
animals is her rejection of what she and I call the ‘mainstream’ ap-
proach in modern animal ethics. The following, I suggest, is a recog-
nisable sketch of the dominant, mainstream approach in animal ethics
that is shared by various well-subscribed theories – utilitarian and
rights-based ones included:-
‘How animals should be treated and regarded depends on their
possession of ‘moral status’ or ‘moral considerability’. For
them to possess this, animals must have features that are identical
or relevantly similar to those in virtue of which we human beings
have moral status or considerability. They must, for example, be
sentient and capable of pleasure and pain, or be at least relatively
autonomous ‘subjects of a life’, or be parties to an implicit social
contract – and so on. Failure of moral regard for animals if they
really have such features, as many of them surely do, is a violation
of principles of equality, justice and indeed reason. The failure
would constitute a form of discrimination, manifesting a
15
Op. cit. note 1, OBA 10, 12.
16
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 80.
255
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

‘speciesist’ attitude comparable to racist or ageist ones that ignore
the moral status of certain human beings.’
The central idea here is often explained and supported with the help
of the image of an ‘expanding moral circle’. Moral regard, the story
goes, begins at home, as it were – with one’s family and friends.
But people are compelled by logic to extend this regard to any
other beings who are relevantly similar to family and friends. And
gradually it has been extended. Historically, it may have taken a
long time for the circle to expand so as to include all human beings
and not just one’s fellow tribesmen, say, or people of the same race
as oneself. And it may yet take a long time for animals to be
brought securely within the circumference of the circle. The
circle’s expansion is, in effect, a history of the power of reason: for
it marks the gradual appreciation that it is irrational to regard this
or that irrelevant difference between different groups of people, or
between human beings and other creatures, as a ground for withhold-
ing moral regard.
Midgley is not, of course, ‘against’ moral theory if, by this, is
simply meant philosophical reflection on moral concepts, or on ‘the
rules and principles, standards and ideals, that emerge’ in our
efforts to ‘guide ourselves through the jungle of the human condi-
tion’.17 But there is a kind of moral theorising that takes the form
of producing ‘highly abstract theories’ and ‘sweeping generalisa-
tions’, and this, she thinks, ‘gives philosophy a bad name, and
rightly so’.18 For Midgley, crucially, mainstream moral theories in
animal ethics of the kind sketched earlier are of precisely this kind.
Bluntly put, the abstractions of mainstream theories betray a lack of
realism and a failure of proper attention to the contexts, facts and
details of our complex relationships with animals. (Her charge,
here, is parallel, of course, to her epistemological complaint against
behaviourism and related attitudes.) This lack of realism is perfectly
illustrated, for Midgley, by the image of the expanding moral circle
that I described above, an image constantly invoked by mainstream
animal ethicists. Far from regard for animals being a very late and
still emerging episode in the history of moral development, all soci-
eties have always been, to a greater or lesser degree, ‘mixed’ or
‘multi-species’ ones in which at least some – often, very many –
animals have been regarded as fellow members of human communi-
ties to which duties of care and decency of treatment are owed.
17
Op. cit. note 1, BM 169.
18
Op. cit. note 1, SW 161-2.
256
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Indeed, the further we go back – to, say, various totemic or nomadic
societies – the greater tend to be the moral links and ‘fellowship’
between beast and man. In many of these societies, moreover, some
animals were the subjects of a significantly greater moral regard
than were some human beings. Duties might be owed, for example,
to a tribe’s totemic animal, such as a bear or eagle, that are not
owed to people from a different tribe. The idea that the story of mor-
ality can be represented by ‘concentric circles’ that gradually grow
outwards to include neighbours, women, slaves, foreigners and, even-
tually, animals, is a historical nonsense.19
This unrealistic image is encouraged by the tendency of main-
stream theorists to wrench moral concepts like respect, dignity,
rights and person from the actual contexts in which they obtain
their sense and force and to turn them, instead, into abstractions.
(The parallel with a similar tendency on the part of behaviourists,
ritual sceptics and the like is again obvious.) The idea, for example,
that all mammals – mammals as such – are in effect persons, possessed
of dignity and rights, and thereby deserving of respect, would be un-
intelligible to hunter-gatherer peoples whose respect for, say, bears
owes to their particular relationship to these animals. The idea
would be equally alien to tribespeople who count as persons only
those animals with whom they share a communal life, or to farmers
whose dogs, horses and oxen have a dignity that is earned and man-
ifested through the uncomplaining work they do, or indeed to pet
owners whose pets have rights that other animals do not precisely
through being their pets, creatures for whom they care and share
their home with.20
Wrenched out of their real life contexts, moreover, talk of animal
rights, dignity and the like is hollow, its implications for the treat-
ment of animals entirely opaque. For example, ‘the word right …
cannot be salvaged for any clear, unambiguous use’ once abstracted
from concrete relationships between animals and people in actual so-
cieties.21 The respect the hunter-gatherer has for the bears that share
his environment is one that makes a difference to how he will act
19
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 110-1. On the shortcomings of the expanding
circle image, see James Serpell, In the Company of Animals: A Study of
Human-Animal Relationships (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), and Gregory
S. McElwain, ‘The Mixed Community’, in I.J. Kidd and L. McKinnell
(eds.), Science and Self: Animals, Evolution, and Ethics: Essays in Honour
of Mary Midgley (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016), 41–51.
20
See op. cit. note 1, SW 160 on dignity, and AWM on pets.
21
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 63.
257
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

towards bears – honouring it in death, perhaps. But a respect that
people are urged to have for all animals, despite there being a connec-
tion with only a tiny number of them, is idle. Are we supposed to
honour every animal who dies?
The claim, central to mainstream animal ethics, that it is discrim-
inatory and hence irrational not to extend moral regard to all creatures
that are relevantly similar or equal to ourselves itself suffers from its
excessive abstractness. ‘The notion of equality’, notes Midgley, ‘is a
tool for rectifying injustices within a group’, whose members count
as equals, and ‘not for widening that group’.22 It is useless, therefore,
to invoke the notion in support of treating certain animals as we treat
human beings in the absence of a practical consensus that they are the
equals of the latter.
More generally, the question of what counts as a ‘relevant’ similar-
ity between humans and animals, or between some animals and
others, cannot be separated from what, in practice, people do regard
as relevant. The hunter-gatherer who extends to wolves the regard
he has long had for bears isn’t noticing some hitherto unnoticed simi-
larity – in intelligence, say, or the capacity to feel pain – between
wolves and bears. Rather, he is bringing wolves into the same
sphere of practices and attitudes already occupied by bears. Wolves,
one might say, now have a place, similar to that of bears, in the
hunter-gatherer’s form of life.
Invocation of allegedly relevant similarities is liable, too, to be idle
in any attempt to modify people’s ways of treating and regarding
animals. There is little point in insisting that sentience, say, is a rele-
vant similarity between beast and man to people who just don’t see
that, say, a mouse’s susceptibility to pain has any significance – like
the scientist, mentioned by Midgley, who, on being asked whether
sentient animals should ‘count at all’ morally, replied no, ‘why
should they?’.23 People whose forms of life have no place for moral
concern for certain animals – mice, chickens, moles, snakes, or what-
ever – will greet the information that they have intelligence and
feeling with a ‘So what?’, a shrug of the shoulders.
Midgley notes another reason why appeals to some very general
similarity, like ‘sensibility’ and ‘complexity of life’, between people
and animals are liable to be idle and leave the implications for practice
obscure. The locust’s sensibility and complexity are presumably less
than the dog’s, but there are a lot more locusts than dogs. With her
tongue at least half in her cheek, she asks if the locust’s ‘joint
22
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 67.
23
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 10.
258
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sensibility [should] outweigh that of a dog, or even the small human
settlement’ the insects are ‘about to overwhelm’.24 Instead of worry-
ing about these and other unprofitable questions that mainstream
moral theorising helps to generate, the focus should be on our prac-
tical relationships with animals and ‘within the limits of what we
can know and can try to do’.25
5. Hubris
There’s a second kind of charge, a moral one, against mainstream the-
ories that may be found in Midgley’s writings, even if it is never made
entirely explicit.The charge is parallel to the second criticism she
made
of
behaviourism
and
related
epistemological
positions.
Mainstream moral theories, she implies, reflect and encourage the
collective hubris of humankind.
This may sound a strange, even perverse charge to bring against
moral theorists who, typically, are ‘on the side’ of the animals, who
genuinely want to extend the compass of moral concern so as to
include animals and, like Midgley, to ‘remove barriers’. The
trouble, as Midgley sees it, with their approach is that, by focusing
on the extension of rights and respect to animals – on, in effect, com-
batting irrational discrimination – issues of justice now ‘monopolise
attention’. What lies outside the sphere of justice therefore gets ‘ne-
glected’. Virtues like ‘mercy and compassion’, for example, ‘begin
to seem like mere matters of taste’, desirable no doubt but, in com-
parison with attention to rights and justice, not central or entirely
‘serious’ components of a commitment to an enlightened morality.26
If mercy and compassion are marginalised or neglected by main-
stream theorists, so too are the vices ‘opposite to these virtues’,
such as harshness and cruelty.27 And it is at this point that the
charge of hubris enters in. The effect of the mainstream approach
is to paint an unwarrantedly rosy picture of humankind. For, on
this approach, the wrongfulness of our treatment of animals is a
failure of information or of reason and consistency. It is due either
to ignorance, a failure to note and recognise the relevant similarities
between animals and ourselves, or to a failure to realise that these
similarities entail the extension of moral regard to animals.
24
Op. cit. note 1, SW 159.
25
Op. cit. note 1, SW 159.
26
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 50-1.
27
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 50.
259
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Now this is a picture that unduly flatters human beings. Entirely
left out of this picture, Midgley remarks, are human ‘greed, mean-
ness, envy, cowardice, sloth, ingratitude’ and the rest of our vices, in-
cluding ‘in most people’s opinion, one of the worst vices … cruelty’.28
When all that gets ‘lit up’ by a moral theory are matters of injustice
and
discrimination,
the
impressively
and
depressingly
large
number of the remainder of our failings and vices remain out of
sight and out of mind. And this, of course, suits us very nicely.
Who wouldn’t prefer to own up to deficiencies of knowledge or con-
sistency than to admit to the catalogue of vices on Midgley’s list?
Instead of concentrating on confronting, for example, our meanness,
vanity and brutality we can instead focus, more agreeably, on brush-
ing up our logic. In this kind of self-exculpation of humankind, there
is hubris and vanity. To the extent that mainstream ethics contributes
to this self-exculpation, it is guilty of ‘boosterishness’, of helping to
inflate our undeservedly high opinion of ourselves.29
6. Coda
With mainstream moral theorising in animal ethics rejected, what
does Midgley want to replace it by? So entrenched in contemporary
moral philosophy is the conviction that it can only proceed by way
of constructing theories that, unsurprisingly, several commentators
insist that Mary Midgley must herself be trying to replace main-
stream theories by one of her own. Callicott, for instance, concedes
that she does not ‘elaborate a positive moral theory’, but adds that
she would surely ‘if pressed … sketch a Humean ethical theory …
grounded in feelings, not reason’.30 Another writer claims that,
despite her apparent denials, Midgley does have a theory of the
‘moral status’ of animals, albeit one that is ‘grounded in relationships
with people’ rather than in intrinsic features of the animals
themselves.31
It is true that Midgley that devotes considerable attention to the
emotions that different people feel for different animals, and also to
28
Op. cit. note 1, AWM 50.
29
On
‘boosterishness’,
see
Alain
de
Botton’s
remarks
in
Do
Humankind’s Best Days Lie Ahead?: Munk Debate (London: OneWorld,
2015), 13.
30
Op. cit. note 4, 165–6.
31
David DeGrazia, Animal Rights: AVery Short Introduction (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002), 29.
260
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the duties of care that come with certain relationships with animals,
such as owning pets or raising them for meat. But it is a mistake, in
my judgement, to construe any of this as indicating adherence to
some moral theory. For Midgley, no theory is needed if by a theory
is meant something that purports to give a general ground for why
we should treat animals in some ways and not others. For her – as
for the Buddha and (pace Callicott) David Hume – moral concern
for animals is not grounded in anything. In particular, it is not
grounded, as it is for mainstream theories, in an alleged moral
status that animals possess. To be sure, a good person feels compas-
sion and sympathy for animals that are suffering. But this feeling is
not a premise from which to draw moral conclusions about how
animals are to be treated. Again, good pet owners will properly care
for their dogs and cats. But they do not do so because they think
that animals as such are ‘subjects of a life’, beings that enjoy
‘dignity’, or anything else that, on the mainstream approach, is sup-
posed to confer moral status on animals.
No syllogisms are required in order to judge how, in most cases, we
should act towards an animal. ‘Confronted with a flotilla of duck-
lings’, writes Midgley, most people will just ‘see’ that things matter
to animals and recognise without further ado that ‘the way in which
we treat these creatures matters’ as well.32 More generally, many of
us simply ‘see what we ought to be doing’ in relation to animals
and that there are many things we do to them that are ‘glaringly
and unmistakeably wrong’.33 Some people, of course, do not see
this, but in their case, no amount of insistence on the moral status
of animals is going to be effective. Like the scientist quoted earlier,
they just don’t get that animals can matter.
The best way, for Midgley, of coming to ‘see what we ought to be
doing’ to and for animals – to seeing that much of what we do is ‘un-
mistakeably wrong’ – is to recognise that all too often our behaviour
manifests vices and human failings. Indeed, for her, what makes such
treatment wrong is precisely that it does exemplify cruelty, greed, in-
difference and a depressingly large number of other failings. What is
wrong with our treatment of animals is, one might say, us. Some of
the most powerful passages in her writings on animals are those
where Midgley draws attention to our refusal to admit to, or even
discern, the vices that our treatment of animals betrays. To the list
of vices I cited earlier, one could add those that serve to blind us to
our failings, including themselves. They include self-deceit, bad
32
Op. cit. note 1, WF 21.
33
Op. cit. note 1, SW 159.
261
‘Removing the Barriers’
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

faith, mindlessness, and the kind of ritual ‘objectivity’ displayed by
animal experimenters and others who pretend to doubt the reality
of animal suffering.34 In this last example, we begin to see how
Midgley’s denunciation of so many of our practices towards
animals is integrated into her wider critique of a civilisation in
which science dictates the boundaries of knowledge and economic,
technological imperatives determine what is worth doing and what
is allowable in the process of doing it.
Mary Midgley was too generous a person to second Mark Twain’s
verdict that, ‘of all the creatures that were made, man is the most de-
testable’.35 But she would, I am confident, endorse Montaigne’s
judgement that man is ‘the most blighted and frail of all creatures’,
and the one ‘most given to [a] pride’ that prevents him from appreci-
ating this.36 In this collective hubris she recognised what is, perhaps,
the greatest of the barriers to be removed in the endeavour to promote
concern for animals.
Durham University
d.e.cooper@durham.ac.uk
34
See
David
E.
Cooper,
Animals
and
Misanthropy
(London:
Routledge, 2018) on the vices and failings reflected in our treatment of
animals.
35
What is Man? And Other Philosophical Writings (Berkeley CA:
University of California Press, 1973).
36
The Complete Essays (London: Penguin, 1991), 505.
262
David E. Cooper
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246119000213 Published online by Cambridge University Press

