 
 
The Death of Voltage 
 
© Forrest Bishop, 
 December 3, 2011 
 www.bishopcubes.com 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Voltage is shown to be a mathematical confection much like electric current and charge 
were. None of the above entities have ever been measured regardless of the names of the 
instruments. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 The sacrificial victims must be summoned to fertilize the fields of Gnosis. So many are 
gone yet so many eagerly await. Heaviside [1] and Catt [2, 3] already offered up electric 
charge and its electric current, much to the displeasure of the gods of magical thinking. 
Those icons were shown to be illusory effects more reasonably caused by the propagating 
transverse electromagnetic wave called Energy Current [4]. Now another victim must 
tumble down the steps. 
 
Those antiquated notions of Electric Current and Electric Charge did not shed much 
light on real physical processes though they were useful for rough engineering work. By 
the same token, although architects understand that the Earth is round, they commonly 
assume a flat Earth for our cities. We speak like shamans of the Sun's rising and setting 
rather than the Earth revolving for similar convenience. All the same, for understanding 
the natural world, these conjuring tricks are more hindrance than help. They have led to 
numerous contradictions and endless confusion. Their desiccated mummies are to be put 
up on the shelf next to the museum exhibits marked Caloric and Phlogiston. 
 
 
What is Measured and Known? 
 
There are distinct limits to human knowledge. We don‟t know how big or how old the 
Universe is, all creation myths aside, or even if those are valid questions. We don‟t know 
what is inside of the Sun or how life actualizes. Those things are outside the purview of 

science for various reasons. Perfect knowledge of the nature of light and electricity may 
also be beyond our limits but we can at least approach the truth on these phenomena, as 
they are accessible. 
 
We can count after a fashion, but only by making the usually unstated assumptions that 
the various objects being counted are of the same class and by ignoring all other 
differences between those objects. For one famous example, there is disagreement on 
how many planets orbit the Sun. 
 
We can presume to measure length, L, angle, Θ, time, T, force, F, and energy, W, most 
directly. Which of these overlapping concepts is the more fundamental is the subject of a 
deeper natural philosophy that has not been resolved. Although mass, M, is often used in 
a physical units system, this quantity has not been directly measured, nor has it been 
defined all that well. For example the number of atoms in a volume of PtIr alloy can 
certainly be counted up and the gravity force presented by that number of atoms can be 
measured on a scale, while a different kind of force can be measured by the collection‟s 
resistance to acceleration, but neither of these methods is directly measuring mass. The 
mass is mathematically inferred from the measurement of the forces or energies: it is one 
further step away from direct knowledge. 
 
We know with fair certitude the imagined geometric relationships between various 
perceived objects- their directions, lengths and the angles between the elements- and so 
can derive volumes, areas and the other Euclidean constructs. Euclidean geometry is held 
in constant view as being a most important precursor to physical knowledge. With the 
above caveats and claims, by no means complete, we have to continue to use the 
available conceptual tools unless something better comes along. 
 
 
Properties of the Aethereal Constants 
 
The transverse electromagnetic wave (TEM Wave) propagating at „Mach 1‟ = c ~ 3x108 
m/sec through the constant Wave Impedance [5, p94] of Zo  ~376.73 ohms is claimed to 
be the fundamental entity that transmits most or all energy and information. The TEM 
wave is a shock-wave slab of Energy Current, obstructed or otherwise- a half-cycle 
square wave approaching zero thickness. Properties of TEM Waves [6]:  
Zo = impedance of the TEM wave 
c = speed of the TEM wave (speed of light)  
 
 
(3)                 
o
1
Zo c
       and          (4)           
o
Zo
c
 
 

 
(5)             
c
1
o o

       and          (6)           
Zo
o
o
 
 
 
The set {c, Zo} is suggested as more fundamental- closer to the absolute truth- than 
permittivity εo, and permeability μo for several reasons. As the speed of light, c, has been 
measured, Zo is presumed to have been measured as well, a presumption developed in 
more detail elsewhere. In that development, no fundamental unit is ever divided further 
into its mathematical root, as occurs when we express c for example in terms of εo and μo. 
There is no way to measure the square root of a fundamental physical property or 
process: if there were, the unit would not be fundamental. This becomes a philosophical 
question concerning things like what does the square root of length mean physically? 
 
 
A Mathematical Invention 
 
Consider the relation for voltage, V, called Ohm‟s Law: 
 
 
(7) 
 
 
 
 
V
IR

 
 
 
and for electric power, P,  in terms of resistance, R, and electric current, I, 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
 
 
2
P
I R

 
 
 
Square both sides of Ohm’s Law- 
 
 
(9) 
 
 
 
 
2
2
2
V
I R

 
  
 
 
then substitute (8) into (9) for 
2I to receive the square of voltage, 
 
 
(10) 
 
 
 
 
2
V
PR

 
 
 
Divide (8) through by R to express the square of electric current as 
 
 

(11) 
 
 
 
 
2
/
I
P R

 
 
 
Taking the square roots of Equs. (10) and (11) gives us expressions for voltage and 
current in terms of power and resistance 
 
 
 (12) 
 
 
 
 
V
PR

 
 
 
and 
 
 
(13) 
/
I
P R

 
 
 
Notice the algebraic relationships between Equs. (10)-(13) would be identical to those of 
Equs. (3)-(6) through a simple change of variables. The reason is simple: Equs. (7) and 
(8) are the basement relations that led to the propositions expressed in Equs. (3)-(6). Of 
the latter propositions, only Equ. (5) is ever to be found in a conventional textbook or 
paper on Maxwell‟s Equations and conventional theory, where it, along with its square 
root, is held forth as a triumph of reasoning- linking electricity, magnetism, and light. 
Tellingly, those four key equations are rarely found together on the same page. 
 
Turning now to the claims made in Equs. (12) for voltage and in (13) for electric current, 
we see that to believe in these concepts requires an additional sacrifice: one has to believe 
that the square root of power is a valid physical idea. It requires a belief in the reality of 
the square root of resistance. The magical equations themselves are quite correct 
mathematically but the concepts they express are as nonsensical as the square root of 
length. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
As Ivor Catt puts it, “Although a cloud cannot exist without edges, the edges of a cloud 
do not exist” [2]. Voltage and electric current are of the nature of amplitudes, a 
mathematical device. Amplitudes are always squared to return to a physically meaningful 
result. The volume of the cloud or the energy passing through the area of the (curvilinear) 
square is what is real, not its edges or field lines. A voltmeter does not measure voltage: it 
is one way to measure the energy in the Energy Current by using Equ (10). 
 
In other places I present a new system of fundamental physical units [7] and a 
reformulation of the master equations [8], replacing Electric Charge (or Amps) with the 
Wave Impedance, Zo. From there we may proceed to a coherent theory of TEM Wave 
Electrodynamics, one in which charge, electric current, and voltage play no part. Gnosis 
would make an exacting and jealous god. 

 
 
References 
 
[1]  Heaviside, Oliver, Electromagnetic Theory, 3 Ed, (1971), Vol. 1-3, Chelsea 
Publishing Co., ISBN 0-8218-3563-7 
[2]  Catt, Ivor,  “The Death of Electric Current”, (Dec., 1982), Wireless World, 
http://www.ivorcatt.com/2608.htm 
[3]  Catt, Ivor, Heaviside Signal-  http://www.ivorcatt.com/2604.htm  
[4]  Catt, Walton, and Davidson, "Displacement Current...", (March, 1978), Wireless 
World, at-  
http://www.ivorcatt.org/icrwiworld78dec1.htm 
[5]  Slater, John C. and Nathaniel H. Frank, Electromagnetism, (1947), McGraw-Hill 
Book Co. 
[6]  Bishop, Forrest, “The Fine-structure Constant and Some Relationships Between the 
Electromagnetic Wave Constants”, Aperion, (2007), 
http://redshift.vif.com/JournalFiles/V14NO4PDF/V14N4BIS.pdf 
[7]  Bishop, Forrest, “Impedance Replaces Charge in Electromagnetic Units”, (2011), 
unpublished 
[8]  Bishop, Forrest, “Reframing Electromagnetic Expressions in Optical Terms”, (2011), 
unpublished 
 

