Institute for Defense Analyses
 
 
Report Part Title: Galaxy-P
 
Report Title: Informatics Technologies for Cancer Research (ITCR) Case Study Report
Report Author(s): Brian L. Zuckerman, Ian D. Simon, Katherine M. Kowal and  William E.
J. Doane
Published by: Institute for Defense Analyses (2018)
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep36489.9
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Institute for Defense Analyses is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to this content.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:29 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

29
6.
Galaxy-P
A.
Background and Goals
Genomics tools are in common use. The Galaxy genomics analysis tool that allows 
users to combine and visualize data from multiple, independent queries using a graphics-
driven interface that reduces dependence upon specialized data science and bioinformatics 
skills was first described in the literature in a 2005 publication by investigators at 
Pennsylvania State University.23 Researchers intending to understand cancer also need 
sophisticated tools to conduct combined multi-omics analyses to link genes to protein 
expression data (e.g., derived from mass spectroscopy), which will provide a more 
complete picture at the molecular level. To address these challenges, in 2016 NCI made 
award U24CA199347 to a team led by Timothy Griffin at the University of Minnesota, 
intended to develop a proteomics extension to integrate into Galaxy to allow for multi-
omics analyses. Specific award goals are to: (1) support metabolomics studies including 
development of a platform that takes high-throughput data, extracts thousands of features 
from metabolomics experiments, identifies them, and analyzes them statistically looking 
for metabolites of interest; and (2) use RNA-Seq data to build precision protein databases, 
match proteomics data to confirm expression of variant protein sequences, and correlate 
transcript and protein abundance data for assessing post-transcriptional regulatory 
mechanisms.
B.
State of Development
The investigators are using the core Galaxy framework to develop Galaxy-P; the 
Galaxy-P team interacts regularly with the Galaxy community. Halfway through the U24 
award, the tool is still in development. The Galaxy proteomics-genomics joint analysis tool 
was developed24 and described in a 2015 publication;25 it is available at http://galaxyp.org. 
The tool utilizes RNA-Seq data to build “precision” protein databases, matches mass 
spectroscopy-based proteomics data to these databases to confirm the expression of variant 
protein sequences, and correlates transcript and protein abundance for assessing post-
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. The software includes a Galaxy visualization plug-
23 B. Giardine et al., “Galaxy: a Platform for Interactive Large-scale Genome Analysis,” Genome 
Research 15, no. 10 (October 2005): 1451–5, doi: 10.1101/gr.4086505.
24 NSF also provided funding, through Awards 1147079 and 1458524.
25 J. Boekel et al., “Multi-omic Data Analysis using Galaxy,” Nature Biotechnology 33, no. 2 (February 
2015): 137–9, doi: 10.1038/nbt.3134. 
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:29 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

30
in for “protein-centric” viewing of validated peptide sequence variants. The Galaxy-P
project’s GitHub repository is accessible at https://github.com/galaxyproteomics/.
An additional effort underway is the development of tools for microbiome analysis, 
given that microbial-derived signals may modulate hallmarks of cancer through diverse 
mechanisms. The team is working to use genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics to find 
microbiota in samples and to understand their interactions with cancer; they are developing 
a user-friendly Galaxy workflow for mass spectrometry-based metabolite quantification 
and identification within the Galaxy framework. The team is leveraging and contributing 
to 
the 
Galaxy-based 
community 
of 
metabolomic 
informatics 
developers 
(Workflow4metabolomics, W4M). Galaxy-P is intended to be a user-driven resource that 
meets requirements for reproducibility, throughput, and making comparisons. 
Along the way, the team reports that it has hit its benchmarks for developing tools.
By the end of the funding period in 2020, the team expects to have a resource to help 
investigators analyze their data in the multi-omics realm. There will be a deliverable that 
helps with workflows for investigators to conduct high-level integrative multi-omic 
analysis of data. Components will be available as Docker containers for portable cloud 
computing applications. 
In addition to the PI’s research group, the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute 
provides expert personnel (e.g., Galaxy expertise, high-performance computing expertise) 
as well as computational infrastructure to support the Galaxy-P effort.
The team presents regularly at the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, the 
Association of Biomolecular Research Facilities, the Galaxy Community Conference, and 
other meetings to present Galaxy-P to investigators and to train them in its use.
C.
Interactions with Other Tools
Collaborations with other ITCR-funded teams:
Globus Genomics: The team has used the Globus Genomics team’s services, 
mainly integrating the Galaxy workflow with the Globus genomics workflow.26
CRAVAT: The team is undertaking current development work to link Galaxy-P
to CRAVAT. The intent is that when a user runs a workflow in Galaxy, the tool 
will provide results to CRAVAT in order to better understand what is already 
known about a particular gene and how it encodes a protein. Specifically, users 
select variants with peptide-level confirmation in the CRAVAT Query Tool. A 
Galaxy plugin is used for automated display of CRAVAT visualizations in the 
26 See, for example, “Galaxy-P: Recent Developments and Emerging Applications,” University of 
Minnesota, 
http://cbs.umn.edu/sites/cbs.umn.edu/files/public/downloads/ASMS_Griffin_poster_FINAL.pdf.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:29 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

31
Galaxy interface. The approach leverages the full suite of CRAVAT tools for 
impact prediction of peptide variants (including both functional and pathogenic 
effects). A joint publication between the two teams has been submitted for 
journal review.
IGV: The team is undertaking ongoing development work to link Galaxy-P to 
IGV. The intent is to use the new IGV JavaScript functionality to call IGV once 
sequences are identified to visualize where a particular protein maps to a 
genome.
NDEx: The NDEx team is in discussions with the Galaxy-P team as to how to 
integrate the NDEx network-viewing functionality with Galaxy-P.
Trinity: Galaxy-P currently uses reference genomes; the Galaxy-P team hopes to 
collaborate in the future to integrate with Trinity to be able to use that tool for de 
novo DNA and RNA assembly.
Collaborations with other academic investigators: The team is working directly in 
collaboration with 10–12 investigators who are trained and running Galaxy-P during its 
developmental stage. The Griffin group has an IMAT-ITCR collaboration supplement 
(EXPANDING MULTIPLEXED KINASE BIOSENSOR ANALYSIS TO SWATH-MS). 
The ITCR-IMAT supplement will be used by the Galaxy-P team to develop a new approach 
to analyzing proteomic data by using predefined segmented isolation windows so that low-
abundant peptides can be reproducibly identified and quantified; the approach will be 
applied to a new assay developed by the IMAT PI (isotope-coded peptide biosensors for 
multiplexed profiling of kinase activity response) and used in a clinical context (assessing 
response in leukemia treatment). 
Collaborations with industry: The team is discussing collaborations with industry users 
(e.g., Persistent Systems, Intero Life Sciences).
D.
Measuring Impact: Uses, Users, and User Communities
1.
Tracking Users
The tool is under active development and has a core group of 10–12 trained users who 
are collaborating with the PI’s research group during the developmental phase. The team 
expects to have ~100 regular users in 3–5 years. Training/workshop attendance is one 
measure of dissemination to date. Over the last two years, the team has conducted six
workshops and trained 20–50 people per workshop.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:29 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

32
2.
Translational Research and Clinical Use
The Galaxy-P tool is intended for use (in the near term) by discovery researchers. No 
clinical use is expected in the near future.
3.
Publication and Citation as Measures of Use
The U24CA199347 award is acknowledged by five publications as of September
2018, all of which describe tool development and functionality associated with aspects of
the Galaxy-P approach. The 2015 article in Nature Biotechnology previously mentioned
has been cited 15 times in PubMed Central as of September 2018. The Galaxy-P team 
considers citations to be an insufficient measure of community size at this time.
E.
Future Development and Sustainability
The Griffin team reports that they would benefit from an additional round of ITCR 
funding to continue development and enhance dissemination, as well as to harden validated 
workflows and tools and to further extend functionalities via collaboration with other ITCR 
groups.
F.
Final Thoughts
The convening efforts of ITCR have been valuable. Bringing together awardees 
facilitates sharing information and leads to improvements to the ITCR-supported 
tools. The ITCR-IMAT supplement also has built synergies between physical 
tool developers with a new approach to using mass spectrometry to collect 
proteomic data and software tool developers with a new approach to analyzing 
proteomic data.
The ITCR team used NSF funding for core algorithm development, which was 
synergistic with ITCR funding.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:29 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

