_cuCfxb6202306061325
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Electronic information Master Academy of Computer Science and Technology
Sep 2021 - Jun 2024
Beijing
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
GPA: 3.40 / 4.00
Related Courses: Pattern Recognization and Machine Learning, Dialectics of Nature, Research Project Management
Mianyang Teachers College
Electrical engineering and its automation Bachelor Academy of Electircal Engineering
Sep 2017 - Jun 2021
Mianyang
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GPA: 81.65 / 100
Related Courses: Automatic Control Principle, Signal Processing and System Analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fluent in English communication
Strong innovation ability, rich project experience, entrepreneurial experience, and a passion for creating
Skilled in coordinating communication and team collaboration, and willing to share knowledge
Optimistic and humble personality, high resilience under pressure,responsible, team player, and efficiently collaborates to solve problems
Problem-Solver,Quick Learner
Highly sensitive to the latest technology and academic trends, willing to research and not afraid of failure.
Automatic question-answering based on local knowledge base using LangChain and ChatGLM-6B series LLM
Vehicle Monitoring System (
Owner of this repositor
Sttaarr:: 1180++ ,, FFoorrkk:: 6 0 +)
y
Jul 2021
Link: https://gitee.com/jiang_maowei/car
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction: This project achieves vehicle detection, counting, license plate detection and license plate recognition functions. Using the
PyTorch deep learning framework, the open source YOLOv4 model is used to implement template detection, YOLOv5 is used to
implement license plate detection, and LPRNet is used to implement license plate recognition.
 
 
g
MaoWei Jian
18398043944 丨jiangmaowei@sia.cn
ShenYang
https://github.com/Zero-coder/
24
   
   
 
   
 
   
N
EDUCATIO
Y
SUMMAR
E
RESEARCH EXPERIENC
E
PROJECT EXPERIENC
ZX Wang, MW Jiang(co-first author),S Li "Enhancing Data Efficiency in Reinforcement Learning: A Novel Imagination Mechanism Based on 
Mesh Information Propagation", submitting to ICLR 2024 (top-tier conference in Machine Learning).
Field: Long-term time series forecasting
MW Jiang, PY Zeng, K Wang*, H Liu, WB Chen, HR Liu, "FECAM: Frequency Enhanced Channel Attention Mechanism for Time Series 
Forecasting", submitted to Advanced Engineering Informatics. (CAS Q1-TOP , JCR Q1, IF = 8.8 )
MW JJiiaanngg, K Wang*, Y Sun, WB Chen, BJ Xia, RQ Li "MLGN: Multi-Scale Local-Global Feature Learning Network for Long-
term Series", submitted to Machine Learning for Science and Technology.(CAS Q2, JCR Q1, IF = 6.8)
Field: Reinforcement Learning
Field: Large Language Model
And so on.
Published
Submitted after Major Revision
Under Review

_cuCfxb6202306061325
 
PHM-GPT is all you need.
Owner of this repository
May 2023
Link: https://gitee.com/jiang_maowei
Introduction: In the field of fault diagnosis, mainstream tasks include fault state detection, life prediction, expert knowledge base Q&A,
and a series of tasks. Usually, these models independently complete their respective tasks, with no collaboration or connection
between them. In order to unify these tasks, we use LLMs and LangChain to connect private resources, allowing a system to complete
multiple tasks, such as classification and prediction, as well as local expert knowledge Q&A, such as diagnosing and providing repair
advice and related information based on local knowledge after the diagnosis result appears. This provides a new solution for the field of
fault diagnosis and life prediction.
 
Autoformer for Long-Term Series Forecasting（Star: 1.1K+, Fork: 285）
Member of this repository
Jun 2022
Link: https://github.com/thuml/Autoformer
Introduction: Time series forecasting is a critical demand for real applications. Enlighted by the classic time series analysis and
stochastic process theory, we propose the Autoformer as a general series forecasting model. Autoformer goes beyond the Transformer
family and achieves the series-wise connection for the first time.In long-term forecasting, Autoformer achieves SOTA, with a 38%
relative improvement on six benchmarks, covering five practical applications: energy, traffic, economics, weather and disease.
Smart Garbage Sorting System Based on TensorFlow
Member of this repository
Nov 2019
Link: https://gitee.com/jiang_maowei/garbage-raspi
Raspberry Pi & tensorflow-based garbage sorting (open source): based on tensorflow / resnet50, a deep learning image classification
network is built, and Huawei Cloud provides training data enhancement processing to fine-tune the model with limited training data and
save network and weight files. The model is then converted into tflite format and deployed on Raspberry Pi with Python-Flask, providing
a local API for Raspberry Pi's touch screen program to interact with users. An Electron-based Linux application package is also
created, and the first version of the program is open sourced on Gitee and Bilibili as a feedback to the community. The correct rate of
garbage classification is 93.6%, and the delay of single recognition is 0.8ms.
A framework for combining multi-object detection and multi-object tracking
based on Yolov5+Deepsort
Owner of this repository
Sep 2022
Link: https://gitee.com/jiang_maowei/Detection-and-Tracking-
Solving-Framework
We have developed a universal framework for combining multi-object detection and multi-object tracking based on Yolov5+Deepsort, which
can be adapted to scenarios that require mobile object flow statistics. For example, in the livestock industry, intelligent counting is needed
to track how many cows are out to pasture and how many have returned, as well as detect any missing animals. In shopping malls,
different areas can be monitored to track customer traffic, which can be used to develop sales strategies or establish efficient evacuation
routes in case of emergencies. In the manufacturing industry, it can be used to count processed parts and detect any missing or
miscounted items. Intelligent traffic systems can also benefit from using video surveillance to track vehicle flow. By acquiring real-time and
accurate traffic information, traffic resources can be allocated more reasonably, road efficiency can be improved, and traffic congestion can
be prevented. Furthermore, it can be applied in the field of security to track the movement of suspects. All of these solutions can be easily
and appropriately implemented on edge devices and can be integrated with cloud-based analysis and scheduling.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
2021.1
2023.08
2022.11 
2022.03
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2020.03
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019.06
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
2019.05
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
2019.03
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019.01
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2021.0
2023 Hackathon @ BWM iFACTORY | Role: Project Leader| Award: Certificate of Completion
2022 Huawei Ascend AI Innovation Contest | Role: Project Leader | Award: Outstanding Solution
Alibaba Cloud Tianchi - Small Sample Trademark Detection Challenge | Role: Project Leader | Global Rank:
239/2135
Alibaba Cloud Tianchi - Asia-Pacific Ophthalmic Big Data Competition | Role: Project Leader | Global Rank:
142/10006
Engineering Training Competition Intelligent Logistics Cart Group| Role: Member | Award: The Second Prize
Recipient of the 2018-2019 National Scholarship for Self-Improvement
Embedded Design and Development Project National Competition | Individual Competition | Award: National Third 
Prize
Embedded Design and Development Project State Competition | Individual Competition | Award: State-level First 
Prize
Recipient of the 2018-2019 academic year Municipal Excellent Student award
Bronze Award for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the College Level
2
HONORS & AWARDS
   

