Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology:
in defense of methodological naturalism
Daniel F. Hartner
Published online: 1 August 2012
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012
Abstract
Three proponents of the Canberra Plan, namely Jackson, Pettit, and Smith,
have developed a collective functionalist program—Canberra Functionalism—span-
ning from philosophical psychology to ethics. They argue that conceptual analysis is an
indispensible tool for research on cognitive processes since it reveals that there are some
folk concepts, like belief and desire, whose functional roles must be preserved rather
than eliminated by future scientiﬁc explanations. Some naturalists have recently chal-
lenged this indispensability argument, though the point of that challenge has been
blunted by a mutual conﬂation of metaphysical and methodological strands of natu-
ralism. I argue that the naturalist’s challenge to the indispensability argument, like
naturalism itself, ought to be reformulated as a strictly methodological thesis. So
understood, the challenge succeeds by showing (1) that we cannot know a priori on the
basis ofconceptualanalysisoffolkplatitudesthatsomethingmust occupythe functional
rolesspeciﬁedfor beliefsanddesires,and(2) thatproponentsofCanberraFunctionalism
sometimes tacitly concede this point by treating substantive psychological theories as
the deliverances of a priori platitudes analysis.
Keywords
Canberra Plan  Naturalism  Conceptual analysis  Philosophical
psychology  Philosophical methodology  Folk psychology  Beliefs and desires 
Platitudes analysis  Neuroscience  Psychology
1 Introduction
The Canberra Plan is a philosophical method that began with the collaborative work of
David Lewis, Frank Jackson, and many others who passed through the Australian
D. F. Hartner (&)
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology,
5500 Wabash Ave, Terre Haute, IN 47803, USA
e-mail: hartnedf@mail.uc.edu
123
Philos Stud (2013) 165:921–937
DOI 10.1007/s11098-012-9981-9

National University in Canberra during the 1990s. It is perhaps most widely discussed
in analytic metaphysics and the metaphysics of mind in particular. But three core
proponents of the Canberra Plan, namely Frank Jackson, Philip Pettit, and Michael
Smith (henceforth ‘‘JPS’’ when I refer to the authors collectively), have recently
compiled a number of co-authored articles (Mind, Morality, and Explanation 2004) in
an effort to use the Canberra Plan to connect the various subﬁelds of philosophical
inquiry, most notably philosophy of mind, moral psychology, and metaethics. I will
refer to JPS’s collective project as Canberra Functionalism (henceforth CF).
At the heart of CF (like the Canberra Plan more generally) is the idea that
philosophy aims to provide an a priori analysis of everyday, or folk, concepts. Using
conceptual analysis (CA), philosophers determine what is required for something to
satisfy a commonplace concept like ‘belief,’ ‘free will,’ or ‘hope.’ The kind of CA in
question is not just any old CA however but rather the distinctive two-step procedure
sometimes called the ‘‘Canberra two-step,’’ which I outline in the next section.
CF is analytic functionalism writ large. Like most forms of functionalism, it begins
with the idea that theoretical terms, in this case folk psychological (FP)1 terms like
‘belief’ and ‘desire,’ are to be deﬁned2 functionally, i.e. by what they do rather than by
what composes them. For the analytic functionalist in particular, those functional
deﬁnitions are to be determined by folk theory, the commonsense theory consisting of
all the various platitudes about mental states that we all take to be true, even if only
implicitly, as evidenced by our everyday practices. Analytic functionalism is
commonly contrasted with psychofunctionalism, roughly the view that theoretical
mental state terms are to be deﬁned by their roles in scientiﬁc psychology. It is
important to keep analytic functionalism and psychofunctionalism distinct here since
the latter, which looks to empirical psychology rather than folk theory to characterize
mental state terms, is at odds with the core commitments of CF. Like analytic
functionalism more generally, CF sees a priori analysis of FP theory as having a sort of
privileged or primary status in elucidating the nature of cognition.
One of the main sources of opposition to CF is so-called philosophical naturalism.3
Unfortunately, naturalism is a rather ambiguous term in contemporary philosophy,
and it is not exactly clear how JPS understand it here. In the most general terms,
naturalism may be either a metaphysical or methodological thesis. The metaphysical
thesis says, roughly, that the universe is exhausted by the natural stuff studied by the
empirical sciences, or that all facts are natural facts, or perhaps even that ‘‘spooky’’
entities are to be rejected from one’s ontology. By contrast the methodological version
says, roughly, that the scientiﬁc method sets the standard for acquiring knowledge of
our universe (cf. Casebeer 2005). It is often far from clear in the literature which of
these two distinct ideas the label ‘‘philosophical naturalism’’ is supposed to pick out,
1 FP will also stand for ‘‘folk psychology.’’
2 Or, alternatively, have their references ﬁxed by the theories in which we ﬁnd them (see Jackson and
Pettit 1990, p. 37).
3 The generic label ‘‘naturalism’’ in this dispute is a bit misleading since the Canberra Planners take their
method to be naturalistic, too. Indeed the Canberra Plan is sometimes called ‘‘naturalistic analysis’’ (see
Braddon-Mitchell and Nola 2009). For the sake of consistency, however, I will continue to follow JPS’s
lead in using the term ‘‘philosophical naturalism’’ to pick out their opposition, a non-CF form of
naturalism that is the source of the particular objection to CA that I consider in this paper.
922
D. F. Hartner
123

though it is worth noting that in some philosophical subﬁelds such as ethics it refers
primarily to a metaphysical position (see Darwall 1998, p. 27). For this reason, and
others to be discussed below, it seems to me that it has become standard practice in
philosophy to treat the metaphysical thesis as primary.
JPS themselves of course share the basic metaphysical commitments of
philosophical naturalism—like most self-described naturalists they reject spooky
entities from their ontology—so it is the methodological position that gives rise to
their conﬂict with naturalism. The naturalists’ characteristic antipathy toward
armchair methodology puts them at odds with JPS, since CA forms the backbone of
CF methodology. In this paper I aim to support the foundational commitments of
methodological naturalism by way of a bipartite critique of CF. As a corollary, I
intend the argument to show that the tendency to read naturalism as a thesis
containing foundational metaphysical commitments, whether in whole or in part, is
problematic. Naturalism is properly a methodological rather than metaphysical
position despite the current convention (or lack thereof). Naturalism, as I see it, is
not a metaphysical position concerned with the metaphysical status of morality, or
psychological states, or scientiﬁc postulates, and so on, but rather the idea that,
one’s metaphysical commitments notwithstanding, it is the methodology of the
empirical sciences that sets the standard for knowledge acquisition. This is the
fundamental idea that the label ought to convey.
The argument I present here against CF is two-parted in that it begins with a
critique of that approach in theory before turning to a critique of that approach in
practice. In §2 I brieﬂy review and elaborate the basic commitments of the Canberra
Plan and CF in particular. In §3 I outline a version of the naturalist’s objection to CF
methodology and then the reply from JPS. I then raise two theoretical problems for
JPS’s reply in §4, which I think cast some doubt on the indispensability of CA in
elucidating the nature of cognitive processes. These arguments are intended to
motivate a turn toward methodological naturalism (and not metaphysical or
‘‘philosophical’’ naturalism) in principle. While philosophical naturalists are right to
point out the limits of CA, those limits reveal more about the methods required to
adequately explain the nature of cognition than they do about metaphysics. Finally
in §5 I present the second part of the critique. I argue that, principled claims about
methodology aside, a careful look at some recent Canberra-style functionalism in
practice suggests that at times the proponents of CF themselves tacitly concede the
theoretical point by treating substantive psychological theories as the deliverances
of platitudes analysis, particularly in advancing theories of moral motivation.
2 Canberra functionalism
JPS and other Canberra Planners are united, primarily, by their commitment to the
so-called Canberra two-step. This is the philosophical method whereby we
investigate everyday concepts through a two-step procedure. First, we choose the
term or concept that we want to understand. In the moral case it will be a moral
concept, like ‘right’ or ‘fair.’ In the psychological case it will be a concept like
‘belief’ or ‘desire.’ We round up all of the platitudes about that concept, that is, the
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
923
123

claims about that concept that reﬂect the way we (everyone, or ‘‘the folk’’) use the
term. These platitudes are then conjoined in order to determine the theoretical role
of the concept in question. Famously, these theoretical roles are represented using
Ramsey sentences, existentially quantiﬁed sentences that contain the information
gathered from the platitudes. Then, in the second step, we go out into the world to
determine what if anything plays the role speciﬁed.
Canberra Planners, JPS included, generally agree that an analysis of a concept is
successful iff it gives us knowledge of all and only the platitudes that—in virtue of
being platitudes—endow us with mastery of the concept (Smith 1994, p. 31).
According to Smith’s version, for example, in acquiring a concept we acquire a set
of inferential and judgmental dispositions, which connect facts expressed in the
terms of that concept to other kinds of facts (37–38). The platitudes about that
concept are then a set of statements of all these various dispositions. CA is just the
attempt to articulate all and only these platitudes. To analyze moral rightness is to
specify which property is the property of being right by referencing descriptions of
the inferential and judgmental dispositions—platitudes about rightness—given by
those who have mastered the concept (39).
Because it is just analytic functionalism writ large, this approach aims to deﬁne
mental states not in terms of observable features of the world but rather implicitly in
terms of their role in a broader network of theoretical and observable terms in a theory.
Analytic functionalists claim that the source of that theory is common, folk opinion,
i.e., FP, rather than empirical science as in psychofunctionalism. JPS, however, make
at least one modiﬁcation worth noting. As they see it, the source of the theory in
question is FP minus anything in FP that we have any reason to seriously doubt. They
call this modiﬁed theory ‘‘commonplace psychology.’’ Like FP, commonplace
psychology is given by a Ramsey sentence, though it is a ‘‘cautious Ramsey sentence’’
with ‘‘anything open to serious doubt deleted or modiﬁed to make it pretty much a
truism’’ (1993, p. 302). I use the label CF to pick out this set of ideas.
3 Naturalism versus the Canberra Plan
There is a dispute between CF and so-called naturalists about the role that CA plays
in generating explanations of cognition and behavior.4 Naturalists have regarded CA
with suspicion for a variety of reasons, but one common thread seems to be this:
armchair reﬂection on concepts does not deliver as many interesting truths about
human cognition and behavior as many philosophers seem to think it does because it
is often far from obvious which concepts stand in need of analysis. It is quite often
the sciences that reveal the concepts relevant to explaining the phenomenon of
interest.
This point is of course controversial, since it is not just obvious that it is primarily
the sciences that tell us which concepts need analysis. I think the naturalist has
something like the following argument in mind.
4 According to Jackson & Pettit (1990, p. 53–4, n24), the naturalist position under consideration informs
the approach of Devitt (1984), and Sterelney and Devitt convinced them of the need to address it.
924
D. F. Hartner
123

It is often in the course of scientiﬁc practice, for example the formulation of
hypotheses, the formulation of operational deﬁnitions in accordance with existing
research frameworks, literature review, data analysis, and so on, that we come to
understand what phenomena—usually some pattern of data or systematically
collected observations—are actually in need of further explanation. In reﬂecting
generally on scientiﬁc practice one might come to overestimate the extent to which
armchair theorizing conducted independently of careful engagement with existing
scientiﬁc literature (data, operational deﬁnitions, hypotheses, etc.) really determines
the relevant concepts of interest.
Given the rapidly advancing state of the sciences, especially the neural and
cognitive sciences, the phenomena of interest to those not immersed in this body of
empirical literature—the folk and sometimes philosophers—may well be too crude,
dated, or inaccurate to actually need analysis. Take the general, folk conception of
‘memory’ for example. This broad concept, upon analysis, actually fragments into a
variety of more speciﬁc and more theoretically useful concepts, such as implicit and
explicit memory, semantic, autobiographical, and procedural memory, long-term
and short-term memory, and so on. But this fragmentation is in many respects a
product of the development of empirical psychology and cognitive science, not the
product of armchair reﬂection (see Baddeley and Hitch 1974; Miller 1956 for some
examples of the scientiﬁc roots of contemporary ideas about memory). The
naturalist can of course acknowledge that all of this may have required some
philosophical work. But for the naturalist it is the kind of philosophical work that is
part and parcel of scientiﬁc methodology involving careful engagement with
scientiﬁc literature rather than mere armchair reﬂection.
According to CF, by contrast, an explanation for a cognitive or behavioral
phenomenon will begin with an analysis of the concepts central to that phenomenon.
Those concepts include beliefs, desires, and many other basic psychological
concepts putatively employed in everyday, naı¨ve folk explanations of behavior like
hunger, thirst, pain, and so on. The naturalist rejects this proposal on the grounds
that whether those folk concepts are relevant to the explanation—indeed whether
they refer to anything at all—is a matter to be settled by the sciences, for the reasons
just given.
It is perhaps because naturalism in philosophy is so frequently construed as a
primarily metaphysical thesis that JPS’s dispute with naturalism seems to slide toward
disagreements about ontology. As JPS explain their dispute with naturalism, the
naturalist holds that the sciences, and not armchair reﬂection, ought to determine
which entities we believe in while JPS must preserve a role for CA in generating the
relevant ontology since that is a bedrock commitment of the Canberra Plan. As I see it,
though, this interpretation of the dispute hinges on a confused picture of naturalism.
The naturalist’s concern ought to be methodological rather than ontological.
Naturalists are committed to continuity between philosophy and the sciences
because they believe the scientiﬁc method to be the most reliable method available
for acquiring information about the world and hence for generating explanations of
cognition and behavior. The naturalist’s objection then is not that we need science to
tell us whether to posit beliefs and desires as entities but rather that we need to
engage directly with the relevant sciences in order to determine whether those
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
925
123

concepts are relevant to our best explanations of human cognition and behavior. The
naturalist, to put it more simply, is not properly in the business of writing up lists of
entities in which we should believe, but is concerned instead with developing
continuity between philosophical and scientiﬁc explanations. Despite this confu-
sion—which, I think, hampers as many naturalists as non-naturalists—we might
reasonably suppose that JPS’s reply speak to both strands of naturalism in virtue of
its defense of CA. So I will focus on showing why their reply to the naturalist’s
challenge, the heart of which is their argument for the indispensability of CA,
achieves much less than they claim.
As JPS understand the dispute, then, naturalists and eliminativists alike have
objected to CF on the following grounds: in generating an explanation for any given
cognitive or behavioral phenomenon it is the sciences, not CA, that reveals the
ontology that we require. Whether beliefs and desires ﬁgure into the future scientiﬁc
explanation for that phenomenon, then, is a matter to be settled in the laboratory
rather than the armchair. JPS are, for this reason, ‘‘sure that [the objection from
philosophical naturalism] lies behind much of the doubt naturalistically oriented
philosophers have about beliefs and desires’’ (1990, p. 31).5 Of course naturalists
need not actually be eliminativists about FP states, but many deny that CA is
capable of revealing substantive truths about human psychological states, and that is
the idea that the JPS must challenge to preserve the needed role for CA.
As JPS see it, philosophical naturalism poses no threat to either the existence of
beliefs and desires or to CA. CA provides ‘‘excellent’’ evidence that we are
sometimes in the states that satisfy what they call the ‘‘folk roles’’ for beliefs and
desires (32). That is, JPS understand beliefs and desires in terms of the roles they
play in our commonsense folk theory. The functional roles deﬁnitive of belief and
desire are given by the roles we implicitly or explicitly presuppose in everyday
predictive and explanatory practice, i.e., by their folk roles (18). Thus ‘‘to believe
(or to desire) that so-and-so is to have a state in one playing the playing the role
deﬁnitive of that belief between inputs, outputs, and other functionally speciﬁed
states’’ (16). Beliefs and desires are thus functional roles that the folk use implicitly
or explicitly in moving from observations of others’ behavior to hypotheses about
their mental content (beliefs and desires) and to predictions of their future behavior.
Here is their argument for the existence of beliefs and desires:
1.
It is sufﬁcient for having beliefs and desires that one be in states which satisfy
the folk roles.
2.
We are sometimes in states which satisfy the folk roles.
3.
Therefore, we have beliefs and desires.
Premises (1) and (2) are supposed to be relatively uncontroversial. (1), they argue, is
a plausible account of the folk theory of beliefs and desires. And (2) will only be
5 The source of the quotation is an article authored by Jackson and Pettit (‘‘In Defence of Folk
Psychology’’, Philosophical Studies 5, 1990) and not Smith. But it has since been reprinted in the
collective volume, Mind, Morality, and Explanation (2004), where they explicitly declare their
commitment to a collective projective. For that reason I will continue to treat the argument presented in
Jackson and Pettit (1990) as a part of JPS’s collective defense of the Canberra Plan.
926
D. F. Hartner
123

controversial if it is a genuine possibility that future neuroscience might ultimately
give us reason to doubt that we are sometimes in states that satisfy the folk roles.
But that, they claim, is virtually impossible. To accept the existence of beliefs and
desires is merely to accept the idea that there are states that can be understood in
terms of law-like relations among external circumstances, internal states and overt
behavior and that facilitate our successful interactions with others by allowing us to
move from our observations to explanations and predictions (16–17). We therefore
have ‘‘excellent reason’’ to believe that the neurophysiological states needed to
explain behavior actually occupy the functional roles deﬁnitive of beliefs and
desires because beliefs and desires so construed are required for successful
prediction and explanation: something must make possible our everyday successes
in this way.
Moreover—and this is the crucial point—we are supposed to know this on the
basis of CA. Here is the key section of their reply to the naturalist who is wary of the
role of CA:
The concern of the naturalists is that in order to see the need for beliefs and
desires, we had to indulge in some conceptual analysis. The science per se will
tell us which roles are occupied by which neurophysiological states. The fact
that this constitutes having beliefs and desires required common-sense
functionalism, and so some conceptual analysis. We had to say something
about how we conceive of beliefs and desires. It was, however, a very
ontologically modest bit of conceptual analysis. We did not use our account of
the folk conception of beliefs and desires as part of an argument that
completed neuroscience is incomplete, but instead as part of an argument that
beliefs and desires will very likely be found within what completed
neuroscience tells us. The role of our account of the folk conception of
beliefs and desires was simply to show which part of any likely complete
neuroscience story is the part which says (though not in so many words) that
there are beliefs and desires (32).
There are two problems with this response to the objection from philosophical
naturalism. First, it misrepresents the naturalist’s concern about the role of CA in
generating empirically adequate explanations of human agency. Second, it
drastically overestimates the reach of CA in supposing that we can determine core
components of explanations in the neural sciences of human cognition and behavior
from armchair analysis of folk platitudes. I pose these in turn.
4 The limits of conceptual analysis
First, it is noteworthy that JPS introduce the objection from naturalism as the
objection that ‘‘lies behind much of the doubt naturalistically oriented philosophers
have about beliefs and desires’’ (31). It seems they have the motivation for
naturalism the wrong way around, which suggests that they have not yet fully
appreciated the force of the naturalist’s objection.
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
927
123

It is not that naturalists—by which, again, I mean those concerned with
establishing continuity between philosophy and science—are motivated to reject
beliefs and desires because they believe that CA is a waste of time. Rather they are
motivated to think that all of the CA is a waste of time because, upon closer
inspection, the relevant contemporary sciences seem to make little use of the mental
state-roles—that is, the roles presupposed by the folk couched in terms of
theoretical mental states—that philosophers like JPS would take to be legitimate
occupants of the folk roles for belief and desire. This point is worth explicating.
A genuinely naturalistic criticism of CA is (or ought to be) primarily about
methodology. Philosophical work on cognitive mechanisms ought to be continuous
with scientiﬁc work that aims to explain the same phenomena. The idea is supported
by the widely accepted observation that the naturalistic turn was inspired by
progress in the neural and cognitive sciences (cf. Copp 2007; Darwall et al. 1992). If
the FP states ultimately fail to appear in the relevant scientiﬁc research in the
appropriate way then there is not much use in going to great philosophical lengths to
save them. That is, unless we are strictly interested in describing how the folk think
and talk about cognition in their own commonsense terms. But philosophical
psychology is concerned with something richer than merely characterizing the way
people talk. It aims to deliver empirically respectable, objective theories of the
nature of cognition, including moral and social cognition, decision-making, and the
like.6
Take for example the dispute surrounding the so-called Humean theory of moral
motivation in metaethics and moral psychology, one of three core disputes
constitutive of what Smith (1994) calls the central organizing problem in
metaethics. The problem concerns whether an agent’s being motivated to act in
accordance with her moral beliefs is brought about by the belief states themselves or
only by the addition of a desire to act upon the belief. To engage in this dispute is to
take on the question whether it is beliefs or desires that have causal efﬁcacy in
motivating agents. But this just assumes that one or the other of these states must
ﬁgure directly into the best scientiﬁc explanation of the causes of moral motivation
without looking ﬁrst at the actual research to determine whether that assumption is
plausible in light of existing data. It is an enormous assumption given the
complexity of contemporary neural and cognitive science research on moral
decision and motivation.
Even as a more general scientiﬁc matter, the question of whether the kinds of
explanations emerging from contemporary cognitive science and neuroscience
preserve the structure of our commonsense mental state concepts and FP
explanations continues to be hotly contested in the philosophy of mind and science.
There is a very difﬁcult empirical project involved in determining whether and how
one will actually ﬁnd anything like beliefs, desires, wishes, fears, and so on in
contemporary neuroscientiﬁc explanations for human and animal motivation,
cognition, and behavior. Moreover, some scientists now openly acknowledge that
6 This is evident from the growing body of philosophical literature concerned with the application of data
from psychology, psychiatry, and neuroscience to disputes in philosophical psychology. Recent
scientiﬁcally informed philosophical work on moral motivation is an excellent example (e.g., Kennett
2002; Kennett and Fine 2009; Schroeder et al. 2010).
928
D. F. Hartner
123

even some of our basic scientiﬁc concepts are beginning to fragment into more
accurate and more useful concepts for generating scientiﬁc explanations. Previously
I mentioned memory as an example. Emotion provides a similarly compelling
example. Here is the leading emotion researcher Elizabeth Phelps on the role of
emotion in neuroeconomics, the emerging neuroscience of decision-making:
To date, most neuroeconomics studies have depicted emotion as a single,
uniﬁed variable that may drive choice, often in contrast to a reasoned analysis
of the options and their relative values (see, for example, Cohen 2005). This
dual-system approach, although intuitively appealing, fails to consider the
complexity of emotion or to capture the range of possible roles for emotion
and
affect
variables
in
decision
making. Adopting a more nuanced
understanding of emotion will help clarify its impact on economic decision
making and provide a basis for further understanding the complex interactions
between emotion, value, and choice (2009, p. 234).
What is true of emotion, memory, and other basic mentalistic concepts could well
be true of beliefs, desires, fears and other ‘‘intuitive’’ states. The naturalist need not
deny that scientists discourse casually in the language of FP. Of course they do. But
pointing this out is a far cry from successfully showing that scientists actually
employ FP concepts as necessary theoretical elements in their work on motivation,
memory and recall, long-term potentiation, decision-making, or whatever else
neuroscientists might study. It is not just obvious from the start that FP states appear
in the relevant capacities in the neuroscience of motivation, and so this is not an
assumption that we should be forced to accept without evidence.
So what really casts doubt on the value of CA for understanding cognitive
phenomena like moral motivation are not so much worries about ontology as
worries about discontinuity between philosophical and scientiﬁc methods. Some
recent scientiﬁc explanations of motivation, decision-making, and choice behavior
are, as I see it, looking less and less like our high-level philosophical theories of
motivation. They have little to say about beliefs and desires and much more to say
about neural subjective value measurements, reward-prediction error signals, and
movement selection thresholds (see, for example, Glimcher 2001; Glimcher et al.
2005; Gold and Shadlen 2000; Kable and Glimcher 2009; Shadlen and Newsome
2001).7 By reading naturalism primarily as a metaphysical rather than methodo-
logical thesis, JPS have missed the force of the naturalist’s objection to the
indispensability of CA.
The second problem with JPS’s reply to the naturalist is that it drastically
overestimates how much we can learn about the nature of cognitive mechanisms by
a priori reﬂection on FP concepts and practice. For JPS, all that is required to defend
the existence of FP states and hence the value of CA is evidence for the occupation
of folk roles. And, as they see it, evidence abounds. If we were unable to predict the
behavior of others on the road, for example, we would be unable to drive our
7 Of course one could try to show that each of these ideas preserves the structure of higher-level FP
concepts but that is quite clearly a difﬁcult empirical project the success of which we cannot just take for
granted.
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
929
123

vehicles without crashing (2004, p. 24). The folk clearly have tacit or implicit
knowledge manifested in successful prediction and explanation of behavior on a
regular basis, which is made possible by implicit (and possibly explicit) belief-
desire hypotheses, or the putting of folk roles to use: ‘‘The empirical fact is that we
are able to predict each other’s behaviour to a remarkable extent… We do this by, in
many cases, working via belief-desire hypotheses’’ (18).
The key for JPS’s argument for the indispensability of CA is that we philosophers
need good reason now, from the armchair, to doubt that neuroscience will ultimately
do away with beliefs and desires construed as functional roles. This we are supposed
to gather from reﬂecting on what must ultimately facilitate the success of this folk
practice. JPS need to show that the philosopher is able to shed light on the
mechanisms underlying folk practice—the practice of implicitly understanding the
mental processes of others in a way that facilitates successful prediction and
explanation—not through familiarity with the scientiﬁc study of human minds,
brains, and behaviors but rather through a priori reﬂection on the kinds of mental
state concepts that the folk must be employing in FP theory. That is what gets us the
indispensability of CA.
But it seems to me that we could not possibly learn about the nature of implicit
folk knowledge by reﬂecting on folk practice from the armchair for one simple
reason. Knowing that FP makes successful folk practice possible by reﬂecting on
folk platitudes is not the same as knowing how it makes that practice possible. This
problem recurs at several points in their argument. To show that the folk must rely
on belief-desire hypotheses, for example, they argue that the alternative is
implausible:
Now the ability to move back and forth from behaviour in situations to belief-
desire hypotheses in successfully explaining and predicting behaviour shows
that we have implicitly mastered, whether or not we have always explicitly
noted, the needed generalizations between the inputs in the situations, the
behavioural outputs, and the beliefs and desires. The alternative is to suppose
that we have arrived at our predictions by chance. But then the success of our
predictions is also chance—and that is incredible (17).
But there is just no compelling reason to think that success by chance must be the
one alternative to the use of belief-desire hypotheses for successful folk practice.
It might turn out, for example, that what we folk actually do when we predict and
explain behavior is develop a kind of procedural knowledge: over time, repeated
experience with a particular task or environment leads our nervous systems to
automate responses to familiar patterns, much like how we learn to play sports and
musical instruments, to walk and ride bicycles, and so on. We gradually come to
have more ﬂuid motor responses to how we feel resulting in more skillful behavioral
output. Scientists might even be able to tell some story about how this is made
possible by brain tissue: some kind of Hebbian process takes place so that when we
encounter a previously-experienced situation the relevant synaptic connections are
primed and the relevant neurons communicate more readily than before.
So the fact that we willingly stake our lives on our predictive success when we
drive our cars may be evidence that we know we are generally successful in
930
D. F. Hartner
123

navigating from observation to explanation and prediction, but it really tells us
nothing of why we are successful. We dread being in the car or on the road with new
drivers precisely because those drivers have a limited experiential repertoire from
which to draw. The fact that we could conceivably characterize all of this in terms
of belief-desire hypotheses is irrelevant. The real issue is whether we must. But
there are certainly available alternatives to belief-desire hypotheses, such as the one
just given, which are not at all like success by chance.
Nevertheless, JPS insist that the functional roles of belief and desire are just too
obvious to be denied: ‘‘It is beyond question that the functional roles are ﬁlled… to
behave as if we have beliefs and desires is to provide overwhelming evidence that
we in fact have beliefs and desires, precisely because to have beliefs and desires it to
be understood purely functionally’’ (26).
But it is too quick to assume that because it is obvious that there is some
function, Y, needed to bring about phenomenon Z that we must know how Y brings
about Z. Prior to scientiﬁc investigation we may know almost nothing about the
nature of Y, or about what function is required to bring about Z. JPS seem to think
that in the case of intentional psychology we know the nature of Y on the basis of
Z–Y is the (singular) function that needs to be ﬁlled. Yet there are many different
ways in which the folk could have platitudinous knowledge: intuitions (Y1),
propositional knowledge and deduction (Y2), some as yet unidentiﬁed sensory
modality (Y3), and so on.
This important difference between that- and how-hypotheses can be illustrated
using an analogous scientiﬁc case. Take for example the discovery of the
mechanism underlying the action potential. Carl Craver provides a helpful account
of that discovery:
[Hodgkin and Huxley] consider the possibility that ions are conveyed cross the
membrane by active transport. They suggest that perhaps a number of
‘‘activation’’ particles could weaken the integrity of the membrane. They hint
at a biological interpretation of their model according to which activation and
inactivation particles move around in the membrane and somehow change the
membrane’s resistance. They admit, however, that they have no evidence
favoring their model of other possible models. This admission spurred
research on the biophysics of the membrane and the search for ion channels.
Nonetheless, well into the 1970s most neuroscientists regarded the talk of ion-
speciﬁc channels as mere metaphor at best and boxology [vague re-description
or ‘‘black boxing’’] at worst (Craver 2007, p. 115).
What was crucial for explaining the mechanism of the action potential was not
simply specifying what physical realizers ﬁlled the role of ‘‘activation particle’’ or
‘‘active transport’’ etc. Rather, it was a matter of pinning down how actually—by
which function given the many possibilities—ions cross a cell membrane to initiate
depolarization of a cell. Claiming that CA will elucidate the cognitive functions
underlying successful folk practice (i.e. beliefs and desires as folk roles) while
future neuroscience will merely reveal the realizers of those functions is very much
like claiming that these scientists could have determined the existence of ion
channels from the armchair, doing the biophysics only to reveal ion channel
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
931
123

realizers. But that is false. The science revealed the function, not just the physical
realizer. Alternatively, we might interpret JPS as claiming that the relevant
functional role in this case is just the depolarizer. But the question isn’t what thing
serves as the depolarizer but how a depolarizer actually depolarizes. Depolarization
in this case is the product of the function, not the function itself.
The ﬁrst premise in JPS’s argument states that, ‘‘it is sufﬁcient for having beliefs
and desires that one be in states which satisfy the folk roles’’ (18). But that is not
quite enough. It is sufﬁcient for having beliefs and desires that one be in states
which satisfy the folk roles in such-and-such a way, i.e., in whatever manner is
supposed to be characteristic of one’s undergoing beliefs and desires. How exactly
do belief-desire hypotheses work? It may be obvious that we are sometimes in states
that somehow manage to facilitate successful folk practice (i.e., folk roles), that is,
that there is some internal mechanism that makes success possible and that makes
our ascriptions of beliefs and desires intelligible when we describe, in the familiar
language of FP, the behaviors of ourselves and others. But that is not the same as
having evidence for the relevance of beliefs and desires—which serve to specify
how and not merely that folk practice is successful—to empirically accurate
explanations of cognitive processes. It is the latter that JPS need CA to deliver. For
otherwise it really will be an empirical question whether people actually have
knowledge of others’ mental states by way of belief-desire hypotheses, and we will
have absolutely no special reason to doubt the possibility that neuroscience might
eventually do away with beliefs and desires. As the naturalist has been arguing all
along, we’ll have to do some empirical work to reveal the actual mechanisms
responsible for our predictive and explanatory successes.
One of the more interesting features of this argument, I think, is that it can be
tested against CF methodology directly. For it suggests that the purported ﬁrst stage
in the Canberra two-step, which is a priori in theory, will actually be ﬁlled with
substantive empirical claims and scientiﬁc work in disguise when put into practice
on a real philosophical problem. How else would the Planners come to assume that
their particular hypothesis about which mechanism the folk require (namely belief-
desire hypotheses qua functional roles) for successful practice is the right one given
all of the plausible alternatives? In fact I think a closer look reveals that the
Canberra two-step in actual practice often turns out to be armchair empirical
psychology disguised as platitudes analysis.
5 Platitudes analysis or armchair psychology?
Smith (1994, p. 21–22) says that platitudes are a priori truths. That two possible
worlds alike in all of their natural features must be alike in their moral features is a
platitude; everyone agrees that the moral features of things do not ‘‘ﬂoat free’’ of
their natural features. A bit later he gives some examples of color platitudes. That
there is no such thing as transparent matte white is a platitude, known a priori by
competent users (29). The idea is that we come to master color vocabulary by
coming to treat such remarks as platitudinous.
932
D. F. Hartner
123

The issue I raised in the previous section concerns the nature of such platitudes.
What Smith and other Canberra Planners need is that platitudes concerning mental
states like beliefs and desires be of the same kind as these exemplary platitudes
(such as those about whiteness). I have argued that this is not the case. What is
required for successful folk practice may be described philosophically by these
platitudes, but it isn’t just obvious that the folk must have mastery of these platitudes
in order be largely successful at predicting and explaining behavior. It might be true
that philosophers consider the claim, ‘‘there is no such thing as transparent matte
white’’ a platitude in the sense that speakers who violate it might lack mastery of
color terms from the standpoint of an external philosophical characterization of the
folk, yet a person could conceivably live out her life without ever having her
mastery of that platitude seriously tested, at least not in any way relevant to her
having successful folk discourse or practice. Or, worse, she might actually employ
the faulty concept to the appearance of some kind of muddled whiteness with some
small degree of success (internally, from within the folk perspective), as when
asked, for example, how the blinds in her ofﬁce look in the morning sunlight.
Philosophical description of folk success in terms of platitudes and folk mastery of
such platitudes are two different things.
Moreover, do philosophers really know a priori that folk knowledge (of at least
the implicit sort, though perhaps also explicit) of functional roles is platitudinous? It
sometimes looks as though their methods are a tacit concession that philosophers
have no such knowledge a priori. Consider, for example, how Smith arbitrates
between competing accounts of desire, such as the phenomenological account and
the dispositional account:
Do we really believe that desires are states that have phenomenological
qualities essentially? That is, do we believe that if there is nothing that it is
like to have a desire, at a time, then it is not being had at that time? I should
say that, at least as far as commonsense opinion goes – and what else do we
have to go on in formulating a philosophical conception of FP states – we
evidently have no such belief. Consider for instance what we should ordinarily
think of as a long-term desire: say, a father’s desire that his children do well. A
father may actually feel the prick of this desire from time to time, in moments
of reﬂection on their vulnerability, say. But such occasions are not the norm.
Yet we certainly wouldn’t ordinarily think that he loses this desire during
those periods when he lacks such feelings (1994, p. 108–109).
Note that the argument depends upon a controversial empirical claim—one in need
of testing—precisely because it makes an assertion about what is normally the case.
There are two things going on in this passage at the same time that must be kept
distinct: there is Smith’s reﬂection on what we evidently believe about the nature of
desire and then there is his reﬂection on why we believe what we believe about
desire. At ﬁrst, it is just the latter that seems to require the support of empirical
evidence. To know what we normally believe we have to reﬂect on what most of us
think about the nature of desire by thinking through a hypothetical case of
characterizing it in others (in this case in fathers). In fact though the former requires
empirical consideration too, which is why Smith says that ‘‘evidently’’ we have no
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
933
123

such belief about the nature of desire. What is evident are the norms governing the
use of the term in the general population, or the way that people actually use the
term when they use it in the same way that most everyone else does.
The ﬁrst step in the Canberra Plan is to lay out the platitudes concerning the
concept of interest, in this case desire. For Smith (1994, p. 31) this amounts to saying
what is crucial to something’s being a desire (Nolan 2009, 274n). So the relevant part
of the above passage from Smith is the question of whether we really believe that
desires have phenomenological qualities essentially. And Smith’s answer is that we
evidently do not really believe this because of the way that most of us employ the
term. That is, because of the norms governing the usage of the term ‘‘desire’’ in the
linguistic community. But the only way that we can have access to those norms is to
go out into the world and observe the way that people use the term. One cannot have
access to linguistic norms, by which is meant here standards determined by linguistic
practice, from the armchair. At most one can determine how people might possibly
use the term incoherently, as by using ‘‘bachelor’’ to refer to married men, for
example. But that is not the same as determining how most people in fact use the
term. People ought not speak incoherently; irregardless, they often do.
This is not the only instance in which Smith’s argument for the dispositional
account of desire and against the phenomenological account invokes fairly
substantial empirical considerations. He argues that there are two serious problems
for the phenomenological conception. Consider his objection to the phenomeno-
logical conception, which is that it gives an implausible epistemology of desire
(1994, p. 108). The idea behind the objection is that any adequate account of desire
must recommend an epistemology that is both prima facie plausible and that allows
subjects to be fallible about their desires. Smith thinks that the phenomenological
conception fails to meet both requirements. The epistemology of the phenomeno-
logical conception is based on the epistemology of sensation, which holds that a
subject is in a state with phenomenological content if and only if she believes she is
in a state with that content. For example, she is in pain if and only if she believes
that she is in pain. Consequently, ‘‘if we think of desires on the model of sensations,
it is plausible to hold that a subject desires to / if and only if she believes that she
desires to /’’ (105). We can represent the biconditional as PD (which stands for
‘‘phenomenological conception of desire’’):
(PD). A subject desires to / / ? she believes that she desires to /.
He argues that PD fails in both directions. From left to right it is plainly false, while
from right to left it violates the fallibility constraint, i.e., any adequate conception of
desire must be able to account for the fact that people are sometimes wrong about
the desires that they have. But the interesting point for my purposes has nothing at
all to do with whether PD is a plausible account of desire but only with the methods
that Smith uses to reject it. Both of his arguments against PD proceed by
counterexample. Let’s look at the ﬁrst.
Smith argues ﬁrst that PD is false left to right because there are perfectly realistic
cases in which it fails to hold. We are asked to consider John, a narcissist who each
day buys a newspaper from one particular newsstand while on his way to work.
Though John might just as easily get the paper at any newsstand, he continues to
934
D. F. Hartner
123

patronize just the one stand in particular. As it turns out, that particular stand has
mirrors placed in such a way that shoppers cannot help but look at themselves as
they make their purchases. If we were to tell John that perhaps he buys his paper
there because he enjoys looking at his reﬂection, he would vehemently deny it, ‘‘and
it wouldn’t seem to John as if he were concealing anything in doing so’’ (106).
Suppose however that without the mirrors, John would no longer visit the shop.
From this Smith concludes that we have reason to reject PD left to right:
If all this were the case, wouldn’t it be plausible to suppose that John in fact
desires to buy his newspaper at a stand where he can look at his own
reﬂection; that, perhaps, he has a narcissistic tendency and buying his
newspaper at that stand enables him to indulge it on the way to work? And
wouldn’t it also be plausible to suppose that he does not believe hat this is so,
given his, from his point of view, sincere denials? If this is agreed, then we
have reason t reject the principle left to right… (106).
Let us just concede to Smith for the moment that this case is rather plausible. The
real issue anyway is not whether the case is plausible but whether the truths about
the nature of desires that it reveals are platitudes about the concept that we ﬁnd in
folk discourse or practice. This is what Smith means when he says that we need an
alternative account of desire in order to ‘‘make sense of desires as states with
propositional contents and that thus allows us to make sense of our commonsense
desire attributions’’ (111). Is Smith’s attribution of desire in John’s case really
commonsensical or platitudinous?
I think it is not. We have seen that even for Smith platitudes are instances of
knowledge, implicit or explicit, which are such that in coming to treat that
knowledge as platitudinous we come to have mastery of the concept (31). Recall
that Nolan characterizes Smith’s view of platitudes as coming close to the
nonnegotiable analytic truths end of the spectrum. It is surely not anything like an
analytic truth that desires are such that they make us do things that we might not
consciously realize we desire to do. Nor could it be known a priori, with no
experience with desiring or watching others desire. If this is a truth about the nature
of desire at all it is surely known a posteriori in virtue of some experience with
desiring and watching other people desire.
But is it platitudinous anyway? I doubt it particularly because the example is so
controversial. The mere fact that most would say to John that he frequents that
particular newsstand because he likes to view his own reﬂection is evidence that that
is what most people would think. Without conducting a survey, it seems quite within
the realm of possibility that the average person doubts that John had absolutely no
idea why he preferred one newsstand to the other, at least for the ﬁrst few trips.
Similarly, it is not just entirely obvious that John lacks any awareness whatsoever of
his enjoyment in looking at his reﬂection. Even within the ﬁeld of psychology this is
a signiﬁcant empirical claim about the nature of desire, and one calls out for some
testing. That is probably why Smith argues by counterexample rather than simply
asserting the obvious fact that desires are such that they make us do things even
when we have no idea whatsoever that we desire to do them. That is not an analytic
truth, a platitude, or even a piece of common sense. It is rather a deliverance of
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
935
123

armchair psychology, which ought to be regarded as empirically suspect until more
rigorously tested.
Let me be clear about what I am not arguing here. I am not arguing against the
possibility that one facet of the nature of our desires (whatever those turn out to be)
could be that they sometimes make us do things of which we are utterly unaware.
This could turn out to be an interesting fact about desire and it will still be the case
that we arrived at the truth via careful observation, experience with desires and
desirers, and assessment of cases. The one thing that seems clear is that some
member of the folk could be adept at applying the term without any knowledge
whatsoever of the fact that sometimes desires work entirely subconsciously. Such a
person would be exactly the type to criticize John for his narcissistic tendency to
gaze into mirrors. There is just nothing incoherent about a conception of desire
lacking the subconscious element, and so it cannot be a platitude the accommo-
dation of which is required for an adequate conception.
Second, and more importantly, I am not arguing that Smith will fail to abide by
the methodological standard of CF that he endorses any time that he appeals to a
behavioral example or a hypothetical case. We can agree that a posteriori
considerations have some role in CA. It is just that any such considerations will have
to reveal a rather obvious truth about the nature of the concept in question in order
for it to legitimately reveal a platitude. And on JPS’s account this will generally
happen in the course of considering what must be the case about the nature of desire
in order for folk practice to be so successful.
But there is just nothing obvious about the purported features of desire that Smith
takes these hypothetical cases to show, neither as an a priori matter nor as a fact
about what the folk must do tacitly. He seems to concede this much when he asks
whether the explanation for John’s behavior is plausible rather than declaring that it
is obvious or necessary. And that is why I think the method used betrays the need
for experience and empirical investigation. The whole point of engaging in
empirical science at all is to test empirical claims that aren’t perfectly obvious.
Successfully supporting a scientiﬁc hypothesis amounts to showing that it holds
generally and so can be applied to help explain other untested cases, precisely like
John’s.
References
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 8, pp. 47–89). New York: Academic Press.
Braddon-Mitchell, D., & Nola, R. (2009). Introducing the Canberra Plan. In D. Braddon-Mitchell & R.
Nola (Eds.), Conceptual analysis & philosophical naturalism. Cambridge: Bradford.
Casebeer, W. (2005). Natural ethical facts: Evolution, connectionism, and moral cognition. Cambridge:
Bradford.
Cohen, J. D. (2005). The Vulcanization of the human brain: a neural perspective on interactions between
cognition and emotion, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 13–24.
Copp, D. (2007). Morality in a natural world. Cambridge University Press.
Craver, C. (2007). Explaining the brain: Mechanisms and the mosaic unity of neuroscience. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
936
D. F. Hartner
123

Darwall, S. (1998). Philosophical ethics. Boulder: Westview Press.
Darwall, S., Gibbard, A., & Railton, P. (1992). Toward Fin de sie`cle Ethics: Some trends. The
Philosophical Review, 101, 115–189.
Devitt, M. (1984). Realism and truth. Oxford: Blackwell.
Glimcher, P. (2001). Making choices: The neurophysiology of visual-saccadic decision-making. Trends
in Neurosciences, 24(11), 654–659.
Glimcher, P., Dorris, M., & Bayer, H. (2005). Physiological utility theory and the neuroeconomics of
choice. Games and Economics Behavior, 52, 213–256.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2000). Representation of a perceptual decision in developing oculomotor
commands. Nature, 404, 390–394.
Jackson, F., & Pettit, P. (1990). In defence of folk psychology. Philosophical Studies, 5, 7–30.
Kable, J., & Glimcher, P. (2009). The neurobiology of decision: Consensus and controversy. Neuron, 63,
733–745.
Kennett, J. (2002). Autism, empathy, and moral agency. The Philosophical Quarterly, 52(208), 340–357.
Kennett, J., & Fine, C. (2009). Will the real moral judgment please stand up? The implications of social
intuitionist models of cognition for meta-ethics and moral psychology. Ethical Theory and Moral
Practice, 12, 77–96.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
Nolan, D. (2009). Platitudes and metaphysics. In D. Braddon-Mitchell & R. Nola (Eds.), Conceptual
analysis and philosophical naturalism. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schroeder, T., Roskies, A., & Nichols, S. (2010). Moral motivation. In J. Doris (Ed.), The moral
psychology handbook (pp. 72–110). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shadlen, M. N., & Newsome, W. T. (2001). Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortext
(area LIP) of the Rhesus Monkey. Journal of Neurophysiology, 86, 1916–1936.
Smith, M. (1994). The moral problem. Oxford: Blackwell.
Conceptual analysis as armchair psychology
937
123

Copyright of Philosophical Studies is the property of Springer Science & Business Media
B.V. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.

