233
Markov Blankets and the Idea of Enactive-Extended Cognition  Juan Diego Bogotá
Enactivism
               https://constructivist.info/17/3/220.prosen
principle might be good candidates for for-
malizing how the nervous system supports 
self-organizing processes (Bruineberg & Ri-
etveld 2014, 2019).
« 12 »  Prosen’s target article provides a 
rich overview of the current state of third-
wave extended-mind research and the dif-
ferent ways in which Markov blankets, 
predictive processing and the free-energy 
principle might be incorporated into third-
wave approaches. In this commentary, I 
raise caution about the ongoing pursuit in 
search of the boundaries of the extended 
mind (whether plastic, flexible, permeable 
or multi-scale). Third-wave extended-mind 
theories are better off abandoning the “con-
tainment metaphor” altogether, and think-
ing of self-organizing minds without bor-
ders.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Odysseus Stone 
and Lillian Wilde for feedback on an earlier 
draft of this commentary.
References
Adams F. & Aizawa K. (2001) The bounds of 
cognition. Philosophical Psychology 14: 
43–64. ▶︎ https://cepa.info/6680
Bruineberg J., Dolega K., Dewhurst J. & Baltieri 
M. (2022) The emperor’s new Markov blan-
kets. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, in press.
Bruineberg J. & Rietveld E. (2014) Self-organiza-
tion, free energy minimization, and optimal 
grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience 8: 599. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Bruineberg J. & Rietveld E. (2019) What’s inside 
your head once you’ve figured out what your 
head’s inside of. Ecological Psychology 31(3): 
198–217. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.
2019.1615204
Hipolito I. & van Es T. (2022) Free energy 
pragmatics: Markov blankets don’t prescribe 
objective ontology, and that’s okay. Pre-
print at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/id/
eprint/20100
Kirchhoff M. (2012) Extended cognition and 
fixed properties: Steps to a third-wave ver-
sion of extended cognition. Phenomenology 
and the Cognitive Sciences 11(3): 207–308.
Kirchhoff M. & Kiverstein J. (2019) Extended 
consciousness and predictive processing: A 
third-wave view. Routledge, London.
Lakoff G. & Johnson M. (1980) Metaphors we 
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Loughlin V. (2020) Extended mind. In: Glăveanu 
V. P. (ed.) The Palgrave encyclopedia of the 
possible. Springer Nature, Cham.
Nave K. (2022) Boundaries and borders gone! 
But life goes on. Preprint at http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/id/eprint/20089
Ross D. & Ladyman J. (2010) The alleged 
coupling-constitution fallacy and the mature 
sciences. In: Menary R. (ed.) The extended 
mind. MIT Press, Cambridge MA: 155–166.
Sutton J. (2010) Exograms and interdisciplinar-
ity: History, the extended mind, and the 
civilizing process. In: Menary R. (ed.) The 
extended mind. MIT Press, Cambridge MA: 
189–225.
Jelle Bruineberg is a Research Fellow at Macquarie 
University. He works in embodied and enactive 
approaches to the mind. In 2018, he defended his 
dissertation at the University of Amsterdam with 
the title Anticipating Affordances: Intentionality 
in Self-Organizing Brain–Body–Environment 
Systems, in which he integrates ecological-enactive 
cognitive science with the free-energy principle.
Funding: This work was funded by a Macquarie 
University Research Fellowship.
Competing interests: The author declares 
that they have no competing interests.
Received: 29 June 2022 
Revised: 30 June 2022 
Accepted: 1 July 2022
Why not Both (but also, 
Neither)? Markov Blankets 
and the Idea of Enactive-
Extended Cognition
Juan Diego Bogotá
University of Exeter, UK 
jb1244/at/exeter.ac.uk
> Abstract • I sympathize with Prosen’s 
conviction in integrating enactivism, the 
free-energy principle, and the extended-
mind hypothesis. However, I show that 
he uses the concept of “boundary” am-
biguously. By disambiguating it, I sug-
gest that we can keep both Markov blan-
kets and operational closure as ways of 
drawing the boundaries of a cognitive 
system. Nevertheless, from an enactive 
perspective, neither of those boundaries 
is a “cognitive” boundary.
Handling Editor • Alexander Riegler
« 1 »  Timotej Prosen’s target article can 
be situated within the ongoing attempts to 
develop a third wave of the extended-mind 
hypothesis (EM). As he notes in §3, third-
wave EM views borrow from two different 
approaches to cognition, namely, enactiv-
ism and predictive processing (PP). Two 
of the reasons why EM theorists are now 
looking at these two different approaches 
are clarified by Shaun Gallagher (2018). 
First, enactivism provides a dynamic con-
ception of constitution that would help EM 
overcome problems found in its first- and 
second-wave versions. Adopting such a 
conception of constitution would cor-
respond with Prosen’s (§2) first aspect of 
third-wave EM views, namely, the focus on 
how the boundaries of cognitive agents are 
both plastic and constituted in temporally 
extended processes.
« 2 »  The second reason Gallagher gives 
is that PP promises a unified scientific ap-
proach that can be used by hands-on cog-
nitive scientists when designing experi-
ments. PP conceives of cognitive systems 
as bounded by Markov blankets. By casting 
EM in PP terms, one can arguably move to-
ward a non-organism-centered view given 
how multiple individual Markov-blanketed 
systems (e.g., individual organisms) “can 

PHILOSOPHICAL CONCEPTS IN Enactivism
234
assemble or self-organize into an ensemble 
that itself has a Markov blanket” (Kirchhoff 
et al. 2018: 7). Doing this would correspond 
with Prosen’s (§2) second aspect of third-
wave EM views, namely, moving away from 
organism-centered approaches.
« 3 »  In my commentary, I focus on 
Prosen’s use of the notion of “boundary” 
and his rejection of the Markov-blanket 
formalism in favor of the enactive notion 
of “operational closure” and the PP-related 
free-energy principle (FEP). While I am 
sympathetic to the idea of integrating en-
activism and FEP, I find Prosen’s use of the 
concept of “boundary” ambiguous. It is 
because of this ambiguity that the Markov-
blanket formalism is rejected. Such a rejec-
tion, however, would make it impossible to 
integrate enactivism, FEP, and EM, because 
Markov blankets are an essential part of FEP. 
In contrast, I suggest that by noting that op-
erational boundaries and Markov blankets 
are different kinds of boundary, it is possible 
to keep both within a single approach.
« 4 »  One of the most important con-
cepts in the target article is that of boundary. 
As stated in the conclusion, the main task 
of any third-wave EM approach, including 
the one put forth in the target article, is to 
“formulate a notion of a boundary of cog-
nitive agents that exhibits plasticity and is 
not necessarily organism-centered” (§47). 
What is meant by “boundary of cognitive 
agents”? Prosen mentions several kinds 
of boundaries. Most notably, he mentions 
mental boundaries (e.g., §§3, 48), opera-
tional boundaries (e.g., §§26, 49), cognitive 
boundaries (§§28f), and the boundaries of 
the mind (§§45, 48). Some of these senses of 
“boundary” are synonymous. For instance, 
it is unproblematic to use “mental bound-
ary” and “cognitive boundary” interchange-
ably. However, other kinds of boundary are 
not synonymous with cognitive boundar-
ies. Specifically, within the enactive ap-
proach, the operational boundaries of an 
autonomous system are not identical to its 
cognitive boundaries. The enactive concept 
of “operational closure” is meant to capture 
the dynamics that make up the identity of 
an autonomous system. Put more tech-
nically, a system is operationally closed 
when it is defined by a network of circular 
and recursive processes (Thompson 2007: 
44–46). Such boundaries can be thought of 
as plastic insofar as an autonomous system 
can incorporate external objects within its 
operational boundaries (Di Paolo 2009; Co-
lombetti 2017).
« 5 »  For enactivists, the operational 
boundaries of an autonomous system are 
not identical to the bounds of cognition 
given that they conceive of cognition as 
sense-making. The idea is that an adaptive 
autonomous (hence, operationally closed) 
system possesses “operational mechanisms 
to potentially distinguish the different vir-
tual implications of otherwise equally viable 
paths of encounters with the environment” 
(Di Paolo 2009: 14). By distinguishing the 
implications of different possible interac-
tions with the environment, such an envi-
ronment becomes a domain of significance 
and valence from the perspective of the 
autonomous system – such a domain is 
what enactivists call the cognitive system’s 
“world” (Varela 1997). In other words, the 
autonomous system makes sense of its en-
vironment, thus constituting a world that 
is intrinsically related to its perspective. 
Importantly, talking about a cognitive or 
a mental boundary implies talking about 
the limits of cognition, as if it were a thing. 
However, for the enactivist, insofar as cog-
nition is sense-making, cognition must be 
conceived as something an adaptive and 
operationally closed agent does in rela-
tion to its environment. Cognition is not 
a thing that has boundaries. Therefore, the 
operational boundaries are not cognitive. 
Prosen, however, conflates these two senses 
of “boundary” when, for instance, he claims 
that –
“ the operational boundary of the autonomous 
agent can come to incorporate all manner of ex-
ternal media. Such a notion of boundary might 
therefore speak to a number of cases of mental 
extension.” (§27)
« 6 »  There is a third kind of boundary 
at play in the target article, namely, statisti-
cal boundaries. Even though Prosen never 
uses such a concept, it is implied in his 
discussion on Markov blankets. A detailed 
overview of the Markov-blanket formalism 
is well beyond the scope of this commen-
tary (see Kirchhoff et al. 2018; Bruineberg 
et al. 2022; Raja et al. 2021). Suffice it to say 
that the Markov-blanket formalism is an es-
sential part of the FEP. As stated by Thomas 
Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo and Karl Friston:
“ An important precondition for any adaptive 
system is that it must enjoy some separation and 
autonomy from the environment […]. A formal 
way to express [such a separation] is the statisti-
cal construct of a Markov blanket.” (Parr, Pez-
zulo & Friston 2022: 42)
Importantly, a Markov blanket is a statisti-
cal boundary that can be drawn between 
conditionally independent variables in a 
Bayesian network (Pearl 1988). It is in part 
because of the link between the Markov-
blanket formalism and Bayesian networks 
that, under the FEP, adaptive systems can be 
cast as looking as if they engaged in forms 
of Bayesian inference.
« 7 »  The guiding idea is that one can 
model the states of a target system via the 
Markov-blanket formalism assuming that 
its internal states are conditionally indepen-
dent of those external to it. In between the 
internal and the external states, the model 
would have (Markov) blanket states. Two 
states are said to be conditionally indepen-
dent when, by knowing the values of the 
internal states of a system and the values of 
the states that compose its Markov blanket, 
one will not learn anything new about it by 
learning the values of the external states and 
vice versa. The important thing here is that 
Markov blankets are not properties of the 
modelled systems, but rather of the models 
thereof. Markov blankets are just a way of 
describing, in statistical terms, the interface 
between a target system and its environ-
ment.
« 8 »  By noticing that statistical bound-
aries are nothing but instrumental bound-
aries (given that they are just modelling in-
struments), it becomes clear that prima facie 
there is no contradiction between Markov 
blankets and the operational boundaries 
of adaptive autonomous systems. Within 
a modelling context, the latter are proper-
ties of the target system, whereas the former 
are instrumental properties of the models 
thereof. Assuming that the statistical de-
pendencies between an operationally closed 
system and its environment can be cast as 
involving conditional independencies, it 
would be plausible to model such an opera-
tionally closed system as having a Markov 

235
Markov Blankets and the Idea of Enactive-Extended Cognition  Juan Diego Bogotá
Enactivism
               https://constructivist.info/17/3/220.prosen
blanket. Therefore, one does not have to 
choose between operational and statistical 
boundaries as Prosen does.
« 9 »  I agree with Prosen saying that 
“[t]he notion of nested Markov blankets 
seems appropriate to describe entities that 
constitute a higher-order system at a given 
moment” (§20) and that such a limitation 
may clash with how third-wave EM views 
try to capture the plasticity and dynamics of 
cognitive boundaries. Two points must be 
pointed out here, however. First, the static 
nature of Markov blankets does not neces-
sarily undermine the utility of modelling a 
given cognitive system at a given moment 
under the Markov-blanket (and more gener-
ally, the FEP) formalism. Moreover, Nathan-
iel Virgo, Fernando Rosas and Martin Biehl 
(2022) have recently proposed a sketch for 
time-unrolling Markov blankets that might 
advance such formalism toward a more dy-
namic perspective.
« 10 »  Second, and perhaps more im-
portantly, if one subscribes to the enactive 
approach – as Prosen does – the coincidence 
between the operational boundaries and the 
(instrumental) statistical boundaries of an 
adaptive autonomous system cannot indi-
cate its cognitive boundaries given that cog-
nition is something it does in relation to its 
environment. Strictly speaking, within enac-
tivism, cognition does not have boundaries, 
because it is understood as a specific kind 
of relation (i.e., sense-making) between the 
cognitive system and its environment (Di 
Paolo 2009). Therefore, even though both 
operational closure and the Markov-blanket 
formalism might indicate the boundaries 
of a system, they do not indicate any kind 
of cognitive boundary that is subject to be 
extended. This point may put into question 
the possibility of integrating enactivism and 
EM. Any third-wave EM view that tries to 
borrow from the enactive approach would 
have to show how cognition (understood as 
sense-making) could be extended.
« 11 »  In sum, there is no conflict be-
tween the Markov-blanket formalism and 
the enactive concept of operational closure. 
These notions refer to two different kind of 
boundaries (statistical and operational, re-
spectively) that nevertheless may converge 
when modelling an adaptive autonomous 
system under FEP. The possibility of refer-
ring to both kinds of boundary within a sin-
gle approach, however, does not necessarily 
entail a third-wave EM view that integrates 
enactivism and FEP. From an enactive per-
spective, neither the statistical nor the op-
erational boundaries of a cognitive system 
would count as its cognitive boundaries.
References
Bruineberg J., Dolega K., Dewhurst J. & Baltieri 
M. (2022) The emperor’s new Markov blan-
kets. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, in press.
Colombetti G. (2017) Enactive affectiv-
ity, extended. Topoi 36(3): 445–455. 
▶︎ https://cepa.info/5681
Di Paolo E. A. (2009) Extended life. Topoi 28: 
9–21. ▶︎ https://cepa.info/322
Gallagher S. (2018) The extended mind: 
State of the question. The Southern 
Journal of Philosophy 56(4): 421–447. 
▶︎ https://cepa.info/6927
Kirchhoff M., Parr T., Palacios E., Friston K. & 
Kiverstein J. (2018) The Markov blankets 
of life: Autonomy, active inference and 
the free energy principle. Journal of The 
Royal Society Interface 15(138): 20170792. 
▶︎ https://cepa.info/5393
Parr T., Pezzulo G. & Friston K. J. (2022) Active 
inference: The free energy principle in mind, 
brain, and behavior. MIT Press, Cambridge 
MA.
Pearl J. (1988) Probabilistic reasoning in intel-
ligent systems: Networks of plausible infer-
ence. Morgan Kaufmann, Portland OR.
Raja V., Valluri D., Baggs E., Chemero A. & 
Anderson M. L. (2021) The Markov blanket 
trick: On the scope of the free energy 
principle and active inference. Physics of Life 
Reviews 39: 49–72.
Thompson E. (2007) Mind in life: Biol-
ogy, phenomenology. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge MA. Reviewed in 
▶︎ https://constructivist.info/3/2/117
Varela F. J. (1997) Patterns of Life: Intertwin-
ing identity and cognition. Brain Cognition 
34(1): 72–87. ▶︎ https://cepa.info/2010
Virgo N., Rosas F. & Biehl M. (2022) Embracing 
sensorimotor history: Time-synchronous 
and time-unrolled Markov blankets in 
the free-energy principle. Commentary 
on “The emperor’s new Markov blankets” 
by Jelle Bruineberg et al. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, in press. Preprint available 
at PsyArXiv, https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.
io/7pqmr
Juan Diego Bogotá is a PhD student at the 
University of Exeter (UK), Department of Sociology, 
Philosophy, and Anthropology. His research revolves 
around the possibility of naturalizing Husserlian 
phenomenology by integrating the enactive approach 
and the free-energy principle. He is also a member 
of the research group Filosofía y cognición at the 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia (Colombia).
Funding: Juan Diego Bogotá is supported 
by the Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnología e 
Innovación (Minciencias) of Colombia.
Competing interests: The author declares 
that he has no competing interests.
Received: 30 June 2022 
Revised: 1 July 2022 
Accepted: 2 July 2022

Copyright of Constructivist Foundations is the property of Constructivist Foundations and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

