Improvisations in Thomistic
Methaphysics: Reading Ferdinand
Ulrich
Jonathan M. Platter
Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, Ferdinand Ulrich,
Humanum Academic, 2018 (ISBN 978-1-948195-01-0), lviii + 526 pp., hb $70
A Companion to Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus, D. C. Schindler, Humanum
Academic, 2019 (ISBN 978-1-948195-03-4), x + 238 pp., pb $30
Abstract
The recent translation of the philosophical work of Ferdinand Ulrich has the potential to
make a signiﬁcant contribution to the ongoing debates about the role of metaphysics in the-
ology. Together with D. C. Schindler’s Companion, this difﬁcult book is made more ac-
cessible. While Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus generates sophisticated and nuanced
responses to various forms of post- or anti-metaphysical theology (especially those
in the wake of Heidegger), perhaps its greatest contribution is an altogether more
humane way of pursuing metaphysics.
Key Words: Ferdinand Ulrich, German philosophy, metaphysics, philosophy of
being, theology of creation, theology of gift
Introduction
Metaphysics is highly contested in contemporary theology, in both its con-
tent and practice. Though the understandings of metaphysics involved in
these contestations are about as varied as the number of people who enter
into the debates, critiques often share some sense that metaphysics
overdetermines the kind of discourse theology is allowed to pursue. Meta-
physics, perhaps, imposes a predetermined conceptual system that con-
strains our apprehension of the radical inbreaking of God in revelation.
Or metaphysics violently contorts the particularity of the other. Or meta-
physics – at least in theology – identiﬁes God with common being and is
Reviews in Religion & Theology, 27:1 (2020)
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

therefore ‘ontotheology’. Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus (HA), originally
published in German in 1961 with Hans Urs von Balthasar’s publishing
company Johannes Verlag, has much to offer in discussion with the presence
of Heidegger in these debates and could shed light on more options than
critiques of metaphysics often allow. The densely argued 500 pages of text
elude quick summary, offering rather a feast for speculative reﬂection. Es-
pecially in conjunction with Schindler’s lexicon (HA, pp. 493–508) and his
Companion, Ulrich’s HA offers something potentially more important than
any particular counter-argument in contribution to the task of retrieving
metaphysics in theology: initiation into a more humane practice of meta-
physics that sacriﬁces none of the speculative rigor or theological verve.
Homo Abyssus: A Précis
Because HA would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to summarize in a few
hundred words, I will not attempt to recount the book’s contents. Rather,
what I offer here are a few situating remarks, to help identify the kind of
work HA is and some of its signiﬁcant contours.
But ﬁrst, a word on the translation and supplements provided by D. C.
Schindler. Although Ulrich scholars will likely ﬁnd reason to alter
Schindler’s translation in order to draw out different resonances from
Ulrich’s German, Schindler’s translation is crisp and readable. Most im-
portantly, he supplies the reader with key German terms throughout the
translation, where Ulrich is either using a technical term or one not easily
translated into a single English equivalent. This grants the reader closer
scholarly access to Ulrich’s thought without constant recourse to a copy
of the German text. In addition, Schindler provides a rich lexicon at the
end of the book, in which he succinctly glosses technical or idiosyncratic
terms to aid the reader’s comprehension. Readers who are not as thor-
oughly conversant with German philosophy as Schindler is (which ap-
plies to most of us, I suspect) will beneﬁt greatly from his explanations.
The Companion, as well, is immensely useful in developing a general pic-
ture of Ulrich’s thought and how it relates to other ﬁgures, especially his
contemporaries (his discussions of Gustav Siewerth is a noteworthy ex-
ample). His lexicon and Companion are indispensable aids to reading
Ulrich’s dense and difﬁcult book, to which I now turn.
Concerning the very basis of metaphysics, Ulrich agrees with Heideg-
ger that we ought not forget the question of being. We might summarize
Heidegger’s argument in Introduction to Metaphysics as suggesting that to
forget the question of what ‘being’ is (as opposed to the character of spe-
ciﬁc beings) is to open the way for our continued technologization of
thinking and being. Ulrich also agrees with Heidegger that metaphysics
is a reenactment of the tradition of philosophical thinking (cf. Companion,
pp. 17–18). But concerning the ‘character’ of this reenactment and the cen-
tral judgments that guide it, Ulrich and Heidegger depart signiﬁcantly.
Review Articles
19
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 14679418, 2020, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/rirt.13714 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Not
only
does
Ulrich
have
trenchant
ripostes
to
Heidegger’s
ontotheological critique, Ulrich can be read as in fact accounting for
how Heidegger’s errors arise in the temptations one encounter when con-
templating ‘being’ (HA, pp. 28–60).
Ulrich articulates this alternative approach to metaphysics through an
extended meditation on Thomas Aquinas’ description of esse commune
(common being) in De potentia I.1, where Thomas says that common being
is completum et simplex, sed non subsistens (complete and simple but
nonsubsisting) (HA, pp. 28 ff). The ﬁrst two terms of this deﬁnition cap-
ture themes that Heidegger also approached under the aspect of being’s
actuality without any external determinants; but the third, being’s
nonsubsistence, draws attention to the radical gift-character of created be-
ing. Hence, Ulrich, in stark contrast from Heidegger, develops a meta-
physic of creation that is at once philosophical in its speculative rigor
and theological in its centering on the giftedness of ﬁnite being. That being
is simultaneously the gift of God and nonsubsisting in itself (considered
independently of its actuality in ﬁnite, concrete entities) offers a middle
way between, on the one hand, conceiving of something ‘outside’ being
that determines it and, on the other hand, insisting on being-itself as its
own ground. The former, as Heidegger recognized, would give rise to
metaphysical problems about the ontological status of whatever it ‘is’ that
determines being without itself being included in ‘being’. The latter
would risk conceiving of being-itself – esse commune – as the ﬁnal ground-
ing and intelligibility of all other reality but without having any reality it-
self apart from the ‘other reality’ that it grounds: a tenuous, if not
contradictory, metaphysical situation.
Lest it seem that HA is simply an arid, jargon-ridden exercise in rhetor-
ical one-upmanship, it is important to see how HA is oriented to a positive
vision, the contemplation of which guides the whole of the work. Esse
commune is nonsubsisting, so it is ultimately a sign of the radical depen-
dence of created reality, its dramatic suspension between God’s act of giv-
ing and the creature’s movement into ﬁnitude or ‘movement of
ﬁnitization’ (HA, pp. 240–44). That creation is suspended in its movement
into particularity and ﬁnitude by the pure, out-going (and in this sense,
‘kenotic’) generosity of God suggests that all creaturely reality is the ac-
ceptation (in the Middle-English sense of ‘favorable reception’) of the gift
that it is and has from God; by participating in the giving that generates
them, creaturely beings repeat the gift and in this sense enact a form of
thanks. Consequently, thinking and being are joined when thinking
makes gratitude its end, when ‘thinking is thanking’ (HA, pp. 319–342,
371–373). When the human task of thinking acknowledges the giftedness
of being and thinking itself – perhaps most explicitly so when this think-
ing becomes metaphysical – it can then enter into an inconceivably pro-
found mystery, ‘inconceivable because it has always already been
entrusted to us beyond our capacity to contain it in concepts’ (HA, pp.
Review Articles
20
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 14679418, 2020, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/rirt.13714 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

490). In light of a comment like this, Ulrich’s metaphysics has potential
sympathy with the concerns of such critiques of metaphysics like
Caputo’s and Marion’s – that the generalizing use of concepts for reality
is a kind of violence – and yet still conceive of a reenactment of metaphys-
ics in service of the mystery of being. It strikes me that Kevin Hector’s
pragmatic approach to theological language (Theology Without Metaphys-
ics [CUP, 2012]) might pair well with Ulrich’s desire to relativize our con-
ceptual grasp on reality while still pursuing meaningful speech and
speculative contemplation of being.
Metaphysics as reenactment: a more humane approach
I have already hinted at the ways that Ulrich can be seen to provide re-
sponses to various concerns about metaphysics in general as well as its re-
lation to theology. In this section, I will develop my claim that Ulrich (with
the help of Schindler’s supplementary aids) might induct readers into a
more humane discussion of metaphysics.
First, however, one might object to my invocation of ‘humaneness’ by
wondering if metaphysics, as a particular domain of philosophizing,
could be ascribed with any kind of moral character. This objection calls
for further clariﬁcation of what ‘metaphysics’ is – for if it is a domain of
knowledge, primarily concerned with establishing and acquiring true
facts about the most basic or general features of reality, then it would seem
to be a category mistake to label it with moral characteristics. We simply
don’t tend to think of facts or propositions as having variations in moral
value; and if we were to ascribe moral value, it would seem natural to
say that propositions’ goodness would be convertible with their truth,
so that the moral value of a ‘metaphysic’ would follow immediately from
its truth value. In that case, it would be irrelevant to say that a metaphysic
is ‘more’ or ‘less’ ‘humane’, for humaneness is a quality that comes in de-
grees and consequently isn’t easily mapped onto a binary like true/false.
However, although the term ‘metaphysic’ (especially in the singular)
can be used to refer to a speciﬁc body of metaphysical propositions, it
would be reductive to identify all of metaphysics in this way. For ‘meta-
physics’ also denotes an activity, a task that includes debating with others,
analyzing metaphysicians throughout history, engaging reality through a
speciﬁc kind of inquiry, and interpreting one’s self and one’s community/
tradition in relation to history and reality. And as a multifaceted activity,
metaphysics can take on a moral character. Ulrich himself discusses this
as the ‘crisis’ character of being and of thinking (HA, pp. 339–73, 438–
48, and 480–87) and is the reason the work is subtitled as Das Wagnis der
Seinsfrage, ‘the wager of the question of being’ (or, as Schindler translates
it, ‘the drama of the question of being’). When Ulrich speaks of crisis, he is
talking about the decision-character of being and thinking. Since a being is
a repetition of the gift of being, its movement of ﬁnitization is a ‘decision’
Review Articles
21
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 14679418, 2020, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/rirt.13714 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

– a movement toward particularity that Ulrich characterizes as gratitude.
Thinking itself takes place within this movement of ﬁnitization – even
playing a signiﬁcant role in the fruition of being’s crisis or decision. And
here, we must attend to the ‘character’ of intellectual activity – even, or
perhaps especially, the ‘moral’ character of human thinking in its partici-
pation in giving direction to being in its movement to ﬁnitization.
As Ulrich points out, the human thinker might – wrongly – take their
role in giving direction to being as license to order all of being to oneself
or to humanity exclusively. But this would in effect submit being to the
reign of the human essence and to the domination of human reason
(HA, p. 339). But inverting the relation between the human essence (in-
cluding human thinking) and being by giving humanity primacy over-
against being would do violence both to the human and to the giftedness
of being, and in a similar way. In respect of being, the inversion would
deny its ‘superessentiality’, the nonsubsistent but inﬁnite fecundity of be-
ing according to which it has the power to move into an inﬁnite variety of
particular, ﬁnite essences. The human person as an intellectual and erotic
being, for whom the scope of thought and desire is potentially inﬁnite,
mirrors the superessentiality of being, so that a denial of being’s
superessentiality would constitute a denial, or at minimum a distortion,
of humanity’s own superessentiality. The human person, rather, ‘co-en-
acts’ being:
Because being, from out of the crisis, is not established exclusively in view of
man’s essence, then the unfolding of that which is enfolded in being through
man at the same time implies a liberation of the whole creation in thinking
as thanking … Man’s self-enactment out of the crisis of being, which origi-
nally lays claim on him, comes to completion exclusively in the fact that
man apprehends being as gift in such a way that he ‘lets beings be’
‘through’; himself and in this letting be he lovingly afﬁrms that the ens is
called a being on the basis of being and not on the basis of man
(HA, p. 342).
It strikes me as no accident that the human person’s co-enactment of being
is described by Ulrich as a ‘letting be’, itself a repetition of the divine let-
ting be through which God speaks creatures into being. The activity of hu-
man thought, the height of which we might call ‘metaphysics’ as the
apprehension of being in its movement to ﬁnitization, is made perfect in
its repetition of the divine act of love that ‘gives’ of itself to the other in or-
der to ‘let the other be’.
Consequently, Ulrich understands metaphysics to be a ‘reenactment’,
and this reenactment does have a moral character. Schindler summarizes
Ulrich so:
Metaphysics as reenactment’ … is an assessment of a particular thinker in
history, not by judging his thought in relation to an abstract ideal, which
would place the one judging outside of history so as to be able to survey it
Review Articles
22
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 14679418, 2020, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/rirt.13714 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

from the outside. Instead, the assessment occurs through an entering into
that thought, a retrieval or reenactment of its basic form [Wiederholung] by
retracing its roots in being and man’s original/originary relation to being
(Companion, pp. 17–18).
In this approach to metaphysics, both as a human task in relation to the
other beings that persons encounter and as an intellectual task in relation
to the philosophers and theologians who precede us, the moral character
of the task is equally integral as its intellectual rigor.
The reader of Ulrich’s HA may ﬁnd points in need of correction, for in-
stance his use of male–female difference to interpret reality in its active
and passive aspects, an interpretive move that has been much discussed
in Balthasar studies. Even if after reading Ulrich one decides to pursue
an alternative construal of metaphysics altogether, one has nevertheless
been prodded to engage in metaphysics more humanely, as a task impli-
cated equally in moral, theological formation and in philosophy.
Review Articles
23
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 14679418, 2020, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/rirt.13714 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

