 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW SUPERMAN DEVELOPED INTO A JESUS FIGURE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRISIS ON INFINITE TEXTS: HOW SUPERMAN DEVELOPED INTO A JESUS FIGURE  
 
 
By ROBERT REVINGTON, B.A., M.A.  
 
 
A Thesis Submitted to the School of Graduate Studies in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements 
for the Degree of Master of Arts  
 
McMaster University © Copyright by Robert Revington, September 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
McMaster University MASTER OF ARTS (2018) Hamilton, Ontario, Religious Studies  
 
TITLE: Crisis on Infinite Texts: How Superman Developed into a Jesus Figure  
AUTHOR: Robert Revington, B.A., M.A (McMaster University)  
SUPERVISOR: Professor Travis Kroeker  
NUMBER OF PAGES: vi, 143  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAY ABSTRACT  
 
This thesis examines the historical trajectory of how the comic book character of Superman came 
to be identified as a Christ figure in popular consciousness. It argues that this connection was not 
integral to the character as he was originally created, but was imposed by later writers over time 
and mainly for cinematic adaptations. This thesis also tracks the history of how Christians and 
churches viewed Superman, as the film studios began to exploit marketing opportunities by 
comparing Superman and Jesus. This thesis uses the methodological framework of intertextuality 
to ground its treatment of the sources, but does not follow all of the assumptions of intertextual 
theorists.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
This thesis examines the historical trajectory of how the comic book character of Superman came 
to be identified as a Christ figure in popular consciousness. Superman was created in 1938, but 
the character developed significantly from his earliest incarnations. This thesis argues that the 
connections between Superman and Jesus were not integral to the character as he was originally 
created, but were imposed by later writers over time and mainly for cinematic adaptations. There 
is a notable difference between how Superman is portrayed in the comics and the films because 
the films are aimed at a broader audience and have different marketing aims. Superman turned 
into a Christ figure for financial reasons in many ways. This thesis also tracks the history of how 
Christians and churches viewed Superman, as the film studios began to exploit marketing 
opportunities by comparing Superman and Jesus. This thesis uses the methodological framework 
of intertextuality to ground its treatment of the sources, but does not follow all of the 
assumptions of intertextual theorists because discussions of authorial intention are necessary for 
the narrative that this thesis pursues. The connection between Superman and Jesus was not 
inevitable and cannot be seen wholly as a byproduct of the changes in the surrounding American 
culture because this connection was a product of specific artistic decisions by particular 
creators—who were not necessarily Christians themselves.   
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
v 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
I would like to thank my committee members and readers — Dr. Travis Kroeker, Dr. 
Matthew Thiessen, and Dr. Peter Widdicombe — for their thoughtful feedback and professional 
goodwill. Thanks also go to Dr. Daniel Machiela and Dr. Philippa Carter, who gave me kind and 
consistent support. Friends Brad and Debra Crumb and Merrill Greene I wish to acknowledge. I 
also owe much to my parents Dan and Kate Revington, my brother Ben, and cat Dickon for their 
love and encouragement. Finally, I give thanks to Superman expert Neal Bailey for his time and 
energy answering different questions about Superman lore.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
vi 
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
 
Chapter One: Allusion, Intertextuality, and Superman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1  
 
Comic Book Heroes as an Object of Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1  
 
Intertextuality and Allusion as Methodological Frameworks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8  
 
The Use and Misuse of Intertextuality as It Pertains to This Study  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15  
 
 
Chapter Two: Superman’s Development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21  
 
Misconceptions About Superman and Jesus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21  
 
Explaining the Origins of Superman  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23  
 
Influences on Superman  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34  
 
 
Chapter Three: The History of the Jesus Superman Across Media  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  56  
 
Early Superman/Jesus Parallels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56  
 
Superman as Jesus in the New Millennium  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71  
 
The Films versus the Comics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91  
 
Superman’s Own Religion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109  
 
 
Conclusions: Superman and Jesus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118  
 
 
Bibliography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  121

 
 
 
 
Chapter One: Allusion, Intertextuality, and Superman   
 
Comic Book Heroes as an Object of Study 
 
When future Superman editor Mort Weisinger was first hired as a comic book editor in 
the 1940s, he called his friend Otto Binder for a “crash course” on working in the medium.1 
Binder said it was “very simple,” because in comics, “you get a fight, the hero hits the villain on 
the head with a lamp and says, ‘Lights out for you!’”2 Are comics so simple? In a 2014 
interview, Academy Award-winning director Alejandro González Iñárritu said: “I think there’s 
nothing wrong with being fixated on superheroes when you are 7 years old, but I think there’s a 
disease in not growing up.”3 He added that “the problem” with comic book films “is that 
sometimes they purport to be profound, based on some Greek mythological kind of thing.”4 Bill 
Watterson (the creator of the Calvin and Hobbes newspaper strip) once wrote: “You can make 
your superhero a psychopath, you can draw gut-splattering violence, and you can call it a 
‘graphic novel,’ but comic books are still incredibly stupid.”5 Conversely, in M. Night 
Shyamalan’s film Unbreakable, a character named Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson) owns a 
gallery of comic book art and points to an old comics image, saying, “This is an art gallery my 
friend … and this … is a piece of art.”6 Later, he says, “I believe comics are our last link to an 
                                                           
1Will Murray, “Superman’s Editor Mort Weisinger,” in The Krypton Companion, ed. Michael Eury 
(Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006), 11.  
2 Ibid.  
3 Mike Fleming Jr., “Birdman’s Alejandro G. Iñárritu and ‘Birdman’ Scribes on Hollywood’s Superhero 
Fixation: ‘Poison, Cultural Genocide’—Q & A,” Deadline, October 15, 2014, http://deadline.com/2014/10/ 
birdman-director-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-writers-interview-852206/ (accessed May 9, 2018).    
4 Ibid.  
5 Bill Watterson, The Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book (New York: Scholastic, 1995), 171  
6 Unbreakable, directed M. Night Shyamalan (Burbank, CA: Touchstone Pictures, 2000).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
2 
 
ancient way of passing on history. The Egyptians drew on walls.”7 Price has a high view of 
comics, but he also turns out to be criminally insane.8  
It is not hard to find silly Superman comics. In a 1975 issue, Superman’s metabolism is 
out of control, so at super speed, he eats hundreds of burgers from a fast food chain, while 
saying, “More burgers! CHOMP! Keep them coming ... GULP ... or I’ll starve to death!”9 
Hundreds of female fast food servers in short skirts line up with platters of burgers to keep up 
with his appetite.10 In a 2000 miniseries, Superman met Elmer Fudd and Bugs Bunny when they 
came to life (though this plot was uncharacteristically silly for the era).11 In a 72 page 1978 
comic, without his powers, Superman is forced into a boxing match against Muhammad Ali, but 
Superman and Ali later defeat alien invaders.12 In a 1987 comic, an alien named Sleez uses mind 
control on Superman, not to turn him evil, but just to make him star in a pornographic film.13 
 
Nonetheless, comic book heroes are culturally significant. They can also be moral 
exemplars and a source of great joy for those who love them. Former Superman artist Jon 
Bogdanove said that, in the United States, Superman was a “national icon” because  
All you need to do is visit the Midwest, especially Metropolis, Illinois, to experience the 
nearly religious nature of people’s love .... for vast numbers of Americans he ranks 
somewhere between Elvis and Jesus. Many people overlay biblical parallels on 
Superman, drawing out the similarities in his story with the stories of Moses and Jesus.14  
 
Superman is an influential figure in many different ways. Comics writer Mark Waid 
reflected that when he was a kid and went to see the first Christopher Reeve Superman movie, 
                                                           
7 Ibid.  
8 Ibid.  
9 Cary Bates, “Superman’s Energy Crisis!” Action Comics #454 (New York: DC Comics, 1975).   
10 Ibid.  
11 Mark Evanier, Superman & Bugs Bunny #1–4 (New York: DC Comics, 2000).   
12 Denny O’Neil and Neil Adams, Superman vs. Muhammad Ali (New York: DC Comics, 1978).  
13 John Byrne, “The Suicide Snare,” Action Comics #593 (New York: DC Comics, 1987). 
14 Michael Eury, “Superman Roundtable Discussion,” in The Krypton Companion, ed. Michael Eury 
(Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006), 230–32. Metropolis, Illinois, is the home of the annual Superman 
festival, a giant Superman statue, and a Superman museum.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
3 
 
“walking into that theatre I was a directionless, unhappy, borderline-suicidal kid with no one to 
look up to and with a real dearth of inspirational figures in his life. Walking out—after two 
consecutive showings—I was transformed.”15 Superman artist Karl Kesel observed that 
“Superman is the Ultimate Immigrant to America.”16 Marsha Boulton writes that Superman is 
“as globally recognizable as Mickey Mouse, Charlie Chaplin, and Elvis.”17  
How should we understand heroes like Superman? In the 1970s, Mario Puzo (the author 
of The Godfather) was hired to write the first Superman movie and met with Superman comics 
writers Cary Bates and Elliot S. Maggin to learn more about the character, and Maggin recalled,  
sometime during the afternoon of the second day Mario furrowed his forehead and 
looked at the both of us and he said, as if it were a revelation, “Well, this thing is a Greek 
tragedy,” and Cary and I looked at each other and then looked at Mario and one of us 
said, “That’s what we’ve been trying to tell you.”18  
 
 
Many writers compare superheroes to gods or mythological figures; for example, in a 
2016 review of the comic book film Captain America: Civil War, Matt Zoller Seitz wrote that 
                                                           
15 Ibid., 211.  
16 Ibid.   
17 Marsha Boulton, “The Man of Steel,” in The Just a Minute Omnibus: Glimpses of Our Canadian 
Heritage (Toronto: McArthur & Company, 2000), 480. Similarly, on the back cover of a book about Superman’s 
creators, comic artist Neal Adams said that Superman, Sherlock Holmes, and Tarzan were “the greatest fictional 
icons of all time.” See Brad Ricca, Super Boys: The Amazing Adventures of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster—The 
Creators of Superman (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2013). Author Harlan Ellison said that “every man, woman, 
and child on the planet knows Mickey Mouse, Sherlock Holmes, Tarzan, Robin Hood ... and Superman.” Quoted in 
Dennis Dooley and Gary Engle, preface, in Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and 
Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 11. Les Daniels writes that Superman “became perhaps the most 
widely known figure ever created in American fiction.” Les Daniels, Comix: A History of Comic Books in America 
(New York: Bonanza Books, 1971), 11. Writer Grant Morrison states: “From his creation, Superman was as 
recognizable as Mickey Mouse, Charlie Chaplin, or Santa Claus.” See Grant Morrison, Supergods: What Masked 
Vigilantes, Miraculous Mutants, and a Sun God from Krypton Can Teach Us about Being Human (New York: 
Spiegel & Grau, 2011), 15.  
18 Michael Eury, “Elliot S! Maggin Interview,” in The Krypton Companion, ed. Michael Eury (Raleigh, 
NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006), 144. His middle initial is sometimes written with an exclamation mark. See 
also, Glen Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), 180. Otto 
Binder (the same man who made the earlier description of a comic book story with the lamp) wrote: “comics are 
modern fairy tales. The comics hero is just as fantastic and unbelievable as any classic fairytale character, but he has 
the one advantage of living in present times and dealing with on-the-spot crimes and evils. As such, the youngster 
can identify himself with the hero much more than he could identify himself with Prince Charming riding a white 
horse through some dank forest of long ago.” Quoted in Bill Schelly, Otto Binder: The Life and Work of a Comic 
Book and Science Fiction Visionary (Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2016), 124.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
4 
 
superheroes “are late capitalist America’s version of Greek gods, running, jumping and flying 
through stories that are as contradictory and self-defeating as the country that spawned them.”19 
Comic book writer Mark Millar (a Roman Catholic) once said: “Growing up I had three moral 
guides: my family, Jesus, and Superman. The first Christopher Reeve movie was the Third 
Testament as far as I was concerned.”20 Superman has many connections to Judaism and 
Christianity. Many of the most important Superman writers in different mediums were Jews of 
varying degrees of orthodoxy; however, the films deliberately connected Superman to Jesus.  
                                                           
19 Matt Zoller Seitz, “Captain America: Civil War,” review of Captain America: Civil War, Roger 
Ebert.com, May 5, 2016, https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/captain-america-civil-war-2016 (accessed May 18, 
2018). Actor Samuel L. Jackson—who played the criminally insane Elijah Price in Unbreakable—called comic 
book heroes “the Greek gods of American culture.” See Comic Books and Super Heroes, disc 2, Unbreakable 
(Burbank, CA: Buena Vista, 2001). John Shelton Lawrence and Robert Jewett believe that American popular culture 
is pervaded by an inbuilt “American monomyth” which often secularizes Judeo-Christian stories. See John Shelton 
Lawrence and Robert Jewett, The Myth of the American Superhero (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 
2002), 6. They add that saviors in American movies and pop culture serve “as replacements for the Christ figure” 
(6–7). See also, Jeffrey S. Lang and Patrick Trimble, “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? An 
Examination of the American Monomyth and the Comic Book Superhero,” Journal of Popular Culture 22, no. 3 
(1988): 157–73. Richard Reynolds wrote a book identifying superhero comic books as “modern mythology.” See 
Richard Reynolds, Super Heroes: A Modern Mythology (Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi Press, 1992). 
Comics artist Bob Layton said, “The struggle of ‘gods and mortals’ in comics is a theme as old as storytelling itself. 
Comics are the modern mythology that we, as a society template our fears and dreams onto.” See Jeffery Klaehn, 
“Some Real Shit Winds-Up Selling Like Hotcakes”: Bob Layton,” in Inside the World of Comic Books, ed. Jeffery 
Klaehn (Montreal: Black Rose Books, 2007), 45–46.  Superman Returns director Bryan Singer called comic book 
movies “modern myths.” See Michael Dougherty, Dan Harris, and Bryan Singer, Superman Returns: The Complete 
Shooting Script (London: Titan Books, 2006), 10. For a study of Superman as an American myth, see Steven 
Harper, “Supermyth!” The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, (Dallas, 
TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 93–99. See also, Peter W. Rose, “Teaching Greek Myth and Confronting 
Contemporary Myths,” Bucknell Review 35, no. 1 (1991): 17–39. For an old Christianity Today article on a similar 
theme, see Harold O.J. Brown, “Superman on the Screen: Counterfeit Myth,” Christianity Today, April 20, 1979, 
https://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2007/julyweb-only/128-14.0.html (accessed June 29, 2018). Also, former DC 
comics president Paul Levitz said: “I don’t think Superman becomes a substitute for religion. I think he becomes a 
substitute for mythology.” See Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns 
(Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video, 2006).  For more on comic book heroes as modern “gods,” see Archie Bland, 
“Comic Book Superheroes: The Gods of Modern Mythology,” The Guardian, May 27, 2016, https://www.the 
guardian.com/books/2016/may/27/comic-book-superheroes-the-gods-of-modern-mythology (accessed June 27, 
2018).  For an analysis of the “episodic” nature of Superman stories, see Umberto Eco, “The Myth of Superman,” 
trans. Natalie Chilton, Diacritics 2, no. 1 (1972): 14–22. Eco writes: “the stories develop in a kind of oneiric 
climate—of which the reader is not aware at all—where what has happened before and what has happened after 
appears extremely hazy. The narrator picks up the strand of the event again and again as if he had forgotten to say 
something and wanted to add details to what had already been said” (17). For a study that builds on Eco’s work, see 
Federico Pagello, “The ‘Origin Story’ Is the Only Story: Seriality and Temporality in Superhero Fiction from 
Comics to Post-Television,” Quarterly Review of Film & Video, 34, no. 8 (2017): 725–45.  
20 Quoted in Stephen Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero (Eugene, OR: 
Harvest House Publishers, 2006), 1.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
5 
 
My research will examine religious symbolism in comics, films, books, and television 
about Superman. I will place particular emphasis on representations of Superman as a Christ 
figure, as well as the controversial history of such parallels. Marco Arnaudo observes that in the 
cases of Superman and Batman, it is unprecedented for one character’s adventures to have been 
written about so “regularly and consistently … without interruption for so long, resulting in such 
a volume of stories at such a fast pace, and with dozens of authors, each inserting himself into 
the collective work.”21 Hence, this research is important because superheroes are a significant 
part of North American popular culture and there is a wealth of primary source material that has 
not been studied. This study will fill some gaps. After all, since the year 2000, superhero films 
have also consistently ranked among each year’s top box office performers.22   
In a study like this one, it is also important to recognize that comic books have changed 
over time. The target audience changed. As author Tim Hanley succinctly puts it,  
In the late 1980s, miniseries like Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons’s Watchmen and Frank 
Miller’s The Dark Knight Returns presented violent, often gruesome stories set in a world 
of superheroes. The violence was part of a critique of the genre, portrayed as a symptom 
of the insanity necessary to don a cape and fight crime in a world of superpowered 
beings. The books were very popular, and the rest of the industry tried to follow their 
dark lead, but in doing so they kept only the violence and forgot the critique. Massively 
muscular, gun-toting, homicidal antiheroes were soon all the rage, and this broader thirst 
for violence bled into previously wholesome mainstream titles.23  
Similarly, in 1997, a reviewer named James O’Ehley wrote a piece analyzing how the 
1992 superhero film Batman Returns was controversial: the film’s dark and violent tone reflected 
how comic books were not aimed at kids as much as they used to be.24 O’Ehley observed: 
                                                           
21 Marco Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, trans. Jamie Richards (Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins 
University Press, 2013), 4.  
22 Steve DiChristopher, “Is Superhero Movie Fatigue a Myth?” CNBC, May 15, 2016, https://www.cnbc. 
com/2016/05/14/is-superhero-movie-fatigue-a-myth.html (accessed May 18, 2018).  
23 Tim Hanley, Investigating Lois Lane: The Turbulent History of the Daily Planet’s Ace Reporter 
(Chicago, IL: Chicago Review Press, 2016), 175–76.  
24 James O’Ehley, “Sci-Fi Movie Page Pic: Batman Returns,” review of Batman Returns, May 1997, 
http://www.scifimoviepage.com/pick3.html (accessed May 18, 2018).   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
6 
 
Comic book readership (along with literacy) has been changing in the past decade .... The 
demographics of comic book readers have also changed. Although kids still make up the 
largest chunk of comic book consumers, comics readers have become older. Why? 
Because kids aren’t interested anymore and few new readers have come into the fold 
while the existing fans … Well, they just turned 29, that's all …25 
 
Although early Superman stories were also targeted at American soldiers during the 
Second World War, for much of the twentieth century they were for children. Now, comic books 
are aimed more at older audiences and have more violence and sexual content than they used 
to.26 The writing style changed as well. Older comics have more expository dialogue, captions, 
and thought bubbles explaining what is happening. For example, on the cover of a 1959 story, 
Superman says: “Great guns … I’m caught in a super-trap by super-villains from the year 2,000! 
Even my Superman powers can’t help me escape!”27 If that story were written today, Superman 
probably would not need to describe his experiences aloud so obviously. Now, extra exposition 
is less common and the art does more of the storytelling, in part because the audience has aged 
and the writing has matured along with it.  
Superman changed over time, as this thesis will demonstrate. The first Superman comic, 
Action Comics #1 (by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster), was published in 1938.28 Yet the years 1985 
and 1986 were especially important. In 1985, DC Comics published a twelve-issue miniseries 
called Crisis on Infinite Earths.29 DC had decided that they had too many characters existing in a 
multitude of confusing parallel universes; the Crisis miniseries ended with the universe being 
reoriented into one harmonious whole.30 The aftermath of this miniseries allowed DC to “reboot” 
                                                           
25 Ibid.  
26 If you pick up a 2018 Superman comic off the shelves, it will say it is rated “T” for “Teen.” This is in 
stark contrast to the 1950s, where all superhero comics had to meet the strict censorship of the Comics Code 
Authority to be considered suitable for children.  
27 Bill Finger, “Superman Duels the Futuremen!” Superman #128 (New York: DC Comics, 1959).   
28 Jerry Siegel, “Superman,” Action Comics #1 (New York: DC Comics, 1938). This study will list all 
issues as “DC Comics” even though the name of the company changed multiple times over the years. 
29 Marv Wolfman, Crisis on Infinite Earths Deluxe Edition (New York: DC Comics, 2015 [1985–1986]).  
30 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
7 
 
classic heroes like Superman and redo their origin stories without the baggage of decades of 
continuity—while also excising some of the more childish aspects of the previous continuity. In 
1986, the Superman comics had new editors, writers, and artists. A writer/artist named John 
Byrne was tasked with rebooting Superman.31 There is a clear-cut difference in tone and content 
between “pre-Crisis” and “post-Crisis” Superman comics. Post-Crisis comics tend to be more 
serious. Byrne also made a major change to Superman: while before, Clark Kent was 
Superman’s clumsy, meek, and mild-mannered alter-ego, after Byrne’s reboot, Clark Kent 
became the normal, “real” person (and no longer meek and clumsy to an exaggerated degree), 
and Superman was the “act” and more like “a professional role, a career, like quarterback, 
trombonist, dental hygienist.”32   
 Just as Crisis on Infinite Earths ended with one harmonious Earth (although the parallel 
universes eventually returned), this study will seek to find a unified, harmonious whole in 
Superman’s development into a Christ figure. This study will offer a historical survey of 
Superman’s development into a Christ figure, but also use “allusion” and “intertextuality” to 
ground its methodological framework for examining Superman’s interactions with religion.  
                                                           
31 See John Byrne, The Man of Steel (New York: DC Comics, 1986). Originally published as a six-issue 
miniseries. For more on the background of the miniseries and the reboot, see Les Daniels, DC Comics: Sixty Years 
of the World’s Favorite Comic Book Heroes (New York: Bulfinch Press, 1995), 188–89; 192–93; Les Daniels, 
Superman: The Complete History: The Life and Times of the Man of Steel (San Francisco, CA: Chronicle Books, 
1998), 146, 148, 159–61.  
32 Tom De Haven, Our Hero: Superman on Earth, Icons of America (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2010), 38. Instead of portraying Clark Kent as a bumbling, clumsy character, in Byrne’s revamp, Clark tells 
his adoptive parents, “Superman isn’t real. He’s just a fancy pair of longjohns that lets me operate in public without 
losing my private life.” See John Byrne, The Man of Steel, Book Six, (New York: DC Comics, 1986), 4.  This 
approach was picked up in the television shows Smallville and Lois & Clark. In the latter show, he says to Lois 
Lane: “Superman is what I can do. Clark is who I am.” See Lois and Clark, “Tempus Fugitive,” S02, E18, directed 
by James Bagdonas, written by Jack Weinstein and Lee Hutson ABC, March 26, 1995. In a 1995 comics storyline 
where Superman’s secret identity is threatened and he is concerned he will have to give it up, he tells Lois Lane, 
“I’m Clark Kent first and Superman second! Superman is the mask I’ve worn all along to have a private life! … See, 
all my memories of life are as Clark Kent! It wasn’t Superman who went off to the first day of Kindergarten or 
graduated from high school—it was Clark! Me! Do you realize that it means more to me to win an award for a 
column or story I’ve written than it does to fly to the moon? One of my fondest dreams isn’t getting along with the 
JLA—it’s to write the great American novel! It’s because I can achieve those things honestly—without benefit of 
my powers!” Dan Jurgens, “The Death of Clark Kent,” Superman #100 (New York: DC Comics, 1995), 28–29.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
8 
 
“Intertextuality” and “Allusion” as Methodological Frameworks 
 
Julia Kristeva introduced the French word intertextualité (or “intertextuality” in 
English).33 Mary Orr credits Kristeva with inventing the term in the 1960s, and adds that the term 
“enjoyed immediate and resounding success.”34 However, Leon S. Roudiez observes that the 
term was “much used and abused on both sides of the Atlantic” and “has been generally 
misunderstood.”35 As a representative example, in a study of intertextuality and rabbinics, 
Katharina E. Keim uses the term intertextuality to refer to simply “a significant narrative, 
thematic, or verbal overlap” between texts.36 This sort of phrasing simplifies the theoretical 
background behind the term. In Roudiez’s words, intertextuality “has nothing to do with matters 
of influence by one writer upon another, or with the sources of a literary work; it does, on the 
other hand, involve the components of a textual system such as the novel, for instance.”37 
Kristeva writes that a text “is a permutation of texts, an intertextuality: in the space of a given 
text, several utterances, taken from other texts, intersect and neutralize one another.”38 Judith 
                                                           
33 Leon S. Roudiez, “Introduction,” in Julia Kristeva, Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to 
Literature and Art, ed. Leon S. Roudiez, trans. Thomas Gora, Alice Jardine, and Leon S. Roudiez (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1980), 15.  
34 Mary Orr, Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003), 1.   
35 Roudiez, “Introduction,” 15. Likewise, Tiphaine Samoyault observes that “le terme d’intertextualité a été 
tant utilise, défini, chargé de sens différents qu’il est devenu une notion ambiguë du discours littéraire.” See 
Tiphaine Samoyault, L’Intertextualité: Mémoire de la littérature (Paris: Armand Colin, 2008), 5.   
36 Katharina E. Keim, Pirqei deRabbi Eliezer: Structure, Coherence, Intertextuality, Ancient Judaism and 
Early Christianity 96 (Leiden: Brill, 2017), 141.  
37 Roudiez, “Introduction,” 15. For more on intertextuality and its definitions, see Frank J. D’Angelo, “The 
Rhetoric of Intertextuality,” Rhetoric Review 29, no. 1 (2010): 31–47; Rama Kundu, Intertext: A Study of the 
Dialogue between Texts (New Delhi: Sarup & Sons, 2008); Graham Allen, Intertextuality, New Critical Idiom 
(London: Routledge, 2000); Judith Still and Michael Worton, “Introduction,” in Intertextuality: Theories and 
Practices, eds. Michael Worton and Judith Still (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990), 1–44.  
38 Julia Kristeva “The Bounded Text,” in Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art, 
ed. Leon S. Roudiez, trans. Thomas Gora, Alice Jardine, and Leon S. Roudiez (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1980), 36. There are parallels between intertextuality and the writings of Harold Bloom. Bloom writes that 
“poems are not things but only words that refer to other words …. any poem is an inter-poem, and any reading of a 
poem is an inter-reading.” See Harold Bloom, Poetry and Repression: Revisionism from Blake to Stevens (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1976), 3. Bloom writes that “there are no texts, but only relationships between 
texts.” See Harold Bloom, A Map of Misreading (New York: Oxford University Press, 1975), 3.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
9 
 
Still and Michael Worton write that the term “intertextuality” can now be understood more 
broadly than it was in Kristeva’s original work.39 The creator of a text is first a “reader,” so the 
creation is made of  
references, quotations, and influences of every kind. Rousseau, for example, does not 
entitle his autobiography The Confessions in ignorance of church practices or of St 
Augustine’s work of the same name. This repetition of past or contemporary texts can 
range from the most conscious and sophisticated elaboration of other poets’ work, to a 
scholarly use of sources, or the quotation (with or without the use of quotation marks) of 
snatches of conversation typical of a certain social milieu at a certain historical moment.40  
 
Likewise, in 2008, DC Comics began a comic book series called Trinity that starred its 
three most famous superheroes: Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman.41 This name carries 
intertextual associations from Christianity.42 Yet intertextuality theorists also think that the 
meaning of a text is affected by the reader’s knowledge; the reader can miss allusions or bring in 
interpretations foreign to the author.43 For example, Still and Worton note how the term 
“confessions” could have a more salacious meaning today than it did in Rousseau’s day.44  
Mary Orr writes that the term was significant because “non-hierarchical and 
democratically inclusive notions of text in a vast mosaic of other texts could now be 
prioritized.”45 The term challenged “the pre-eminence of high-cultural expression (as essentially 
white, male and European).”46 The term “intertextuality” was meant “to replace and displace” 
the word “influence,” because the latter term was tied to “critical source-hunting and authorial 
                                                           
39 Still and Worton, “Introduction,” 1. They also argue that the concept goes as far back as Plato (2–4).  
40 Ibid.  
41 Kurt Busiek and Fabian Nicieza, Trinity, vols. 1–3 (New York: DC Comics, 2009).   
42 Greg Garrett writes that by naming an earlier miniseries Trinity, “DC Comics finally acknowledged that 
in the persons of Batman, Superman, and Wonder Woman they had a fully functional equivalent of the Christian 
trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.” See Greg Garrett  Holy Superheroes: Exploring the Sacred in Comics, 
Graphic Novels, and Film, rev. ed., (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2008), 42. The connection is a 
bit superficial though.   
43 Still and Worton, “Introduction,” 1–2. 
44 Ibid., 2.  
45 Orr, Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts, 1.  
46 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
10 
 
intention.”47 On a related point, in 1991, Jay Clayton and Eric Rothstein wrote that younger 
scholars associated “influence” with “elitism” and “the old boy networks of Major Authors,” 
while intertextuality was either an “enlargement” or a “replacement” for “influence.”48  
Intertextuality goes beyond the term “influence” to “encompass unconscious, socially 
prompted types of text formation (for example, by archetypes or popular culture),” and it 
removes concern for authorial intention altogether.49 Clayton and Rothstein believe that in the 
18th century, the “originality” and “genius” of the author began to take on more importance and 
critics began to use the notion of “influence” to downgrade the value of authors.50 While 
“influence” emphasizes authorial intention, Graham Allen writes: “intertextuality is not … an 
intended reference by an author to another text: intertextuality is the very condition of 
signification, of meaning, in literary and indeed all language.”51 Furthermore, Judith H. 
Anderson writes that the term “intertextuality” has often been used to “demonize an other,” and 
that “other” seems to be terms such as “influence” or “imitation.”52 Anderson believes that the 
latter two terms are disparaged by certain intertextuality scholars more because they are hard to 
clearly differentiate from intertextuality.53 John Frow concludes that  
                                                           
47 Ibid., 15.   
48 Jay Clayton and Eric Rothstein, “Figures in the Corpus: Theories of Influence and Intertextuality,” in 
Influence and Intertextuality in Literary History, eds. Jay Clayton and Eric Rothstein (Madison, WI: The University 
of Wisconsin Press, 1991), 3.  
49 Ibid. One can draw a parallel to Northrop Frye’s idea that literature relies on pre-existent recurring 
“archetypes.” See Northrop Frye, “The Archetypes of Literature,” The Kenyon Review 13, no. 1 (1951): 92–110; 
Northrop Frye Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1957). For another 
concept of “archetypes” that pulls heavily from Carl Jung, see Maud Bodkin, Archetypal Patterns in Poetry 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1934). For more, as well as a connection to the writings of T.S. Eliot, see Thaïs 
E. Morgan, “Is There an Intertext in This Text? Literary and Interdisciplinary Approaches to Intertextuality,” 
American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4 (1985): 1–40. For a discussion of intertextuality and “tropes,” see also 
Michael Riffaterre, “Compulsory Reader Response: The Intertextual Drive,” in Intertextuality: Theories and 
Practices, eds. Michael Worton and Judith Still (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990), 77.  
50 Clayton and Rothstein, “Figures in the Corpus,” 5.  
51 Graham Allen, Roland Barthes, Routledge Critical Thinkers (New York: Routledge, 2003), 82.   
52 Judith H. Anderson, Reading the Allegorical Intertext: Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton (New 
York: Fordham University Press, 2008), 4.  
53 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
11 
 
the identification of an intertext is an act of interpretation. The intertext is not a real and 
causative source but a theoretical construct formed by and serving the purposes of a 
reading ... Intertextual analysis is distinguished from source criticism both by this stress 
on interpretation rather than on the establishment of particular facts, and by its rejection 
of a unilinear causality (the concept of ‘influence’) in favour of an account of the work 
performed upon intertextual material and its functional integration in the later text.54  
 
Jonathan Culler argues that if the author’s original sources can be readily identified, one 
is no longer within the proper paradigm of “intertextuality” because “intertextuality is the 
general discursive space that makes a text intelligible.”55 Some scholars exclude “allusion” from 
intertextuality, but Culler thinks that this move calls into question the validity of intertextuality.56 
The role of the “author” and the meaning of “allusion” in intertextuality theory deserve more 
probing, and those points must be understood with reference to Roland Barthes’s theories.  
After Kristeva, since the 1970s and the 1980s, Roland Barthes became one of the most 
important proponents of intertextuality. Barthes writes that the text “is the phenomenal surface of 
the literary work; it is the fabric of the words which make up the work and which are arranged in 
such a way as to impose a meaning which is stable and as far as possible unique.”57 Barthes 
acknowledges his debt to Kristeva.58 He writes that any text contains “scraps” of other texts, and 
so, “any text is an intertext; other texts are present in it, at varying levels, in more or less 
recognisable forms: the texts of the previous and surrounding culture. Any text is a new tissue of 
past citations.”59 He argues that intertextuality is not reducible to “sources or influences,” but 
instead, “the intertext is a general field of anonymous formulae whose origin can scarcely ever 
                                                           
54 John Frown, “Intertextuality and Ontology,” in Intertextuality: Theories and Practices, eds. Michael 
Worton and  Judith Still (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990), 46.  
55 Jonathan Culler, The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction (Oxon, UK: Routledge, 
2001 [1981]), 116–17.  
56 Ibid., 116.  
57 Roland Barthes, “Theory of the Text,” in Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist Reader, trans. Ian 
McLeod, ed. Robert Young (Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981), 32.  
58 Ibid., 36, 38, 43, 45. 
59 Ibid., 39. In a different essay, Barthes stated the text was “a tissue,” or “skein of different voices and 
multiple codes which are at once interwoven and unfinished.” See Roland Barthes, “Textual Analysis of Poe’s 
‘Valdemar,’” in Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist Reader, trans. Geoff Bennington, ed. Robert Young (Boston: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981), 157.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
12 
 
be located; of unconscious or automatic quotations, given without quotation marks.”60 Barthes is 
able to write an analysis of an Edgar Allan Poe poem without thinking about the author directly 
or even the fact that Barthes himself was dealing with a translation.61 Indeed, Thaïs E. Morgan 
states that intertextuality “presents a special challenge to the positivistic sciences whose pursuit 
of knowledge of ‘truth’ is by definition grounded on ‘facts.’”62 In Barthes’s metholodogy, the 
reader is not a passive “echo chamber, but the reagent of the text.”63 Barthes’s way of reading 
the text can encourage going against the grain in accordance with the reader’s subjective 
experiences and interpretations.64 Just as Barthes emphasizes the role of the reader, he 
downplayed the role of the author in an essay called “The Death of the Author,” where he says: 
We know now that a text is not a line of words releasing a single ‘theological’ meaning 
(the ‘message’ of the Author-God) but a multi-dimensional space in which a variety of 
writings, none of them original, blend and clash. The text is a tissue of quotations drawn 
from the innumerable centres of culture …. the writer can only imitate a gesture that is 
always anterior, never original. His only power is to mix writings, to counter the ones 
with the others, in such a way as never to rest on any one of them …. a text is made of 
multiple writings, drawn from many cultures and entering into mutual relations of 
dialogue, parody, contestation, but there is one place where this multiplicity is focused, 
and that place is the reader, not, as was hitherto said, the author.65    
 
Jonathan Culler writes that Barthes’s confident definition of the text (in distinction from 
the author) shows “that assurance that comes upon some writers in Paris.”66 In any event, for 
Barthes, the text is not viewed as a unified creation constructed by one author, but is derived 
from other texts, and not limited to one specific reading. Hence, Barthes believes that  
once the Author is removed, the claim to decipher a text becomes quite futile. To give a 
text an Author is to impose a limit on that text, to furnish it with a final signified, to close 
                                                           
60 Barthes, “Theory of the Text,” 39.  
61 Barthes, “Textual Analysis of Poe’s ‘Valdemar,’” 137.  
62 Morgan, “Is There an Intertext in This Text?” 34.      
63 Orr, Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts,  35.  
64 Orr, Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts, 35–36.  
65 Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” in Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, trans. Stephen Heath 
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 146, 148.  
66 Jonathan Culler, On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1982), 32.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
13 
 
the writing …. everything is to be disentangled, nothing deciphered; the structure can be 
followed, ‘run’ (like the thread of a stocking) at every point and at every level, but there 
is nothing beneath: the space of writing is to be ranged over, not pierced …. In precisely 
this way literature (it would be better from now on to say writing), by refusing to assign a 
‘secret’, an ultimate meaning, to the text (and to the world as text), liberates what may be 
called an anti-theological activity, an activity that is truly revolutionary since to refuse to 
fix meaning is, in the end, to refuse God and his hypostases—reason, science, law.67  
 
Barthes says that trying “to find the ‘sources’ or ‘influences’ of a work, is to fall in with 
the myth of filiation; the citations which go to make up a text are anonymous, untraceable, and 
yet already read: they are quotations without inverted commas.”68 Barthes compares the “text” 
to the words of the demoniac in Mark 5:9: “My name is Legion: for we are many.”69 For Barthes, 
the text is like a “network.”70 Yet Barthes may have overstated his case.  
When it is possible to identify authorial intention, it would seem ridiculous not to do so. 
Indeed, William Irwin argues that a concept of intertextuality like Barthes’s theory merely 
transfers the power of the “author” to the “reader.”71 Irwin also criticizes Barthes and Kristeva 
for relying on obscure and pretentious jargon.72 Irwin offers a colourful and well-founded 
critique of the “death of the author” when he writes that 
to treat a text as if its meaning were essentially independent of authorial intent is to treat 
the text as if it were not a text at all, but merely an entity like a monkey’s randomly and 
accidentally typed Hamlet. The truth is that we could not make use of such a text at all 
without making certain basic assumptions about the author and what he or she intended, 
for example that she was presenting a work of fiction in English … Authorial intention is 
unavoidable; intertextual connections are not somehow magically made between 
inanimate texts but are the products of authorial design.73  
 
 
These points are well-made, but it is not always easy to separate “authorial intention” 
from the interpreter’s guesswork. As a parallel, the Pixar film Inside Out tells the story of the 
                                                           
67 Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” 147.  
68 Roland Barthes, “From Work to Text,” in Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, trans. Stephen Heath 
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 160.   
69 Ibid.  
70 Ibid., 161.  
71 William Irwin, “Against Intertextuality,” Philosophy and Literature 28 no. 2 (2004): 230–33.   
72 Ibid., 232.  
73 Ibid., 240.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
14 
 
mind of a schoolgirl with parts of her mind and emotions represented by the film’s characters 
and places, and at one point in the film, some of the “facts” and “opinions” in her brain are 
haphazardly jumbled into one pile without differentiation.74 Something similar can happen when 
the distinctions between “authorial intent” and “opinion” are not recognized. This study of 
Superman will endeavour to explain authorial intent as much as possible, but with the knowledge 
that not everything can be proven.75 When authorial intent is ambiguous or hard to know, the 
language of intertextuality provides a backdoor to understand the relationships between texts. 
Granted, Jacob Neusner writes: “I find in theories of intertextuality somewhat less than meets the 
eye, because definitions of terms turn out to be few, applications of theory episodic and 
anecdotal, criteria for validation or invalidation pretty much absent.”76 Intertextuality invites 
subjective interpretations. Paying some attention to authorial intent addresses that subjectivity, 
even if intertextuality theorists would not approve (because subjectivity is part of the concept).   
On a related point, in his study of Renaissance intertextuality, Raphael Lyne observes 
that “allusion and intertextuality are usually set against one another.”77 Lyne offers a useful 
distinction between the two: allusion “denotes an intentional appropriation and/or 
acknowledgement of another work which came before it in time,” while intertextuality “typically 
                                                           
74 Inside Out, directed by Pete Docter (Emeryville, CA: Pixar Animation Studios, 2015).    
75 Some examples of overconfidence in deciphering authorial intention are in New Testament studies when 
scholars claim that the hypothetical “Q” community did not know about the resurrection of Jesus, or that the author 
of the Gospel of Mark wanted to set his community against Peter and the apostles by portraying them unfavourably. 
For example, see Richard A. Horsley, Jesus in Context: Power, People and Performance (Minneapolis: Fortress 
Press, 2008), 45; Theodore J. Weeden, Sr., Mark—Traditions in Conflict (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971).   
76 Jacob Neusner, Canon and Connection: Intertextuality in Judaism, Studies in Judaism (Lanham, MD: 
University Press of America, 1987), 150. For other uses of intertextuality and rabbinics, see Daniel Boyarin, 
Intertextuality and the Reading of Midrash (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990); Marianne 
Schleicher, Intertextuality in the Tales of Rabbi Nahman of Bratslav: A Close Reading of Sippurey Ma’asiyot 
(Leiden: Brill, 2007).    
77 Raphael Lyne, Memory and Intertextuality in Renaissance Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2016), 21. For applications of the concept to other spheres of Western literature, see also Sudha Shastri, 
Intertextuality and Victorian Studies (Hyderabad, India: Orient Longman, 2001). See also, Margery A. Evans, 
Baudelaire and Intertextuality: Poetry at the Crossroads, Cambridge Studies in French 38 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
15 
 
denies intention and chronology, emphasizing instead spontaneous interconnection as a property 
of language.”78 Allusion “appeals to intuition ... and belongs to traditional and sometimes deeply 
embedded conceptions of what reading and writing are,” while “intertextuality is dynamic, 
deliberately dispensing with the key sites of authority.”79 The term “allusion” affirms authorial 
intention; the term “intertextuality” does not. This study of Superman will use both.  
 
The Use and Misuse of Intertextuality as It Pertains to This Study 
 
The term intertextuality is often used in a way that contradicts the key theorists behind 
the concept. It is ironic that, in a book on the New Testament, Richard B. Hays uses the term 
“allusion” to refer to “obvious intertextual references” (emphasis mine).80 He has melded two 
terms that have often been conceptually opposed! Even so, in a 2016 monograph, Külli Tõniste 
wrote that she would adopt Hays’s terminology “since it is widely used by a growing number of 
biblical scholars.”81 Is this valid? Thomas R. Hatina observes that “pragmatically, the term 
[intertextuality] is used as a substitute category for uncovering and investigating conscious or 
unconscious allusions to scripture in the New Testament.”82 According to Hatina, sometimes 
scholars use the term because it is convenient or fashionable to do so, but those scholars do not 
pay heed to the term’s theoretical background.83 He concludes: “it is clear that the term 
‘intertextuality’ cannot simply be bandied about as a synonym for allusion without regard for its 
                                                           
78 Lyne, Memory and Intertextuality in Renaissance Literature, 21.  
79 Ibid.  
80 Richard B. Hays, Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1989), 29. He uses the term “echo” to refer to “subtler” references.  
81 Külli Tõniste, The Ending of the Canon: A Canonical and Intertextual Reading of Revelation 21–22, 
Library of New Testament Studies 526 (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2016), 24.  
82 Thomas R. Hatina, “Intertextuality and Historical Criticism in New Testament Studies: Is There a 
Relationship?” Biblical Interpretation 7, no. 1 (1999): 28.  
83 Ibid., 43.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
16 
 
origin, its integrated theory of text, and its relationship to influence.”84 To a different end, in a 
monograph on intertextuality and the Book of Zechariah, Michael R. Stead admits that by paying 
attention to authorial intent, he is—ironically—using the term “intertextuality” in a way different 
than the creators of the term intended.85 His study does not ignore authorial intent, but draws 
other textual links beyond that.86 Other biblical scholars have also used the term in a way 
different than Barthes’s theories. Brian C. Dennert uses the term “intertextuality” in a loose way 
                                                           
84 Ibid.  
85 Michael R. Stead, The Intertextuality of Zechariah 1–8, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 
506 (New York: T & T Clark, 2009), 19. Stead’s use of the term focuses on three things: how texts are created from 
a mosaic of other texts, how textual meaning can be derived “from a ‘dialogue’ between texts,” and how the reader 
plays a role in the creation of meaning (20). For a study with some of the same features, see Suk Yee Lee, An 
Intertextual Analysis of Zechariah 9–10: The Earlier Restoration Expectations of Second Zechariah, Library of 
Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 599, (London: Bloomsbury T & T Clark, 2015).      
86 Stead, The Intertextuality of Zechariah 1–8, 22. For more uses of intertextuality (that do not all reflect the 
theory of the term), see also, Lee, An Intertextual Analysis of Zechariah 9–10, 24–25; Timothy K. Beal, “Ideology 
and Intertextuality: Surplus of Meaning and Controlling the Means of Production,” Reading between the Texts: 
Intertextuality and the Hebrew Bible, ed. Danna Nolan Fewell, Literary Currents in Biblical Interpretation 
(Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992), 27–39. The remaining essays in this same book apply the 
concept in different ways. See also Timothy K. Beal, “Intertextuality,” in Handbook of Postmodern Biblical 
Interpretation, ed. A. K. M. Adam (St. Louis, MO: 2000), 128–30; Andrew Wilson, “Kristeva,” in Handbook of 
Postmodern Biblical Interpretation, ed. A.K.M. Adam (St. Louis, MO: 2000), 144–50; Alison M. Jack, The Bible 
and Literature, SCM Core Text (London: SCM Press, 2012); Patricia Tull, “Intertextuality and the Hebrew 
Scriptures,” Currents in Research: Biblical Studies 8, no. 1 (2000): 59–90; Geoffrey D. Miller, “Intertextuality in 
Old Testament Research,” Currents in Biblical Research 9, no. 3 (2011): 283–309; S. Philip Nolte and Pierre J. 
Jordaan, “Ideology and Intertextuality: Intertextual Allusions in Judith 16,” HTS Teologiese Studies 67, no. 3 (2011): 
1–9; Katharine Dell and Will Kynes, eds., Reading Job Intertextually, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament 
Studies 574 (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2013); Katharine Dell and Will Kynes, eds., Reading Ecclesiastes 
Intertextually, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 587, (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014); 
Lesleigh Cushing Stahlberg, Sustaining Fictions: Intertextuality, Midrash, Translation, and the Literary Afterlife of 
the Bible, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 486, (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2008); Craig A. 
Evans and Jeremiah J. Johnston, eds., Searching the Scriptures: Studies in Context and Intertextuality, Studies in 
Scripture in Early Judaism and Early Christianity 19, published under Library of New Testament Studies 543 
(London and New York: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2015); Leroy A. Huizenga, The New Isaac: Tradition and 
Intertextuality in the Gospel of Matthew, Supplements to Novum Testamentum 131, (Leiden: Brill, 2009); Marvin 
A. Sweeney, Form and Intertextuality in Prophetic and Apocalyptic Literature, Forschungen zum Alten Testament 
45 (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005); Marvin A. Sweeney, Reading Prophetic Books: Form, Intertextuality, and 
Reception in Prophetic and Post-Biblical Literature Forschungen zum Alten Testament 89 (Tübingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2014); Richard B. Hays, Echoes of Scripture in the Gospels (Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2016); 
Sylvia C. Keesmaat, “Exodus and the Intertextual Transformation of Tradition in Romans 8.14–30,” Journal for the 
Study of the New Testament 54, no. 1 (1994): 29–56; Michelle Fletcher, Reading Revelation as Pastiche: Imitating 
the Past, Library of New Testament Studies 571 (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2017); Kenneth Duncan Litwak, 
Echoes of Scripture in Luke—Acts: Telling the History of God’s People Intertextually, Journal for the Study of the 
New Testament Supplement Series 282 (London: T&T Clark, 2005); Craig A. Evans and H. Daniel Zecharias, eds., 
Early Christian Literature and Intertextuality, vol. 1, Thematic Studies, Library of New Testament Studies 391, 
Studies in Scripture and Early Judaism 14 (New York: T&T Clark, 2009); Craig A. Evans and H. Daniel Zecharias, 
eds., Early Christian Literature and Intertextuality, vol. 2, Exegetical Studies, Library of New Testament Studies 
392, Studies in Scripture and Early Judaism 15 (New York: T&T Clark, 2009).             

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
17 
 
that refers to authorial intention in an essay about how Matthew 11:16-19 and Luke 7:31-35 link 
to Proverbs 1:20-33.87  Geoffrey D. Miller notes that some scholars “use ‘intertextuality’ as a 
catchall term to refer to any relationship that can be established between texts.”88 As one 
example of Miller’s point, Peter D. Miscall namedrops Barthes and Kristeva, but says that 
“intertextuality” is a covering term for all the possible relations that can be established 
between texts. The relations can be based on anything from quotes and direct references 
to indirect allusions to common words and even letters to dependence on language itself. 
The effect of the relations can extend from support and agreement to one text’s rejection 
and attempted destruction of the other.89  
 
That is not what Barthes and Kristeva were saying! Likewise, John Barton writes:  
it would be good if biblical scholars sometimes avoided “domesticating” ideas that come 
from Theory, and did not at once turn them into ‘helpful’ ways of deriving theological 
insights from the Bible. Intertextuality … is highly challenging to any idea of the fixity, 
canonicity, and inspiration of the biblical text.90  
 
Nonetheless, is there a way to reconcile “intertextuality” and “allusion” (and by 
extension, authorial intent)? In the field of Latin poetry, Stephen Hinds wrote a book trying to do 
that very thing. He called it Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of Appropriation in Roman 
Poetry.91 Hinds notes that Romanists typically prefer to write about deliberate and clear allusions 
from one author to another rather than the broader “intertextuality.”92 Although allusion and 
intertextuality are set at odds, Hinds sees value in both. The term “allusion” emphasizes the 
                                                           
87 Brian C. Dennert, “ʻThe Rejection of Wisdom’s Call’: Matthew’s Use of Proverbs 1:20–33 in the Parable 
of Children in the Marketplace (Matthew 11:16–19//Luke 7:31–35” in Searching the Scriptures: Studies in Context 
and Intertextuality, eds. Craig A. Evans and Jeremiah J. Johnston, Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Early 
Christianity 19, published under Library of New Testament Studies 543 (London and New York: Bloomsbury T&T 
Clark, 2015), 46–63.  
88 Miller, “Intertextuality in Old Testament Research,” 283.   
89 Peter D. Miscall, “Isaiah: New Heavens, New Earth, New Book,” in Reading between the Texts: 
Intertextuality and the Hebrew Bible, ed. Danna Nolan Fewell, Literary Currents in Biblical Interpretation 
(Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992), 44.  
90 John Barton, “Déjà Lu: Intertextuality, Method or Theory,” in Reading Job Intertextually, eds. Katharine 
Dell and Will Kynes, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 574 (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2013), 
16.  
91 Stephen Hinds, Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of Appropriation in Roman Poetry (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998).   
92 Ibid., xi.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
18 
 
writer’s intention to connect two texts, but Hinds observes that this emphasis contradicts “one of 
the most famous and broadly acknowledged impasses in twentieth century criticism: the ultimate 
unknowability of the poet’s intention.”93 Hinds admits that the critic might still have to construct 
the intention of the poet to some degree, but he believes that scholars can use the term 
“‘allusion,’ along with its intention-bearing author, as a discourse which is good to think with—
which enables us to conceptualize and to handle certain kinds of intertextual transaction more 
economically and effectively than does any alternative.”94 Furthermore, in a study of Superman, 
one can read interviews where the filmmakers or writers explain their intentions—while a 
Romanist such as Hinds does not have that luxury. Like Hinds’s book, this study will examine 
instances of deliberate allusions and try to figure out authorial intention—with the understanding 
that sometimes it is not possible to know. In that case, the language of intertextuality is beneficial 
when authorial intention is uncertain. When discussing Hinds’s book, Lyne observes that “an 
uncharitable point of view might see it as another attempt to have the critical cake and eat it,” but 
Lyne believes that Hinds’s “diluted” form of intertextuality is “a flexible and practical 
compromise.”95 Lyne argues that even people who support the concept of intertextuality would 
surely see evidence of authorial intention and deliberate allusion in some cases, and to act 
otherwise would be to ignore the way many readers intuitively interpret some texts.96 However, 
Lyne believes that, rather than choosing between allusion and intertextuality, or even merging 
the two, there is still a way to see both terms as “coexistent and complementary aspects of a 
more broadly conceived property of literary texts.”97 Lyne theorizes that a scholar can 
conceptualize how a text deliberately recalls other specific sources, but also relates to the shared 
                                                           
93 Ibid., 47–48.  
94 Ibid., 50.  
95 Lyne, Memory and Intertextuality in Renaissance Literature, 24.  
96 Ibid.  
97 Ibid., 25.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
19 
 
tradition of other sources “automatically and serendipitously,” and that both processes can be put 
in dialogue; the author might not have known where a particular intertextual trope originated.98 
Likewise, Superman stories exist in a shared cultural heritage in the modern Western world, so 
both intentional allusions and intertextuality can be examined.  
This study will acknowledge that some of Barthes’s theoretical underpinnings for the 
term “intertextuality” will be ignored—and in particular the disregard for authorial intention.99 
Not all scholars who have used the term have acknowledged its disregard of authorial intention, 
much less followed through on it. In this study, whatever insights can be gained when authorial 
intention cannot be known fall under the framework of intertextuality. Intertextuality changes 
how we look at texts, but it should not invalidate previous ways of thinking. For example, a 1975 
edited volume called Biblical Images in Literature included essays analyzing a range of works—
including Moby Dick, Huckleberry Finn, and the poems of T.S. Eliot—to explain and interpret 
the precise biblical allusions in the works.100 The essays clarify the meaning of the texts, but they 
stem from an effort to understand authorial intention. If the author’s intended meaning can be 
understood, it should be; there is nothing inherently wrong with detecting allusions.  
Although not identified as “intertextuality,” Dale C. Allison’s study of typology in the 
Gospel of Matthew provides a parallel for this study of Superman; Allison analyzes how the 
                                                           
98 Ibid., 43. Lyne uses memory as an analogy for intertextuality (73–75).   
99 Kristeva became dissatisfied with her own term because she later wrote that “intertextuality” refers to the 
“transposition of one (or several) sign system(s) into another; but since this term has often been understood in the 
banal sense of ‘study of sources,’ we prefer the term transposition.” See Julia Kristeva, Revolution in Poetic 
Language, trans. Margaret Waller (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984), 59–60. Simon Dentith writes that 
intertextuality “denotes the myriad conscious ways in which texts are alluded to or cited in other texts: the dense 
network of quotation, glancing reference, imitation, polemical refutation and so on in which all texts have their 
being. At a still more profound level, intertextuality refers to the dense web of allusion out of which individual texts 
are constituted—their constant and inevitable use of ready made formulations, catch phrases, slang, jargon, cliché, 
commonplaces, unconscious echoes, and formulaic phrases.” See Simon Dentith, Parody, The New Critical Idiom 
(New York: Routledge, 2000), 5. This definition suggests that intertextuality can be understood as both unconscious 
and reflective of deliberate intent. Yet it seems better to distinguish the term from “allusion.”   
100 Biblical Images in Literature, eds. Roland Bartel, with James S. Ackerman and Thayer S. Warshaw 
(Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1975).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
20 
 
author of the Gospel of Matthew used pre-existing texts from the Hebrew Scriptures to make 
Jesus into a “new Moses.”101 Similarly, parts of this study will examine how biblical connections 
have made Superman into a Moses or Jesus figure. Intertextuality provides a framework to 
understand how texts relate to one another even if not all connections were intended by the 
author. After all, it is possible that the writer of the Gospel of Matthew could have picked up 
Allison’s study and not even been consciously aware of every connection Allison made, but 
simply used them instinctively. The language of intertextuality offers a cushion when one cannot 
know authorial intention, but this study of Superman will prioritize authorial intention. For 
another example that has some similarities to this study of Superman, Marisa Gatti-Taylor wrote 
an essay noting the “intertextual” biblical echoes between Ignazio Silone’s Italian novel 
Fontamara and the story of Moses in the Book of Exodus; however, Gatti-Taylor acknowledged 
that one cannot be certain that the author had the Bible in mind for all these connections.102  
Finally, “intertextuality” is not limited to books. It can be applied to music, visual art, and 
films.103 To that end, this study will examine books, comics, films, and television. It will analyze 
Christian symbolism in Superman, but also track how Superman came to be viewed as a Christ 
figure in the public consciousness and how Christians looked upon these connections with 
scepticism, but over time, saw the opportunity to use Superman/Jesus parallels for evangelism. 
                                                           
101 Dale C. Allison Jr., The New Moses: A Matthean Typology (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993), 
185. This connection is not unique to Allison. See also Robert H. Gundry, Matthew: A Commentary on His Literary 
and Theological Art (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1982), 78.   
102 Marisa Gatti-Taylor, “Silone’s ‘Moses’ at the Bitter Fountain: Exodus as Subtext,” in Intertextuality in 
Literature and Film: Selected Papers from the Thirteenth Annual Florida State University Conference on Literature 
and Film, eds. Elaine D. Cancalon and Antoine Spacagna (Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1994), 61–
73. For another application of the concept to cinema, see Keith A. Reader, “Literature/Cinema/Television: 
Intertextuality in Jean Renoir’s Le Testament du docteur Cordelier,” in Intertextuality: Theories and Practices, eds. 
Michael Worton and  Judith Still (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990), 176–89. 
103 For example, see Wendy Steiner, “Intertextuality in Painting,” American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4 
(1985): 57–67; Robert S. Hatten, “Intertextuality in Music Studies,” American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4 (1985): 
69–82; Elaine D. Cancalon and Antoine Spacagna, eds., Intertextuality in Literature and Film: Selected Papers from 
the Thirteenth Annual Florida State University Conference on Literature and Film (Gainesville, FL: University 
Press of Florida, 1994).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
21 
 
Chapter Two: Superman’s Development  
 
Misconceptions about Superman and Jesus 
 
When the 2013 Superman film Man of Steel was released in theatres, the film’s director 
Zack Snyder said: “When we started to examine the Superman mythology, in the most classic 
sense, I really wanted to press upon the film the ‘why’ of him, which has been 75 years in the 
making,”104 Snyder added:  
The Christ-like parallels, I didn't make that stuff up. We weren't like, “Hey, let's add 
this!” That stuff is there, in the mythology. That is the tried-and-true Superman metaphor. 
So rather than be snarky and say that doesn’t exist, we thought it would be fun to allow 
that mythology to be woven through.105  
 
Snyder said that the relationship between Superman and Jesus “has been talked about 
since the creation of Superman,” and “probably was talked about more when Superman was 
created than it is now.”106 Snyder’s words reflect some popular misconceptions about the 
character of Superman. Similar to Snyder’s statement, Arno Bogaerts writes that the 
Christological representation of Superman probably is “the version of the character that non-
comic book readers are most familiar with.”107 Snyder was not the first to portray Superman as a 
Christ figure, but it is wrong to treat this portrayal as an original and natural part of the character.  
                                                           
104 Jennifer Vineyard, “ʻMan of Steel’ Director Zack Snyder on Superman’s Christ-Like Parallels,” CNN, 
June 16, 2013, https://www.cnn.com/2013/06/14/showbiz/zack-snyder-man-of-steel/index.html (accessed June 27, 
2018).  In a different interview, Snyder called Superman “a Christlike figure,” but admitted that they tried “not to 
make him so predictably morally black and white.” One wonders why. See Noelene Clark, “ʻMan of Steel’: Zack 
Snyder Says Superman ‘Must Be Taken Seriously,’” Hero Complex, April 25, 2013, http://herocomplex.latimes. 
com/movies/man-of-steel-zack-snyder-says-superman-must-be-taken-seriously/#/0 (accessed June 27, 2018).   
105 Vineyard, “ʻMan of Steel’ Director Zack Snyder on Superman’s Christ-Like Parallels.”   
106 Ross McD, “Man of Steel: The Top 20 Reasons Why Superman Is Jesus,” Metro News, June 11, 2013, 
https://metro.co.uk/2013/06/11/man-of-steel-the-top-20-reasons-why-superman-is-jesus-3837465/ (accessed June 
27, 2018).   
107 Arno Bogaerts, “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s Übermensch in Superman as a Heroic Ideal,” in Superman 
and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, ed. Mark D. White, Blackwell Philosophy and Pop Culture 
Series (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013),  92.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
22 
 
This paper will argue that the Jesus parallels are not organic to the original source 
material of Superman (the comic books) but were grafted onto the character in the films to 
appeal to a mass audience. Furthermore, this paper will argue that the comic book writers have—
with some exceptions—been less willing to identify Superman as a Jesus figure, but more as a 
moral example that anyone can aspire to emulate. Contrary to the statements of someone like 
Snyder, this paper will demonstrate that Superman came to be associated with Jesus mainly 
because the 1978 film Superman: The Movie introduced that imagery onto the character. Then, 
Superman famously died and rose from the dead in the comics in 1992, and that storyline 
intensified the association between Superman and Jesus in the public consciousness. Later, the 
television series Smallville and the films Superman Returns, Man of Steel, and Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice further exploited the Jesus imagery, but they were building on the 
1978 film and the 1992 comics storyline. One of the core claims of this thesis is that Jesus 
imagery is not foundational to the character of Superman, but has been exploited by the studios 
for marketing purposes. Finally, this thesis will track how Christians perceived the application of 
Jesus comparisons to the fictional character of Superman. I will argue that—based on how 
Christian writers have engaged with the topic over time—many Christian writers have shifted 
from viewing Superman/Jesus comparisons as a blasphemous threat to seeing them as a 
springboard to evangelize to non-Christians, although this idea is not universally lauded. 
In this study, when reference is made to Superman as a “Jesus figure” or “Christ figure,” 
that term can carry different connotations in different media and many of these connotations are 
surface-level parallels and allegories. Even so, some Superman media compare Superman and 
Jesus by placing Superman in narrative contexts or visual contexts that deliberately mimic the 
life of Christ and typical artistic representations of it—such as Michelangelo’s Pietà or the 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
23 
 
crucifixion and resurrection. These parallels are direct imitations of Christ. Other comparisons 
stem from the fact that Jesus and Superman both save people, though one in a spiritual sense and 
the other in a physical sense (because it is an allegory). Finally, the original Superman films 
explore the idea that Superman was sent to Earth by his father for the specific purpose of saving 
it—despite the fact that these parallels fit uneasily into the surrounding narrative context.             
 
Explaining the Origins of Superman 
 
The core argument of this thesis is that Superman did not start as a Jesus figure, but 
became one in later representations to appeal to a wider audience. In order to establish the 
veracity of this claim, it is necessary to establish why Superman was created—if the life of Jesus 
Christ was not in fact an influence on Superman’s creators. 
Gerard Jones writes of Superman’s co-creator that “all his life, in all the interviews he 
gave, all the talks he had with editors and peers, all the autobiographical sketches he wrote, Jerry 
Siegel never mentioned what happened to his father.”108 What did happen to Jerry Siegel’s 
father? In 1932, in a poor area of Cleveland, three men robbed Michel Siegel’s used clothing 
store, and Michel collapsed and died of heart failure, leaving six children; the perpetrators were 
never caught.109 Later Superman writer Mark Waid commented, “You can see how that would 
make you long for a father figure who was bullet-proof,”110 and six years later, Michel’s son 
                                                           
108 Gerard Jones, Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book (New York: 
Perseus, 2004), 23.   
109 Larry Tye, Superman: The High-Flying History of America’s Most Enduring Hero (New York: Random 
House, 2012), 6, 8; Ricca, Super Boys, 6–7; 301–10; Danny Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent: Jews, Comics, and 
the Creation of the Superhero (New York: Continuum, 2007), 41. Gerard Jones portrays this death as a murder, 
when it was a heart failure at the time of a robbery. See Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 38. 
110 Secret Origin: The Story of DC Comics, directed by Mac Carter (New York: DC Entertainment, 2010). 
Also, in the early Superman comics, it is also worth noting that in Superman #2, a criminal dies in a way similar to 
Siegel’s father, that Superman had a father on his home planet of Krypton who died young, and that in Superman’s  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
24 
 
Jerry completed the first published modern “superhero” story about Superman, a hero with 
fantastic powers who could stop the sorts of crimes that happened on the night Michel died. 
Larry Tye suggests that Superman possibly “embraced the vigilante justice that Jerry longed to 
mete out to his father’s robbers.”111 Regardless of the motivations, the character soon became 
incredibly popular.112   
It is important to emphasize here that if the death of Jerry Siegel’s father played a role in 
the creation of Superman, then that has a direct bearing on whether the character was created to 
be a Christ figure. This is significant because if Siegel created Superman in part because of his 
lost father figure, he may not have created him to be a replacement for Jesus Christ. Nonetheless, 
the death of Jerry Siegel’s father may have been one of many influences on Superman.113 Siegel 
said that the premise of Superman was influenced by his own frustrations as a shy high school 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
earliest origin story, he can be seen visiting the grave of his adoptive father.  See Ricca, Super Boys, 306–10. The 
character of Superman had been created before 1938, but took some time to find a publisher. Before creating the 
hero Superman, Jerry Siegel wrote a story called “The Reign of the Superman”—about an evil superpowered being 
who is created from a science experiment, but appears to be defeated by intervention from God. For more on this 
creation, see Glen Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), 10; 
Ricca, Super Boys, 65–79; Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 78–86; Tye, Superman, 8, Daniels, DC Comics, 21; Daniels, 
Superman: The Complete History, 14–15; Adam Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” in 
Superman and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, ed. Mark D. White, Blackwell Philosophy and Pop 
Culture Series (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 111–13; Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of 
Superman, directed by Kevin Burns; Dennis Dooley, “The Man of Tomorrow and the Boys of Yesterday,” in 
Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle  (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 
1988), 19–34.See also, Thomas Andrae, “From Menace to Messiah: the Prehistory of the Superman in Science 
Fiction Literature,” Discourse 2, no. 1 (1980): 84–112. A version of this essay can also be found as Thomas Andrae, 
“From Menace to Messiah: the Prehistory of the Superman in Science Fiction Literature,” American Media and 
Mass Culture: Left Perspectives, ed. Donald Lazere (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1987), 124–38.     
111 Tye, Superman, 34.  
112 In the 1940s, Superman appeared in comics, newspapers, cinemas, the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day 
Parade, and the New York World’s Fair. Mark Waid said: “We have not seen anything like it in American pop 
culture since. Beatlemania was not that big.” See Secret Origin, directed by Mac Carter. See also, Daniels, DC 
Comics; Daniels, Superman ;.Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns.    
113 Brad Ricca writes that Superman was influenced by Flash Gordon, Buck Rogers, and weightlifters, 
while being a form of wish-fulfillment. As originally drawn, Superman’s face was derivative of the actor Johnny 
Weissmuller, who played Tarzan in the 1930s and 1940s. See Ricca, Super Boys, 128. Clark Kent’s name was 
influenced by the actors Clark Gable and Kent Taylor. See Tye, Superman, 32, 106; De Haven, Our Hero, 36.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
25 
 
student who wished he could impress girls.114 Siegel said: “I was quite meek and I was quite 
mild. And I thought, ‘Gee, wouldn’t it be great if I was a mighty person?’ And these girls didn’t 
know that this clod here is really someone special.”115 Siegel said that in high school he “had 
crushes on several attractive girls who either didn’t know I existed or didn’t care … It occurred 
to me: What if I … had something special going for me, like jumping over buildings or throwing 
cars around or something like that?”116 Just as Siegel felt inadequate at times, co-creator Joe 
Shuster recalled that he was bullied when he was younger.117 These quotations from Siegel and 
Shuster are important because they demonstrate that Superman represented a sort of wish-
fulfillment for his creators’ adolescent anxieties. If that is the case, again, it is less likely that 
Superman was created with a Jesus allegory in mind.  
Brad Ricca writes that Jesus was a “modern, practical hope” in the 1920s and 1930s, but 
he can offer no direct evidence Siegel and Shuster were influenced by Jesus when they created 
Superman.118 Having said this, Ricca writes that the cover of the first Superman story in Action 
Comics #1—with Superman holding the car of some criminals over his head—is similar to “the 
pose of Christ, lifting the heavy cross with his legs.”119 There is nothing particularly Christlike 
about Superman smashing a car though, so any similarities Ricca spots are surely coincidental.  
It is important to understand that when Siegel explained why he created Superman, he did 
not mention Jesus, but referenced  
                                                           
114 Jerry Siegel, “Happy 45th Anniversary, Superman!” in Action Comics #544 (New York: DC Comics, 
1983), n.p. Les Daniel writes that “outside their worlds of fantasy, Siegel and Shuster were classic nerds, 
bespectacled, unathletic, shy around girls.” See Daniels, Superman, 12.     
115 Secret Origin, directed by Mac Carter.  
116 Otto Friedrich, “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!” Time, June 24, 2001, http://content.time.com/time/magazine/ 
article/0,9171,148856,00.html (accessed June 28, 2018). The article is listed with a June 2001 date, but appears to 
have been written in 1988 to commemorate Superman’s fiftieth anniversary.   
117 Secret Origin, directed by Mac Carter. Later in life, Shuster fell on hard times and was forced to draw 
pornographic comics. See Craig Yoe, Secret Identity: The Fetish Art of Superman’s Co-Creator Joe Shuster (New 
York: Abrahams ComicArts, 2009); Tye, Superman, 187; Ricca, Super Boys, 231–42.    
118 Ricca, Super Boys, 131–33.   
119 Ibid., 356 n. 38.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
26 
 
President Roosevelt’s “fireside chats” … being unemployed and worried during the 
depression and knowing hopelessness ... Hearing and reading of the oppression and 
slaughter of helpless, oppressed Jews in Nazi Germany .. seeing movies depicting the 
horrors of privation suffered by the downtrodden … reading of gallant, crusading heroes 
in the pulps, and seeing equally crusading heroes on the screen in feature films and movie 
serials … I had the great urge to help … the despairing masses somehow. How could I 
help them when I could barely help myself? Superman was the answer.120  
 
Again, these quotations demonstrate that Superman’s creators did not have Jesus in mind 
when they invented their costumed hero. This point further establishes that Jesus imagery was 
grafted onto Superman later in the character’s history.  
Superman’s character changed over time. In early stories, from 1938 to the early 1940s, 
he is called the “champion of the oppressed,”121 but compared to later portrayals, he was much 
more violent and intimidating to criminals. This point is significant because even if Siegel and 
Shuster intended to make Superman a Jesus figure (despite never saying so), one would expect 
their version of the character to emulate the moral character of Christ. Superman’s ethics in these 
early comics are the antithesis of the Sermon on the Mount and much closer to what Superman’s 
fellow hero Batman would become. For example, in the first Superman story in Action Comics 
#1, he harshly beats up a wife-beater.122 Later, Superman carries a thug over telephone wires, 
telling him: “Birds sit on telephone wires and they aren’t electrocuted—not unless they touch a 
telephone-pole and are grounded! OOPS!—Almost touched that pole!”123 In another story, he 
tells a crook: “You see how effortlessly I crush this bar of iron in my hand?—That bar could just 
                                                           
120 Quoted in De Haven, Our Hero, 68–69. This material comes from an unpublished letter by Siegel. Also, 
Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster created the occult characters Doctor Mystic and Doctor Occult before Superman 
emerged, and “students of the history of comics heroes must regard the Occult-Mystic figure as a definite prototype 
of Superman, performing many of the feats, Superman later performed,” except with supernatural powers. See  
Dick O’Donnell, “It’s Magic,” in The Comic Book Book, eds. Don Thompson and Dick Lupoff (New Rochelle, NY: 
Arlington House, 1973), 157. See also, Daniels, DC Comics, 44. Occult also had strength, a blue costume, and a red 
cape for a time. See Daniels, Superman, 23–25.   
121 Siegel, “Superman,” Action Comics #1.   
122 Ibid.  
123 Ibid. Gerard Jones examines Siegel’s portrayal of Superman as a “practical joker” in this passage. See 
Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 125.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
27 
 
as easily be your neck!”124 Superman forces a war profiteer to enlist in a foreign war to see the 
error of his ways.125 Marco Arnaudo observes that people today “are sometimes shocked to 
discover that Superman … killed people during World War II.”126 Again, it is a misconception 
that Superman was intended to be a Christ figure from the start—even though the director of 
some recent Superman movies believed that to be the case. A Superman who brutally beats up 
and murders people can hardly have been created to mimic Jesus.   
Superman was not a Jesus figure. When discussing the rough and tumble Superman from 
the early years, Glen Weldon writes: “He was impatient, given to anger, and prone to violence. 
He was a bully to bullies and a reckless one. He was, in point of fact, kind of a jerk. And he’d 
stay that way for a while.”127 Arno Bogaerts observes that the Superman of the earliest comics 
was “a bit more morally ambiguous and more proactive toward tackling social problems and 
exposing Metropolis’s corrupt elite.”128 One can find many examples in the primary texts that 
support these authors’ contentions that Superman was a bully (and therefore not like Jesus 
Christ). Superman was willing to hurt and threaten a woman to make her confess to a crime she 
committed.129 In another early Superman comic, Superman is trying to stop a poisonous gas 
formula from falling into the wrong hands, and threatens a man to get it, saying: “Cracking your 
head like an egg shell will be a messy job, but if you insist on being stubborn …”130 In one story, 
                                                           
124  Jerry Siegel, Action Comics #2 (New York: DC Comics, 1939), n.p.   
125 Ibid.  
126 Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 4. His steadfast “refusal to kill” did not develop in the comics until 
later. For more, see Peter B. Lloyd, “Superman’s Moral Evolution,” in The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at 
Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, (Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 181–98.  
127 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 20. As Bogaerts says, the Superman of the early 
comics “beats down ‘bullies,’ if you will, by becoming an even bigger one.” See Arno Bogaerts, “Rediscovering 
Nietzsche’s Übermensch,” 91.  In 2011, Grant Morrison wrote Superman closer to his 1938 personality in Action 
Comics.  
128 Bogaerts, “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s Übermensch,” 91. Bogarts also writes that Superman was “a 
social crusader and defender of the weak and oppressed” (91).  
129 Jerry Siegel, Superman #1 (New York: DC Comics, 1940), n.p.   
130 Jerry Siegel, “Superman Champions Universal Peace!” Superman #2 (New York: DC Comics, 1940), 8. 
In another story in Superman #4, Superman grabs a man named Gus Snide, and tells his criminal compatriots, “You 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
28 
 
Superman intimidates a criminal by throwing him hundreds of feet into the air, saying, “Let’s 
play ‘catch’! You be the ball!”131 Later, he tells a criminal, “If you don’t confess, I’ll come back 
and dish out the justice you deserve with my bare hands!”132 These examples show that 
Superman was willing to hurt and threaten his opponents.  
In early stories, Superman did not perform as many world-saving feats, but acted on the 
fringes of the law, and focused more on urban problems that seem quaint by the standards of his 
later adventures. As Danny Fingeroth puts it, “Superman himself, in his early stories, was a 
liberal, Rooseveltian do-gooder, battling corrupt politicians and wife-beaters, going up against 
forces large and small that threatened the average citizen in the days of the Great Depression.”133 
Fingeroth’s quote is amply demonstrated by the original comics. Superman deals with urban 
problems; at this time, “saving the world” is beyond his capabilities. For example, in an early 
adventure, criminals want to take over the city’s truck driver’s union by forcing a strike and 
paralyzing food distribution—so the criminals can get anything they want from the employers!134 
In Action Comics #3, Superman disguises himself as a miner who works in a dangerous mine, 
and leads the rich mine owner and a party of wealthy, well-dressed socialites into the mine to see 
its conditions.135 When the owner of the mine sees it in person and watches a cave-in, he 
becomes so horrified at the working conditions of his miners that he promises to make his mine 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
can drop those guns, boys—or I’ll show you how to crack an egg-shell … using Snide’s head to demonstrate with!” 
See Jerry Siegel, “Terror in the Trucker’s Union,” Superman #4 (New York: DC Comics, 1940), 6.     
131 Jerry Siegel, “Superman and the Skyscrapers,” Superman #2 (New York: DC Comics, 1940), 8–9. 
132 Ibid., 16. Mark Waid described the early Superman as “a quick-tempered social activist” and one who 
might “gladly have bent the Miranda Laws with his bare hands.” See Mark Waid, “Introduction,” in Superman in the 
Fifties (New York: DC Comics, 2002), 5.    
133 Danny Fingeroth, Superman on the Couch: What Superheroes Really Tell Us about Ourselves and Our 
Society (New York: Continuum, 2005), 120.   
134 See Siegel, “Terror in the Trucker’s Union.”   
135 Jerry Siegel, “Superman Battles Death Underground,” Action Comics #3 (New York: DC Comics, 
1938).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
29 
 
“the safest in the country, and my workers the best treated.”136 In Action Comics #8, Superman 
encounters some poor boys in the slums who steal, he fights against the police to stop them from 
being arrested, and then tries to mold them into productive citizens.137 In the story “Superman 
Declares War on Reckless Drivers,” in Action Comics #12, one of Clark Kent’s friends is hit by a 
car and dies; an angry Superman bursts into the studio of a radio show, seizes the microphone, 
and gives the city a tongue-lashing, declaring:  
The auto accident death rate of this community is one that should shame us all! It’s 
constantly rising and due entirely to reckless driving and inefficiency! More people have 
been killed needlessly by autos than died during the World War! From this moment on, I 
declare war on reckless drivers—henceforth homicidal drivers answer to me!138  
 
 
Superman visits “the great lot where the autos of traffic violators are temporarily stored,” 
and smashes all the cars there!139 Superman visits a used-car lot and smashes a faulty car before 
the salesman’s eyes.140 He searches for bad drivers and, shockingly, he sees a car “on the wrong 
side of the road, weaving in and out wildly,” and the driver says, “Whoopee! (Hic!) Some 
fun!”141 Superman terrifies the reckless driver into submission; then, when another reckless 
driver hits Superman, but does not realize he is invulnerable, Superman catches up to the driver, 
and claims he is a ghost who will “haunt” the driver if he drives recklessly, and the driver is 
terrified.142 Superman visits the owner of a car factory whose cars get in the most accidents 
because the owner uses “inferior metals and parts so as to make higher profits at the cost of 
human lives!”143 Superman destroys the factory with his bare hands (although one wonders if he 
                                                           
136 Ibid., 14. This story was “Siegel’s favourite story of this socially conscious type.” See Daniels, DC 
Comics, 23.  
137 Jerry Siegel, “Superman in the Slums,” Action Comics #8 (New York: DC Comics, 1939).   
138 Jerry Siegel, “Superman Declares War on Reckless Drivers,” Action Comics #12 (New York: DC 
Comics, 1939), 4. This is a better plot than at least a couple of the Superman films. 
139 Ibid.  
140 Ibid., 5.  
141 Ibid., 6.  
142 Ibid., 6–9.  
143 Ibid., 9.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
30 
 
could have given more thought to the workers).144 In sum, while both Superman and Jesus had an 
angry side (as in the temple cleansing), there are no deliberate parallels in these early comics. In 
the examples already cited, Superman gets his way mainly by imposing his superior strength 
upon his opponents—and often in reckless ways. Superman’s approach is therefore far from the 
ethos of Christ.   
After his first few years, Superman became less of a social activist, and devoted more 
time to simply fighting criminals.145 Even in 1940, some more science-fiction elements began to 
creep into the stories as well, as Superman fights some dinosaurs created by Luthor.146 Les 
Daniels writes that Superman’s adventures became “more impressive physically but less 
interesting politically.”147 In the earliest Superman comics, “Superman is clearly the champion of 
the underdog desplaying [sic] a sense of class consciousness virtually absent from later comic 
book stories,” anti-establishment, and willing to use his powers for radical ends for social 
change.148 However, in 1942, “when the war effort demanded unquestioning loyalty to the state 
and increased collaboration between government and industry, Superman no longer operates 
outside the law but is made an honorary policeman.”149 This point is significant because it shows 
that the war was the first step in the domestication of Superman. Although Superman would not 
be explicitly compared to Jesus for decades, the demands of wartime comics curbed Superman’s 
rebellious spirit and some of his morally ambiguous patterns of behavior. In other words, the 
writers had to make Superman’s ethics conform to authority during the war years, so the 
character stopped being as much of a brutal vigilante. This character change paved the way for 
                                                           
144 Ibid., 9–10. Ironically, at the end of the issue, Clark Kent receives a parking ticket (14).  
145 De Haven, Our Hero, 73.  
146 Jerry Siegel, “Luthor’s Undersea City,” Superman #4 (New York: DC Comics, 1940).   
147 Daniels, DC Comics, 23.  
148 Andrae, “From Menace to Messiah,” 98–100.  
149 Ibid., 100.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
31 
 
Superman to eventually become a paragon of virtue, and from there, he could later be compared 
to Christ.  
This domestication of Superman intensified and several authors have observed that 
Superman stopped being so radical. Unlike his early years as a “social crusader,” in the 1950s, 
Superman fought “to defend the status quo.”150 As Glen Weldon writes, “he may have started life 
as a New Deal Democrat, but in twelve years of life, that reformist zeal had cooled to a 
normative breed of Eisenhower Republicanism,” and Superman began to be seen as a “big blue 
Boy Scout,” but in “a society that meant it as a compliment.”151 Superman “was what a nation of 
American men wanted to see themselves as—a coolly paternal presence who always knew 
best.”152 When discussing the Superman of the 1950s, Mark Waid says: “It’s a very conservative 
era. It’s very respectful of authority. And Superman therefore went from being a crusader of 
social causes to a symbol of the social order.”153 Tom De Haven writes that Superman came to 
be seen as “dull-normal, middle-aged. Establishment.”154  
These continued changes to Superman deserve an explanation and I would argue that 
there are two reasons. The first reason that Superman’s adventures were sanitized is because the 
Comics Code Authority was created in 1954 to censor stories that could cause juvenile 
                                                           
150 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography,  90–91; Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin 
Burns. For a study of gender in 1950s Superman comics, see Mark Best, “Domesticity, Homosociality and Male 
Power in Superhero Comics of the 1950s,” Iowa Journal of Cultural Studies 6, no. 1 (2005): 80–99.   
151 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography,  91.  
152 Ibid; Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns.    
153 Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. Elsewhere, Waid laments that Superman may not be as 
popular today is because he is closely associated with upholding a “status quo” that young people are disenchanted 
with. Waid thinks that young people today want heroes “who symbolize their rebellious spirit and understand their 
frustrations”—which is how Superman originally was. See Mark Waid, “Superman,” in Superman: Birthright (New 
York: DC Comics, 2004), 293. Although this example is from a later decade, Greg Garrett writes that the end of the 
film Superman II—where Superman carries an American flag to the White House—“is perhaps the iconic example 
of his conformity to the status quo.” See Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 53. In the late 1950s, Superman’s comics began 
to have more “situational” or “emotional” stories—such as having Superman travel back in time and fall in love on 
Krypton, or his college love affair with a mermaid. These changes were “a natural evolution for a god-like hero who 
had no real peers among his adversaries.” See Lynn Wooley, “’Twixt Joe and Kurt: The Art of Wayne Boring and 
Stan Kaye,” Comic Book Marketplace, September-October 1998, 26–29.       
154 De Haven, Our Hero, 163.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
32 
 
delinquency.155 In other words, all comics now had to be approved by a governing body that 
censored any plot element that could promote reckless behavior in youths. The Comics Code 
Authority could go to extremes. As a representative example, Les Daniels cites a 1956 Plastic 
Man comic where—for a lame throwaway joke—one character accidentally drinks a jug that 
contained a villain made of water.156 The Comics Code Authority forced the scene to be 
rewritten so that the villain is spilled out of the jug—so as not to encourage cannibalism in 
children!157 The creation of the Comics Code Authority is directly related to a sensationalist 
book by Dr. Fredric Wertham called The Seduction of the Innocent.158 Since Wertham’s book 
argued that comic books could cause violence in children, like the other heroes, Superman had to 
be on his best behavior in his adventures. Hence, in the 1950s, it would have been unthinkable 
for Superman to battle cops or perform the sort of violent vigilante justice that characterized his 
earliest adventures. It must be emphasized again that these changes to Superman’s moral 
character enabled later writers to compare him to Jesus Christ, even if those connections were 
not yet explicit.  
Nonetheless, there is a second reason why Superman was more of an “establishment” 
figure in the 1950s. Superman’s creator Jerry Siegel lost creative control of the character, and the 
character was thus controlled by corporate interests who wanted to appeal to the broadest 
audience possible. Siegel did not write any Superman stories between 1948 and roughly 1960 
(when he was hired as a freelance writer). Thus, the original ethos of the character were gone.  
There may be an unintentional parallel with how the fiery Jesus of the Gospels could become 
                                                           
155 For more on the history of comics censorship, see Daniels, DC Comics.  
156 Daniels, DC Comics, 115.   
157 Ibid. 
158 See Fredric Wertham, The Seduction of the Innocent (New York: Rhinehart and Company, 1954).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
33 
 
identified with upper-class, respectable, mainline Christianity. By the 1950s and 1960s, Siegel no 
longer controlled his character, and, as Thomas Andrae puts it:  
Siegel’s original vision of Superman was radically subverted and a vapid, 
establishmentarian hero substituted in his place which the public, ironically, came to 
accept as the “real” Superman. The memory of Superman’s existence as an outlaw and 
champion of the oppressed would be virtually extinguished.159  
 
Andrae’s points are significant to my thesis because they identify a point at which the gap 
between Siegel’s violent outlaw version of Superman moved closer to being identified with 
Jesus. Although Superman was never explicitly identified with Jesus in any of the comics in this 
period, the changes to the character in the 1950s laid the groundwork for him to become a Jesus-
like character later. Having said this, while Superman was more conservative in the 1950s, even 
in the 1940s, Siegel and Shuster took  
Superman seriously as a model for children ... he took the time to help young weaklings 
stand up against bullies, to lead poor boys back from gangdom to their mother’s tables, to 
teach snotty urchins a lesson or two and send them on their way as humbler citizens. 
Theirs wasn’t a coherent political statement, but it was a New Deal Hollywood portrayal 
of a world where innocent people are hurt by greed and callousness and we could all use 
a primary-colored conscience to zoom in and knock us to our senses.160 
 
On a related point, Ken Schenck notes that “the fact that children have frequently 
dominated Superman’s audience is one of the factors that has always pushed his character toward 
the straight and narrow.”161 The creation of the Comics Code Authority intensified that 
emphasis. Granted, Schenck overstates the case when he says that the Superman of the 1950s 
was “a Christ-like moral example for ‘one nation under god’”162 because Superman was not 
connected to Jesus in the comics themselves then. In short, Superman did not start as a Jesus 
figure, but became one.  
                                                           
159 Ibid., 102. Andrae is overly negative in his portrayal of the 1950s comics.   
160 Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 174.   
161 Ken Schenck, “Superman: A Popular Culture Messiah,” in The Gospel According to Superheroes: 
Religion and Popular Culture, ed. B.J. Oropeza (New York: Peter Lang, 2005), 37.  
162 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
34 
 
Influences on Superman 
 
To analyze the question of whether Superman should be understood as a Jesus figure, it is 
necessary to analyze other influences on the character’s creation. The traditional Superman story 
is that he was born “Kal-El” of the planet Krypton and his father Jor-El sent him to Earth in a 
spaceship; on earth, his ship was found by Jonathan and Martha Kent of Smallville, Kansas, who 
discovered that he had superhuman powers. He grew up as Clark Kent and works for the 
newspaper The Daily Planet under editor Perry White and alongside his love interest Lois Lane 
and young friend Jimmy Olsen. This section will analyze several commonly cited “influences” 
on Superman—including Nietzsche and Siegel and Shuster’s Jewish background (encompassing 
the characters of Moses, Noah, the golem, and alleged parallels between Superman’s planet 
Krypton and Jewish identity). I will reject most of these comparisons. The earlier discussion of 
Siegel and Shuster’s adolescent frustrations is more relevant to Superman’s creation than many 
of the deeper philosophical or religious influences some writers have detected. Finally, I will 
examine why writers and scholars find it attractive to compare Superman and Jesus.    
The character of Superman can be linked to Nietzsche’s concept of the Übermensch, 
which has sometimes been translated “Superman,” and later Superman writers have used this 
comparison.163 Nonetheless, the character probably did not get his name from Nietzsche because 
                                                           
163 In an episode of the 1950s Superman TV show, a German-speaking villain calls Superman the 
Übermensch when he sees him. See Adventures of Superman, “Double Trouble” S01, E16, directed by Tommy Carr, 
written by Eugene Solow, ABC, December 26, 1952. Interestingly, Superman: The Movie producer Ilya Salkind said 
that the filmmakers wanted Superman composer John Williams to emulate Richard Strauss’s Nietzsche-inspired 
Also Sprach Zarathustra. See Ilya Salkind and Pierre Spengler, “Audio Commentary,” disc 1, Superman: The 
Movie, DVD, directed by Richard Donner (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures), 2001.  When Lois Lane gives 
Superman his name in the 1990s Superman animated series, she describes him as “the Nietzschean fantasy ideal all 
wrapped up in a red cape. The superman.” See Superman: The Animated Series, “The Last Son of Krypton: Part III,” 
S01, E3, directed by Dan Riba and Bruce Timm, written by Alan Burnett and Paul Dini, Kids WB!, September 6, 
1996. In the first episode of the television show Smallville, Clark Kent runs into his high-school crush Lana Lang 
and drops his copy of The Portable Nietzsche; Lana asks him, “So, what are you? Man  or superman?” Clark replies, 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
35 
 
Siegel did not read Nietzsche, “but most likely Siegel picked up the term from other science 
fiction writers who casually used it before him.”164 Therefore, Nietzsche was not an influence on 
the creation of Superman. Ironically, Adam Roberts writes that Nietzsche scholars stopped 
translating Nietzsche’s term Übermensch as “Superman” partly in deference to the character.165 
If that is true, then Superman may have influenced how Nietzsche is written about more than 
Nietzsche influenced Superman. In any case, Superman’s traditional characterization is at odds 
with Nietzschean ideals. Adam Barkman writes that   
Superman’s absolute devotion to the universal moral law and Judeo-Christian morality 
stands in stark contrast to Nietzsche’s morality of power. Where Nietzsche sees 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
“I haven’t figured it out yet.” Smallville, “Pilot,” S01, E1, directed by David Nutter, written by Alfred Gough and 
Miles Millar, The WB, October 16, 2001.  The issue Action Comics #800 begins with an epigraph quoting Thus 
Spake Zarathustra: “He turns all of his injuries into strengths, that which does not kill him makes him stronger, he is 
superman.” Joe Kelly, “A Hero’s Journey,” Action Comics #800 (New York: DC Comics, 2003), n.p. Superman 
#203 shows a Kryptonian from Kandor acting as a caricatured version of Nietzsche’s ideal, complete with a desire 
“to cleanse the impure” and references to “man and Superman.” See Joe Kelly and Michael Turner, “Godfall, Part 6 
of 6: Divinity,” Superman #203 (New York: DC Comics, 2004).  For a comparison of the Nitzschean ideal with 
Superman, see Adam Roberts, “Is Superman a Superman?” in The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, 
ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, (Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 115–25. For more on Nietzsche, see Harry 
Neumann, “Nietzsche: The Superman, the Will to Power and the Eternal Return,” Ultimate Reality and Meaning 5, 
no. 4 (1982): 280–95; Jennifer Ratner-Rosenhagen, “Conventional Iconoclasm: The Cultural Work of the Nietzsche 
Image in Twentieth-Century America,” The Journal of American History 93, no. 3 (2006): 728–754.  For the 
application of Nietzsche to superheroes, but more specifically Marvel characters, see Jason Bainbridge, “Beyond the 
Law: What is So Super about Superheroes and Supervillains?” International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 30, 
no. 3 (2017): 367–88.   
164 Daniels, Superman, 18. See also, Ricca, Super Boys, 129. Barkman adds that the evil “superman” in 
Siegel and Shuster’s older “Reign of the Superman” story was closer to Nietzsche’s concept. See Barkman, 
“Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 111–13. In 1941, John Kobler of the Saturday Evening Post wrote an 
article that portrayed Superman stories as infantile fantasies, but nonetheless identified Superman as “the first 
authentic cultural hero since Paul Bunyan.” However, Kobler doubted that Siegel and Shuster really understood the 
Nietzschean philosophy linked to the character’s name. See John Kobler, “Up, Up and Away! The Rise of Superman 
Inc.,” Saturday Evening Post, June 21, 1941, 14–15, 70–78, quoted in Ian Gordon, Superman: The Persistence of an 
American Icon (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2017), 4. In a study of the prefix “super,” David B. 
Guralnik speculates that by making Superman a hero Jerry Siegel and Shuster might have been affected “even if 
only half-consciously, by Hitler’s perverted use of Nietzsche’s Ubermensch as a basis for the well-publicized Nazi 
pseudo-racial theories.” Guralnik thinks that as Jews, the two of them “could not have been entirely unaware of that 
propaganda.” See David B. Guralnik, “Superstar, Supermom, Super Glue, Superdooper, Superman,” in Superman at 
Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 105.  
Superman. Arie Kaplan writes that it is ironic that Nietzsche’s term later had Nazi connotations because “the most 
famous ‘Superman’ in history was created by Jews.” See Arie Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton: Jews and Comic 
Books (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society, 2008), 11. Many writers in comics, films, and television are 
Jews, and so Fingeroth writes that “Jewish-humanist—one could even say ‘Judeo-Christian’—ideals of the 
superhero seem to be consistent across media.” See Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 147.   
165 Roberts, “Is Superman a Superman?” 116.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
36 
 
sacrificial love as a weakness because it conforms to social standards, Superman sees 
sacrificial love as a strength insofar as it conforms to the Highest Law.166  
 
 
Arno Bogaerts makes a similar observation when he writes: “like Nietzsche’s 
Übermensch, Superman is strong, creative, noble, independent, and life-affirming, but unlike 
him, Superman is compassionate and looks out for the little guy.”167 Barkman and Bogaerts’s 
observations are consistent with Superman’s character. Elliot S. Maggin’s 1978 fictional novel 
Superman: The Last Son of Krypton even affirms a similar point directly because the reader 
learns of Superman that “in an apparent contradiction of his own condition, he held Hobbes and 
Nietzsche and their ideas of the natural superiority of certain members of society, in 
contempt.”168 Conversely, Iain Thomson argues that, “under the influence of the comics 
Nietzsche unintentionally helped inspire, we tend to think of Superman as a type of superhero, 
but on Nietzsche’s view, it would be more accurate to say that all superheroes are variations of 
the superman archetype.”169 Yet there is no positive evidence that Nietzsche influenced Siegel 
and Shuster’s character, beyond maybe suggesting the name, and even then, that influence is 
second-hand at best. In fact, Ian Gordon observes that after the Second World War, it was 
necessary to disassociate Superman from the Übermensch since that concept was tied to 
America’s enemies.170 Indeed, a 1943 issue of the Catholic World claimed that “in a vulgar way 
this fantastic character [Superman] seems to personify the primitive religion expounded by 
Nietzsche’s Zarathustra. ‘Man alone is and must be our God,’ says Zarathustra, very much in the 
style of a Nazi pamphleteer.”171 This quotation testifies to the fact that in the United States, 
                                                           
166 Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 116.  
167 Bogaerts, “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s Übermensch,” 91.    
168 Elliot S. Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton (New York: Warner Books, 1978), 73.  
169 Iain Thomson, “Deconstructing the Hero,” in Comics as Philosophy, ed. Jeff McLaughlin (Jackson, MS: 
The University Press of Mississippi, 2005), 113.  
170 Ibid., 16.  
171 Thomas F. Doykem “What’s Wrong with the ‘Comics’?” Catholic World, February 1943, quoted in 
Tye, Superman, 128. Fortunately, in the 1940s, the producers of the Superman radio show “reached out to experts on 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
37 
 
Nietzsche was viewed with suspicion. Ultimately, Superman’s relationship to Nietzsche’s 
concept is easy to overstate because it seems that Superman’s character has little in common 
with Nietzschean ideals and because in the early years of the character’s creation, Superman’s 
writers had no need to emphasize any possible parallels between the two. Thus, I would argue 
that the relationship between Nietzsche and Superman should not be pressed too far. 
Since Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster were Jewish, many writers have argued that there are 
Jewish influences on Superman.172 Christopher B. Zeichmann argues that in early Superman 
comics, “Superman’s recurring title of ‘champion of the helpless and oppressed’ seems to be a 
loose translation of Psalm 82:3” (“uphold the cause of the poor and oppressed” [Psalm 82:3 
NIV]).173 That parallel could be unintentional, but it is impossible to know. Countless writers—
both Jewish and Christian—have linked Superman’s Kryptonian name “Kal-El” to the Hebrew 
name for God “El” (and the many biblical figures who have this suffix in their names) and drawn 
many intricate conclusions.174 Nonetheless, the earliest comics were not like this; George 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
child welfare and education, as well as religious organizations, to help them craft messages children would 
understand and respond to.” The series received praise and awards from The Veterans of Foreign Wars of the U.S. 
(VFW), the American Veterans Committee, and the Boy Scouts, but also “the Award of Distinguished Merit” from 
the National Conference of Christians and Jews. The show earned respect from the National Conference on 
Christians and Jews for an episode where Superman battled a group modeled on the Ku Klux Klan. See Weldon, 
Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 82–83. See also Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 242.   
172 Michael Shapiro wrote a book ranking the 100 most influential Jews in history; Moses placed number 
one, while Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster claimed the one-hundredth spot via Superman. See Michael Shapiro, The 
Jewish 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Jews of All Time (New York: Citadel Press, 1995).  
173 Christopher B. Zeichmann, “Champion of the Oppressed: Redescribing the Jewishness of Superman as 
Populist Authenticity Politics,” Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 29, no. 2 (2017): 140–41.  
174 Larry Tye writes that the suffix “El” is tied to some of “Judaism’s most cherished birthrights, from Isra-
el to the prophets Samu-el and Dani-el. It means God. Kal is similar to the Hebrew words for voice and vessel. 
Together they suggest that the alien superbaby was not just a Jew but a very special one.” See Tye, Superman, 65.  
Gary D. Engle reasons that “El” is masculine singular for God, just as “angels in Hebrew mythology are called benei 
Elohim (literally, sons of the Gods), or Elyonim (higher beings),” while “el” appears at the end of many names in the 
Hebrew Bible. Engle thinks Superman’s closest parallel is with Michael the warrior angel who traditionally fights 
Satan. It may be something of a reach for Engle to link the Kal to the Hebrew for “swiftness” and Superman’s great 
speed, or to compare it to the Hebrew “hal” for “everything” or “all,” and infer that Superman represents “all that 
God is.” Engle even compares the name “Kent” to the Hebrew “kana,” and says that in the Bible, in the k-n-t form it 
means “I have found a son.” See Gary D. Engle, “What Makes Superman So Darned American?” in Superman at 
Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 86.  
Simcha Weinstein notes the parallels between Kal-El and other biblical names such as Samuel, Israel, and Daniel, 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
38 
 
Lowther’s 1942 Superman novel renamed Superman’s parents from Lora and Jor-L, to “Lara,” 
and “Jor-el,”—with the latter eventually being modified to “Jor-El.”175 While one could interpret 
the name of Superman’s Kryptonian father “Jor-El” as a pun on the Hebrew “God teaches,” it 
seems that Jor-El’s name (and by extension Kal-El’s) is not taken from God, but was an in-joke 
for the name of Superman co-creator Jerry (Jerome/Jor) Siegel.”176 Hence, these readings of 
“Kal-El” may not be helpful.177 Other interpreters have noted a possible Jesus connection: the 
fact that Superman’s adoptive mother on Earth was named “Mary,” before having that name 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
but then compares the name “Kal-El” to “Michael,” who in Jewish tradition is the angel who battles Satan. Simcha 
Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey! How Jewish History, Culture, and Values Shaped the Comic Book Superhero 
(Baltimore, MD: Leviathan Press, 2006), 27. Arie Kaplan argues that in Hebrew, Kal-El means “All that God is.” 
See Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 15. Harry Brod asks: “Can it really be coincidental that Kal-El’s original 
Kryptonian name spoken with a Hebrew pronunciation sounds like the Hebrew words for ‘all is God’ or ‘all for 
God’?” See Harry Brod, Superman Is Jewish? How Comic Book Superheroes Came to Serve Truth, Justice, and the 
Jewish-American Way (New York: Free Press, 2012), 5. See also, Jason Cohen, “Bendis Signals a Welcome Return 
to Superman’s Jewish Roots,” CBR, February 2, 2018, https://www.cbr.com/bendis-dc-superman-jewish-roots/ 
(accessed June 27, 2018); Marcy Oster, “DC Comics’ Newest Writer is Poised to Make Superman Jewish Again,” 
The Times of Israel, February 17, 2018, https://www.timesofisrael.com/dc-comics-newest-writer-is-poised-to-make-
superman-jewish-again/ (accessed June 27, 2018); Lou Anders, “A Tale of Two Orphans: The Man of Steel vs. The 
Caped Crusader,” The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop (Dallas, TX: 
BenBella Books, 2005), 75; Stephen Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero (Eugene, 
OR: Harvest House Publishers, 2006), 50; Bogaerts, “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s Übermensch,” 92; Barkman, 
“Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 114; John Kenneth Muir, “Cult Movie Review: Superman: The 
Movie (1978),” John Kenneth Muir’s Reflections on Movies and Classic TV, August 7, 2012, 
http://reflectionsonfilmandtelevision.blogspot.com/ 2012/08/cult-movie-review-superman-movie-1978.html, 
(accessed June 23, 2018); Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 30; Schenck, “Superman: A Popular Culture 
Messiah,” 33–48;  Friedrich, “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!” For a non-serious article, see J.K. Brower, “The Hebrew 
Origins of Superman,” Biblical Archaeology Review 5, no. 3 (1979): 22–26.     
175 See Roger Stern, “Introduction,” in George Lowther, The Adventures of Superman (Bedford, MA: 
Applewood, 1995 [1942]), xvi–xvii.   
176 Tye, Superman, 69; Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 45.  
177 Tom De Haven writes: “It was Lowther who changed Superman’s birth name from Jerry Siegel’s 
original Kal-L to Kal-el and his father’s name from Jor-L to Jor-el (later comic book writers would capitalize the e), 
which is why I’ve never put any credence into the argument that Siegel intended Superman to be a Jewish avatar, 
since the suffix ‘-el in Hebrew means ‘sent by God.’ All you can really argue is that George Lowther possibly meant 
Superman to be a Jewish avatar, and so what, right?” See De Haven, Our Hero, 194–95. Martin Lund thinks that 
scholars who find Hebrew readings in the name “Kal-El” are making too much of nothing, and points out that one 
could just as easily argue that the root qal has “the additional meaning of ‘insignificant, light,’–the radically 
different ‘translation’ ‘God is insignificant’ … can also be constructed, giving Superman’s name a ‘meaning’ that 
fits far better with what is known about Siegel and Shuster’s views about religion.” See Martin Lund, Re-
Constructing the Man of Steel: Superman 1938—1941, Jewish American History, and the Invention of the Jewish—
Comics Connection, Contemporary Religion and Popular Culture (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016), 26.    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
39 
 
changed to the now-canonical “Martha.”178 It is impossible to prove if this is a direct reference to 
Jesus.  
Dan W. Clanton Jr., writes that “from the beginning Superman stories have contained 
potentially religious or scriptural references or echoes, leading interpreters to suggest that there 
are religious/scriptural meanings or subtexts within ‘Superman.’179 Clanton observes that the first 
Superman stories have little direct religious symbolism.180 Even so, in early Superman 
newspaper comic strips, the spaceship Jor-El is making on Krypton is “an ark of space.”181 
Clanton thinks that “given the context—an impending cataclysm initially known to and later 
only believed in by one man and his family that will prove fatal to all living creatures on a 
planet—and the specific use of the term ‘Ark,’” the story has resonances with the Hebrew Bible 
because Jor-El is like Noah in Genesis 6—9, but at the same time, the Hebrew word for “ark” in 
the Noah story is used in one other place in the Hebrew Scriptures: the vessel that carries Moses 
down the Nile.182 Clanton’s analysis is significant because he makes a good case that the story of 
Noah was an influence in how Superman’s origin story was shaped in the character’s early years.    
Numerous interpreters have noted parallels between how Moses was sent down the Nile 
to be saved from the Egyptians just as Kal-El was sent to safety from Krypton in his rocket 
                                                           
178 Dan W. Clanton Jr., “The Origin(s) of Superman: Reimagining Religion in the Man of Steel,” Religion 
and Popular Culture in America, 3rd ed., eds. Bruce David Forbes and Jeffrey H. Mahan (Oakland, CA: University 
of California Press, 2017), 38–39. See also, Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 54; 
Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 114. Mr. Kent was named “Eben” in George Lowther’s 
1942 Superman novel, but in a 1948 comic, the Kents were named “John” and “Mary,” before “John” changed from 
“Silas” to finally “Jonathan,” and “Mary” became “Sarah” and then “Martha.” See Tye, Superman, 106–7; De 
Haven, Our Hero, 160–61. Clark’s middle name is “Joseph.” This can be linked to the Bible. See Tye, Superman, 
68; Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 54–56. Anton K. Kozlovic compares 
Jonathan Kent to Jesus’s father. See Anton K. Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts in Superman: 
The Movie (1978) and Superman II (1981),” Journal of Religion and Film 6, no. 2, article 5 (2002): 12–14.     
179 Clanton, “The Origin(s) of Superman,” 33. Clanton believes that Superman stories are “religious 
multivalent,” meaning that Superman can lend himself to both Jewish and Christian interpretations (33–34).  
180 Ibid., 35.  
181 See Jerry Siegel, Superman: The Dailies, 1939—1940, vol. 1 (New York: DC Comics, 1999).   
182 Clanton, “The Origin(s) of Superman,” 36–37. See also, Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s 
Greatest Superhero, 46. Grant Morrison’s modern reboot of Action Comics makes reference to an “escape ark” 
prototype on Krypton. See Grant Morrison, “Rocket Song,” Action Comics #5 (New York: DC Comics, 2012). 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
40 
 
ship—and both Moses and Kal-El were adopted.183 Martin Lund acknowledges the existence of 
parallels to figures like Moses, but downplays the Jewish aspects of such parallels and points out 
that “these figures have long been common to Western culture in general.”184 Still, when Action 
Comics #1—the first Superman story—narrated the character’s arrival to Earth from Krypton, 
the narration says: “When the vehicle landed on Earth, a passing motorist, discovering the 
sleeping babe within, turned the child over to an orphanage.”185 Glen Weldon writes that  
with Siegel’s use of the phrase ‘sleeping babe,’ a biblical subtext forever becomes part of 
Superman’s creative DNA; the reader may think of Moses among the reeds or Jesus in 
                                                           
183 Larry Tye writes: “much as the baby prophet was floated in a reed basket by a mother desperate to spare 
him from an Egyptian Pharoah’s death warrant, so Kal-El’s doomed parents, moments before their planet blew up, 
tucked him into a spaceship that rocketed him to the safety of Earth. Both babies were rescued by non-Jews and 
raised in foreign cultures—Moses by Pharoah’s daughter, Kal-El by Kansas farmers named Kent—and the adoptive 
parents quickly learned how exceptional their foundlings were .... Kal-El’s escape to Earth was the story of Exodus.” 
See Tye, Superman, 65–66, 68. See also,  Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin 
Burns; Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 9; Friedrich, “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!”; Anton K. Kozlovic, “The Unholy 
Biblical Subtexts and Other Religious Elements Built into Superman: The Movie (1978) and Superman II (1981),” 
Journal of Religion and Film 7, no. 1, article 7 (2003): 25–26; Christopher Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex: The 
Secret History of Comic Book Heroes (San Francisco: Weiser Books, 2007), 123 n. 102; Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy 
Vey, 15, 26; De Haven, Our Hero, 179; Morrison, Supergods, 15–16; Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 19; Kaplan, From 
Krakow to Krypton, 14; Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 46; David Hopkins, “A 
History of Violence,” in The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop (Dallas, 
TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 9–21; Schenck, “Superman: A Popular Culture Messiah,”; David Welky, Everything 
Was Better in America: Print Culture in the Great Depression (Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2008), 
133; Cohen, “Bendis Signals a Welcome Return to Superman’s Jewish Roots,”; Oster, “DC Comics’ Newest Writer 
is Poised to Make Superman Jewish Again.” Brad Ricca also notes the parallel with how Superman and Moses were 
both sent to safety in small vessels and adopted, but misrepresents the Moses parallel when he writes, “as a grown 
man he finally embraces his true background to save his adopted people.” As worded, it gives the impression that 
Moses may have saved the Egyptians! See Ricca, Super Boys, 131. To a different end, in the comic Superman #400 
from 1984, the text compares Superman to a host of famous people from history—including Martin Luther King Jr., 
Albert Einstein, William Shakespeare, Joan of Arc, Abraham Lincoln, and Moses. See Elliot S. Maggin, “The 
Living Legends of Superman: Chapter One,” Superman #400 (New York: DC Comics, 1984), 2–3. To a very 
different end, Maggin’s novel Superman: The Last Son of Krypton alludes to Exodus when it compares Lex Luthor’s 
turn to evil to Isaac Newton discovering gravity under the apple tree, Franz Ferdinand’s assassination, and Moses 
killing the Egyptian slave master in Exodus 2:11–15. See Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, 145. 
Maggin concludes that Lex Luthor’s transformation was inevitable, just as Newton would still have discovered 
gravity, war would still have happened in 1914, and inevitably “Moses would have recoiled from oppressive 
Egyptian society even if he had witnessed one fewer act of wanton brutality” (145). In the film Superman: The 
Movie, Daily Planet newspaper editor Perry White tells his staff that whoever gets the first interview with Superman 
will have “the single most important interview ... since God talked to Moses.” See Superman: The Movie, directed 
by Richard Donner (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 1978).  
184 Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 12. Lund argues that Superman’s task is more global than 
Moses and also downplays other Moses parallels (such as Clark Kent’s stuttering) (74–78, 182). Lund denies that 
having Clark Kent’s parents tell him to fight for good is comparable to Moses meeting God, as some have claimed 
(74). To see the case for these claims, see Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 26–27.    
185 Siegel, Action Comics #1. Other versions of the character’s origin would skip the orphanage.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
41 
 
the manger. It’s not something Siegel or Shuster would pursue ... but it’s an element of 
the character that would inspire comics writers and filmmakers in years to come.186  
 
  
Weldon is right to say that Siegel and Shuster did not explore the biblical subtext in 
depth, but later Superman writers exploited a Moses connection that was—at the very least, 
latent. For example, in the 1990s Superman animated series, Jonathan Kent shows young Clark 
Kent the rocket ship they found him in, and prefaces this revelation by saying, “You know how 
some babies are found in baskets?”187 In the afterword to Grant Morrison’s 2011 retelling of 
Superman’s origin, Morrison explicitly says that Superman’s “rocket is Moses’ basket,” and 
artist Rags Morales said that he deliberately tried to draw the shape of the rocketship “a little 
more basket-y.”188 In the 1978 Superman movie, a scene where Superman first meets a hologram 
of Jor-El can be compared to Moses meeting God at the Burning Bush in Exodus.189 There are 
good reasons to compare Superman and Moses. Indeed, Michael Uslan taught the first accredited 
college course on comics after convincing the dean of Indiana University “that Superman and 
Moses shared an origin story and a teachable moment.”190 The comparisons between Superman’s 
birth story and that of Moses are of great importance and close enough that it is not unreasonable 
to draw a parallel between the two.   
Several writers link Superman to the mythical Jewish figure of the golem; the golem is a 
creature with miraculous powers that was supposedly brought to life from clay by a 16th century 
rabbi named Judah Loew ben Bezalel (or Rabbi Liva) in Prague to protect the Jews from 
religious persecution from a priest named Thaddeus and others who blamed the Jews for the 
                                                           
186 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 17–18. Tye is reaching a bit more when he writes 
that “the narratives of Krypton’s birth and death borrowed the language of Genesis.” See Tye, Superman,  66.  
187 Superman: The Animated Series, “The Last Son of Krypton: Part II,” S01, E2, directed by Scott Jeralds 
and Curt Geda, written by Alan Burnett and Paul Dini, Kids WB!, September 6, 1996.   
188 Grant Morrison and Rags Morales, “Action Comics Sketchbook,” in Superman in Action Comics, vol. 1, 
Superman and the Men of Steel (New York: DC Comics, 2012), n.p.  
189 See Superman: The Movie, directed by Richard Donner. For the comparison, see De Haven, Our Hero, 
181. See also, Salkind and Spengler, “Audio Commentary,” Superman: The Movie.   
190 Tye, Superman, 211–12. He later produced several comic book movies.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
42 
 
death of Christ.191 Lund does not think Siegel and Shuster had the “golem” in mind when they 
created Superman because there is no evidence and “differences between the golem of Prague 
and Superman outweigh their one similarity; Superman, unlike golems … is born, not created; he 
is fully autonomous and a moral actor; he is capable of speech; and he is never put to rest, but is 
perpetually needed.”192 Lund adds that “the small but growing Jewish—comics connection 
library suffers from a paucity of textual, biographical, or historical support for its interpretations, 
which is likely a reason for why this literature has relied so heavily on internal, mutual 
referencing.”193 Lund’s analysis effectively refutes a commonplace assertion in the secondary 
                                                           
191 Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 15–17; Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 29; Brod, Superman Is 
Jewish?, 18; Tye, Superman, 73, 78; Robert Leslie Liebman, “Rabbis or Rakes, Schlemiels or Supermen?: Jewish 
Identity in Charles Chaplin, Jerry Lewis, and Woody Allen,” Literature Film Quarterly 12, no. 3 (1984): 195–201.  
Comic book writer Will Eisner said: “The Golem was very much the precursor of the super-hero in that in every 
society there's a need for mythological characters, wish fulfillment. And the wish fulfillment in the Jewish case of 
the hero would be someone who could protect us. This kind of storytelling seems to dominate in Jewish culture.” 
Kaplan thus links it with Superman. See Arie Kaplan, “How the Jews Created the Comic Book Industry, Part 1: The 
Golden Age (1933-1955),” Reform Judaism, Fall 2003, vol. 32, no. 1 http://reformjudaismmag.net/03fall/ 
comics.shtml (accessed June 6, 2018). The myth of the golem was used in another way in Superman #248, as the 
evil Lex Luthor created a creature called the “Galactic Golem,” because it was made of “galactic matter” from stars 
and other phenomena from space. See Len Wein, “The Man Who Murdered the Earth!” Superman #248 (New York: 
DC Comics, 1972). Luthor says, “like the legendary golem of old who was forged from bits of clay, I have molded a 
man-thing that’ll be more than a match for my old ‘friend’—Superman!” (4). While the original golem protected the 
Jews, Luthor says that his galactic golem “will free me from the yoke of my oppressor—Superman!” (5). Larry Tye 
notes that the story came out under Superman’s Jewish editor Julius Schwartz. See Tye, Superman, 209. In a 
throwback comics story, written in 1998 but set in the 1930s, Clark Kent’s newspaper sends him to cover the Nazi 
occupation of Poland, and a Jewish family tells him the legend of the golem; Superman thinks to himself, “I’m not a 
golem and I’m no angel—but it’s time Superman got busy!” See Jon Bogdanove and Louise Simonson, Superman: 
The Man of Steel #81 (New York: DC Comics, 1998), 10. As Superman fights many of the Nazis and saves many 
Jews from extermination, both the Jews and Nazis wonder if the “golem” is real and in their midst. See also, Jon 
Bogdanove and Louise Simonson, Superman: The Man of Steel #82 (New York: DC Comics, 1998). The Anti-
Defamation League criticized DC Comics for not identifying the people in the ghetto as Jewish more clearly. See 
Danny Goldberg, “The ADL Vs Superman,” Tikkun 14, January/February 1999, 5–7. To read the myths of the 
golem, see Chayim Bloch, The Golem: Mystical Tales from the Ghetto of Prague, trans. Harry Schneiderman 
(Blauvelt, NY: Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1972); Yudl Rosenberg, “The Golem or The Miraculous Deeds of Rabbi 
Liva,” trans. Joachim Neugroschel, in The Great Works of Jewish Fantasy and Occult (New York: The Overlook 
Press, 1976), 162–225. For more on the golem myth, see Arnold L. Goldsmith, The Golem Remembered, 1909—
1980: Variations of a Jewish Legend (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1981); Elizabeth Baer, The Golem 
Redux: From Prague to Post-Holocaust Fiction (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 2012); Golem!: 
Danger, Deliverance and Art, ed. Emily D. Bilski (New York: The Jewish Museum, 1989); Nicola Morris, The 
Golem in Jewish American Literature: Risks and Responsibilities in the Fiction of Thane Rosenbaum, Nomi Eve and 
Steve Stern, Twentieth-Century American Jewish Writers (New York: Peter Lang, 2007). 
192 Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 28. The myth is not as old as it has sometimes been portrayed.  
193 Ibid., 28–29. Lund says that writers like Harry Brod “find their own meaning in the comics they read, 
and promote their interpretations within a vibrant and multifaceted, but also contentious, contemporary Jewish 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
43 
 
literature because so many authors uncritically regurgitate the claim that the golem must have 
been an influence on Superman’s creation—with no evidence beyond the fact that both have 
Jewish roots and save people. 
Superman is an “immigrant” who came to America with little—like many Jewish 
immigrants—and so Superman’s journey from Krypton is sometimes compared to Jewish 
assimilation.194 This comparison is sometimes misrepresented. Harry Brod compares the infant 
Superman’s journey from his old planet of Krypton to Earth to how many Jews left an “old” 
world of Europe that was, in a sense, heading to a sort of destruction by the 1930s—and found 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
American order of discourse” (32).  Lund is concerned that even “academic” works have uncritically cited these 
popular-level works by Jewish authors (34). He singles out Marco Arnaudo because Arnaudo “rehashes popular 
interpretations and gives them the imprimatur of academic writing” without engaging with early comics (38).  
194 Secret Origin, directed by Mac Carter. In this film, Mark Waid also observes that early superheroes like 
Superman were generally not invented by affluent people, while writer Dwayne McDuffie commented that the 
earliest immigrant comic book creators struggled to be accepted by mainstream America.  Gary Engle believes 
“Superman is like nothing so much as an American boy’s fantasy of a messiah,” who “protects the weak and 
defends truth and justice and all the other moral virtues inherent in the Judeo-Christian tradition” and “raises the 
American immigrant experience to the level of religious myth.” See Engle, “What Makes Superman So Darned 
American?” 86–87. Scott Raab sees a parallel between the Jewish struggle for assimilation and Superman’s secret 
identity. Raab observes that “both Superman and Siegel have small homelands, Siegel’s Eretz Yisroel and 
Superman’s Kandor” (the city from Krypton that was shrunk small enough to fit in a bottle by the evil Brainiac 
before Krypton exploded and discovered by Superman decades later). See Scott Raab, “Is Superman Jewish?” in 
Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 
1988), 166–67. This is not a perfect parallel. Knowles calls that the story of Superman’s journey to Earth from a 
dying world “an eerie foreshadowing of the coming Holocaust, when parents sent their children out of Europe to 
save them.” See Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 123 n. 102. Danny Fingeroth writes: “Superman is never 
specifically identified as Jewish—or anything else, except Caucasian and male. The fact that he is an alien from 
space is forgotten in the general public’s conception of the character—talk about an immigrant blending in!” See 
Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 37, 155. Fingeroth writes that Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster were from families 
of Yiddish-speaking Eastern European Jewish immigrants (from Lithuania and the Netherlands), and interprets 
Superman as a wish-fulfillment assimilationist fantasy. See Fingeroth, Superman on the Couch, 54–56. Arie Kaplan 
writes that since Superman is his planet’s last survivor, he is a refugee, who, “like many Jews … came to America to 
escape the extinction of his people.” See Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 14. Tom De Haven calls Superman “the 
ultimate immigrant.” See De Haven, Our Hero , 5. Jules Feiffer compares Superman’s arrival on Earth to Jews 
coming from the “old country,” and writes, “it wasn’t Krypton that Superman came from; it was the planet Minsk or 
Lodz or Vilna or Warsaw.” Feiffer also says that “Superman was the ultimate assimilationist fantasy.” See  Jules 
Feiffer, “The Minsk Theory of Krypton,” New York Times Magazine, December 29, 1996, 14–15. See also, Jules 
Feiffer, Backing into Forward: A Memoir (New York: Doubleday, 2010), 73; Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing 
Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns. The comic miniseries Birthright exploits the angle of Superman as an 
immigrant, and how immigrants are not always perceived positively in modern America. See Mark Waid, 
Superman: Birthright (New York: DC Comics, 2004).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
44 
 
new life in America.195 Clark Kent’s journey to the big city thus mirrors “Jewish immigration 
patterns” to urban centres.196 Scott Raab notes a parallel between Superman’s relationship to his 
home planet Krypton and the concept of the “Diaspora” for Jews.197 These parallels may work on 
a superficial level, but there is not sufficient evidence that Siegel and Shuster had them in mind; 
they are just speculation. To a similar end, Michael Chabon draws parallels to how Superman 
had to come from his homeland (Krypton) and change his Kryptonian name (Kal-El) for the 
more American name “Clark Kent” to blend in because that is, in effect, what Jewish immigrants 
had to do.198 Although the parallel works on a superficial level, it ignores the fact that “Clark 
Kent” did not choose this name for himself but was adopted by the Kent family, who found 
                                                           
195 Brod, Superman Is Jewish?,  5. One can compare the destruction of Krypton to the Holocaust, and 
Superman’s journey from the dying Krypton to Earth has parallels with how hundreds of young Jewish children 
were evacuated from Nazi-occupied Europe in Kindertransports. Arie Kaplan, “How the Jews Created the Comic 
Book Industry,”; Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 14; Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 44. However, this 
connection is chronologically late to be an influence on Superman’s creation. Lund suggests that Jewish-American 
comics creators were not that well-informed on the full horror of the Holocaust—at least in 1938. See Lund, Re-
Constructing the Man of Steel, 101. Tye believes that Siegel was influenced by the Holocaust, as he and many other 
comics creators were Jewish. See Tye, Superman, 67; 72–75. Since “Krypton” means hidden, Brod confusingly 
suggests that this name is “a secret invitation to decode Superman’s encrypted secret identity as a crypto-Jew (Jews, 
who since the days of the Spanish Inquisition, have publicly given up their faith to escape persecution, but who 
remain Jews in their private lives and personal allegiance)” (5–6). Brod also argues that Superman’s alter ego, 
clumsy Clark Kent is a “nebbish” Jewish stereotype (7, 10, 11). Similarly, Weinstein says that the shy Clark is a 
Jewish stereotype. See Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 23.  It seems a bit of a stretch for Brod to say that 
“Superman sees ‘mortal men’ as the world sees Clark, which is essentially how the anti-Semitic world sees Jewish 
men. His wish for Lois to fall in love with Clark is then the revenge of the Jewish nerd for the world’s anti-
Semitism” (Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 8). According to Brod, in the early Superman comics, “Superman’s values 
would have been recognized ... as very much those of a New Dealer,” and Brod says that that generation of Jews 
saw traditional Jewish ethics in Roosevelt’s New Deal reforms (13). Although Scott Raab says Superman himself is 
not Jewish (“the man has all the ethnicity of Formica”), Raab notes that Superman’s concerns parallel the Jewish 
concern for social justice. See Raab, ”Is Superman Jewish?”, 166. Many comic book heroes were created by Jews 
(the list includes Superman, Batman, Spider-Man, and Captain America), and as Gerard Jones writes, “secret 
identity stories always reverberated with the children of Jewish immigrants ... because they were so much about the 
wearing of the masks that enabled one to be an American, a Modern, a secular consumer, but still part of an ancient 
society, a link in an old chain, when safely among those who knew one’s secret.” See Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 201.   
196 Brod, Superman Is Jewish?,  9.  
197 Raab, ”Is Superman Jewish?”, 167. Christopher Knowles writes that “the destruction of Krypton is an 
apt metaphor for the Diaspora, as well as for the assault on European Jewish communities that prompted their mass 
emigration to North America in the late 19th century.” See Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 122.  
198 Comic Books and Super Heroes, disc 2, Unbreakable. In Chabon’s novel The Amazing Adventures of 
Kavalier and Clay, a character says: “They’re all Jewish, superheroes. Superman, you don’t think he’s Jewish? 
Coming over from the old country, changing his name like that. Clark Kent, only a Jew would pick a name like that 
for himself.” See Michael Chabon, The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay (New York: Random House, 
2000), 585. Kaplan writes that Clark Kent’s Kryptonian name “Kal-El” was turned to “Clark Kent” on Earth, like 
many Jews “Americanized” their names. Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton , 15.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
45 
 
him—and he did not even know his Kryptonian name until later in life. Therefore, that 
interpretation imposes a pattern on the Superman story that ignores the specificities of the story 
itself. Similarly, when discussing the Jewish background of Superman’s creators, Tye writes: 
“Superman was a refugee who had escaped to America from a world about to explode, just as the 
Siegels and Shusters did in fleeing Europe before the Holocaust.”199 This is an irresponsible 
statement that Lund effectively refutes because it also imposes a pattern on the lives of 
Superman’s creators without giving due weight to their specific experiences. Lund is wary of 
interpreters who homogenize the cultures of different early 20th century Jewish communities, 
both in Europe and in their transfer to the United States.200  Lund says that Tye  
erases the respective historical specificities of both the Siegels’ and Shusters’ personal 
migratory experiences and of the Holocaust: Siegel’s parents immigrated in 1900, to 
escape after conscription and attempts at conversion; Shuster’s mother left Russian 
insecurity and anti-Semitism for Canada in 1912, and his father, whom she met in 
Rotterdam en route, followed soon after, out of love.201  
 
For these specifically “Jewish” readings of Superman, Lund also observes that even 
though Jerry Siegel was raised in an Orthodox Jewish home, he did not regularly go to 
synagogue, dated non-Jewish girls, and that neither he nor Shuster showed any interest in groups 
for young Jewish adults in Cleveland.202 Indeed, although this is likely a slight exaggeration, one 
                                                           
199 Tye, Superman, 78.   
200 Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 19,   
201 Ibid., 72–73.  
202 Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 134. Lund believes that the subjective “eisegesis” of certain 
Jewish writers is “harmful” (184). Jonathan D. Sarna writes that from the years 1932 to 1935 in America—within 
the years Siegel and Shuster created Superman—most religious denominations experienced a notable decline in 
attendance, but synagogues especially. See Jonathan D. Sarna, American Judaism: A History (Yale, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2004), 226. It probably makes sense to downplay what Tye writes of Superman: “He adhered to 
ethical guideposts as unbending as those of the tzadik, or righteous man, in the Old Testament tradition .... Even 
Kryptonite radiated with symbolism: It showed the influence his homeland still had over its Last Son, threatening to 
upend his life in the diaspora.” See Tye, Superman, 78. Some of these connections seem to be coincidental, based on 
when they appeared chronologically. Despite Siegel’s lack of interest in the rites of Judaism, the Nazi SS newspaper 
Das Schwarze Korps went after Siegel. In a lengthy rant, the magazine said: “Jerry Siegel, an intellectually and 
physically circumcised chap who has his headquarters in New York, is the inventor of a colorful figure with an 
impressive appearance, a powerful body, and a red swim suit who enjoys the ability to fly through the ether …. As 
you can see, there is nothing the Sadducees won’t do for money! ... Jerry Siegellack stinks. Woe to the American 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
46 
 
of Jerry Siegel’s friends said, “I don’t think he ever went to the synagogue in his life.”203 These 
points are significant because scholars are sometimes guilty of overstating how much Siegel’s 
Jewish identity really influenced his life—and by extension his Superman writing.  
In later decades, there may be more Jewish elements involving Superman’s identification 
with his home planet Krypton (including stories written by Siegel), but those resonances cannot 
be found in the earliest comics, where Krypton plays a small role.204 Nonetheless, by the stories 
of the late 1950s and 1960s, Superman’s relationship to Krypton was more like that of post-
Holocaust Jews with “survivor’s guilt,” and Tom De Haven speculates that Superman’s guilt and 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
youth, who must live in such a poisoned atmosphere and don’t even notice the poison they swallow daily.” See 
“Jerry Siegel Attacks!” Das Schwarze Korps, April 25, 1940, translated by Randall Byrtwerk, “The SS and 
Superman,” German Propaganda Archive, http://research.calvin.edu/german-propaganda-archive/superman.htm, 
(accessed June 5, 2018). Gerard Jones writes that Hitler and Mussolini both publicly “denounced” Superman for 
being Jewish, but is not specific. See Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 162. Ironically, while the Nazis had labeled 
Superman a Jewish pawn, after the war, a Jewish psychiatrist (Fredric Wertham) thought Superman was a corrupting 
Nazi influence for children and compared Superman’s S symbol to the Nazi SS! See Tye, Superman, 127—28; De 
Haven, Our Hero, 86; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 98–99; Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 274.    
203 Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 84. Still, Fingeroth says that Siegel was at least exposed to the Bible and was 
from a Jewish part of Cleveland. See Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 28, 41. To a different end, Superman’s 
mantra of “Truth, justice, and the American way,” has attracted different interpretations. The phrase did not 
originate with Siegel and Shuster, but as the phrase “truth, justice, and the American way,” can be compared to 
Pirkei Avot 1:18, which says that “the world ... endures on justice, truth, and peace.” See Tye, Superman, 66, 320; 
Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 28.  Elliot S. Maggin calls Superman’s “truth and justice” mantra “Superman’s 
personal Torah.” See Tye, Superman, 262. Patrick L. Eagan writes of “the American Way” that “God is its author 
and Superman its guardian.” See Patrick L. Eagan, “A Flag with a Human Face,” in Superman at Fifty: The 
Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 89. Originally, 
Superman only fought for “truth and justice” on the Superman radio show, but the phrase “American way” was 
added during the war effort, although the full phrase was popularized more widely with the 1950s TV show. Andrew 
Terjesen, “Is Superman an American Icon?” in Superman and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, ed. 
Mark D. White, Blackwell Philosophy and Pop Culture Series (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 72. Even less 
convincingly, Greg Garrett links Superman’s fight for truth, justice, and the American way to Pontius Pilate asking 
Jesus “What is truth?” in John 18:38. See Garrett  Holy Superheroes, 35. Superman is typically described as “faster 
than a speeding bullet, more powerful than a locomotive, able to leap tall buildings in a single bound.” Weinstein 
compares this description to Avot 5:20, which says to be as “bold as a leopard, light as an eagle, swift as a deer, and 
strong as a lion.” See Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 28. For another comparison between Superman and Judaism, 
some interpreters link the destruction of Krypton to the Kabbalah “where the divine vessel was shattered and Jews 
were called on to perform tikkun ha-olam by repairing the vessel and the world.” See Tye, Superman, 66. See also, 
Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 20. Conversely, Lund argues that this particular social activist reading of the tikkun 
olam originated during the 1950s, became popular in the 1970s, and in any case comes far too late to have been an 
influence on Superman. See Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 85. On a less serious note, Zeddy Lawrence 
joked that if “man” is “at the end of someone’s name you can draw one of two conclusions: a) they’re Jewish, as in 
Goldman, Feldman, or Lipman; or b) they’re a superhero, as in Superman, Batman, or Spider-Man”  Zeddy 
Lawrence, “Web Master,” Totally Jewish—Lifestyle Channel, July 8, 2004. This idea is referenced in Tye, 
Superman, 66; Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 9.      
204 Lund, Re-Constructing the Man of Steel, 72.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
47 
 
helplessness about Krypton’s destruction might also connect to the religious background of 
Superman editor Mort Weisinger and his writers.205 De Haven writes:  
Whether Mort Weisinger and his virtually all-Jewish cadre of creative talent were 
consciously using the Kryptonian adventures of the late 1950s and early 1960s as 
metaphors for the European holocaust of the 1940s is anybody’s guess … but there’s no 
denying that ... those stories’ subtext added a pathos to the character.206  
 
One 1962 comics story is a good example of this phenomenon. In a story called “The 
One Minute of Doom,” Superman, his cousin Supergirl, and Krypto the Super Dog all rush to 
Superman’s Arctic Fortress of Solitude for a mysterious “special appointment,” and the story 
builds the suspense as to what that special appointment might be.207 It turns out that it is a 
memorial day commemorating the destruction of Superman’s home planet Krypton for survivors, 
and the residents of Kandor (Krypton’s only surviving city, which was shrunk and put in a bottle 
by the evil Brainiac before the planet exploded) and even criminals in the otherworldly 
Kryptonian prison the “Phantom Zone” also observe this moment of silence.208 In a poignant 
scene, Superman decides to build a life-sized replica of Krypton’s capital city on an uninhabited 
planet deep in outer space; he cannot rebuild what was lost of his old planet, but he can honour it 
with this monument in the stars.209 Given that the author (Siegel) and editor (Weisinger) of this 
story were Jewish, Arie Kaplan suggests that “Krypton Memorial Day could certainly be a 
metaphor for Yom Ha-Shoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day.”210 If that is true, an otherwise 
innocuous Superman story becomes a moving metaphor for the millions of Jews who died in the 
Holocaust and for those still living who tried to process the tragedy. Unlike some alleged 
“Jewish” influences on Superman, this one makes sense chronologically.  
                                                           
205 De Haven, Our Hero, 116. See also, Tye, Superman, 66.  
206 De Haven, Our Hero, 116. Weisinger was responsible for many important aspects of the Superman 
mythos. See Murray, “Superman’s Editor Mort Weisinger,” 8–15.  
207 Jerry Siegel, “The One Minute of Doom!” Superman #150 (New York: DC Comics, 1962), 1–4. 
208 Ibid., 4–8.  
209 Ibid., 8–9.  
210 Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 14.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
48 
 
In both Superman #61 (1949) and Superman #141 (1960), Superman visits Krypton in the 
distant past and sees his parents in the flesh (in the latter story, Superman even falls in love with 
a Kryptonian woman from the past), but Superman is helpless to stop the deaths of his people; 
the latter story is particularly gut-wrenching.211 Fingeroth writes:  
a Holocaust survivor would long to go back to a time and place that could never be 
revisited. Previously, Superman’s stories had never gone into the emotional ramifications 
of the Man of Steel being the last survivor of a doomed planet. But in a world where the 
Nazi genocide of Eastern Europe’s Jews was so recent, Jewish (and gentile) Superman 
writers were moved—and encouraged by Weisinger—to explore territory that had 
previously been considered too deep for comics.212    
 
  
 
These stories provide further evidence that there may be links between the Jewish 
identity of Superman’s writers and editors and the comics themselves. Nonetheless, these 
resonances do not appear until the character had existed for a few decades; they were not there in 
the first comic book stories. 
In Superman #400, Elliot S. Maggin—an Orthodox Jew—depicts a day in the distant 
future (the year 5902) where Superman is honoured by a yearly meal with parallels to 
Passover.213 This night “is different from all other nights,” and is a celebration of freedom.214 
The ritual includes lines such as “let all who are hungry come and eat!”215 The family dips their 
                                                           
211 See Bill Finger, “Superman Returns to Krypton!” Superman #61 (New York: DC Comics, 1949); Jerry 
Siegel, “Superman’s Return to Krypton!” Superman #141 (New York: DC Comics, 1961).   
212 Fingeroth may be saying more than he can prove, but the writers and editors were Jewish. See 
Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 66–67. See also Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 82–83. Elsewhere, 
Fingeroth writes: “To the Jewish editors and writers of the stories—particularly Jerry Siegel … there was a distinct 
yearning in these stories for things lost” (84). Fingeroth reads more into the texts than they contain when he writes 
that the introduction of living Kryptonian criminals posed questions such as why “the evil General Zod survived 
when Jor-El and Lara had not” and hence “the types of questions with which Holocaust survivors were grappling. 
Why had those who survived done so? What choice of fate had made them so lucky? And were they really all that 
lucky, having to live with survivors’ guilt and the host of other psychological and physical consequences of having 
remained alive?” (84). Fingeroth compares Weisinger’s Superman stories to “tales of the Old Jerusalem (or vanished 
Jewish Warsaw), expressed through Superman’s longing for the glory and grandeur of Krypton” (89).     
213 Elliot S. Maggin, “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter Seven,” Superman #400 (New York: DC 
Comics, 1984), 1–10. See Weinstein, Up, Up, and Oy Vey, 20.  
214 Maggin, “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter Seven,” 4.  
215 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
49 
 
food in a dish.216 When celebrating, the family leaves an empty seat for Superman in case he 
should appear (like Elijah), and in this story, on one of his adventures he accidentally time-
travels to the future to this family’s home without knowing that they are celebrating him!217 
Since Maggin is a religious Jew who also reveres Superman, it is clear that he was not parodying 
the Jewish Passover.218 This story provides a unique connection between Superman and Judaism 
and was written by a Jew, although it came some forty-five years after Superman’s creation.  
A study of the history of the Superman mythos also reveals another intertextual biblical 
connection that has not gotten due weight in scholarship: the fact that Jonathan and Martha Kent 
(the elderly couple who adopt Kal-El after they find his rocket in a field) have parallels with 
many couples in Scripture who are blessed with a child in old age.219 This idea developed over 
time. George Lowther’s 1942 Superman novel says: “Destiny perhaps played a part in directing 
the rocket to the Kent farm, for the Kents were childless and desired a child above anything else 
on earth. And here, like a gift from Heaven, was the infant Kal-el.”220 Martha is named “Sarah” 
in this continuity, and the story has parallels to another childless elderly couple—Abraham and 
Sarah.221 In Superman: The Movie, Martha Kent tells the infant Clark, “all these years as happy 
as we’ve been, how I’ve prayed and prayed the Good Lord would see fit to give us a child.”222 
                                                           
216 Ibid., 6.  
217 Ibid., 6–10. 
218 Bruce Bachand interviewed him and he talked about religion. See Bruce Bachand, “Interview: Elliot S. 
Maggin,” Fanzing, 1998, http://www.fanzing.com/ mag/fanzing09/iview.shtml (accessed June 27, 2018).   
219 Stephen Skelton observes the parallels between the elderly Martha and the biblical figures of Sarah, 
Rebekah, Samuel’s mother Hannah, Samson’s mother Hannah, and Elizabeth. See Skelton, The Gospel According to 
the World’s Greatest Superhero, 55.  
220 George Lowther, The Adventures of Superman (Bedford, MA: Applewood, 1995 [1942]), 24. Before he 
dies, his father says: “Ye’re a—a a modern miracle .... ’Tis not for you nor me to question the ways of God” (55).  
221 Anton K. Kozlovic notes the use of the name “Sarah” in Lowther’s book, while also arguing that Martha 
Kent fits into this paradigm in Superman: The Movie. See Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts,” 
11–12. Michael Mautner believes that the name “Sarah” is intentional in Lowther’s novel, and that her husband’s 
name “Eben” is derivative of Abraham. See Michael E. Mautner, “From the Pit to the Peak: Superman and the 
Ascension of America,” http://ws.fortress.net.nu/americanway/ thesis.php (accessed June 23, 2018).  
222 Superman: The Movie, directed by Richard Donner; Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical 
Subtexts,” 11–12. Marco Arnaudo compares this to the Virgin Mary receiving a child from Heaven, but Mary was a 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
50 
 
Elliot S. Maggin’s 1981 novel Superman: Miracle Monday makes the connection directly and 
describes Martha Kent’s relationship with her husband as follows: “Middle-aged and childless, 
Martha Clark Kent wanted no more from life than to grow old in the company of this unshakably 
good man. Then, as happened to Abraham’s aged wife Sarah, the Heavens gave her a son.”223 
These examples show that this element of the Superman mythos grew from being a suggestion to 
a definite reference. Then, in Grant Morrison’s All-Star Superman comics miniseries, Jonathan 
Kent recounts to Clark how they found him as a baby, and says  
we’d been married, oh, it must have been ten years .... we both bitterly regretted that we 
couldn’t have a child ....  I’ve never been much of a one for sitting in church, but what 
else could I do? I came right out here and prayed. I figured nothing would happen, but I 
had to try ... Then, one night ... you came. Makes you wonder, huh? A childless couple, 
blessed from above with a miracle boy from another world.224  
 
 
The “childless couple” theme recurs, even if the Bible is not directly referenced. In John 
Byrne’s version of Superman, the biblical theme is not explicit, but Jonathan Kent says: “We’d 
been trying for eight years to have a baby of our own … and after two miscarriages and one 
stillbirth, our friends were just as thrilled as could be to meet little Clark Kent.”225 Jesus’s mother 
Mary was young and not sterile, but Abraham and Sarah, Abimelech and his wife, Isaac and 
Rebekah, Jacob and Rachel, Hannah and Elkanah, and Zechariah and Elizabeth did have that 
problem—and God intervened. In a way, this is what happens to the Kents.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
young woman and Martha Kent was older, so those parallels are not as strong. See Arnaudo, The Myth of the 
Superhero, 48.  
223 Elliott S. Maggin, Superman: Miracle Monday (N.p.: Caveat Corner Books, 2017 [1981), 17. Tom De 
Haven’s Superman novel also dwells on how the Kents were childless, but Martha Kent saw Clark’s arrival from 
space as “a miracle,” and says, “God is good. God is great. God has blessed us.” See Tom De Haven, It’s 
Superman!: A Novel (London: HarperCollins, 2006), 32, 34.  
224 Grant Morrison, All-Star Superman, vol. 1, (New York: DC Comics, 2007), 133–34. The “otherworldly” 
aspect of the story might point to Jesus. Regardless, in another telling by Morrison, Action Comics #5 shows young 
Martha Kent lamenting, “I lost our baby. Our last chance at … at a …” But as her voice trails off, the rocketship 
arrives. See Grant Morrison, “Rocket Song,” n.p.   
225 John Byrne, The Man of Steel, Book One, (New York: DC Comics, 1986), 14.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
51 
 
Sholly Fisch’s short 2012 story “Baby Steps” (a backup feature in Action Comics) shows 
Jonathan and Martha’s wedding, their plans for future children, and gives some on-the-nose 
foreshadowing, as Martha says: “babies don’t just fall out of the sky, you know.”226 This story 
goes even further by using direct biblical quotations to heighten the parallel. The story shows 
Martha Kent failing a pregnancy test and their doctor telling them they are unlikely to have a 
child because of “low motility and endometriosis”; hormone treatments do not help.227 Martha 
and Jonathan visit a church and Martha asks if God is punishing them.228 The pastor quotes 1 
Samuel 1:8: “And Elkanah, her husband, said to her, ‘Hannah, why do you weep? Am I not 
better to you than ten sons?’”229 Before Hannah gave birth to the prophet Samuel, after a long 
struggle, Elkanah asked her this question (and could have been more tactful). The pastor says:  
Hannah was tormented by her inability to have a child. Yet, eventually, with God’s help, 
she bore Samuel, one of the greatest of the prophets. Scripture tells us that Sarah was 
ninety years old before she finally bore Isaac, and that Abraham was one hundred .... I 
don’t know why the two of you have had these troubles. But I do know that everything is 
part of God’s plan. And with two people as fine as you, I can’t imagine it’s a punishment. 
I’m sure it’s because, when the time is right, he has something wonderful in store ...230  
 
 
After Jonathan and Martha try in vitro fertilization, Jonathan jokingly quotes Elkanah’s 
words (“Am I not better to you than ten sons?”).231 Yet the story ends with a glimpse of Kal-El’s 
rocket in the sky above them; their child is finally coming.232 Although in this case, Martha and 
Jonathan do not miraculously give birth to a child in their old age, they nonetheless receive one 
                                                           
226 Sholly Fisch, “Baby Steps,” Action Comics #5 (New York: DC Comics, 2012), n.p.  
227 Ibid.  
228 Ibid.  
229 Ibid.  
230 Ibid.  
231 Ibid.  
232 Ibid. Although the television show Smallville deliberately made Martha and Jonathan Kent much 
younger than they are often portrayed, there is a scene in the show’s pilot episode where Martha meets three-year-
old Lana Lang pretending to be a fairy princess; Lana asks Martha to make a wish, and Martha wishes for a child. 
Their desire for a child is granted when Kal-El’s rocket ship arrives on Earth soon after. See Smallville, “Pilot,” 
directed by David Nutter. In the Smalllville series finale, Martha Kent reflects to Clark: “Before you arrived, we 
wanted a child so badly. The day you found us in that field, you were the miracle we prayed for.” Smallville, 
“Finale, Part 1” S10, E21, directed by Kevin G. Fair, written by Al Septien and Turi Meyer, The CW, May 13, 2011.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
52 
 
from above. Again, this biblical aspect of Superman’s origin story started as just a vague hint, 
but later writers built on it. The connection has roots in the Hebrew Bible.  
 While this paper will demonstrate that Superman/Jesus parallels were applied to the 
character later, it is significant to note that Jewish writers are not always pleased by this 
development. Harry Brod has argue that over time, “treating Superman’s biography as the life of 
a saint, as the life of a squeaky-clean do-gooder, sacrifices the original Jewish sensibility that 
created a more human hero to a Christian sensibility of saintliness.”233 It was not Christians who 
were necessarily responsible for these changes though. Still, Brod observes that Superman’s 
powers increased from what they were in the earliest comics and he became more and more 
“divine.”234 By using the word “divine” here, Brod is referring to the expansion of Superman’s 
powers in the 1950s and 1960s; while the Superman of the earliest comics would have a hard 
time lifting up a train, the Superman of later decades was powerful enough to move planets or 
moons from their orbit. Danny Fingeroth admits that “there doesn’t seem to be much overt 
Jewish content in the Superman movies,” beyond the superficial thematic level of “identity” and 
“meaning.”235 A writer in the Times of Israel criticized the film Man of Steel for making 
                                                           
233 Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 15. Brod believes that Christians are more likely to understand Old 
Testament figures as exemplary saints, while Jews do not (14–15). 
234 Ibid., 15. Brod concludes that the release of the 2006 film Superman Returns demonstrated Superman’s 
“deJewification,” since that film unashamedly presented Superman as a Christ figure (even though it was directed by 
a Jew) (17). In fact, as will be argued in this paper, that process started earlier than 2006.  
235 Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 145. One exception: in Superman II, Superman saves a boy at 
Niagara Falls, and an elderly woman says of Superman, “What a nice man. Course he’s Jewish.” See Superman II, 
directed by Richard Lester (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 1980). Regardless, Fingeroth observes that 
both Jesus and Moses are identified as influences on Superman, but does not think they should be seen as “avatars of 
conflicting belief systems.” See Fingeroth, Disguised as Clark Kent, 44. Still, Fingeroth thinks that the Jesus 
imagery was not applied to Superman much before the 1992 Death of Superman storyline and the film Superman 
Returns; he ignores the Jesus symbolism in Superman: The Movie in 1978. He says “the Mosaic take has the more 
resonant, long-term credibility” (44). Still, he admits: “On the other hand, Superman isn’t a leader like Moses, but a 
one-at-a-time savior like Jesus” (44). It is an odd description. Fingeroth argues that Jesus is the Son of David and 
son of god, while Moses was from an ordinary family and hence Superman is closer to the latter, but admits that 
these distinctions “may be in the realm of partisan argument” (45). Ben Saunders writes that attempts to make 
Superman into a Moses, Jesus, or mythical figure are often superficial, and “reveal more about the interpretive 
desire to claim Superman for this or that tradition ... than they do about Superman himself.” See Ben Saunders, Do 
the Gods Wear Capes? Spirituality, Fantasy, and Superheroes, New Directions in Religion and Literature (New 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
53 
 
Superman disregard his Kryptonian roots, and wondered if “Siegel and Shuster’s original Man of 
Steel” would have been as “dismissive of his roots”—in effect, reading Superman’s dismissal of 
his Kryptonian enemies as anti-Judaism!236 These authors’ words are significant because they 
show that Jewish interpreters were protective of Superman. While these writers try to make 
Superman into a much more Jewish figure than he actually is, at the very least, their concerns 
acknowledge that Superman/Jesus parallels are foreign to the original conception of the 
character, as I have argued.    
Still, certain basic connections can be drawn between Superman and Jesus, and these 
parallels might explain why later Superman media would want to make use of such 
connections.237 Larry Tye says of Superman: “Like Jesus Christ, he descended from the heavens 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
York: Continuum, 2011), 17. Saunders thinks that “it will always be reductive to try and explicate Superman in 
terms of a single belief system such as Judaism or Christianity” (32). Although these words have some truth, the 
makers of Superman media in recent decades have actively exploited comparisons with Superman and Jesus.     
236 This writer implausibly linked the Kryptonian artefact the “codex” in the film to the Aleppo Codex. See 
Jordan Hoffman, “‘Man of Steel’ No Longer Man of Shtetl,” Times of Israel, June 14, 2013, https://www.timesof 
israel.com/man-of-steel-no-longer-man-of-shtetl/ (accessed July 11, 2018). In fact, Chris Roberson shows that 
Krypton was not fleshed out in the Superman mythos until the 1950s. In early comics, it “is presented in only the 
most cursory fashion, with contradictory details.” See Chris Roberson, “Jewel Mountains and Fire Falls: The Lost 
World of Krypton,” The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop (Dallas, TX: 
BenBella Books, 2005), 38. Jason Cohen writes that Superman was originally powered by “profoundly Jewish 
teachings,” but turned into a Christ figure. Cohen was hopeful that 2018 Superman comics writer Brian Michael 
Bendis would make a more “Jewish” Superman because Bendis is Jewish. Cohen lamented that Superman became 
“a symbol of conservative Christian wholesomeness ... instead of the [Jewish?] social liberalism that can bring about 
real change.” See Jason Cohen, “Bendis Signals a Welcome Return to Superman’s Jewish Roots.” See also, Marcy 
Oster, “DC Comics’ Newest Writer is Poised to Make Superman Jewish Again”; Mark Hughes, “Exclusive: Bendis 
to Write Superman, Revive Jinxworld, and Oversee New Custom Imprint at DC Comics,” Forbes, February 1, 2018, 
https://www.forbes.com/ sites/mark hughes/2018/ 02/01/ exclusive-bendis-to-write-superman-revive-jinxworld-and-
oversee-new-custom-imprint-at-dc-comics/#29 eeed695c40 (accessed June 27, 2018).   
237 Tye observes that Superman’s adoptive mother was originally named “Mary,” or that Superman’s cape 
could be similar to an angel’s wings. He adds that while Jews could compare Superman to Moses, Aaron, or David, 
Christians could compare Superman to the saints. Kal-El’s baby blankets from Krypton were like Jesus’s 
“swaddling clothes” in the manger. Superman’s Arctic Fortress of Solitude looked similar to a cathedral. “Krypton” 
may be “Greek for “hidden,” just as the kingdom of Heaven is “hidden” in Matthew 13:33 and 13:44, and the name 
of Superman’s enemy “Lex Luthor” sounds vaguely like Lucifer. “Clark” sounds somewhat similar to the word 
“cleric.” Yet these are weak links. For all these connections, see Tye, Superman, 68. See also, Skelton, The Gospel 
According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 50, 69. There is no chance Siegel and Shuster had the word “cleric” 
in mind when they named Clark Kent. Regardless, Grant Morrison writes: “Superman was Christ, an unkillable 
champion sent down by his heavenly father (Jor-El) to redeem us by example and teach us how to solve our 
problems without killing one another.” See Morrison, Supergods, 16. Morrison claims that “the idea of Superman is 
every bit as real as the idea of God” (415). Much like certain fringe New Testament “scholars,” Superman #400 
imagines a future where not all scholars believe that Superman really existed, but was a “legend” or “faked news.” 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
54 
 
to help us discover our humanity.”238 Tye compares how the people around Clark Kent did not 
see past his secret identity to how Jesus’s contemporaries did not recognize him as the messiah 
and George Aichele compares Superman keeping his secret identity in the television series Lois 
& Clark to the so-called “Messianic secret” in the Gospel of Mark (where Jesus hides his 
identity).239 These are superficial parallels, but nonetheless, they are present in the source 
material, even if a deliberate parallel was not intended. Between the arrival from Krypton and the 
virgin birth, “both share amazing entrance stories and a parallel stranger-citizen dynamic.”240 
The name “Kal-El” means “Star-Child” in Krypton’s language; that can be linked to the Star of 
Bethlehem.241 Greg Garrett writes that “since one of Superman’s obvious predecessors is the 
Jewish tradition of Messiah, it makes perfect sense that he would also reflect images of Jesus, 
since Christians see Jesus as the fulfillment of those legends.”242 Like Jesus, in some ways, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
See Elliot S. Maggin, “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter Five,” Superman #400 (New York: DC Comics, 
1984), 2. In an article on the historical Jesus, Adam Gopnik writes: “The view that the search for the historical Jesus 
is like the search for the historical Superman—that there’s nothing there but a hopeful story and a girlfriend with an 
alliterative name—has by now been marginalized from the seminaries to the Internet.” The “girlfriends” in question 
are Mary Magdalene and Lois Lane. See Adam Gopnik, “What Did Jesus Do?” The New Yorker, May 24, 2010, 
https://www.newyorker. com/magazine/2010/05/24/what-did-jesus-do (accessed June 27, 2018). Bruce Meyer 
writes that “Superman is humanity’s imaginative defence against the possibility of a tragic universe,” and “offers 
protection against evil through action, much as Jesus offered protection against evil through thought, moral practice, 
and belief.” See Bruce Meyer, Heroes: From Hercules to Superman (Toronto: HarperCollins, 2008), 225.     
238 Tye, preface, Superman, xiii-xiv. Garrett writes: “We can find in Superman a powerful messiah figure.” 
See Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 7.   
239 Tye, Superman, 68. George Aichele, “Rewriting Superman,” in The Monstrous and the Unspeakable: 
The Bible as Fantastic Literature, eds. George Aichele and Tina Pippin (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), 
75–101. 
240 Felix Tallon and Jerry Walls, “Superman and Kingdom Come: The Surprise of Philosophical Theology,” 
in Superheroes and Philosophy: Truth, Justice and the Socratic Way, Popular Culture and Philosophy 13, eds. Tom 
Morris and Matt Morris (Chicago and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 2005), 208.   
241 Tye, Superman, 68.  
242 Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 21. See also, Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 114; 
Tallon and Walls, “Superman and Kingdom Come,” 207–8. See also, Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 119–24. 
This is a stretch, but Stephen Skelton notes that Hercules and Samson were both influences on Superman’s creation, 
and Skelton argues that both of them prefigure Christ because Hercules had a divine father and did miraculous 
deeds, while Samson’s birth was promised by an angel and he gave his life for the people. See Skelton, The Gospel 
According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 37. Some Jewish commentators see Superman as a Jewish messianic 
figure (without attaching him to Christianity). See Kaplan, From Krakow to Krypton, 17.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
55 
 
Superman “must be equally God and man.”243 In other words, in the allegory, Superman’s 
“divine” side is the Kryptonian side that gives him power, but to live as Clark Kent, he has to 
appear to be a human being.  Al Gough, co-creator of the series Smallville, said Superman is “a 
Christ-like figure ... You see him three times. You see him ... at birth. Once when he’s in his 
teenage years. And then when he suddenly appears at thirty. Ready to take on his mantle and 
save the world.”244 Superman’s heroic actions to save people in danger are like Jesus’s miracles 
or how Jesus’s death brings salvation.245 The point of noting all of these parallels is not to reflect 
on whether they are anything deeper than surface-level connections, but merely to suggest that 
there are parallels between Superman and Jesus in the basic source material that later authors 
could build on. And they did build on them.  
                                                           
243 Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 23–24. In J. Michael Straczynski’s series Superman: Earth One, Superman 
says of his name that “there may be something  super at the start of that name, but by the time you get to the end, it’s 
still just a man.” See J. Michael Straczynski, Superman: Earth One, vol. 1, (New York: DC Comics, 2010), n.p. 
Since Superman is “an alien” he is a tertium quid, or “third thing,” rather than fully god and fully man, and this 
status “would disallow Jesus as a savior” because it would deny his humanity, but it “paradoxically enables 
Superman as one.” See A. David Lewis, “Superman Graveside: Superhero Salvation beyond Jesus,” in Graven 
Images: Religion and Comic Books and Graphic Novels, eds. A. David Lewis and Christine Hoff Kraemer (New 
York: Continuum, 2010), 175; Susie Paulik Babka, “Arius, Superman, and the Tertium Quid: When Popular Culture 
Meets Christology,” Irish Theological Quarterly 73, no. 1 (2008): 113–32. When Denny O’Neil wrote Superman 
comics in the early 1970s, even then, he thought that the character’s powers had increased so much that he had to be 
somewhat depowered and “the godlike stuff had to go.” Granted, O’Neil’s changes were undone—only for John 
Byrne to depower Superman again. See Dennis O’Neil, “The Man of Steel and Me,” in Superman at Fifty: The 
Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 54.   
244 Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. Adam Barkman writes: “each was raised incognito on 
Earth, each began his mission at the age of 30, each tries (at least for a while) to hide his identity,” and “each 
assumes self-imposed servitude.” See Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 116–17. See also, 
Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 49. Skelton believes that Superman fulfills all the Beatitudes (86–89). Skelton 
compares Superman “S” to the serpent that Moses put up in the wilderness that would save those who looked at it 
(Numbers 21:4–9) and notes that in John 11:35, Jesus applied that symbolism to himself (101–2).     
245 John Wesley White compares Superman saving people at the Hoover Dam in Superman: The Movie to 
Jesus stilling the storm in Mark 4:35–41. See John Wesley White, The Man from Krypton: The Gospel According to 
Superman (Minneapolis, MN: Bethany Fellowship, 1978), 60–61. White compares Superman’s X-Ray vision to how 
Jesus “knew all people” in John 2:24–25 (93). In Superman: The Movie, Superman brings Lois Lane to life by 
turning back time, and Arnaudo compares this to Jesus raising Lazarus. Granted, the resurrections are very different. 
See Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 49. Skelton compares Superman’s powers (such as flying) and heroic 
rescues (catching planes and helicopters) to the miracles of Jesus. See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s 
Greatest Superhero, 73–74. Edward Mehok compares Superman’s powers to the miracles of Jesus, but also those of 
the saints in Medieval legend, except while Clark Kent transformed into Superman in a phone booth, the saints’ 
transformed because of their time in a prayer booth. See Edward Mehok, “St. Clark of Krypton,” in Superman at 
Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 123–29. 
Mehok compares Superman’s X-Ray vision to Jesus’s ability to see Nathanael at the fig tree in John 1:46–50, or his 
knowledge of the Samaritan woman’s past husbands, or Judas Iscariot’s motivations (128).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
56 
 
In conclusion, this chapter has argued that Superman was not created as a Jesus figure, 
and that many other alleged religious or philosophical influences on the character were not there 
originally. Originally, Superman was best understood as a wish-fulfillment creation by Siegel 
and Shuster. Nonetheless, the next chapter will show why he is associated with Jesus today.   
 
Chapter Three: The History of the Jesus Superman Across Media  
 
Early Superman/Jesus Parallels 
 
The idea of connecting Superman and Jesus has sometimes been controversial. This 
section will track the history of how Jesus/Superman parallels developed, but also show that 
making such parallels was controversial at times.  
In 1973, a Pennsylvania pastor named John T. Galloway Jr. wrote the book The Gospel 
According to Superman, though Galloway specifies that his book was not written to “find the 
gospel in Superman,” but “find the gospel where it can best be found—in scripture and in the 
changed lives of Christians.”246 The book’s back-cover says: “Superman is the perfect man-made 
‘god.’ He is available to help in a crisis, he never makes any demands, and he never intrudes into 
anyone’s life.”247 Galloway thinks that there are inherent problems with comparing Christ to 
other figures; he cites an old news article that drew attention to how none other than U.S. 
president than Richard Nixon was born in a farming community to a father who practiced 
                                                           
246 John T. Galloway Jr., The Gospel According to Superman (Philadelphia and New York: A.J. Holman 
Company, 1973), 9.  
247 In the book, Galloway rhetorically asks: “Wouldn’t life be a lot simpler if we had a Superman to do for 
us what the Man of Steel does for Jimmy Olsen? The inner man, left to itself, will produce such a self-satisfying 
Superman god” (41). Superman gave Jimmy a watch with high-pitched frequency only Superman can hear, so that if 
Jimmy is in danger, Superman can rescue him. Galloway says that he saw a composite Jesus-Superman in public, 
and recalls that he thought to himself that “this younger generation seems hopelessly fouled up …. How can anyone 
confuse the powerful steel hero with the meek suffering servant?” (18).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
57 
 
carpentry.248 He thinks that, unlike Jesus, Superman is a man-made “projection,” but only Jesus 
can bring eternal life.249 In other words, Galloway thinks that Superman is a fantasy, but Jesus is 
a reality who is the only means to salvation. He compares Superman saving people to “foxhole 
Christianity”—the type of faith that only exists in a time of crisis, but does not last after or result 
in a consistent commitment.250 This book is important early evidence for the fact that some 
Christians were suspicious about comparing Superman and Jesus.  
A few years later, John Wesley White wrote The Man From Krypton: The Gospel 
According to Superman.251 White’s book is an alarmist take on the decline of Western culture at 
the hands of Satan, and he writes that the antichrist “will both compare and be in contrast to 
Jesus Christ,” just as “Superman can be both compared and contrasted to both!”252 White does 
not necessarily prove these claims in his book. The book takes short anecdotes from the first 
theatrical Superman film—usually at the start of a chapter—as a springboard to tangentially 
critique modern culture with almost no further reference to Superman. For example, Chapter 
Nine references Superman capturing some criminals, only to spend the rest of the chapter 
expositing biblical passages about how God will one day judge the world.253 Compared with 
Galloway’s book, White is not contemptuous of Superman, but he certainly does not praise the 
character at length. In fact, it seems as though his book was using a relevant popular film at the 
time to talk about Christianity, without engaging the two in any depth. Unlike some Christians in 
                                                           
248 Ibid., 28. Galloway suggests that identifying a white Anglo-Saxon like Superman with god is typical of 
the American “ʻGod-is-on-our-side’ brand of religion” (76). He says that it is “inconceivable” Superman would 
support the Soviet Union, little knowing that that very idea would be explored in a graphic novel three decades later.  
249 Ibid., 96–99; 122.  
250 Ibid., 103–4.  
251 White, The Man from Krypton, 1978.  
252 Ibid., 8.  
253 Ibid., 149–165. White compares Superman saving people on a bridge to Jesus making a “bridge between 
God and man” (171).   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
58 
 
later decades, White does not use Superman’s story itself as an explicit evangelistic tool by 
drawing comparisons to Jesus, but simply wrote a book that reflected the popularity of a film.  
Other Christians in the 1970 reflect an ambiguous or hostile attitude to Superman/Jesus 
parallels. For example, in a 1979 interview, the Reverend Kenneth Reichley from a New York 
Lutheran church said that “the Word became flesh, not steel,” and that “Superman is magic. He 
manipulates fate and history .... Jesus is not magic. He works within history.”254 This quotation is 
noteworthy not so much for the argument itself, but as further testimony for the fact that 
Christians were suspicious of comparing Superman to Jesus. Reichley was not the only Christian 
to see things this way, although some took it much further. When the first Superman movie came 
out in 1978, it was intended “to have religious resonance,” and on one level, the Christian 
parallels could make for compelling Sunday School conversations, articles, and editorials.255 
That appears to have been the motivation for using that symbolism. In essence, the use of 
Christian symbolism in the film was not organic to the Superman source material, but the film 
used Christian symbolism to get Superman more attention in popular culture. Having said this, 
some biblical literalists thought the film’s parallels between Jor-El (played by Marlon Brando) 
and Superman with God the Father and Jesus were blasphemous, so the film’s director Richard 
Donner even received death threats; Donner said that “studio security brought them to my 
attention. Some of them were just nuts, fanatics. There was talk of blood running in the 
streets.”256 The existence of these death threats demonstrates again that some Christians were 
                                                           
254 George W. Cornell, “Superman/Jesus Similarities Explained,” Los Angeles Times, February 24, 1979. 
Magic is actually one of Superman’s weaknesses.  
255 Tye, Superman, 204. Anton K. Kozlovic writes: “Superman was the secularisation of the Judeo-
Christian mythos with American nationalism replacing Judaic ethnocentrism.” See Anton K. Kozlovic, “Superman 
as Christ-Figure: The American Pop Culture Movie Messiah,” Journal of Religion and Film 6, no. 1, article 5 
(2002): 27.  
256 Tye, Superman, 203–4. See also, Richard Donner and Tom Mankiewicz, “Audio Commentary,” disc 2, 
Superman: The Movie, DVD, directed by Richard Donner (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures), 2001. 
Ironically, Donner approached the film itself with reverence. After reading an overly campy draft of the script, he 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
59 
 
concerned by comparisons between Superman and Jesus (even if these threats were from a fringe 
group). The filmmakers nonetheless included the parallels to have resonance in popular culture. 
The use of Christian symbolism in Donner’s film (starring Christopher Reeve) paved the 
way for other Superman adaptations to do the same.257 Though not a Christian, Superman: The 
Movie writer Tom Mankiewicz said that the film gave “the Christian message: that we should be 
honest, love one another, and be for the underdog.”258 That quote is an obvious simplification of 
Christianity, but it shows that the screenwriter had Christianity in mind when he wrote the film. 
Marco Arnaudo writes that the film gives a Christological depiction of Superman that is close to 
“preachiness.”259 In other words, it is not particularly subtle. That observation is proven by the 
writer’s own statements, as Mankiewicz said, “I tried hard to have Brando symbolize God in that 
long speech when he sends Clark down to Earth. ‘I have sent them you, my only son.’ If that’s 
not God sending Christ to Earth, it’s as close as you can get without offending the churchgoing 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
agreed to direct the film—with alterations—in part “to protect Superman” because he feared that the film was 
destroying the institution of Superman. See Tye, Superman, 194. After Donner cast Christopher Reeve to play 
Superman, he would later say, “I didn’t find him,” but “God sent him to me” (196). For a study of the history of 
behind-the-scenes documentaries in the Superman movies, see Nicola Jean Evans, “Undoing the Magic: DVD 
Extras and the Pleasures behind the Scenes,” Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 24, no. 4 (2010): 
587–600. For a study of how films can take on religious dimensions, see John C. Lyden, Film as Religion: Myths, 
Morals, and Rituals (New York: New York University Press, 2003). Superman Returns treated the original Donner 
film with reverence, and some reviewers would criticize its fidelity to the earlier film. See Tye, Superman, 287. Jon 
Bogdanove says: “Clearly Superman resonates deeply through our culture—at least the idea of him does. Yet, only a 
fraction of Americans read his comics. Why? It may be that the weight of being an American icon is too big a 
burden for the character. For most writers or artists, it may be too difficult to write or draw stories, or versions of the 
character, that consistently fulfill everyone’s heartfelt vision. Superman means so much to so many people that it is 
a rare comic that can satisfy them all. There are so many expectations and so much baggage, the status quo of the 
classic myth is too sacred to challenge.” See Eury, “Superman Roundtable Discussion,” 232. Philip Skerry and Chris 
Lambert compare knowing the opening narration of Superman’s origin in the George Reeves Superman television 
series to learning the Lord’s Prayer as children. See Philip Skerry and Chris Lambert, “From Panel to Panavision,” 
in Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 
1988), 63.   
257 Jesus wears a Superman shirt in stage productions of Godspell as early as 1971. See Tye, Superman, 68; 
Michael Eury, “Dennis O’Neil Interview,” in The Krypton Companion, ed. Michael Eury (Raleigh, NC: 
TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006), 119.   
258 Quoted in White, The Man from Krypton, 13–14.  
259 Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 47.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
60 
 
public.”260 Later in the film, a hologram of the deceased Jor-El tells his son, “They can be a great 
people Kal-El, if they wish to be. They only lack the light to show the way. For this reason above 
all, their capacity for good, I have sent them you ... my only son.”261 This phrasing is evocative 
of the first chapter of the Gospel of John.262 Weldon describes Jor-El’s words as “paraphrased 
gospel that was the last thing on Siegel and Shuster’s mind when they created their rabble-
rousing costumed bruiser.”263 Weldon’s quote is significant because he recognizes, again, that 
this film was imposing Christian language onto the Superman source material, but that that 
influence is not there in the earliest versions of the character. It largely originated with this film.  
In the film, as Jor-El puts his infant son in the rocket, he tells him, “You will carry me 
inside you. The son becomes the father and the father the son. You will see my life through your 
eyes as your life will be seen through mine.”264 Lou Anders compares Jor-El’s speech to Jesus’s 
                                                           
260 Jake Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood: How Fiendish Producers, Devious Directors, and Warring 
Writers Grounded an American Icon (Chicago, IL: Chicago Review Press, 2008), 72, 120. Mankiewicz said that 
there were “obvious allusions to God sending Christ to Earth.” See Donner and Mankiewicz, “Audio Commentary,” 
Superman: The Movie. Another screenwriter who worked on the film named David Newman said: “It begins with a 
father who lives up in heaven, who says, ‘I will send my only son to save earth.’ The son takes on the guise of a man 
but is not a man. The religious overtones are so clear.” See Friedrich, “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!” The film’s producer 
Ilya Salkind commented on the Christological themes, saying “Brando represents the ultimate good who is sending 
part of himself to do good things,” and even compared Superman’s Kryptonian mother to the virgin Mary. See 
Salkind and Spengler, “Audio Commentary,” Superman: The Movie. Salkind said that casting Marlon Brando to 
play Superman’s father was like “getting God for Jor-El” because Brando was the world’s biggest movie star at the 
time. See Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. See also, Bogaerts, “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s 
Übermensch,” 92; Anders, “A Tale of Two Orphans, 74. See also, Leo Partible, “Superheroes in Film and Pop 
Culture: Silhouettes of Redemption on the Screen,” in The Gospel According to Superheroes: Religion and Popular 
Culture, ed. B.J. Oropeza (New York: Peter Lang, 2005), 229—254. Clanton writes that “Christian readings” of 
Superman: The Movie emphasize the depiction of “Jor-El as ‘heavenly father;’ a sense that the parallels with Moses 
actually point to an identification with Christ; Kal-El (Clark) as the “only son” sent with a “divine mission” with a 
“hidden identity”; and most obviously, the view that Superman is a kind of “Christ figure.” See Clanton, “The 
Origin(s) of Superman,” 39. In a romantic scene in the film where Superman flies with Lois Lane, we also hear a 
poem in Lois’s internal monologue that identifies Superman as a god. See Superman: The Movie, directed by 
Richard Donner.       
261 Superman: The Movie, directed by Richard Donner.  
262 Tye, Superman, 68, 203–4.  
263 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography,  188.  
264 Superman: The Movie, directed by Richard Donner. In a different medium, in a flashback to Superman’s 
time as a baby on Krypton before he was sent to Earth, Superman’s father Jor-El says that when his son lives on 
Earth, “He will be like them, but he will not be one of them. He will be among them, but he will not be of them.” See 
Straczynski, Superman: Earth One, vol. 1, n.p. One line in Tom De Haven’s novel It’s Superman! says: “He loved 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
61 
 
words in John 10:30 (“The Father and I are one”) and John 14:9 (“Whoever has seen me has seen 
the Father”).265 He is right to do so. Roy M. Anker writes that since Jor-El uses Trinitarian 
language and he and the other Kryptonians speak in language similar to the King James Bible, 
Marlon Brando “ends up sounding and looking an awful lot like the God envisioned by the 
Jewish-Christian tradition.”266 This may be a simplistic statement, but the more formal, stately, 
and archaic language used in these scenes does enhance that intertextual connection with a 
common perception of the King James Bible. Some observers also compare Krypton to Heaven 
and compare Jor-El banishing the Kryptonian criminal General Zod to the interstellar prison the 
Phantom Zone to the stories of Lucifer getting banished from Heaven by God.267 Lois Lane has 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
them, lived among them, but was not of them.” See De Haven, It’s Superman!, 413. These descriptions are 
somewhat reminiscent of some of the terminology in John 17.   
265 Anders, “A Tale of Two Orphans,” 74. Clanton writes that these words echo parts of John 14–17 where 
Jesus talks about how his followers “abide” in him. See Clanton, “The Origin(s) of Superman,” 40.   
266 Roy M. Anker, Catching Light: Looking for God in the Movies (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. 
Eerdmans, 2004), 253–54. Anker is stretching the parallels a bit when he says Kal-El’s story on Krypton parallels 
Jesus’s birth, exile, and Herod’s Slaughter of the Innocents (252). For a brief examination of the Christian ideas in 
Superman: The Movie, including a reference to Superman being about his “father’s business” (Luke 2:49), see 
Patrick D. Anderson, “From John Wayne to E.T.: The Hero in Popular American Film,” American Baptist Quarterly 
2, no. 1 (1983): 16–31. See also, Mark D. Stucky, “The Superhero’s Mythic Journey: Death and the Heroic Cycle in 
Superman,” Journal of Religion & Film 10, no. 2 (2006): article 6, 1–11. 
267 John Kenneth Muir, “Cult Movie Review: Superman: The Movie (1978),”; John Kenneth Muir, 
“Superman Week: Superman II (1981),” John Kenneth Muir’s Reflections on Movies and Classic TV, June 11, 
2013, http://reflectionsonfilmandtelevision.blogspot.com/ 2012/08/cult-movie-review-superman-movie-1978.html, 
(accessed June 23, 2018); Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero  47–49. Skelton thinks 
that the three Kryptonian criminals (Zod, Non, and Ursa) are an “Unholy Trinity” like Lucifer, the antichrist, and a 
false prophet, while Jor-El, Superman, and Lois are the Holy Trinity. Just as Zod threatens to kill Jor-El’s son, in 
Revelation 12:4–5, the dragon tries to kill the son of God. These readings are subjective (121–27). Skelton compares 
Lex Luthor to Lucifer and compares Luthor getting out of prison to Lucifer getting out of prison in Revelation 20 
(67, 116, 154). Sarah Kozloff presents Krypton as Heaven, Superman’s Kryptonian and Earth mothers as Mary 
figures and Lois as Mary Magdalene, Zod as Satan, and Lex Luthor as (a little) like Judas, and implausibly 
compares Jor-El’s name to “Jehovah.” See Sarah R. Kozloff, “Superman as Savior: Christian Allegory in the 
Superman Movies,” Journal of Popular Film and Television 9, no. 2 (1981): 78–82. Arnaudo writes that Krypton 
and its inhabitants are like angels, “so that Superman’s appearance on Earth later seems symbolically like a fall from 
Paradise.” While General Zod offers that Jor-El can join him and take power, Jor-El puts him in the Phantom Zone 
prison; Arnaudo compares this to God casting out Satan the fallen angel and Jesus refusing the devil’s temptations. 
See Arnaudo, The Myth of the Superhero, 47–48. Arnaudo adds: “Luthor lives underground like Satan, which has no 
counterpart in the comic” (49). However, the “underground lair” is a cliché for villains. Anton K. Kozlovic outlines 
how General Zod and the other Kryptonian criminals are like the Satan or the antichrist; they are banished from 
Krypton as Lucifer fell, but emerge to oppose Superman. See Kozlovic, “The Unholy Biblical Subtexts,” 2–14. 
Kozlovic argues that the filmmakers tried to present Jor-El as God through their cinematography, his plain white 
costume (even though most Kryptonians dressed this way), and his name; at the same time, he identified Lara as the 
Holy Spirit and Virgin Mary. See Anton K. Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts,” 1–11. Many of 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
62 
 
been ascribed contradictory roles from Christian tradition (like Mary Magdalene or the Holy 
Spirit), but most of these interpretations seem to be eisegesis.268 The rocket ship that carries the 
infant Kal-El to Earth is shaped like a star and has thus also been compared to the Star of 
Bethlehem that the magi follow in Matthew’s gospel.269 Still, the overarching Jesus/God 
connections are not perfect because  
If this is God sending his only Son to the world, then what kind of Supreme Being is Jor-
El? ...  He’s about to die. He waited too long and didn’t build a rocket large enough for 
the whole family; yes, he leaves a hologram to give his only son moral instruction upon 
reaching adulthood, but it’s a hologram, it’s not a father, or a Father either.270  
 
 
These words acknowledge the limitations of the allegory. While Jor-El is supposed to 
represent God in the film, the fact remains that he is not alive, and only speaks to his son in the 
form of a hologram, so he is not like God the “Father” in this regard, or even a living “father.” 
Superman would not have been sent to Earth if his home world was not going to be destroyed. 
Therefore, the film’s attempt to add a connection to Jesus in this part of the story does not fit 
neatly with the source material, where the primary motivation was simply survival.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Kozlovic’s interpretations seem like random eisegesis, such as when he says: “Jor-El’s starship instruction lessons 
referred to twenty-eight known galaxies. This fact was irrelevant to the storyline and had no filmic consequences in 
either S1 or S2, however, it did resonate with Jesus's claim that: “In my Father's house are many mansions” (John 
14:2). Nor was Jor-El averse to exposing Kal-El to Chinese philosophy as part of his developing intellectual growth. 
The use of overt pagan philosophy for God's (Christian) ends was also an important pedagogic tactic used by the 
Apostle Paul (Acts 17:22–23, 28).”`See Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts,” 6. The website 
Hollywood Jesus notes Superman’s Christ-like parallels (including his time “in the wilderness” on the way to his 
Arctic Fortress of Solitude), the parallels between Zod and Satan falling out of Heaven, but also compared Lois 
Lane coming back from the dead to the saints coming from their tombs in Matthew 27:52–53. That is a weak 
comparison because Superman does not die in the film. See David Bruce, “You’ll Believe a Man Can Fly,” 
Hollywood Jesus, October 1998, http://www.hollywoodjesus.com/ superman.htm (accessed June 28, 2018).         
268 Anton K. Kozlovic compares Lois Lane to Mary Magdalene because she is connected to the main hero 
and her character makes a few sexualized puns around Superman (even though the canonical gospels say nothing 
about Mary Magdalene’s sex life). Anton K. Kozlovic, “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts,” 14–22. He also 
compares Lois to Simon Peter and Adam (22–25). Skelton compares Lois Lane to Mary Magdalene, but also 
compares Lois agreeing to fly with Superman to Simon Peter stepping out of the boat when Jesus walks on water. 
See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 109–10.    
269 Muir, “Cult Movie Review: Superman: The Movie (1978),”; Cohen, “Bendis Signals a Welcome Return 
to Superman’s Jewish Roots.” Anton K. Kozlovic notes Superman’s “divine” paternity, his name (“El”), the 
comparison between his ship and the Star of Bethlehem, his “mission” to save the world, and his character. Kozlovic 
compares Superman’s flight to the Ascension of Christ in Acts 1. See Anton K. Kozlovic, “Superman as Christ-
Figure,” 1–33.   
270 De Haven, Our Hero, 179.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
63 
 
Without Jor-El, the theatrical cut of the 1980 sequel Superman II has almost no Christian 
symbolism; as Jake Rossen puts it, “the Christ metaphor the screenwriter had played with during 
the first film had been all but erased; whether the sometimes-suffocating allegory was missed 
depends on the viewer.”271 However, Richard Donner was fired and replaced by Richard Lester 
on Superman II, and some scenes Brando had already filmed for Superman II were cut because 
the producers did not want to pay Brando’s large salary—but Donner was allowed to release his 
own director’s cut in 2006 with the Brando scenes back in.272 The Donner cut still has Trinitarian 
symbolism, even if it is simplified and not consistent with an orthodox understanding of the 
Trinity. The film links the Son and the Father, but the Spirit has no place in the allegory. In that 
film, Superman gives up his powers to live as a mortal with Lois Lane, but realizes he made a 
mistake when the Kryptonian criminal General Zod takes over Earth; the hologram Jor-El must 
absorb itself into Superman so he can get his power back.273 Jor-El says: “The Kryptonian 
                                                           
271 Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 130. See also, Tye, Superman, 233. In the theatrical cut of Superman 
II, Superman kills General Zod, and Arnaudo writes, “here, the Christian symbolism permeating the film series ... 
prevails over the character’s ethical and psychological continuity within the comics canon, thus obliging the script to 
reproduce the traditional scene of Lucifer’s banishment to Hell, without considering the fact that the killing of a 
defenseless victim constitutes the greatest possible distortion of Superman’s ethical profile.” See Arnaudo, The Myth 
of the Superhero, 94. It is more plausible that director Richard Lester did not think about that. Having said this, it is 
worth noting that in Superman II, when the evil Kryptonian General Zod has taken over the White House, he sees 
the symbol of the eagle on the Seal of the President of the United States in the Oval Office, and says, “I see you are 
practiced in worshipping things that fly.” When the president says, “Oh God,” in despair, Zod reveals his own 
pretensions when he corrects “God” to “Zod.” See Superman II, directed by Richard Lester.  
272 Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut, directed by Richard Donner (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers 
Pictures, 2006).   
273 Ibid. Regarding the theatrical cut, John Kenneth Muir compares Superman’s lonely journey back to his 
Arctic Fortress of Solitude to Christ in the wilderness, and Superman’s re-emergence with his powers to the Second 
Coming. See John Kenneth Muir, “Superman Week: Superman II (1981).” Meanwhile, Ken Schenck confusingly 
compares Superman temporarily giving up his powers in Superman II to Christ emptying himself in Philippians 2:5–
11—even though Superman emptied himself because he wanted to have sex with Lois Lane. See Schenck, 
“Superman: A Popular Culture Messiah,” 40. Lex Luthor betrays Superman to the Kryptonian criminals as well, and 
Skelton compares this to Judas betraying Jesus. See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest 
Superhero, 126. Kozlovic even compares Lex Luthor’s female associate Miss Teschmacher to both Mary 
Magdalene and the whore of Babylon (Revelation 17)—because she at first appears to have been redeemed by 
Superman in the first film, but returns to evil in the sequel. Anton K. Kozlovic, “The Unholy Biblical Subtexts,” 16–
19. Although this observation does not apply to all versions of Superman, Rosa Maria DelVecchio argues that 
Superman’s traditional virginity “is a large part of what makes him so godlike” when linked to “the Judeo-Christian 
God.” See Rosa Maria DelVecchio, “Why Is Superman Still a Virgin?” in Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a 
Legend, eds. Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle (Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988), 173. DelVecchio notes that the 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
64 
 
prophecy will be at last fulfilled: the son becomes the father and the father becomes the son.”274 
Mankiewicz said that without Jor-El in the theatrical cut, “it loses all its impact …. The whole 
full circle, the arc, is him coming back to his father.”275 Still, Schenck writes that, unlike Jesus, 
the Superman of the films is not sinless; he disobeys his Kryptonian father by giving up his 
powers to have pre-marital sex with Lois.276 Schenk’s point is important because he identifies 
another area where the Superman/Jesus analogy breaks down. Jesus perfectly follows the will of 
his father, but in this film, if Jor-El represents God, Superman does not live up to that standard.  
After the first two Superman films, the next important step in the public’s understanding 
of Superman as a Christ figure is a 1992/1993 comics storyline where Superman is killed by the 
raging monster Doomsday and rises from the dead like Jesus.277 This story started out as another 
cliché comic book story, but it took on a life of its own because it received far more public 
attention than the comic book creators ever imagined. Just as Jesus is known for his resurrection, 
Superman’s death and resurrection is his best-known comics storyline since his inception. From 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Virgin Mary and Jesus “are not thought of in a sexual sense” (even though Jesus had siblings) (173). DelVecchio 
acknowledges that Superman has sex in Superman II, but had to give up his powers to do it (173). (DelVecchio does 
not mention that the screenwriters of Superman III somehow ignored this plot point when Superman has sex in 
Superman III—and still has powers—when a variant form of Kryptonite temporarily makes him act out of character 
and partly evil.)        
274 Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut, directed by Richard Donner. See Barkman, “Superman: From 
Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 117. Tom Mankiewicz compared this scene to “God touching the hand of Adam” as 
well. See Richard Donner and Tom Mankiewicz, “Audio Commentary,” Superman: The Movie. Weldon also notes 
that the visual in this scene of Jor-El reaching out is “a tableau deliberately reminiscent of the Creation of Adam on 
the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.” Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 200.    
275 Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 120. Mankiewicz called the ending of Jor-El’s storyline “dramatic 
and wonderful,” but said, “of course it means nothing if it’s the mother instead” (120). The hologram of Superman’s 
mother appears in the theatrical cut.  So, while Skelton compares Lara to the Holy Spirit in the film, she was only in 
Superman II because the producers wanted an excuse not to pay Marlon Brando again and she was cheaper! See 
Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 51. 
276 Schenck, “Superman: A Popular Culture Messiah,” 39.  
277 See Tye, Superman, 68; Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 123; Skelton, The Gospel According to the 
World’s Greatest Superhero, 145–46. Superman was killed off in the comics because the writers wanted him to 
marry Lois Lane, but were told they could not until it happened in the television show Lois & Clark—so killing off 
the character for an extended period was one way to fill time. See De Haven, Our Hero, 6. Superman editor Mike 
Carlin said that the comics where Superman fought to his death originally “were the issues where we would have 
been getting Superman married.” See Daniels, Superman, 167. See also, Daniels, DC Comics, 218. For a study of 
death in Superman stories and other comics, see Michael Kobre, “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?” 
Michigan Quarterly Review 53, no. 2 (2014): 149–165.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
65 
 
the start, the unthinking grey monster Doomsday is depicted as a force of malice and destruction; 
before he fights any heroes, we see him alone as he crushes an innocent little bird with his fist 
just because he can, and later strangles a deer in the wild.278 Even the name “Doomsday” has 
apocalyptic connotations. Skelton thinks that Doomsday is like “the Beast” in Revelation.279 
When Superman dies a sacrificial death defeating Doomsday, he falls into Lois Lane’s arms in a 
few pages of images clearly reminiscent of Michelangelo’s Pietà, where Jesus falls into Mary’s 
arms.280 In words with Christian symbolism, Lois tells the dying Superman, “You stopped him! 
You saved us all!”281 On a small scale, just like Jesus, Superman saved the people from death.  
The worldwide reaction to Superman’s death was greater than the initial reaction to 
Jesus’s death in the first century! Mark Waid observes that “as luck would have it, the day that 
the Death of Superman comic hit the newsstands, nothing else happened in the world” and that 
“it was a huge, huge, gigantic cultural touchstone moment.”282 Waid is using hyperbole, but the 
underlying point is that because the comic about Superman’s death was published on a slow 
news day, it received much more scrutiny than the writers of the comics dreamed of. Superman 
editor Mike Carlin recalled that “the real world acted the way the characters acted in the story. 
                                                           
278 Louise Simonson, “Doomsday! Part One,” Superman: The Man of Steel #18 (New York: DC Comics, 
1992); Dan Jurgens, “Down for the Count,” Justice League America #69 (New York: DC Comics 1992). 
Doomsday’s creator Bertron thought of himself as a god, and said, “gods need not concern themselves with 
ambiguous notions of morality.” See Dan Jurgens, Superman/Doomsday: Hunter Prey Book Two (New York: DC 
Comics, 1994), 15.    
279 Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 131.  
280 Dan Jurgens, “Doomsday!” Superman #75 (New York: DC Comics, 1992). See Barkman, “Superman: 
From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 118. Knowles also notes that the cover of the Death of Superman graphic novel 
mimics Michelangelo’s Pietà, with Lois Lane in the Mary position, but he calls it “garish and tasteless.” See 
Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 123. Unlike most comics, to emphasize the scale of the battle, Superman #75 
had only one panel per page. See Tye, Superman, 247; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 247. 
281 Jurgens, “Doomsday!” 26. Weldon criticizes the death of Superman because, “the threat to Metropolis 
that Doomsday may have posed never registered hard enough on readers for the Man of Steel’s sacrifice to land with 
the weight it deserved. Superman should die saving the universe or the world or a single human life .... He should 
not die saving public works projects.” See Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 249. Frankly, these 
words do not do justice to the series, which shows Superman saving the lives of innocent people (and one particular 
young family) throughout to create a sense of mounting tension for millions of people in danger. Yet Weldon thinks 
a more intellectual villain such as Lex Luthor should have killed Superman (248–49).   
282 Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns.    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
66 
 
They were shocked, and sad, and worried.”283 In other words, the real world reacted to the death 
of Superman almost as strongly as the people of Earth did in the DC Comics universe. In the real 
world, the death of Superman was headline news and almost every television news show or late-
night talk show covered the story.284 Tye writes that  
it was a distraction for a country mired in a recession and an endless presidential 
campaign. Having its longest-lived icon die said something about America, even if 
nobody could agree what. The stories made clear one more thing: Journalists, along with 
most of their readers and viewers, didn’t understand that heroes regularly perished in the 
comics, and almost never stayed dead.285  
 
Likewise, Tom De Haven reflects: 
 
There was anger, cynicism, nostalgia, grief, satisfaction, even snarkiness, and everybody, 
it seemed, viewed Superman’s death as a metaphor for … something. It meant the end of 
wholesomeness, the end (yet again!) of our innocence. It exemplified corporate arrogance 
and self-regard, the primacy of profit …. It symbolized the annihilation (and either it was 
a crying shame, or about time) of the national platitude that Americans, like Superman, 
do the right thing because it’s the right thing, not because of any expectation of reward. It 
said something, something or other, about the decline of America the superpower.286  
 
The issue was bought by everyone from Wall Street businessmen to artists; comedians 
made jokes about the story, and, just as Richard Donner had once received death threats for 
Superman/Jesus parallels in his movie, DC Comics staff now received death threats for killing 
off Superman—although a New York Times critic named Frank Rich claimed that the heroic, 
                                                           
283 Ibid. For a study that uses Superman #75 (where Superman dies) as a starting point for discussing 
fictional characters with children, see Barry Gilmore, “E.J. in Focus: Superman Is Dead: How We Help Students 
Make Sense of Literary Characters,” The English Journal 102, no. 1 (2012): 27–33.    
284 Tye, Superman,  245. DC had not expected the publicity. Executives from DC’s parent company Warner 
Brothers were angry they had not been told ahead of time—especially after Superman appeared in a Duracell 
batteries ad (“He runs like he’s on Duracell”) in People magazine with an article about Superman dying (245). As 
Les Daniels writes, “publicity snowballed until the news of Superman’s death was in every paper and magazine, on 
every news broadcast, and included as part of every comedian’s monologue.” See Daniels, DC Comics, 218. The 
death of Superman made headlines in People magazine, Newsweek, New York Newsday, and was referenced on The 
Tonight Show and Saturday Night Live. See Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography , 245.  
285 Tye, Superman, 245.  Regarding Superman’s death, Gerard Jones writes that “editorial writers moaned 
and fretted about what this meant about America, its heroes, and its soul,” but the DC Comics people wondered how 
so many journalists took it seriously. See Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 335. See also, Schenck, “Superman: A Popular 
Culture Messiah,” 40–41; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 244–45.  Weldon also writes that when 
Superman was killed off in 1992, for many people, it felt “like a curiously personal attack on something good, 
innocent, and fondly (if dimly) remembered” (3).    
286 De Haven, Our Hero, 17–18.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
67 
 
hyper-masculine ideal Superman represented had long been dead.287 The issue sold over six 
million copies, was the best-selling comic book in history that was not a first issue, and would be 
printed in a special collector’s edition, with an accompanying black Superman armband for 
mourning.288 DC editor Jenette Kahn said that the year Superman died was “our most successful 
year in the history of DC.”289 Mike Carlin said: “I can’t believe people went for it as hard as they 
did. It must have been the way Orson Welles felt when his War of the Worlds actually went 
over.”290 Carlin also said: “Characters die every day in comics. This is old news to us. If it had 
been a new idea, I would have been worried about it, but this really is one of our cliché 
stories.”291 Yet by happenstance, it was a major step in the progression of the Jesus Superman! 
Carlin said it was always obvious to the writers and editors that Superman would return, since 
the makers of the comics wanted neither to get rid of their own jobs nor be the ones who ended 
Superman’s battle for truth and justice!292 Carlin rejects the idea that the Death of Superman was 
a cynical publicity stunt because DC had no idea the story would get so much public attention.293 
He recalled that “the world was taking Superman for granted. So we literally said, ‘Let’s show 
                                                           
287 Tye, Superman, 248, Frank Rich, “Term Limit for the Man of Steel: Yes, It’s Time for Him to Go,” New 
York Times, November 22, 1992; “Superman’s Death Issue to Go to Second Printing,” Wall Street Journal, 
November 20, 1992.  
288 Tye, Superman, 245–46. See also, Daniels, DC Comics, 218. DC printed three million copies of the 
issue. It was soon reprinted multiple times. See Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 246.  The issue 
was accompanied by black armbands in a way reminiscent of “the ripped black fabric modern Jews wear to show 
they are in mourning.” Likewise, when Superman appeared to die in the animated television show Justice League 
and his fellow heroes reminisced about him, one reviewer suggested that the Justice League “is essentially sitting 
‘Shiva,’ the Jewish mourning period.” See Barry Freiman, “Long Live Superman in the ‘Hereafter,’” review of 
Justice League, “Hereafter,” Superman Homepage, https://www.supermanhomepage.com/tv/ tv.php?topic=reviews/ 
jl2-ep20 (accessed July 14, 2018). For the Justice League episode, see Justice League, “Hereafter” S02, E19, 
directed by Butch Lukic, written by Dwayne McDuffie, Cartoon Network, November 29, 2003.  
289 Tye, Superman,  251.  
290 Daniels, DC Comics, 218. See also, Daniels, Superman, 168; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized 
Biography, 244–45. A commentator in First Things did not believe Superman would come back. See Herbert 
London, “The Death of Superman,” First Things, March 1993, 11–12.   
291 Daniels, Superman, 168; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 244–45.  
292 Tye, Superman, 245.  
293 Daniels, DC Comics, 218. Knowles calls the Death of Superman storyline an “ill-fated marketing ploy” 
that “left a sour aftertaste,” or  a “cynical publicity stunt,” but this description does not do justice to the quality of 
the surrounding stories at this time. See Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 7, 123.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
68 
 
the world what it would be like without Superman.’”294 The Superman comics took a break for a 
few months after Superman’s funeral, as Carlin realized that if Superman’s death had been such 
a big cultural event, they had to put some care into his return.295  
It must be emphasized that what started as just another Superman story became a key 
event in the perception of Superman as a Christ figure because later films and television would 
imitate this death of Superman, since it was so popular. Jake Rossen’s book Superman vs. 
Hollywood: How Fiendish Producers, Devious Directors, and Warring Writers Grounded an 
American Icon details at length how Warner Brothers studios tried several times to adapt this 
comic book storyline into a feature film in the 1990s, but kept switching writers and directors. 
Nonetheless, as will be shown later in this chapter, the television series Smallville and the 2016 
film Batman v Superman both directly used story elements derived from this series that had 
Christian symbolism. They used that imagery because they thought it would be more financially 
successful; the Doomsday storyline was part of one of the bestselling comic books in history.      
 Before Superman returned in the comics, in a storyline called “Reign of the Supermen,” 
initially there were four supermen who came forth, and the first three claimed to be the real one: 
a half-robot Cyborg Superman, an immature teenage Superman clone (Superboy), a 
personification of an ancient Kryptonian artefact called the Eradicator who shows no mercy to 
criminals, and lastly, a black man in a metal suit who Superman once saved (John Henry Irons, 
also known as “Steel”).296 The people of the world wonder: “Are the new supermen the four 
                                                           
294 Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. Carlin had come to the conclusion that, with the 
character’s sales in decline, killing the character helped save him, as Carlin had thought to himself that if the world 
wanted “to embrace the antiheroes of the time ... and you think Superman is old-school and corny .... Well, how 
about we take him away?” See Tye, Superman, 246. In a 2005 comic, Batman told Superman, “Everyone looks up to 
you. They listen to you … But they need to be inspired. And let’s face it, ‘Superman’ … the last time you really 
inspired anyone—was when you were dead.” See Geoff Johns, Infinite Crisis (New York: DC Comics 2006), 38.     
295 Tye, Superman, 249.  
296 See Jerry Ordway, The Adventures of Superman #500 (New York: DC Comics, 1993). In his 
introductory issue, some people wonder if Steel is a “walk-in spirit” of the original Superman. Louise Simonson, 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
69 
 
horsemen of the apocalypse?”297 Elements of the storyline include other examples of Christian 
symbolism. A subplot features a cult of robed Superman-worshippers who venerate his tomb in 
Metropolis, predict his return, and chant his name.298 A newscaster says that many “people have 
joined a cult which gathers daily at Superman’s tomb, awaiting his resurrection. Members of the 
cult … worship the late hero as a messiah and maintain that he will rise from the grave to carry 
on the never-ending battle.”299 This cult has obvious parallels with Christian claims about Jesus. 
Action Comics #687 is titled “Born Again!” and the story makes specific reference to 
Superman’s coffin being “empty;” later, the Eradicator-Superman is surrounded by crowds who 
surround him and want him to touch and heal them.300 The Superman cult members predict “that 
judgment day is at hand.”301 One Superman cult (wearing blue monk robes with Superman’s 
symbol) fights another at the site of Superman’s tomb over which of the four supermen is the 
real one.302 None of them are. In fact, the mysterious “Cyborg Superman” is an evil imposter, in 
league with the alien Mongul, and destroys an entire city called Coast City!303 
The “real” Superman returns in a comic called “Resurrections,” and despite not having 
his powers back yet, he convinces Lois he is the real Superman by sharing a “Clark Kent” 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
“Steel,” Superman: The Man of Steel #22 (New York: DC Comics, 1993). However, unlike the other three, Steel did 
not claim he was Superman. See Louise Simonson, “Ambush!” Superman: The Man of Steel #23 (New York: DC 
Comics, 1993). The name of the storyline (“Reign of the Supermen”) is a reference to Siegel’s original story about 
an evil Superman. See Tye, Superman, 251. Weldon refers to this storyline as “The Four Horsemen of the Supe-
ocalypse.” See Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 249.  
297 Roger Stern, “An Eye for an Eye,” Action Comics #688 (New York: DC Comics, 1993). The title of the 
issue has biblical resonances. Skelton compares the “four supermen” to the “four horsemen of the apocalypse” in 
Revelation 6:1–8, but this comparison does not work for all of them since Steel and Superboy are good characters 
(even though the latter is immature). See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 140–
43.   
298 Roger Stern, “Who’s Buried in Superman’s Tomb?” Action Comics #686 (New York: DC Comics, 
1993); Louise Simonson, “Ghosts,” Superman: The Man of Steel #21 (New York: DC Comics, 1993). 
299 Roger Stern, “Born Again!” Action Comics #687 (New York: DC Comics, 1993), 12.  
300 Ibid., 17, 20.   
301 Ibid., 17.  
302 Roger Stern, “Lies & Revelations,” Action Comics #690 (New York: DC Comics, 1993), 1–3. The 
Cyborg Superman has his own cult and a cult member is interviewed on TV in one issue, having patterned his look 
after the Cyborg. See Karl Kesel, “Assault on Engine City!” The Adventures of Superman #504 (New York: DC 
Comics, 1993), 11.   
303 Dan Jurgens, “Deadly Alliance,” Superman #80 (New York: DC Comics, 1993).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
70 
 
memory: that his favourite book is To Kill a Mockingbird.304 The title “Resurrections” has 
intertextual associations with the story of Christ. In a later issue, there is another Jesus parallel as 
Superman reflects that the Cyborg is “a madman who killed millions. A madman using my 
name!”305 Since the Cyborg pretended to be Superman while doing evil, it is fair to compare him 
to the antichrist or Beast in Revelation.306 Hence, it is significant that the real Superman tells the 
Cyborg, “You killed millions … And you did so wearing my symbol … using MY NAME!”307 
This similar to how the Beast performs blasphemous deeds in Revelation 13.  
Ultimately, although the story leaned heavily into science fiction,  
the very fact of his [Superman’s] rebirth affirmed writers’ and readers’ faith in humanity 
and, for many, divinity. The Christ-like nature of his journey could not have been 
clearer—from a noble death to the discovery of his empty tomb, the resurrection itself, 
and his making clear that he was back to redeem mankind.308  
 
 
In short, like the 1978 film, this storyline was a key signpost in the popular association 
between Superman and Jesus. There are parallels between Superman and Jesus even in the nature 
of Superman’s resurrection. Earlier, Jonathan Kent had a heart attack, he met Clark in the 
afterlife, they fought off demons, and Jonathan convinced Clark to come back.309 Jonathan 
awoke in hospital, and—in biblical fashion—Superman’s tomb was empty.310 Superman’s 
opposition to the demons in the afterlife before his resurrection could have parallels to the 
Harrowing of Hell. At the same time, the series had a science fiction explanation involving 
                                                           
304 Dan Jurgens, “Resurrections,” Superman #81 (New York: DC Comics, 1993), 5. Before Superman’s 
powers return, he uses guns, and Glen Weldon suggests that these stories parody other violent heroes. See Weldon, 
Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 252.   
305 Kesel, “Assault on Engine City,” 2.  
306 See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 142–43.  
307 Dan Jurgens, “Back for Good!” Superman #82 (New York: DC Comics 1993), 26. It could also be read 
as a parallel to Christians who abuse the name of Jesus, although that is not a strong comparison.  
308 Tye, Superman, 251.  
309 Jerry Ordway, “Life After Death,” The Adventures of Superman #500 (New York: DC Comics, 1993).  
310 Ibid., 42–46.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
71 
 
Kryptonian technology for Superman’s return as well, but validates both the science-fiction and 
the “afterlife” explanations.311  
  
Superman as Jesus in the New Millennium 
 
Outside the comics, while the third and fourth Superman films did not use Jesus imagery, 
the 2001 pilot episode of the television series Smallville (a show about Clark Kent in high 
school) did.312 I would argue that the decision to include Christian imagery in this series was 
built on the foundation of the 1978 film. In any case, as part of a high school hazing ritual carried 
out by the football players, Clark Kent is stripped almost naked and tied to a wooden cross as 
that year’s “scarecrow”; he is unable to resist because one of the players unknowingly has a 
necklace made of Kryptonite.313 The scene portrays the future Superman in a crucified Jesus 
pose and this image was used in promotional materials for the show.314 Skelton compares the 
way Clark is mocked by his fellow high school students to how Christ was mocked on the 
cross.315 Smallville co-creator Al Gough had not expected the show’s marketers to emphasize the 
Jesus image in the show’s ad campaign as much as they did; while Gough admitted that the show 
“heightened” the Jesus parallel, he said that “when we saw that campaign, we were shocked. We 
thought they were going to crucify us for this. But it was really compelling and people remember 
                                                           
311 Roger Stern, “And Who, Disguised as Clark Kent?” Action Comics #692 (New York: DC Comics, 
1993).   
312 Smallville started as a show about Clark Kent in high school and cleverly made the development of his 
powers a metaphor for puberty. The show would run ten years. For more on this background, see Look, up in the 
Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns.   
313 Smallville, “Pilot,” directed by David Nutter.  
314 See Tye, Superman, 68, 275–76; Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 60, 
64–65; Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 17; Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns; Rossen, Superman vs. 
Hollywood, 255. The pose drew comparisons to the 1998 murder of the gay college student Matthew Shepard (255).   
315 Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 64.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
72 
 
that campaign.”316 The reaction seems to have been much less of a problem than it was for 
Donner in 1978.317 Gough’s words are notable because they testify to the fact that it was 
financially profitable to sell Superman as a Christ figure at this time. The Jesus parallels 
continued in later seasons of the show.318 Having said this, Smallville producer Ken Horton said 
that after the first episode, the show would be more subtle in its use of religious imagery because 
“we also knew it was dangerous ... there’s a line you don’t cross.”319 Horton does not define 
                                                           
316 Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman, directed by Kevin Burns. This image is also on the 
cover of the DVD boxed set. David Nutter, the director of the episode, stated that he tried to throw in as many Jesus 
metaphors as possible; in addition to the “crucifixion” scene, he likened another scene where Clark speaks to his 
father as a “Sermon on the Mount” pose. See Alfred Gough, Miles Millar, and David Nutter, “Audio Commentary,” 
disc 1, “Pilot,” directed by David Nutter, Smallville: The Complete First Season, DVD, (Burbank, CA: Warner 
Brothers Pictures, 2003). For a study of Christianity and Smallville, and the irony of the show’s perceived anti-
capitalist ethics (coupled with the capitalist aims of the network), see Gustav Peebles, “God, Communism, and the 
WB,” in The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, (Dallas, TX: BenBella 
Books, 2005), 77–92. For a study of homosexuality and fan culture in Smallville, see Michaela D. E. Meyer, 
“Slashing Smallville: The Interplay of Text, Audience and Production on Viewer Interpretations of Homoeroticism,” 
Sexuality & Culture 17, no. 3 (2013): 476–93.     
317 In the 1990s, Jonathan Lemkin wrote an aborted script for a Superman movie that would have been 
called Superman Reborn, where Superman would have died but then his “spirit” would have entered Lois Lane and 
allowed him to be “reborn” from her like Jesus from the Virgin Mary. The reborn Superman would quickly grow to 
manhood. Lemkin would later “profess great amusement over his attempt to antagonize the religious right with his 
clumsy allegory.” See Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 211–12. For a different kind of Jesus allusion, In Tom De 
Haven’s novel It’s Superman! (set in the 1930s)  a young Clark Kent witnesses the death of a Black man in the 
American South, goes ballistic with his heat vision, and later reflects to his father in a letter, “People could hate me. 
They probably will. And if they can find nails that won’t break, they might just crucify me.” See De Haven , It’s 
Superman!, 193. In the last pre-Crisis Superman story, Superman is forced to kill his enemy Mr. Mxyzptlk, and 
because he broke his own vow never to take a life, he voluntarily takes away his own powers with gold kryptonite in 
his Fortress of Solitude and the world believes he has killed himself. See Alan Moore, “Whatever Happened to the 
Man of Tomorrow? Part Two,” Action Comics #583 (New York: DC Comics, 1986). The text says:  “They found 
me outside the locked gold kryptonite chamber, weeping. When Superwoman and Captain Marvel ripped the vault 
open, it was empty. He was gone” (22). The reader learns that although the world at large believes Superman was 
dead, instead, he did not die, but left public life and married Lois Lane under an alias (24). Greg Garrett writes: 
“Moore consciously echoes the Gospel stories of Easter morning to tell a story of mysterious rebirth.” See Garrett, 
Holy Superheroes, 25. It has a weeping woman and an “empty tomb,” but this is a story about Superman faking his 
death, so the parallels are not that strong. Lou Anders says of Superman’s “death” and return in the Batman graphic 
novel The Dark Knight Returns that “this is nothing short of the death and resurrection of Christ.” See Anders, “A 
Tale of Two Orphans,” 75; Frank Miller, “The Dark Knight Falls,” Batman: The Dark Knight Returns (New York: 
DC Comics, 1986). Superman is a supporting character in that story.    
318 Ironically, although the show exploits Jesus imagery for Superman, in one episode, Clark finds a 
message from his Kryptonian parents telling him to conquer Earth because he “will be a god among men.” That, of 
course, is a little different than what the Father told Jesus to do! See Smallville, “Rosetta,” S02, E17, directed by 
James Marshall, written by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar, The WB, February 25, 2003. Early episodes would also 
show Clark “in halos of light,” or beside a statue of an angel, with scattered references to the wise men, the Holy 
Grail, or the ancient Romans. See Tye, Superman, 276. For the reference to the Three Wise Men, see Smallville, 
“Hothead,” S01, E3, directed by Greg Beeman, written by Greg Walker, The WB, October 30, 2001.  
319 Tye, Superman, 276.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
73 
 
what that line was, but at the very least, there is no evidence that the Smallville staff ever faced 
death threats for using Christian imagery the way that Donner did in 1978.  
There are other comparisons between Superman and Jesus in Smallville. In one episode, 
teenage Clark Kent feels guilty he could not save a friend from getting hurt, and the young Lex 
Luthor tells him, “Clark, you can’t save the world. All you’ll end up with is a messiah complex 
and a lot of enemies.”320 These words draw a deliberate connection between Superman and Jesus 
the messiah. Stephen Skelton draws attention to a later subplot on Smallville where it is revealed 
that when Clark’s Kryptonian blood is transferred to humans, it can cure them of diseases; this 
might be compared to the blood of Jesus.321 Clark’s blood can save a person’s physical life—just 
as the blood of Christ brings eternal life in popular understandings of Christianity.  
 
In Season 8 of the show, a character named Tess Mercer calls Kal-El “a prophesied 
messiah,” but discovers Doomsday, and believes that Doomsday has a Judas-like role to play to 
make Kal-El achieve his destiny.322 As was referenced earlier, Doomsday was included in this 
show because the 1992 comics storyline where Superman died made the character a well-known 
                                                           
320 Smallville, “Kinetic,” S01, E13, directed by Robert Singer, written by Philip Levens, The WB, February 
26, 2002. Clark is similarly said to have a “saviour complex” in another episode. See Smallville, “Crush,” S01, E19, 
directed by James Marshall, written by Philip Levens, Alfred Gough, and Miles Millar, The WB, May 7, 2002.  
321 Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 91. See Smallville, “Resurrection,” 
S03, E15, directed by Terrence O’Hara, written by Todd Slavkin and Darren Swimmer, The WB, February 25, 2004. 
In a later episode, Lex Luthor’s villainous father Lionel switches bodies with Clark for one episode, but even after 
Lionel is returned to his original body, he discovers that his liver was healed, and being inhabited by Clark makes 
him turn good for a time! See Smallville, “Transference,” S04, E06, directed by James Marshall, written by Todd 
Slavkin and Darren Swimmer, The WB, October 27, 2004. Skelton compares this plot twist to the power of Christ. 
See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 92–94. Clark also died and came back to life 
in the Smallville episode “Hidden,” and Skelton compares this to Jesus’s resurrection as well (146–48). See 
Smallville, “Hidden,” S05, E03, directed by Whitney Ransick, written by Kelly Souders and Brian Peterson, The 
WB, October 13, 2005. That symbolism is undercut by the fact that in a later episode, Jonathan Kent dies ostensibly 
dies to restore “balance” to the universe from the impact of Clark’s resurrection. See Smallville, “Reckoning,” S05, 
E12, directed by Greg Beeman, written by Kelly Souders and Brian Peterson, The WB, January 26, 2006. In another 
episode of Smallville, Clark is on the verge of death, but is revived by the sun. See Smallville, “Odyssey,” S08, E01, 
directed by Kevin Fair, written by Todd Slavkin, Darren Swimmer, Kelly Souders, and Brian Peterson, The CW, 
September 18, 2008. One Smallville storyline involves a secret society that knew he would come to Earth, and see 
him as a godlike figure—however, one of them believes he must “sacrifice” Clark in his church. See Smallville, 
“Quest,” S07, E19, directed by Kenneth Biller, written by Holly Harold, The New CW, May 8, 2008.          
322 Smallville, “Eternal,” S08, E18, directed by James Marshall, written by Kelly Souders and Brian 
Peterson, The CW, April 2, 2009.    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
74 
 
Superman villain. In Smallville, Doomsday is a normal man named Davis Bloome by day, but 
turns into the monster at night, and Tess tells him: “What do you do when you find Judas in your 
midst? Who would Christ have been if Judas had not betrayed him? Maybe we would remember 
Jesus as only a teacher roaming the desert.”323 She adds: “Without Judas, Jesus would have never 
risen from the dead to come back and face his greatest challenge: saving humankind. There is a 
savior among us. You are here to betray him.”324 Tess believes that the “traveler” (the future 
Superman) “cannot become the world’s savior … without triumphing over the world’s 
destroyer.”325 Reviewer Neal Bailey argued that this portrayal did not work because “Doomsday 
is at best one of the beasts of the apocalypse. He’s a dull, mindless killing machine .... Judas 
doesn’t beat Jesus to death, he sells him out to the Romans.”326 Bailey’s quote demonstrates that 
the Jesus allegory is a stretch because the show compares an unthinking alien monster that 
destroys things to the disciple who betrayed Jesus. Yet the show used Doomsday (and by 
extension the Christian connotations that came from using a character best known for killing 
Superman) mainly to exploit the massive popularity of Carlin’s Death of Superman storyline in 
the 1990s, because it was such a popular comic book series. The 1992 Death of Superman comic 
had gone far beyond the traditionally narrow audience of comic book readers, since it sold so 
many copies. As was the case in the marketing of the show’s pilot episode, the series used Jesus 
parallels because they thought such parallels would appeal more to a mass audience.  
The 2006 film Superman Returns also used Jesus imagery and made Superman die again. 
Nonetheless, this film is more dependent on the 1978 film than the 1992 comics storyline. 
                                                           
323 Ibid.  
324 Ibid. In a later episode, Clark criticizes Tess for seeing him as “an alien Jesus.” See Smallville, 
“Injustice,” S08, E21, directed by Tom Welling, written by Al Septien and Turi Meyer, The CW, April 2, 2009.   
325 Smallville, “Eternal,” directed by James Marshall.   
326 Neal Bailey, review of Smallville, “Eternal,” Superman Homepage, https://www.supermanhomepage. 
com/tv/ tv.php?topic=reviews/smallville8-ep18 (accessed July 13, 2018). To be precise, Judas betrayed Jesus to the 
Jewish authorities who were working with the Romans.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
75 
 
Marlon Brando’s lines as Jor-El from Superman: The Movie are repurposed in Superman 
Returns, including those with Trinitarian or Christological significance (such as the lines “the 
son becomes the father,” and “I have sent them you … my only son”).327 Early in Superman 
Returns, Superman falls into his adoptive mother Martha’s arms after a return home from space, 
and director Bryan Singer confirmed that that shot of Superman and his mother “was very much 
inspired” by the Pietà.328 Later, when weakened by Kryptonite, Superman is brutally beaten up 
by Lex Luthor and his thugs in a manner recalling Christ being flogged by the Romans.329 Luthor 
stabs Superman with a shard of green Kryptonite, and this is meant to parallel how Jesus’s body 
is stabbed in John 19:34.330 Jesus had to wear a scarlet or purple robe as he was beaten (Matt 
27:27-31, Mark 15:16-20, John 19:2-5), and Superman’s cape perhaps fills a similar visual 
function.331 Luthor has built his own continent using Kryptonian technology and wants to use it 
to destroy much of the United States, so Superman throws the continent into space, but the 
Kryptonite weakens him, and he falls to Earth in an obvious crucifix pose, is rushed to hospital, 
and is close to death.332 Superman Returns has an “overt messianic subtext,” as when Superman 
                                                           
327 Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2006). For more 
on superheroes in film, see The 21st Century Superhero: Essays on Gender, Genre and Globalization in Film, eds. 
Richard J. Gray II and Betty Kaklamanidou (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 2011); Liam Burke, The Comic 
Book Film Adaptation: Exploring Modern Hollywood’s Leading Genre (Jackson, MS: University Press of 
Mississippi, 2015); John Kenneth Muir, The Encyclopedia of Superheroes on Film and Television (Jefferson, N.C.: 
McFarland & Company, 2004); Marc DiPaolo, War, Politics and Superheroes: Ethics and Propaganda in Comics 
and Film (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company, 2004); Jennifer K. Stuller, Ink-Stained Amazons and Cinematic 
Warriors: Superwomen in Modern Mythology (New York: I.B. Tauris, 2010).   
328 See Stephen Skelton, “Superman Returns (2006),” Hollywood Jesus, n.d., http://www.hollywood 
jesus.com/superman-returns-2006/, (accessed June 24, 2018). This interview can also be found as Stephen Skelton, 
“Exclusive Interview with ʻSuperman Returns’ Director Bryan Singer The Messiah of Metropolis,” Dove.org, 
November 29, 2006, http://www.dove.org/exclusive-interview-with-superman-returns-director-bryan-singer/ 
(accessed June 27, 2018). See also Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 305. Also, Weldon describes 
the cover of the 1985 comic Crisis on Infinite Earths #7 as a “super-pieta,” except in that case Superman is holding 
the dead Supergirl in his arms (217). See Marv Wolfman, Robert Greenberger, “Beyond the Silent Night,” Crisis on 
Infinite Earths #7 (New York: DC Comics, 1985). In Infinite Crisis, Superboy (Kon-El) dies and ends up in a Pieta-
like pose in Wonder Girl’s arms. See Johns, Infinite Crisis, 208–9.  
329 See Matt 27:26, Mark 15:15, and John 19:1. See Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 21,  
330 Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 305.    
331 Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer. In this film, the red in his costume is darker than usual.  
332 Ibid. Earlier, he has a brief crucifix-like pose as he descends to his Arctic Fortress of Solitude.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
76 
 
falls to the earth in the crucifix pose, it is “a deafeningly obvious reference to Christ’s 
crucifixion.”333 Superman is meant to be understood as a Christ figure rather than antichrist, 
since he is the hero of the story. In the hospital, the doctors look at his Kryptonite stab wound as 
his pulse flatlines; Singer compared this to Christ being taken down from the cross after his 
stabbing in John’s Gospel.334 Despite Superman’s “death,” he “rises,” leaving the white sheets in 
his hospital bed empty—just as Jesus left behind his tomb in Luke 24:2-3 and his linen in John 
20:6-7.335 In Time magazine, Richard Corliss even titled his review of the film “The Gospel of 
Superman.”336 Singer told Christianity Today that Superman was like Jesus because “Superman 
is a savior.”337 In the film, Superman left the world for five years and when he was gone, a bitter 
Lois Lane wrote an article about how the world did not need Superman, but he told her, “You 
wrote that the world doesn’t need a savior … but every day I hear people crying for one.”338 
While this wording is superficial in some respects and only references Superman saving people 
in danger, the use of the word “savior” carries clear intertextual associations with Jesus.  
                                                           
333 Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 294. See also, Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-
Tye,” 117; Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 305; Brod, Superman Is Jewish?, 17. For an older 
study of messianic motifs, see Stanley Cohen, “Messianic Motifs, American Popular Culture, and the Judeo-
Christian Tradition,” Journal of Religious Studies 8, no. 1 (1980): 24–34. For a different idea of the Western 
tradition behind Superman, see also, Wesley C. McNair, “The Secret Identity of Superman: Puritanism and the 
American Superhero,” American Baptist Quarterly 2, no. 1 (1983): 4–16.     
334 Mark Moring, “The ʻSavior’ Returns,” Christianity Today, June 26, 2006, https://www.christianity 
today. comct2006juneweb-only/bryansinger.html?start=2 (accessed June 27, 2018).   
335 Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer. See Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 21, 116; Weldon, 
Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 305.  
336 See Richard Corliss, “The Gospel of Superman,” review of Superman Returns directed by Bryan Singer, 
Time, June 26, 2006. For more on the messianic symbolism but also the film’s relationship to American 
exceptionalism, see Jason Dittmer, “American Exceptionalism, Visual Effects, and the Post 9/11 Cinematic 
Superhero Boom,” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29, no. 1 (2011): 114–30.    
337 Mark Moring, “The ʻSavior’ Returns.” Singer said that Superman is a “Judeo-Christian” allegorical 
figure, “right up to the fact that he descends from the heavens.” See Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. 
Larry Tye writes that Superman Returns tried to show that Superman “still mattered” and the film “revisited the 
Christ story by looking at whether society still wanted and needed a savior.” See Tye, Superman, 286.   
338 Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer. Luthor compares himself to Prometheus, but when one of 
his associates tells him he is not a god, he replies: “Gods are selfish beings who fly around in little red capes and 
don’t share their power with mankind.” It is fitting that Superman has a new beginning on Earth after being gone for 
five years by saving a space shuttle called the “Genesis,” which has biblical resonances. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
77 
 
Singer said: “if you’re going to tell that story, you’ve got to tell it all the way. You’ve got 
scourging at the pillar, the spear of destiny, death, resurrection—it’s all there.”339 This quotation 
is significant because he is saying that the plot of the latter half of the film is deliberately 
modeled on Christ’s passion—a little like the death of Aslan in C.S. Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch, 
and the Wardrobe. One of the film’s screenwriters had attended Catholic school, and when he 
first saw the rough cut of Superman falling in the crucifix pose, he looked at Singer, and Singer 
remembers,  
he said, “Are we …?  Are we …? Shouldn’t he open his legs a little bit more? Are we…? 
Is this too on the nose?” And I said, “If we’re telling this story, we’re going to tell this 
story.  Some parts are going to be subtle. But this one is not ..... But if there was ever a 
time to hammer it home, this is it.340  
 
                                                           
339 Stephen Skelton, “Superman Returns (2006)”; Skelton, “Exclusive Interview with ʻSuperman Returns’ 
Director Bryan Singer.” Singer endorsed the idea that Lex Luthor was a Lucifer figure.   
340 Stephen Skelton, “Superman Returns (2006)”; Skelton, “Exclusive Interview with ʻSuperman Returns’ 
Director Bryan Singer.” Before the film was released, Superman Returns screenwriters Michael Dougherty and Dan 
Harris acknowledged that the film would look at the “messianic” and godlike dimensions of Superman and how 
those concepts transferred to the modern world. See Steve Younis, “Superman Returns Set Visit Report—Part 2 (of 
12),” Superman Homepage, July 28, 2005, https://www.superman homepage. com/movies/movies.php?topic=set-
visit-report2 (accessed June 27, 2018). They also acknowledged the film’s use of “Christian mythology.” See Evan 
Jacobs, “Dan Harris & Michael Dougherty Talk about Writing Superman Returns,” MovieWeb, June 28, 2006, 
https://movieweb.com/dan-harris-michael-dougherty-talk-about-writing-superman-returns/ (accessed June 27, 
2018).  Years later, Bryan Singer reflected: “I’ve always felt that the origin of Superman is the story of Moses—the 
child sent on a ship to fulfill a destiny. And this was a story about Christ—it’s all about sacrifice .... So what 
happens? He gets the knife in the side and later he falls to the earth in the shape of a crucifix. It was kind of nailing 
you on the head, but I enjoyed that, because I’ve always found the myth of Christ compelling and moving.” See Ed 
Gross, “SUPERMAN EXCLUSIVE: Bryan Singer Looks Back at Superman Returns,” ComicBookMovie.com, 
March 25, 2011, https://www.comicbook movie.com/superman/superman-exclusive-bryan-singer-looks-back-at-
superman-returns-a33821 (accessed June 27, 2018). Singer also identified Superman as “part Moses, part Jesus,” 
and reflected on how Superman is an alien and an immigrant. See Robert David Jaffee, “ʻSupermanʼ Director Lives 
Out His Dream,” June 22, 2006, Jewish Journal, http://jewish journal. com/culture/arts/13264/ (accessed June 27, 
2018). Even Singer had limits with the Jesus angle though. Jim Caviezel—fresh off playing Jesus in Mel Gibson’s 
The Passion of Christ—was a rumoured candidate to play Superman in Singer’s film, and Superman comics writer 
Mark Millar even laid a $1,000 bet that Caviezel would be chosen. See Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 285. 
While Caviezel lobbied to play Superman, Singer “disliked the on-the-nose parallels with the actor’s previous 
project, which the media would surely flog to death” (285). In Superman: The Movie, Superman does not die, but 
Lex Luthor exposes him to Kryptonite and throws him into a pool to drown; Skelton thinks that Superman’s  
recovery is like the resurrection of Jesus. See Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 
119. It is a weak parallel, because a human helps Superman out of the pool. Superman Returns was more deliberate 
about showing a death and resurrection.      

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
78 
 
These words prove that the filmmaker deliberately wanted to compare Superman and 
Jesus. Yet, as has been argued, that comparison was not part of the early comics source material. 
That same year—unlike earlier works—Stephen Skelton’s book The Gospel According to 
the World’s Greatest Superhero turned Superman into an evangelistic tool. While in the 1970s, 
Christians were suspicious of comparing Superman to Jesus, Skelton (and by extension some of 
his reading audience) were open to talking about Superman as a means to reach out to non-
Christians. As Skelton writes:  
the story of Superman bears some incredible parallels to the story of the Super Man, 
Jesus Christ …. Perhaps you have mostly thought of Christ as the suffering lamb. Why 
not the universal Hero? Jesus is both—as we will use Superman to illustrate … Because 
the gospel story is the crucial story by which all humankind longs to define their lives, to 
the extent that the Superman story corresponds to the gospel story, the superhero from 
Krypton offers some soul’s illumination, some heart’s preparation.341  
 
In an interview, Skelton recalled how a non-Christian friend saw Superman Returns and 
said: “Do you know that movie spoke more to me about Jesus than The Passion of the Christ?”342 
Skelton adds that The Passion of the Christ “was obviously about Jesus Christ, and so it was 
easily dismissed by a non-believer.”343 Skelton says of his friend’s reaction that Superman 
Returns “spoke to his heart before he realized what it was saying” and “spoke to him about the 
one true Savior before he could reject that he needs a one true savior.”344 The “one true savior” 
in question is Jesus. In sum, Christians like Skelton believed that by talking about a Superman 
movie, they could make people who were initially resistant to Christianity come to appreciate it 
                                                           
341 Skelton, The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero, 22. Elsewhere, the Roman Catholic 
priest John Cush endorsed Superman as a Christ figure and a Catholic cleric in Texas named Bill Necessary was 
known for wearing a Superman shirt underneath his clerical attire, and was known at his church as “Superdeacon.” 
See Tye, Superman, 69, 267–68. Bud Collyer who played Superman on the radio in the 1940s Superman radio show 
(as well as various Superman cartoons), taught Sunday School, and “his Sunday School classes were populated by 
children eager to hear the testimony of Superman.” See Rossen, Superman vs. Hollywood, 4.  
342 Hannah Goodwyn, “Superman and Jesus: Superman’s Origin and Parallels to Jesus,” 2016, CBN, 
http://www1.cbn.com/movies/superman-and-jesus-supermans-origin-and-parallels-jesus (accessed June 28, 2018). 
343 Ibid.  
344 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
79 
 
more. This is an obvious change from John Galloway Jr. or the “Christians” who sent Richard 
Donner death threats. It seems that by 2006, some Christians were less concerned with the 
possibility that Superman/Jesus parallels were blasphemous and more willing to use them to 
appeal to the hearts and minds of unbelievers to convert them.   
The next Superman movie had equally obvious Jesus parallels. Before writing the music 
for the 2013 film Man of Steel, composer Hans Zimmer wrote music for the History channel 
miniseries The Bible, and when CNN asked Zimmer if there were any similarities between the 
two, “Zimmer laughed and said, ‘Yes. Yes is the answer. Once you see Superman, you'll see how 
close you are with your question.’”345 When Man of Steel was released in theatres to reboot 
Superman, Warner Brothers marketers invited church leaders to free screenings of the film, and 
sent pastors nine pages of sermon notes titled, “Jesus: The Original Superhero”—and these notes 
emphasized the film’s religious undertones.346 The sermon notes advised pastors to show the 
film’s trailer during their sermons, and asked people to consider, “How might the story of 
Superman awaken our passion for the greatest hero who ever lived and died and rose again  
[Jesus]?”347 A Baltimore pastor named Quentin Scott said he intended to preach on the film, and 
said: “When I sat and listened to the movie I actually saw it was the story of Christ, and the love of 
God was weaved into the story.”348 Considering that Superman murders a Kryptonian criminal in 
the film by breaking his neck, not all of Superman’s actions in the movie fit into that paradigm.  
Regardless, Scott added: “If you give me another opportunity to talk to someone about Jesus 
                                                           
345 Jennifer Vineyard, “ʻMan of Steel’: Not the Familiar Superman (Fan)fare,” CNN, April 5, 2013, 
https://www.cnn.com/2013/04/05/showbiz/zimmer-man-of-steel (accessed June 27, 2018).   
346 Eric Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You,” CNN Belief Blog, June 14, 2013, 
http://religion.blogs.cnn.com/2013/06/14/superman-coming-to-a-church-near-you/ (accessed June 27, 2018). See 
also, “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians by Sending Pastors Prepared Sermon Notes That Compare 
Superman to Jesus Christ,” DailyMail.com, June 17, 2013, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2343165/Man-
Steel-marketers-target-Christians-sending-pastors-prepared-sermons-compare-Superman-Jesus-Christ.html 
(accessed June 27, 2018).   
347 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You,” “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians.”    
348 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You,” “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians.”     

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
80 
 
Christ, and I can do that because of your movie, that’s a win for me, because it is about spreading 
the Gospel.”349 These words are significant because they further reflect the arguments made in 
Skelton’s 2006 book. Conversely, a deacon named P.J. Wenzel from Dublin Baptist Church in 
Ohio said, “Any pastor who thinks using ‘Man of Steel Ministry Resources’ is a good Sunday 
morning strategy must have no concept of how high the stakes are, or very little confidence in the 
power of God’s word and God’s spirit.”350 He added: “As they entertain their congregants with 
material pumped out from Hollywood’s sewers, lives are kept in bondage, and people’s souls are 
neglected.”351 Wenzel’s point is that using Superman to talk about Jesus shows a lack of 
confidence in the power of God and Scripture itself, whereas others would argue that a 
discussion of Superman could be used as a bridge to talk about Jesus.  
Despite the reservations of people like Wenzel, it seems that some Christians had no 
problem with using Superman to evangelize—and even these Christians acknowledged that the 
sermon notes amounted to a marketing ploy on the studio’s part. Quentin Scott acknowledged 
Warner Brothers’ financial motivations for sending the sermon notes (the studio had done the same 
thing for other films), but said: “They’re using us but in fact we’re using them.”352 Christian film 
reviewer Ted Baehr told CNN, “I think it’s a very good thing that Hollywood is paying attention 
to the Christian marketplace.”353 Hollywood made more of an effort to market to Christians after 
Mel Gibson’s The Passion of the Christ unexpectedly made $370 million domestically in 
2003.354 The success of that film encouraged film studios to market films to Christians in new 
                                                           
349 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You,” “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians.”     
350 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You,” “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians.”     
351 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You.”   
352 Ibid. The studio had done the same thing for the films Les Misérables and The Blind Side.  
353 Ibid.  
354 Sharon Waxman, “The Passion of the Marketers,” The New York Times, July 18, 2005, https://www.ny 
times.com/2005/07/18/business/media/the-passion-of-the-marketers.html (accessed July 25, 2018).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
81 
 
ways. A Superman film fell in that framework. Again, while the Jesus imagery was not essential 
to the comic book version of Superman, the studio exploited it to appeal to a wider audience.    
The Superman sermon notes were written by Craig Detweiler, who is the president of a 
graduate school—The Seattle School of Theology & Psychology—and Detweiler said: “All too 
often, religious communities have been defined by what they're against. With a movie like ʻMan 
of Steel,’ this is a chance to celebrate a movie that affirms faith, sacrifice and service.”355 
Although Detweiler was a piece of the studio’s strategy to make millions of dollars off a 
Superman film, he at least was not being disingenuous. He did believe in what he was doing. In 
the sermon notes, he wrote: “What Jesus and Superman both give us, through their ‘hero’ actions 
but also their ‘human’ actions—is hope.”356 In Christianity Today, Detweiler defended his 
decision to write sermon notes for a Hollywood Superman movie by comparing his task to 
Daniel interpreting Nebuchadnezzar’s dreams (in Daniel 2) or Philip interpreting the Book of 
Isaiah for the Ethiopian eunuch (in Acts 8).357 Detweiler compared modern Christians in secular 
America to the Jews in exile during the Babylonian Captivity (greatly overstating the plight of 
the former), said he wanted “to affirm” Hollywood’s “interest” in Christians, and concluded:  
Hollywood is testing our faith. Thanks to thousands of responsive pastors and 
congregations, the studios are discovering we are as large, vibrant, diverse, and 
influential as we claim to be .... The faith, hope and love that arises along with these 
stories may even get us back on our feet, marching out of exile.358     
 
 
The author of the Superman sermon notes—along with those who used them—essentially 
believed that Christians should take advantage of the fact that Hollywood was marketing to 
them, in order to bring to the gospel to the surrounding society. Even so, not all Christians would 
                                                           
355 Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You.”    
356 Quoted in Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You.”  
357 Craig Detweiler, “Superman: Sermon Notes from Exile,” Christianity Today, June 2013, 
https://www.christianitytoday.com/pastors/2013/june-online-only/superman-sermon-notes-from-exile.html 
(accessed June 27, 2018).   
358 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
82 
 
approve. Ironically, when Superman Returns came out in 2006, an anonymous Christianity 
Today writer praised Warner Brothers for not targeting that earlier film to Christians, and wrote:  
Thank you for not using the church as a money-making vehicle.  
Thank you for not hijacking my church’s mission to make disciples by using it to make 
consumers …. 
Thank you for not trying to interfere with the ministry of preaching God's Word by 
offering pastors rewards for mentioning your film in a sermon. 
Thank you for not telling me “Superman Returns” is the greatest outreach opportunity in 
the galaxy.  
Thank you for not asking me to rent an entire theater so our members can invite non-
Christians to see the film.  
Thank you for respecting the integrity of my faith.359  
 
This anonymous author was likely not amused by the studio’s approach to Man of Steel. 
Elsewhere, in Christianity Today, Alicia Cohn wrote that “Superman Isn’t Jesus,” and criticized 
the parallels.360 Such articles demonstrate that while many pastors were quite willing to use 
Superman as a vehicle to talk about Jesus, not all Christians liked the concept. On that point, 
Jonathan Merritt wrote that sermon notes for a Superman film made him  
a little uncomfortable because it represents another step forward in the commodification 
of Christianity. In a land of profit and greed, these trends illustrate once again that 
unchecked capitalism can leverage anything—even faith, even Jesus—to turn a buck … 
Let’s be clear that Warner Brothers isn’t trying to spread the Christian gospel; they are 
trying to make a profit. And, whether we like it or not, religion in America can be a 
lucrative business. In this case, generating profit means transforming pastors into 
marketers, hocking movie tickets from their pulpits.361  
 
This quote presents the opposite side to the arguments of those like Quentin Scott or 
Craig Detweiler because it touches on a fundamental point: is it ethical for Christians to exploit a 
studio that is interested in profits, for the purpose of winning new converts? There is no easy 
                                                           
359 “The Second Coming of Superman: Finally, a ‘Christian’ Movie Not Marketed to Churches,” 
Christianity Today, June 2006, https://www.christianitytoday.com/pastors/2006/june-online-only/second-coming-of-
superman-finally-christian-movie-not.html (accessed June 28, 2018). 
360 Alicia Cohn, “Superman Isn’t Jesus,” Christianity Today, June 19 2013, https://www.christianity 
today.com/women/2013/june/superman-isnt-jesus.html (accessed June 27, 2018).    
361 Jonathan Merritt, “Superman Spirituality: Is Hollywood Manipulating Christians?” Religion News 
Service, June 18, 2013, https://religionnews.com/2013/06/18/is-hollywood-manipulating-christians/ (accessed July 
25, 2018).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
83 
 
answer. A Christian like Scott, Detweiler, or Skelton would likely argue that winning souls is 
more important than anything, while someone like Merritt would not want to feel like he was 
being taken advantage of by a multinational corporation. Either way, a comic book website said 
that it “comes off as a money grab” and asked if making Superman a Jesus figure broke the Ten 
Commandments (both by making him another god and making a graven image).362 This attitude 
shows that the studio’s marketing aims could be looked upon with cynicism in the wider culture.  
The sermon notes for the Superman film must be understood as simply one component in 
a larger marketing strategy by Warner Brothers. This is because Man of Steel partnered with 7-
Eleven, Carl’s Jr./Hardee’s, Chrysler, Energizer, Gillette, IHOP, Kellogg’s, LEGO, Mattel, 
Nokia, Norton, Samsung, Sears, Twizzlers, Wal-Mart, and more than a hundred companies in 
total to promote the film, and the film itself was notable for its obvious product placements in 
several scenes—particularly in one fight scene in Kansas where several prominent chains appear 
onscreen during the battle.363 Churches were another part of that moneymaking strategy. In fact, 
just as certain Christians and churches thought they could use a Superman film to recruit new 
members, evidently, the U.S. National Guard thought the same thing, and the National Guard 
partnered with the filmmakers and used images from the movie with the tagline “Soldier of 
Steel” to attract their own batch of new recruits.364 In the film, Superman teams up with 
American soldiers to save the world, so in effect, the use of sermon notes in Man of Steel is 
similar to the studio’s mutually beneficial partnership with the National Guard. Money was the 
                                                           
362 Matthew Meylikhov, “Jesus Christ, Superman: How Warner Bros Is Marketing Man of Steel to 
Pastors,” Multiversity Comics, June 17, 2013, http://www.multiversitycomics.com/news/jesus-christ-superman-how-
warner-bros-is-marketing-man-of-steel-to-pastors/ (accessed June 27, 2018).   
363 Ryan Pumroy, “Recruiting Soldiers of Steel: The Cross-Promotion of Man of Steel and the National 
Guard,” The Journal of Popular Culture 48, no. 4 (2015): 762–775; Asawin Suabseng, “How the National Guard Is 
Using ‘Man of Steel’ to Recruit You,” Mother Jones, June 14, 2013, https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/ 
06/man-of-steel-national-guard-product-placement/ (accessed June 29, 2018).   
364 Ryan Pumroy, “Recruiting Soldiers of Steel,”; Suabseng, “How the National Guard Is Using ‘Man of 
Steel’ to Recruit You.”   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
84 
 
driving force in both cases. Again, despite the fact that the studio’s transparent motivation was to 
make money, clearly, many of the Christian speakers I have quoted believed that the larger aim 
of winning souls to Christ was more important.  
 
What of the film itself? In a discussion early in Man of Steel with Christlike parallels, 
Lara tells her husband Jor-El that the people of Earth might kill their infant son, but Jor-El 
replies, “How? He’ll be a god to them.”365 In Man of Steel, all Kryptonians are born by artificial 
insemination, but Superman is the planet’s first “natural birth” in centuries; while this is not a 
miraculous, virgin birth, there may be parallels nonetheless.366 The filmmakers could not give 
Superman a virgin birth without doing violence to the traditional origin story, but by giving him 
a birth that was unusual relative to his society, they come as close as they can. Later, Clark Kent 
has saved some men from dying on an exploding oil rig, but the explosion sends him underwater; 
once underwater, he lies with his arms stretched out in a clearly intentional Jesus pose—and even 
has a Jesus-like beard at this point in the film.367 In one of the most obvious Christological 
references in Man of Steel, Zod threatens the Earth if Kal-El will not give himself up, Clark visits 
a priest at a church for advice.368 As Clark explains his plight, a stained glass image of Jesus’s 
agonies in the Garden of Gethsemane is clearly visible behind him—and Superman is the same 
age as Jesus.369 When Superman does turn himself in to the U.S. military so they can transfer 
him to Zod, Superman says to an American general, “Do what you have to do, General.”370 This 
                                                           
365 Man of Steel, directed by Zack Snyder (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2013).  
366 Justin Craig, “ʻMan of Steel’ Filled With Jesus, Christianity References,” Fox News, June 14, 2013, 
http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2013/06/14/man-steel-filled-with-jesus-christianity-references.html 
(accessed June 27, 2018); Man of Steel, directed by Zack Snyder. Zod calls this birth “heresy.”    
367 Man of Steel, directed by Zack Snyder. This genetic engineering on Krypton is done in a “Genesis 
chamber” in Man of Steel, and that name has biblical resonances. See also, McD, “Man of Steel: The Top 20 
Reasons Why Superman Is Jesus.” For more on Superman/Jesus parallels in the film, see “ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers 
Target Christians.”    
368 Man of Steel, directed by Zack Snyder.   
369 Ibid.   
370 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
85 
 
line echoes Jesus’s words to Judas in John 13:27: “Do quickly what you are going to do.” Soon 
after, Superman thanks Lois Lane “for believing in me.”371 Later, Superman is in outer space, 
and as a hologram of Jor-El tells him he can save the world, he flies back towards Earth in an 
obvious crucifix pose.372 Like previous entries, this film intentionally mimics the Gospels. 
Although the film tries to use Christian imagery, some contemporary observers did not 
see much depth in the portrayals. Journalist Wesley Morris wrote:  
The movie is so serious about comparing Clark to the Messiah that it starts to feel like 
church. Yet the filmmaking and storytelling lack the essential biblicality to bring off a 
divine incarnation of Superman. We see him perform feats of life saving and enemy 
pummeling, but they’re so generic that they mean far less than they should.373     
 
Similarly, in Richard Corliss’s review, he observed that the film gave Superman an 
all-seeing father from afar [the hologram version of Jor-El] … the Earth parents; an 
important portent at age 12 (Jesus talks with the temple elders; Kal-El saves children in a 
bus crash); the ascetic wandering in his early maturity (40 days in the desert for Jesus; a 
dozen years in odd jobs for Kal-El); his public life, in which he performs a series of 
miracles; and then, at age 33, the ultimate test of his divinity and humanity.374  
 
Nonetheless, Corliss adds: “All these New Testament allusions … don’t necessarily 
make Man of Steel any richer, except for students of comparative religion.”375 Essentially, Morris 
and Corliss argue that the Jesus imagery in the film does not enhance the viewing experience 
because it is generic at best.  
                                                           
371 Ibid.  
372 Ibid. The film has various references to God. When young Clark Kent saves some of his friends when 
their school bus crashes underwater, a local parent calls it “an act of god” or “Providence.” Young Clark Kent seems 
to think his powers are almost a curse, and asks, “Did God do this to me?” A CNN writer also observed: “During a 
fight with his archenemy, General Zod, Superman plunges down to Earth, his arms outstretched as if he were being 
crucified. Of course, he rises again.” See Marrapodi, “Superman: Flying to a Church near You.”     
373 Wesley Morris, “Jesus Christ Superman: Man of Steel Flies for Our Sins,” Grantland, June 13, 2013, 
http://grantland.com/features/man-steel-flies-our-sins/ (accessed June 27, 2018).  
374 Richard Corliss, “Man of Steel: Super Man … Or Human God?” Time, June 12, 2013, 
http://entertainment. time.com/2013/06/12/man-of-steel-super-man-or-human-god/ (accessed June 28, 2018).   
375 Ibid. Corliss compared Superman’s doubts in the film to the portrayal of Jesus in Nikos Kazantzakis’s 
controversial book The Last Temptation of Christ (and Martin Scorcese’s film adaptation).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
86 
 
The reactions of such critics may be proof of the fact that because these connections are 
not essential to the character of Superman, but were simply used as shorthand with wide pop 
culture resonance. The films are aimed at a much wider audience than the comics, so they use 
imagery that is automatically recognized by the surrounding culture—even by those who are not 
Christian. Similarly, many buildings are destroyed in Metropolis in Superman’s final battle 
against his enemies, and Metropolis is essentially equivalent to New York. The filmmakers 
cannot have been unaware of the visual parallels between these battle scenes and the destruction 
of the World Trade Centre in 2001 because the onscreen visuals are quite similar. Yet there is no 
depth to the parallel. Again, it is shorthand that the audience recognizes to show that there are 
high stakes to the destruction that Superman’s enemies are performing. That is quite similar to 
how the film uses Jesus poses for Superman.  As this thesis has consistently argued, Jesus 
parallels were never essential to understanding Superman, but they were included in cinematic 
adaptations to appear culturally relevant. The Jesus references in a film like Man of Steel 
theoretically are meant to give the film a deeper subtext, since otherwise it would just be a film 
about characters who have super powers punching each other. Whether these parallels are 
substantive is another matter. However, Jeff Jensen reads more into the film, and writes that  
Man of Steel is subversive mythology for atheists that exalts a Superman who behaves the 
way they think God should but doesn’t. He is also stands [sic] for a generation of 
emerging Christians who are more interested in social justice, redeeming the culture and 
tending to the here and now, and less interested in preaching turn-or-burn rhetoric, 
running away from the world, and punching the clock until they can kick the bucket and 
go to Krypton … errr, Heaven.376   
 
Jensen’s argument is not grounded in any direct statements from the filmmakers, but it is 
theoretically possible that members of the viewing audience could interpret the film as he 
                                                           
376 Jeff Jensen, “Superman as Jesus—Christian Imagery in Man of Steel,” Entertainment Weekly, June 17, 
2013, http://ew.com/article/2013/06/17/man-of-steel-jesus/ (accessed June 29, 2018).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
87 
 
suggests. At the very least, his words rightfully reflect that the use of Jesus imagery in the film is 
not grounded in any attempt to be reverential to Jesus (unlike a C.S. Lewis novel).  
  One problem with making Superman a Christ figure is that the parallel might break 
down to keep up with the demands of a modern superhero action movie. The final fight in Man 
of Steel has a great deal of collateral damage and many buildings are destroyed. As Mark Waid 
describes the film’s ending (with some exaggeration):  
Superman and Lois land in the three-mile-wide crater that used to be a city of eight 
million people, and the staff of the Planet and a couple of other bystanders stagger out of 
the rubble to see Superman and say, “He saved us,” and before you can say either 
“From what?” or “Wow, these eight are probably the only people left alive,” and 
somehow—inexplicably, implausibly, somehow—before  Superman can be bothered to 
take one second to surrender one ounce of concern or assistance to the millions of 
Metropolitans who are without question still buried under all that rubble, dead or dying, 
he saunters lazily over to where General Zod is kneeling and moping, and they argue, and 
they squabble, and they break into the Third Big Fight, the one that broke my heart.377 
 
Waid’s sarcastic depiction of the scene indirectly shows the limitations of making the 
hero of a violent action movie an allegorical Jesus figure because when Superman “saves” the 
world, many people are still killed. The film marketed to Christians to make money, but it also 
had to have action scenes because it was a comic book film. Those aims can sometimes be at 
odds. Hence, on a related point, Barna William Donovan wrote:  
The levels of destruction in the film offended many of the target-marketed American 
clergy. When it came to the climactic killing of General Zod, however, the religious 
viewers were joined in their outrage by the comic book purists, equally offended by the 
film’s repudiation of the no-killing maxim of the comics.378  
 
In sum, a violent action movie does not always easily fit alongside a movie with Jesus 
parallels. A blockbuster film like this one is intended to have something for as many viewers as 
                                                           
377 Mark Waid, “Man of Steel, Since You Asked,” Thrillbent, June 14, 2013, http://thrillbent.com/blog/ 
man-of-steel-since-you-asked/ (accessed July 11, 2018).  
378 Barna William Donovan, “A Superman for Our Time: How the Man of Steel Tries to Make Superman 
Relevant Again—and Why It Succeeds,” Cinephile 9, no. 2 (2013): 24. He was positive about the film though.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
88 
 
possible, but sometimes there are conflicts with those aims. A film that has to have big-budget 
action scenes will need to make some shifts in tone to also be an allegory of the life of Christ.   
The 2016 film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice presents Superman as a godlike or 
messianic figure as well.379 There are many examples. At one point, Lex Luthor gives a list of 
“gods” that includes Apollo, Horace, “Jehovah,” and Kal-El.380 A man from Metropolis who was 
paralyzed by the battle at the end of Man of Steel sprays graffiti on a Superman statue, labeling 
him a “false god.”381 One scene shows a montage of television commentators debating 
Superman, and, with dubious accuracy, one of them says: “Every religion believes in some sort 
of messianic figure. And when this savior character actually comes to Earth we want him to 
abide by our rules?”382 In a rare moment of humility for this film, a commentator says: “The fact 
is, maybe he’s not some sort of devil or Jesus character. Maybe he’s just a guy trying to do the 
right thing.”383 Yet Batman has a dream sequence where some soldiers worship Superman; in the 
real world, after Superman saves some people in Mexico, a crowd of onlookers all reach out to 
touch him in a way reminiscent of the hemorrhaging woman in Mark 5:21-43 who hopes she will 
be healed if she touches Jesus.384 Again, the Jesus imagery is grafted onto Superman.  
Lex Luthor’s motivation in the film is to manipulate Batman and Superman into fighting 
each other and he describes that battle as “God versus man.”385 His motivation is framed in 
religious (albeit slightly incoherent) terms, as Luthor blames God—and by extension 
Superman—for his own abusive childhood, telling Superman: “No man in the sky intervened 
                                                           
379 Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, directed by Zack Snyder (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers 
Pictures, 2013).  Luthor speaks of “gods among men.” Batman’s butler says that the gods “hurl thunderbolts.” 
380 Ibid. On the other hand, in one scene where Superman has to speak at the Capitol in Washington, people 
in a crowd can be seen holding signs saying “God Hates Aliens” and “You Can’t Be Christian and Pro-Alien.”  
381 Ibid.  
382 Ibid.  
383 Ibid.  
384 Ibid.   
385 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
89 
 
when I was a boy to deliver me from daddy’s fist and abominations. I figured out way back if 
God is all-powerful, He cannot be all-good. And if He is all-good, then He cannot be all-
powerful.”386 Luthor tells Superman that people “need to see the fraud you are with their eyes” 
and Luthor gloats that “now God bends to my will.”387 These scenes do not have much depth, but 
again, the film compares Superman to God. Batman and Superman fight, but in a widely-mocked 
scene, they reconcile when Batman learns that Clark Kent’s mother’s name is “Martha” and 
Batman has a flashback to the night his own mother died, as she was also named Martha.388 
Thus, Luthor uses Kryptonian technology to unleash Doomsday and describes his actions by 
saying, “if man won’t kill god ... the devil will do it.”389 Again, Superman is identified as God.  
Like the comics, Superman dies a sacrificial death defeating Doomsday; he falls in a 
crucifix pose, and some of the surrounding wreckage is shaped like crosses.390 Lois Lane holds 
Superman’s body in a Pietà-like pose.391 The film ends with a shot inside his coffin.392 Director 
Zack Snyder also said that earlier in the film, Batman stabs Superman with a Kryptonite spear to 
                                                           
386 Ibid. Luthor’s rivalry with Superman had different explanations over time. Lex Luthor developed from a 
mad scientist to an evil corporate tycoon—and eventually the U.S. president. See Bob Batchelor, “Brains Versus 
Brawn: The Many Lives (and Minds) of Lex Luthor, the World’s Greatest Villain,” in The Man from Krypton: A 
Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, (Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 199–210. In older 
comics, Luthor blamed Superboy for the loss of his hair after a failed lab experiment when he was young. An issue 
of Grant Morrison’s All-Star Superman miniseries is called “The Gospel According to Lex Luthor,” and Luthor says 
“the Gospel of Lex” is that “there’s no deep psychology behind the struggle between Superman and me .... How 
would you feel if someone deliberately stood in your way, over and over again?” See Grant Morrison, All-Star 
Superman, vol. 1, 2007), 128. See also, Mark Millar, “How Much Can One Man Hate?” Superman Adventures #27 
(New York: DC Comics, 1999).  Luthor’s jealousy against Superman is explored in this 1999 issue where Luthor is 
jealous that the people of Metropolis love Superman enough to build statues in his honour (6). As a child, Luthor 
wanted there to be a day when he could look down on the people of Metropolis; the story ends with Luthor on the 
top-floor of his company’s building, but nonetheless compelled to look up at Superman soaring above him in the sky 
(21–22). Neal Bailey observes that weaker writers just made Lex jealous of Superman, but it goes deeper than that—
especially when Lex resents Clark Kent for winning the hand of Lois Lane in marriage. Some stories suggest Luthor 
could have cured cancer without Superman. See Kurt Busiek and Geoff Johns, “Up, Up, and Away! Part VII of VIII: 
Up in the Sky,” Superman #653 (New York: DC Comics, 2006).  
387 Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, directed by Zack Snyder. Earlier in the film, Luthor said: “Devils 
don’t come from Hell beneath us. No, they come from the sky.” Luthor calls Clark’s mother Martha a “witch.”   
388 Ibid. At one point during their fight, they are in a church, and Superman falls in a Christlike pose.  
389 Ibid.  
390 Ibid.  
391 Ibid. There are vigils at Superman’s tomb and “Amazing Grace” is played at his funeral.   
392 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
90 
 
draw a parallel with the soldier piercing Jesus’s side in John 19:34.393 Superman’s “Christlike” 
death again exploits the popularity of the 1992 comics story. As this paper has already shown, 
that comics storyline attracted massive success in popular culture since it was one of the best-
selling comics ever made. Like Smallville, this film copies “Christian” story elements from that 
comics storyline because the filmmakers knew they were better known even among people who 
do not actively read Superman comics. Once again, money and marketability mattered.  
Graeme Macmillan drew attention to the fact that Batman v. Superman was deliberately 
released in theatres on Good Friday in 2016, because it is a film shows Superman dying for the 
world in a way that is supposed to be like the sacrificial death of Christ.394 In other words, the 
studio again made certain marketing decisions with Christians partly in mind—and not because 
these parallels were essential to the original character of Superman.  
The Jesus comparisons in these Superman films can only go so far: once Superman dies 
and rises from the dead, what comes next? After all, film studios will want to make movies about 
such a popular character for a long time. Macmillan asks: “Can the allegory expand beyond 
where it already is, and if so, can it do so without damaging or subsuming the idea of Superman 
as an action hero?”395 These questions offer no easy answers, but Superman’s “resurrection” in 
Justice League (the 2017 follow-up film) is not Christlike. Superman is brought back to life by 
some other superheroes using alien technology (a “Motherbox”), and when Superman wakes up, 
                                                           
393 Ian Cardona, “Zack Snyder Explains Why Batman Used a Kryptonite Spear in Dawn of Justice,” CBN, 
April 4, 2018, https://www.cbr.com/batman-v-superman-kryptonite-spear-explained/ (accessed June 29, 2018). 
Also, Revelation 6:8 says: “And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell 
followed with him.” With reference to this verse, director Zack Snyder endorsed the view that he made riderless 
horses a recurring visual motif in multiple scenes in the film that showed death: including a bombing in Washington 
that Superman cannot prevent, Superman’s own death, and the fact that Jonathan Kent told Superman story about 
some horses that drowned in Smallville to illustrate the point that one cannot always be the hero. See Grant Davis, 
“Batman v Superman Had Hidden Allusion to the Book of Revelation,” Heroic Hollywood, April 2, 2018, 
https://heroichollywood.com/batman-v-superman-book-revelation/ (accessed June 29, 2018).      
394 Graeme Macmillan, “ʻBatman v. Superman’: The Problem with Turning the Man of Steel into the Son 
of God,” The Hollywood Reporter, March 25, 2016, https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/batman-v-
superman-ending-problem-878463 (accessed June 27, 2018).     
395 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
91 
 
he does not understand what is going on, goes berserk, and fights the other heroes until Lois 
Lane calms him down.396 The lack of Christ imagery in Justice League seems to acknowledge 
that once Superman has died and risen from the dead, there is less iconic Jesus imagery for the 
filmmakers to use without getting redundant. I will hypothesize that they will give this imagery a 
rest in Superman films for the foreseeable future for that very reason. Not every Superman movie 
can have a plot that will lend itself to sermon notes.  
This chapter has shown that Jesus parallels in Superman films are not always artistically 
coherent and are imposed on the character often to appeal to a mass audience. However, the 
comic book story of The Death of Superman reached a mass audience almost by accident and 
later onscreen adaptations exploited its popularity. Still, I will demonstrate that comparisons 
between Superman and Jesus or God are usually treated more cautiously in the comics.  
 
The Films versus the Comics 
 
 
Even with the 1992 Death of Superman storyline, compared with the films, over eight 
decades, the comics have been less willing to connect Superman with Jesus and Christianity 
because they had different marketing aims. In older comics, Superman has one of his few 
interactions with Christianity in the 1961 story “Superman’s Greatest Feats!”397 In the issue, 
Superman’s mermaid ex-girlfriend Lori Lemaris asks him if he can use his super-speed to travel 
back in time to stop her home city of Atlantis from having ever fallen into the sea.398 When he 
succeeds in saving Atlantis, since Superman has some free time, he decides to do more time-
                                                           
396 Justice League, directed by Zack Snyder (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2017). Zack Snyder 
is the only credited director on Justice League, but Joss Whedon filmed a substantial portion of the movie after the 
tragic death of Snyder’s daughter; Whedon’s material has a notably different tone.  
397 Jerry Siegel, “Superman’s Greatest Feats!” Superman #146 (New York: DC Comics, 1961), 1–13.   
398 Ibid., 3.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
92 
 
traveling and right other wrongs from history.399 He visits “ancient Rome, on the very day when 
captive Christians who refused to worship the cruel Roman emperor were slaughtered by 
starving lions in the Colosseum!”400 The emperor is not identified. Superman traps the lions in a 
steel cage and moves the Christians to safety.401 Superman performs similar feats, but discovers 
that his efforts were in a parallel universe, because it was not possible to change the past in his 
own universe.402 Regardless, Jerry Siegel—a Jew—wrote a story about Superman saving 
Christians in antiquity. Yet it was something of a rarity for the comics to relate to Christianity.  
In 1961, DC published an “imaginary” comic book story (outside the regular continuity) 
where Lex Luthor finally killed Superman.403 There are no Superman/Jesus connections in this 
portrayal, as would be typical for the era. It is just a science-fiction story where the hero dies. 
Superman does not even rise from the dead. It speaks volumes that the comics of this era could 
write a story about Superman dying without having even the smallest artistic reference to the 
Gospels. Compared with the films, the comics were simply not targeted at an audience where it 
was necessary to do this; they were aimed at children who wanted to read adventure stories. 
 
Granted, some comics stories compare Superman to god or Jesus in a very circumspect 
way. In John Byrne’s 1986 reboot of Superman, before Superman is sent to Earth as a baby, Jor-
El says: “In time he will become the Supreme Being on that planet, almost a god.”404 The point is 
not developed. In a January 2012 issue set early in Superman’s career, a news anchor named Bill 
McCoy wants to make a documentary film attacking Superman called Superman in Metropolis: 
                                                           
399 Ibid., 3–4.  
400 Ibid., 5.  
401 Ibid., 5–6.  
402 Ibid., 6–13.  
403 The story includes mourners from a range of countries and planets.  Zack Snyder would be shocked by 
the lack of Jesus parallels! See Jerry Siegel, “The Death of Superman!” Superman #149 (New York: DC Comics, 
1961).  
404 John Byrne, The Man of Steel, Book One, 6. Even in Smallville, he was sent to Earth to conquer it. See 
Smallville, “Rosetta,” directed by James Marshall. The television series Lois & Clark never explored the Jesus 
angle.    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
93 
 
Messiah? Or Menace?405 However, this title is mostly a throwaway reference. Yet in contrast to 
Superman: The Movie, when Mark Waid’s miniseries Superman: Birthright retells Superman’s 
origin, rather than show Jor-El sending his son to Earth to save it in a premeditated way, his 
decision to send Kal-El to Earth is a last-minute decision; Jor-El finds Earth as he searches 
through the planets in his computer database.406 This portrayal acknowledges that Jor-El would 
not have sent his son to Earth if Krypton was not going to explode. Superman was sent to Earth 
primarily to save him from death (like Moses), but while Superman: The Movie acknowledges 
this, the film tries to have it both ways and suggest that Superman was sent to save Earth, not just 
sent to Earth to be saved. The religious allegory of the film gives Jor-El different motivations.  
To further emphasize the distinction between the films and the source material, it is worth 
noting that in the comics, Superman sometimes rejects the label of “saviour.” In Geoff Johns’s 
telling of Superman’s origin story, early in Superman’s career, he tells the people of Metropolis: 
“I want you to stop looking for a great savior. Lex Luthor isn’t it. I’m not it. You are. All of you 
are. I do what I do because I was given a gift, but all of you were given gifts, too. Use them to 
make each other’s lives better. Show the world that Metropolis has a heart.”407 That comic was 
published in 2010. Yet the point is not unique to Johns’s story. In a 1976 story, Superman has 
just introduced himself to the world by destroying a dangerous robot, and he describes himself to 
                                                           
405 George Pérez, “A Cold Day in Hell,” Superman #3 (New York: DC Comics, 2012).  
406 Waid, Superman: Birthright, 16. However, in Birthright, Superman has a new power with religious 
connotations that lets him see the “soul” of any living thing, and this ability makes him becomes a vegetarian (37). 
The decision caused “Internet outrage.” See Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 289. Oddly, in Elliot 
S. Maggin’s novel Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, Kal-El’s rocket was specifically intended to go to Albert 
Einstein because he was Earth’s smartest person, but Einstein believed that it was better for Kal-El to be raised by 
the Kents. See Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton.    
407 Geoff Johns, Superman: Secret Origin: The Deluxe Edition (New York: DC Comics, 2010)  n.p. In a 
comics storyline, the Kryptonian criminal General Zod comes to Earth. Zod says that Superman “should have forced 
these sub-Kryptonians to take their place beneath him. And make them understand, that when they look up into the 
sky they do not see their savior—they see their better. Ruling over them.” See Geoff Johns and Richard Donner, 
“Last Son,” Action Comics Annual #11 (New York: DC Comics, 2008), n.p. However, this description of Superman 
comes from an outsider. Still, Christopher Knowles writes that “all superheroes are essentially savior figures,” even 
though they offer a different kind of salvation than religion. See Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 111. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
94 
 
the crowd as “someone who wanted you to look not to heroes and false gods for salvation … 
someone who has enough faith to know that your salvation is within you … all of you!”408 In a 
1992 story, Superman struggles with the fact that a woman who lives in Clark Kent’s apartment 
will not leave her abusive husband even when Superman tries to intervene.409 Martha Kent says: 
“You aren’t God, to be aware of every bird and blade of grass. You’re a man.”410  In one story, 
Batman tells Superman, “the world needs you,” but Superman responds “I’m not a god.”411 In a 
2004 comics storyline, some characters think Superman is a god, but he is at pains to argue that 
he is not.412 In contrast, some of the films openly compare Superman and god.  
Brian Azzarello’s 2004/2005 story arc Superman: For Tomorrow plays with messianic 
imagery for Superman, but also shows its limitations. Superman visits a Roman Catholic priest 
named Daniel Leone.413 Superman majestically floats in Leone’s large Gothic cathedral, and 
there are some carefully composed juxtapositions; multiple times, the art shows Superman with a 
                                                           
408 Cary Bates and Elliot S! Maggin, “Superman 2001!” Superman #300 (New York: DC Comics, 1976), 
n.p. Although the story is written in 1976, it imagines a world where Superman emerges in the “future” in 2001.  
409 Louise Simonson, “Hard Knocks,” Superman: The Man of Steel #16 (New York: DC Comics, 1992).  
410 Ibid., 21. There is a parallel (probably coincidental) in the Smallville series finale, where Chloe Sullivan 
says, “He’s not god. He can’t be aware of every blade of grass.” See Smallville, “Finale, Part 1.”   
411 Johns, Infinite Crisis, 37.     
412 In a 2004 storyline, a woman named Lyla lived on Kandor but resented Superman, viewing him as a god 
who neglected the city, so she used mind control to make him temporarily forget his life on Earth and trap him 
inside the bottle on Kandor while she ascended to Metropolis. She enabled a villain from Kandor named Preus to 
escape and wreak havoc on Metropolis.  Lyla thought the world outside her bottle was Heaven, and was 
disappointed to find that the “Promised Land” is not what she expected. Joe Kelly and Michael Turner, “Godfall, 
Part 3 of 6: Goddess,” Superman #202 (New York: DC Comics, 2004). With Superman trapped on Kandor, Lyla 
tells Lois Lane that “God is dead.” One of the residents of Kandor who helps Superman escape the bottle and sees 
what it is like outside says, “So this is ‘heaven.’ Always ‘spected more clouds ... an’ nekkid angles.” (It is “angles” 
not “angels,” to reflect the character’s speech patterns.) Joe Kelly and Michael Turner, “Godfall, Part 4 of 6: 
Heaven,” Action Comics #813 (New York: DC Comics, 2004), n.p. Lyla described her actions as pulling “God down 
from the sky.” See Joe Kelly and Michael Turner, “Godfall, Part 6 of 6,” n.p. Superman has to tell Lyla he is “not 
god,” but “just a man. A flawed man who failed you.” See Joe Kelly and Michael Turner, “Godfall, Part 5 of 6: 
Tempest,” The Adventures of Superman #626 (New York: DC Comics, 2004), n.p. Superman tells Lyla to help him 
stop Preus, telling her, “If there is a god ... if there is a plan ... Free will is at the heart of it.” See Kelly and Turner, 
“Godfall, Part 6 of 6: Divinity,” n.p. She had declined to help him because “God helps those that help themselves.” 
Later, Superman returns to Kandor and has to convince the people he is “definitely not a god.” See Kelly and 
Turner, “Godfall, Part 6 of 6,” n.p. See Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 118. In part 
because his home city was destroyed by the Cyborg Superman, Green Lantern tried to remake the entire universe, 
and Superman accused him of playing god. See Dan Jurgens, Zero Hour #0 (New York: DC Comics, 1994).  
413 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 1,” Superman #204 (New York: DC Comics, 2004).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
95 
 
statue of the crucified Christ in the background.414 On the surface, this imagery invites 
comparisons between Superman and Jesus, but this story depicts a deeply flawed version of 
Superman. Superman wants to visit Father Leone for confession.415 A year earlier, a million 
people around the world (including Lois Lane) suddenly vanished “without a trace,” and at the 
time, Superman says, “I was a million miles away … chasing my Holy Trinity. Three words … 
Superman … save me.”416 The issue ominously ends with Superman saying, “My sin? Was to 
save the world.”417 This line points to a difference between Superman and Jesus because 
Superman’s desire to save the world causes problems in some stories. Superman’s “sin” is 
referenced again in his follow-up meeting with Father Leone, as Superman narrates what 
happened after the vanishing: he traced the vanishing to a Middle Eastern country and intervened 
in a war.418 Then, another mysterious vanishing removed three hundred thousand more people—
but Superman found the device responsible.419  
 
The fifth issue flirts with Jesus imagery again, as Superman spots Father Leone sitting on 
the shores of Metropolis and flies down to visit him, and they talk:  
Leone: To be honest, I expected to see you. But I thought you’d come walking …  
Superman: That’s a play on your beliefs I’d never do to you.  
Leone: Because you can?420  
 
 
Superman brushes off the remark, but the reader is left to contemplate a comparison with 
Jesus walking on water. Again, the storyline invites a comparison between Superman and Jesus, 
but as will be seen, Superman’s flawed behavior in the story will repudiate that comparison. 
                                                           
414 Ibid.  
415 Ibid.  
416 Ibid., n.p. To be precise, Superman was busy helping a Green Lantern in outer space.   
417 Ibid.  
418 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 2,” Superman #205 (New York: DC Comics, 2004). The story 
was likely commenting on the War in Iraq. For an analysis of Superman’s intervention, see Arnaudo, The Myth of 
the Superhero, 108–11.     
419 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 3,” Superman #206 (New York: DC Comics, 2004); Brian 
Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 4,” Superman #207 (New York: DC Comics, 2004).  
420 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 5,” Superman #208 (New York: DC Comics, 2004), n.p.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
96 
 
Also, the seventh issue begins with Father Leone having a vivid dream where he serves the 
Eucharist at his church, but then sees Superman.421 Leone has cancer, and in the dream, 
Superman tells him to jump off his roof, saying, “If you want me to cure you … you have to 
believe in me.”422 Leone jumps, Superman catches him, but then Superman turns into a 
nightmare figure before Leone wakes up.423 Again, Superman is shown in a Christlike guise, but 
then with qualifications because the writer shows the limitations of such comparisons as well. 
Leone asks Superman (in real life) if he can cure cancer, and they discuss it:  
Superman: I’ve never tried. And I won’t. I’m sorry. If I did, people would expect me—  
Leone: To perform miracles? But you already do.424  
 
 
Superman chooses to enter the device that caused the Vanishing; Wonder Woman fears 
he will be lost to the world and says there is no proof the vanished people are even alive, but 
Superman says, “I don’t need proof. I have something stronger. I have faith.”425 Nonetheless, 
that issue ends ominously. Again, Superman says, “my sin … was trying to save the world.”426 
The last panel shows Superman’s Arctic Fortress of Solitude lying in ruins and the shape of a 
crucifix is visible in the outline.427 Again, the reader is left to wonder if Superman is really a 
saviour. In fact, Superman created the device responsible for the vanishings and the people who 
have vanished live in a dreamlike heavenly utopia of his own creation.428 Superman says: “I 
created heaven from hell.”429 The criminals from his home planet Krypton were kept in a prison 
in another dimension called the Phantom Zone, but Superman used the Phantom Zone to create 
                                                           
421 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 7,” Superman #210 (New York: DC Comics, 2004), n.p.  
422 Ibid.  
423 Ibid.  
424 Ibid.  
425 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 8,” Superman #211 (New York: DC Comics, 2005), n.p.  
426 Ibid.  
427 Ibid.  
428 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 9,” Superman #212 (New York: DC Comics, 2005), Brian 
Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 10,” Superman #213 (New York: DC Comics, 2005).   
429 Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part Ten,” n.p.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
97 
 
his utopia (called “Metropia”) to resolve a hypothetical question: what if one day Earth was 
going to be destroyed like Krypton?430 While Superman had good intentions for making the 
device, he admits that making his “heaven” was wrong, and he was not ready for the device to 
zap all those people into the utopia.431 That is why his sin was to save the world: he tried to be 
like God. Moreover, the utopia turns into a sort of hell; despite being a utopia with everything 
one could want, a faction starts a war, led by Superman’s enemy General Zod, and one of Zod’s 
minions announces: “Metropia! We’ve come for your savior!”432 As Metropia descends into war, 
Superman evokes Genesis 1 and 2 as he describes his creation as “made in my own image out of 
the clay of the Phantom Zone.”433 The utopia is destroyed and Superman returns most of the 
vanished people to Earth—but Father Leone must sacrifice himself.434 In an image evocative of 
Michelangelo’s painting The Creation of Adam, Superman the Creator even reaches out and tries 
to save Zod before the utopia dies.435  
A key point to take away from this storyline is that Superman is not a saviour like Jesus 
because his ambition to save the world causes his problems. The story is ponderous and plays 
with deep ideas without always resolving them. Still, despite the way it juxtaposes Superman 
with godlike or messianic ideas, the series can be read as a critique on the concept because, as is 
reiterated throughout Superman’s messianic zeal causes his failures. Whether or not the series is 
a good portrayal of Superman’s character is another matter. Although this story is not universally 
beloved, it is significant because it provides further evidence demonstrating that the comics and 
films are at odds in how they represent Superman.  
                                                           
430 Ibid. Other dimensions are not be confused with parallel “Earths.”  
431 Ibid.  
432 Ibid.  
433 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 11,” Superman #214 (New York: DC Comics, 2005), n.p.   
434 Brian Azzarello, “For Tomorrow, Part 12,” Superman #215 (New York: DC Comics, 2005).    
435 Ibid., n.p.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
98 
 
 
Elsewhere, Mark Waid’s miniseries Kingdom Come has a great deal of biblical resonance 
and allusions to Christianity. As will be seen, on the surface, it invites comparisons between 
Superman and Jesus, but I would argue that it nonetheless does not commit to those parallels the 
way some of the films do. Once again, I would argue that the comics and films present 
Superman’s relationship to Jesus differently. To understand this portrayal, first it is necessary to 
understand the plot of Kingdom Come. The story begins by quoting Revelation 16:18, 8:7, 8:10, 
and 8:13, with artwork that foreshadows the final battle in the fourth book of the miniseries:  
“There were voices … and thunderings, and lightnings … and an earthquake.  
“And there followed hail and fire mingled with blood.  
There fell a great star from heaven, burning as if it were a lamp …  
“and I beheld and heard an Angel … saying with a loud voice … woe, woe, WOE to the 
inhibiters of the Earth.”436  
 
The hero the Sandman is in a hospital bed and having apocalyptic visions, while being 
comforted by a Protestant minister named Norman McCay.437 The Sandman passes away, while 
McCay becomes the narrator of the story, reflecting, “hope for tomorrow has become more and 
more precious … Still, I tried to keep the faith … and hew to the scriptures.”438 The story is in a 
distant future where the traditional heroes are older and the new generation of more violent 
heroes is uncontrollable and destructive. The story works as a commentary on the emergence of 
more violent heroes in the comic book industry. As Batman says, “They wanted their ‘heroes’ 
stronger and more ruthless.”439 McCay has dreams about an apocalyptic future (like the 
Sandman did before), and a supernatural being called the Spectre appears and promises to show 
                                                           
436 Mark Waid, Kingdom Come (New York: DC Comics, 1997), 11–13. Kingdom Come examines the idea 
of the apocalypse, frequently references Revelation, and employs religion because one of its lead characters is a 
minister (artist Alex Ross modeled the character off his own father). See Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 89–90, 126.   
437 Ibid., 14–15.  
438 Ibid., 20.  
439 Ibid., 73.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
99 
 
McCay what is to come; the rest of the plot is told through the eyes of McCay and the Spectre as 
they are (usually) ghostly presences that watch the acts of the heroes, but do not participate.440  
Superman is bitter, shut himself off from the world, and has lived for ten years in self-
imposed isolation in a computer simulation of the farm he grew up on, in his Arctic Fortress of 
Solitude.441 A super-powered being named Magog is part of “the new breed of heroes” who are 
more violent and rose up in Superman’s place—but when fighting a criminal, Magog causes an 
explosion that destroys Kansas.442 Wonder Woman tries to convince Superman to leave his exile, 
but he refuses.443 McCay is despondent, and the text quotes Revelation 8:7 and 9:2 (“And the 
third part of the trees was burnt up … And all green grass was burnt up! “And the sun and the 
air were darkened!”)444 With hope at a low ebb, Superman leaves his exile and stops some 
criminals before a cheering crowd.445 Nonetheless, McCay has another vision that tells him that 
“the threat of armageddon hasn’t ended. It’s just begun …”446 
.  
The second issue begins with more of Norman’s dream visions and citations from 
Revelation 8:2—8:7 (“And I saw the seven angels which stood before God … “and another 
angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer … “and the angel took the censer, and 
filled it with the fire of the altar … “and the seven angels prepared themselves to sound”).447 
Superman and some of the old guard heroes apprehend several of the more violent new “heroes,” 
                                                           
440 Ibid., 26–30. As Aaron Ricker Parks observes, in Kingdom Come, “the Spectre, the Revelation-quoting 
‘spirit of God’s vengeance,’ engages in an apocalyptic cliché by taking pastor Norman McCay on a tour of Earth 
and Heaven.” See Aaron Ricker Parks, “The Devil’s Reading: Revenge and Revelation in American Comics,” in 
Graven Images: Religion and Comic Books and Graphic Novels, eds. A. David Lewis and Christine Hoff Kraemer 
(New York: Continuum, 2010), 21.  
441 Waid, Kingdom Come, 31–35.  
442 Ibid., 37–38.  
443 Ibid., 32–39. In Kingdom Come, “Waid underlined the spirituality of his tale by making his narrator a 
minister.” See Tye, Superman, 262.  
444 Waid, Kingdom Come, 49.  
445 Ibid., 51–54.  
446 Ibid., 55.  
447 Ibid., 59.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
100 
 
and McCay reflects on whether they are angels—or even gods.448 Superman amasses a team of 
old-school heroes (without Batman), and Norman McCay references Revelation 4:3 (“and there 
was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald”).449 The reader learns in 
flashback the full story behind Superman’s original exile. The Joker murdered Lois Lane, and 
Magog murdered the Joker; even though Lois was the love of Superman’s life, he could not 
condone Magog’s actions, and left the world with public opinion against him.450 In the present, 
Superman meets his old friend Orion, who usurped the throne of the evil Darkseid on the planet 
Apokolips, only to become a dictator himself.451 In a bit of foreshadowing, Superman tells Orion, 
“You’re a god. You have the power to change your world.”452 Orion says: “Or to destroy it. You 
would be surprised, I fear, at how easily one can lead to the other.”453 From that juxtaposition, 
Superman chooses to build a gigantic penal colony for all the violent superpowered beings.454  
The third issue starts with more lines from Revelation that tease an apocalypse, including 
Revelation 10:3: “and he cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth … “and when he had 
cried … “Seven thunders uttered their voices.”455 The reader knows ominous things are coming. 
McCay dreams of Armageddon.456 Superman’s giant gulag begins to fill, and the reader wonders 
                                                           
448 Ibid., 64.  
449 Ibid., 88.  
450 Ibid., 96–98. Superman faces many dilemmas in the comics because of his unwillingness to kill. For a 
silly example, in Superboy #104, Superboy thought he killed a British boy named Reggie, and gives up being 
Superboy, but it was a trick! See Edmond Hamilton, “The Untold Story of the Phantom Zone!” Superboy #104 
(New York: DC Comics 1963). In Action Comics #583 he quits being Superman and lets the world believe he is 
dead. See Moore, “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? Part Two.” In Superman #22, Superman executes 
three evil Kryptonians and would struggle with the guilt for some time. See John Byrne, “The Price,” Superman #22 
(New York: DC Comics, 1988). For the reconciliation of this guilt, see Roger Stern, “Two Destinies!” Superman 
#33 (New York: DC Comics, 1989). In Action Comics #719 he is put in a position where it looks as if he has to kill 
the Joker to save his wife Lois Lane and does not do it (though she survives anyway). See David Michelinie, 
“Hazard’s Choice,” Action Comics #719 (New York: DC Comics, 1996). Superman will not even let his enemy 
Darkseid die! See Jurgens, Superman/Doomsday: Hunter Prey Book Two.   
451 Waid, Kingdom Come, 103.  
452 Ibid.  
453 Ibid.  
454 Ibid., 106–7.  
455 Ibid., 111.  
456 Ibid., 112.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
101 
 
if Superman is becoming a dictator or playing god.457 The teased Armageddon scenario comes 
when there is a revolt at the gulag.458 An epic battle begins between Superman’s forces and the 
escaped, violent beings of the gulag, and McCay narrates that “Armageddon has arrived.”459  
Now that the reader can finally see the Armageddon scenario, the text quotes the opening 
citation from Revelation 16:1 again: “There were voices … and thunderings, and lightnings … 
“and an earthquake.”460 As McCay watches the battle, the Spectre quotes from Revelation 14: 7: 
“Fear God, and give glory to him … for the hour of judgment is come.”461 The government 
decides to drop a nuclear bomb on the battle site; most of the super beings die, but Captain 
Marvel sacrifices himself to save some of them.462 Superman survives, visits the UN, and a man 
tells him, “We … we saw you as gods.”463 Superman replies, “As we saw ourselves. And we 
were both wrong.”464 Later, Wonder Woman gives Superman a pair of “Clark Kent” glasses to 
remind him of his human side, which he lost after Lois died.465 Despite the apocalyptic scenes, 
the story ends with optimism and new life—like Revelation—and this optimism is exemplified 
by Superman and Wonder Woman having a child and asking Batman to be the godfather.466  
After reading Kingdom Come, in some ways, it is easy to read the book as an allegory of 
Jesus and Revelation. When Superman makes his pitch to the next generation of superpowered 
beings to do things his way, one of them even says, “I feel like I was just asked to become the 
                                                           
457 Ibid., 113–19.  
458 Ibid., 136–55.  
459 Ibid., 155.  
460 Ibid., 159.  
461 Ibid., 163.  
462 Ibid., 165–84. He intercepts the bomb prematurely.  
463 Ibid., 194.  
464 Ibid.    
465 Ibid., 200–01.  
466 Ibid., 209–12. To keep with the “biblical” tone, the artist’s sketches and rough notes in the back of the 
collected volume are labeled “apocrypha” (213–30).   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
102 
 
thirteenth disciple!”467 Kingdom Come has extensive “biblical imagery” as “prophetic 
eschatological dreams figure largely in the plot.”468 The title of Kingdom Come is derivative of 
the Lord’s Prayer, but it shows a return of Superman rather than Christ.469 A reporter calls 
Superman’s re-emergence the “Second Coming of Superman,” and interpreters of the book have 
connected this to the return of Jesus in Revelation.470 The nuclear missile at the end is framed as 
“God’s judgment,” the end battle is “Armageddon,” and the name of the violent character Magog 
is also derivative of Revelation.471 In a sequel volume, Superman meets a version of Norman 
McCay in another universe and asks him, “couldn’t you tell me how you see my journey as 
fulfilling biblical prophecy? Could I be part of Revelation?”472 Garrett writes that “Kingdom 
Come is a book about faith and belief, that there truly are reasons that things happen—even 
horrific things—and that all is ordained to turn out well .... Kingdom Come is one of the most 
religious comics ever published.”473 David Hatfield observes that when we see Superman as a 
recluse early in Kingdom Come,  
he’s doing carpentry; he wears the long hair and beard associated with the Western iconic 
image of Christ; he’s carrying a heavy timber across his shoulders reminiscent of the 
cross beam carried by Christ; and tucked into the back pocket beneath his overalls are 
three very distinctive spikes.474  
                                                           
467 Ibid., 87.  
468 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 262.  
469 Tallon and Walls, “Superman and Kingdom Come,” 207–20.  
470 Waid, Kingdom Come, 68. See Tallon and Walls, “Superman and Kingdom Come,” 209, 220; Barkman, 
“Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 117; Ricker Parks, “The Devil’s Reading,” 21. For more, see, Thom 
Parham, “Superheroes in Crisis: Postmodern Deconstruction and Reconstruction in Comic Books and Graphic 
Novels,” in The Gospel According to Superheroes: Religion and Popular Culture, ed. B.J. Oropeza (New York: 
Peter Lang, 2005), 205; Robert M. Price, “The Seven-Sealed Comic Book: The Book of Revelation in the Graphic 
Novel Kingdom Come,” Journal of Unification Studies 13, no. 1 (2012): 215–233.     
471 Ricker Parks, “The Devil’s Reading,” 21.   
472 Alex Ross, JSA Kingdom Come Special #1 (New York: DC Comics, 2008), 16. McCay tells him not to 
let his life be defined by Revelation (17). See also, Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 117.  
473 Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 90. At the end, the characters “regain their faith and sense of purpose” (91). 
Despite its apocalyptic scenarios, the book ends with a message of hope (91–92).   
474 David Hatfield, “Superman’s Revelation: The Problem of Violence in Kingdom Come,” in Superman 
and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, ed. Mark D. White, Blackwell Philosophy and Pop Culture 
Series (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013),  140.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
103 
 
Despite the claims of these writers, I would argue that the Jesus analogy for Superman 
should not be taken too far. In some ways, in Kingdom Come, Captain Marvel is more of a 
Christ-figure than Superman because it is Captain Marvel who dies a sacrificial death.475 
Granted, in various stories like this one where Superman disappears for some time, Garrett 
observes that “a world without Superman is fundamentally off-center, like the notion of a world 
without God.”476 Knowles writes that “perhaps more than any other comic book in history” 
Kingdom Come demonstrates that superheroes are like gods to their fans.477 Despite these claims, 
Elliot S. Maggin rightfully emphasizes that in Kingdom Come, Superman and the heroes “learn 
that they are not gods.”478 while Grant Morrison notes that Alex Ross’s art in the book showed 
Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman age, even if it meant losing their “divinity.”479 Most 
important of all, Kingdom Come is a story where Superman fails because of his ambition. As 
Maggin alluded to, the most important part of Superman’s character arc is when he recognizes 
that he is not like god.480  
Like For Tomorrow, Kingdom Come demonstrates that (unlike Jesus) Superman can go 
too far to save the world and fail, as he failed with his gulag.481 Likewise, Mark Millar’s story 
(outside regular continuity) envisioning Superman as a Soviet dictator also demonstrates that 
                                                           
475 Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 10. David Hatfield writes that “the mythology we’ve established 
around Superman determines that he could not have been killed by the nuclear blast, and therefore could not have 
served as a sacrifice. The mythology requires a sacred death and puts Marvel on the altar .... It’s important to note 
that the mushroom cloud is even depicted in the shape of a cross.” See Hatfield, “Superman’s Revelation,” 142.  
476 Garrett, Holy Superheroes, 111.  
477 Knowles, Our Gods Wear Spandex, 210–11. Knowles says that the Revelation references “underscore 
the apocalyptic events” (210). The story is “an apocalyptic tract, awash in fiery Biblical wrath,” and “a 
fundamentally religious piece of work,” but he compares the heroes to gods in a polytheistic religion (10, 210).  
478 Elliot S. Maggin, “The New Bards,” Introduction in Mark Waid, Kingdom Come (New York: DC 
Comics 1997), 7. Knowles writes that McCay “protests against the Apocalypse using the tepid language of liberal 
Protestantism, but regains his religious fervor ... after helping the gods of the League save humanity.” See Knowles, 
Our Gods Wear Spandex, 209.  
479 Morrison, Supergods, 300.  
480 Waid, Kingdom Come, 194.  
481 Danny Fingeroth writes that in stories like the film Superman IV: The Quest for Peace (where Superman 
tries to rid the world of nuclear weapons), it is evident that “when superheroes try to change society proactively, 
things almost always end up worse than they were at the beginning.” Fingeroth, Superman on the Couch, 161.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
104 
 
when someone like Superman extends his “godlike” power too far into earthly affairs or uses his 
powers to make an earthly utopia, it never ends well—even when he is trying to “save” the 
world.482 There is a paradox insofar as Superman’s power does not always come from his great 
strength, but his salvific power comes from his ability to inspire others. Sometimes, Superman is 
more effective as an example. For instance, Weldon observes that in the story Superman: Peace 
on Earth, when Superman discovers that there are practical and political obstacles to his plan to 
end world hunger, Superman “relearns the lesson he learned in Kingdom Come: despite his 
amazing abilities, he does the most good as a symbol, inspiring humanity to work together.”483 
(Granted, having Superman fail in such stories serves to draw attention to how the real world 
                                                           
482 Millar imagines a parallel universe where Superman grew up in the Soviet Union. See Mark Millar, 
Superman: Red Son (New York: DC Comics, 2004). After Stalin’s death, Superman sees the starvation in the Soviet 
Union and decides, “I could take care of everyone’s problems if I ran this place and, to tell you the truth, there’s no 
good reason why I shouldn’t” (54). Luthor is America’s champion against the Communist Superman, and Luthor is 
described as “a human being who dared to challenge a god” (59). Although he started with good intentions, 
Superman becomes a totalitarian dictator, the world has more than six billion communists, and he controls the robot 
Brainiac to help him run the country—after defeating Brainiac (107).  Brainiac is a robot that shrinks cities into 
small bottles to study them. Regardless, the reader is told that in Superman’s regime: “Moscow tick-tocked with the 
same Swiss watch precision as every other town and city in our global Soviet Union. Every adult had a job. Every 
child had a hobby, and the entire population enjoyed the full eight hours’ sleep which their bodies required. Crime 
didn’t exist. Accidents never happened. It didn’t even rain unless Brainiac was absolutely certain that everyone was 
carrying an umbrella. Almost six billion citizens and hardly anyone complained. Even in private” (107). Luthor is 
U.S. president and married to Lois Lane in this reality, but Lois is concerned about the motives for Luthor’s 
opposition to Superman, and says: “Superman might be a nut with a messiah complex. But don’t you think we’re in 
danger of just replacing one demagogue with another?” (113). Luthor convinces Superman that his totalitarian 
ambitions have been a failure by giving him a note that says “Why don’t you just put the whole WORLD in a 
BOTTLE, Superman?” (136). Luthor compared Superman’s totalitarian government to Brainiac’s methods, and 
Superman has a crisis of conscience; after saving the world from nuclear destruction, he disappears, with the world 
believing him dead (137–44). Luthor becomes dictator of the world instead, and all the communist countries join his 
“Global United States.” Luthor’s “American” dictatorship is as cold and sterile as Superman’s Soviet utopia, even as 
many diseases are eradicated by Luthor’s scientific genius. For another depiction of Superman as a world dictator, 
but not in his right mind, see Karl Kesel, Superman King of the World #1 (New York: DC Comics, 1998).   
483 Weldon, Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 271.  Not everyone agrees. Lex Luthor tells 
Superman that the people of Earth “need someone to wake them up. They need someone to show them they can 
reach the stars without you flying them up there.” Luthor also says: “You leap over tall buildings. You outrun 
speeding bullets. You juggle locomotives. How does that inspire anyone to be a better human being?” See Johns and 
Donner, “Last Son,” n.p. Paul Lytle argues that stories such as Kingdom Come show that the true way to “destroy” 
Superman is to destroy his image, rather than destroy him physically. See Paul Lytle, “The Golden Shield: Image as 
Superman’s Greatest Power,” in The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop, 
(Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005), 137–47.  In an episode of Lois & Clark, Superman is accused of having an 
affair with Lois Lane (who is married to Clark Kent!), and a Roman Catholic priest appears on television as a 
pundit, saying, “I’m most concerned about the children … After all, Superman was their one undisputed moral 
reference point.” See Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman, “Sex, Lies, and Videotape,” S04, E13, 
directed by Philip J. Sgriccia, written by Andrew Dettmann, Daniel Truly, and Dan Wilcox, ABC, January 19, 1997.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
105 
 
must better address issues like hunger.) Batman once reminded Superman that he needs to set an 
example because everyone looks up to him.484 The films and comics are not necessarily 
contradictory, but the films portray Superman as a Jesus figure unashamedly, while, in eighty 
years of stories, the comics have emphasized Superman’s role as an exemplar, and not portrayed 
him as a Jesus figure as much.485 Superman “is as close as contemporary Western culture has yet 
come to envisioning a champion who is the epitome of unselfishness,” and different comics 
stories demonstrate that Superman’s example can make others courageous.486  
Some important Superman comics writers have demonstrated that Superman’s most 
important characteristic is that he is a moral example for others to emulate. There are numerous 
examples of this. Kingdom Come acknowledges this point as the Spectre tells McCay about 
                                                           
484 Johns, Infinite Crisis, 37. In the 1999 film The Iron Giant, the metal robot in the title dies a Christ-like 
death saving a town from a bomb because it wants to emulate the character of Superman. See The Iron Giant, 
directed by Brad Bird (Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers, 1999). The symbol of Superman can be exploited by others. 
Superman artist Alex Ross made a painting of Barack Obama tearing his shirt in a Superman-like pose to support the 
candidate for the 2008 American election. See Anita K. McDaniel, “Obama-Man: The Fan-Boy Ideograph for ‘Hope 
and Change,’” International Journal of Comic Art 15, no. 1 (2013): 338–53. At a fundraising dinner, Obama joked 
that “contrary to the rumours you have heard, I was not born in a manger,” but instead, “I was actually born on 
Krypton and sent here by my father, Jor-El, to save the planet Earth.” See “US elections: Barack Obama Jokes He Is 
Superman,” The Telegraph, October 17, 2008, https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/ barackobama/ 
3213768/US-elections-Barack-Obama-jokes-he-is-Superman.html (accessed June 29, 2018).    
485 Superman actor Brandon Routh described the character as “someone that people can aspire to be.” See 
Look, up in the Sky, directed by Kevin Burns. Even though Superman Returns director Bryan Singer used Christian 
symbolism freely, he may have been closer to the heart of the character, when he said, “And when there is so much 
bad happening, it’s very, very important to be able to look at a character, even if he is in tights ... and say, ‘Hey 
maybe I can be a good guy like that.’” See Stephen Skelton, “Superman Returns (2006).” Unfortunately, 
Superman’s example was not enough to stop Singer from allegedly sexually assaulting a teenage boy in 2003.      
486 See Mark Waid, “The Real Truth about Superman: And the Rest of Us, Too,” in Superheroes and 
Philosophy: Truth, Justice and the Socratic Way, Popular Culture and Philosophy 13, eds. Tom Morris and Matt 
Morris (Chicago and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 2005), 3. Regarding how Superman makes other courageous, in a 
1996 comic story that Waid co-authored, the evil robot Brainiac makes Superman switch bodies with a psychiatric 
patient named Chas who had convinced himself that he was Superman to cope with an abusive childhood. See Tom 
Peyer and Mark Waid, “Identity Crisis I: Cages,” The Adventures of Superman #536 (New York: DC Comics, 
1996); Tom Peyer and Mark Waid, “Identity Crisis II: Keys,” Action Comics #723 (New York: DC Comics, 1996); 
Tom Peyer and Mark Waid, “Identity Crisis III: Snares,” Superman: The Man of Steel #58 (New York: DC Comics, 
1996); Tom Peyer and Mark Waid, “Identity Crisis IV: Worldwide Web,” Superman #114 (New York: DC Comics, 
1996). Superman reflects to the boy, “given all you had to endure ... you needed to be made—of steel.” See Peyer 
and Waid, “Identity Crisis IV: Worldwide Web,” 16.The side of Chas’s psyche that believes he is Superman shares 
Superman’s body with Brainiac’s consciousness, and is even able to restrain Brainiac from killing the real Superman 
in Chas’s body (12–13). Chas heroically saves Superman from Brainiac, and almost sacrifices his own life in the 
process (19–20). Superman’s example made Chas a hero. Likewise, in Superman #108, a fragile alien named Mope 
sacrifices himself for Superman because Superman taught him what a hero was. See Dan Jurgens, “No Escape!” 
Superman #108 (New York: DC Comics, 1996).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
106 
 
“those who … felt the crush of Superman’s greatest and most necessary failing … his inability 
to perceive himself as the inspiration he is. The shock of seeing Superman suddenly abandon his 
never-ending battle took an immeasurable toll on his contemporaries, his peers.”487 One sees a 
concrete example of this aspect of Superman’s character in Grant Morrison’s All-Star Superman 
miniseries; a teenage girl is thinking about committing suicide by jumping from a building, but 
Superman flies to her and says, “You’re much stronger than you think you are.”488 They 
embrace.489 Waid reflected that when Superman says those words,  
they become the most moving words we have ever read in a Superman story. And they 
are perfect because they reveal, in one sentence, the fundamental secret of Superman and 
why we love him so: Gods achieve their power by encouraging us to believe in them. 
Superman achieves his power by believing in us.490  
 
Although Waid wrote Kingdom Come, which might be “the most spiritual Superman 
story ever,” or at least one of them, Waid says that “Superman is not a story about faith, it’s 
about inspiration. It’s a story about trying to move us into emulating, into being, into doing.”491 
That applies in the real world as well.492 For all his violent excesses, Siegel and Shuster’s 
original “champion of the oppressed” Superman had this dimension too; in a 1939 story, he saves 
                                                           
487 Waid, Kingdom Come, 40.   
488 Grant Morrison, All-Star Superman, vol. 2, (New York: DC Comics, 2009), 96.   
489 Ibid.  
490 Mark Waid, “Introduction,” in Grant Morrison, All-Star Superman, vol. 2, (New York: DC Comics, 
2009), 8. In one comics story, Superman is dying and  Lois Lane reflects, “Superman told me when we last spoke, 
that he has faith in me. Faith in the world to solve its greatest problems. Faith in humanity to build a better future. I 
don’t know if we’re always worthy of that faith ... but if we were ever up to the challenge in the past ... today we 
must meet that challenge as never before.” Scott McCloud, “The War Within,” Superman Adventures #11 (New 
York: DC Comics, 1997), 21.    
491 Tye, Superman, 70.  
492 When attending Western Washington University, a student named Chris Clow told Larry Tye, 
“Superman continues to inspire me not because I can relate to him, but because I aspire to act as he does. He, and by 
extension the storytellers that have given him life, have taught me how to live well. Not financially, but socially. 
Spiritually. Morally. And I am better for it.” See Tye, Superman, 263. A man named Emilio Ramos Jr., who grew up 
in a poor area of Massachusetts, told Larry Tye: “I’ve never had alcohol, never smoked, never done a drug in my 
life. People are surprised with that because of the environment I was exposed to growing up. People are even more 
surprised when they asked how I turned out the way I am and I just say one word: ‘Superman.” See Tye, Superman, 
71.  Ramos adds that Superman played a role in his decision to pursue a career in law enforcement (71).  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
107 
 
a down-on-his-luck boxer from suicide and helps turn his life around.493 Superman actor 
Christopher Reeve once said that he could not “be silly about Superman” because he  
had seen firsthand how he actually transforms people’s lives. I have seen children dying 
of brain tumors who wanted as their last request to talk to me, and have gone to their 
graves with a peace brought on by knowing that their belief in this kind of character is 
intact … It’s not Superman the tongue-in-cheek cartoon character they’re connecting 
with; they’re connecting with something very basic: the ability to overcome obstacles, the 
ability to persevere, the ability to understand difficulty and to turn your back on it.494  
 
Waid wrote that what makes Superman unique is  
not his powers, it’s not his costume, it’s not his heritage. It’s that … he has more faith in 
us than we have in ourselves, and ALL-STAR SUPERMAN is the story of how 
transcendently that faith elevates and redeems the human race. Everyone Superman 
encounters … inherits some of Superman’s values just by being in contact with him.495  
 
 
Morrison recalls that when he wrote All-Star Superman, “the attempt to be true to the 
underlying spirit of Superman … had brought out the best in all of us. Like a monk 
contemplating the deeds of a saint, I was elevated by the time I spent imagining how Superman 
might feel.”496 Likewise, in another comic written by Greg Rucka, Lois Lane says, “It’s not 
invulnerability or flight or super speed that makes him the World’s Greatest Hero. It’s that 
Superman refuses to despair. He is a testament to the opposite in fact.”497 Former Superman 
                                                           
493 See Jerry Siegel, “The Redemption of Larry Trent,” Superman #2 (New York: DC Comics, 1939).  
494 Friedrich, “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!” For a study of Superman actor Christopher Reeve’s identity after 
his paralysis, see Larry Kriegel, “Superman’s Shoulders: On the Healing Power of Illusion,” Southwest Review 91, 
no. 2 (2006): 258–267. See also, Sarah Zettel, “You Will Believe a Man Can Walk: Christopher Reeve’s Part in the 
Superman Myth,” The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, ed. Glenn Yeffeth, Smart Pop (Dallas, TX: 
BenBella Books, 2005), 23–31. When Reeve was paralyzed in 1995, he received letters from all over the world from 
people who identified him with Superman and cited him as a major influence in their lives. See Dana Reeve, Care 
Packages: Letters to Christopher Reeve from Strangers and Other Friends (New York: Random House, 1999).  
495 Waid, “Introduction,” in All-Star Superman, 7.  
496 Morrison, Supergods, 411. Morrison says of his miniseries that “All-Star Superman was a divine 
Everyman, Platonic man sweating out the drama of ordinary life on an extraordinary canvas” (411). Morrison 
presented “Superman as the Enlightenment ideal paragon of human physical, intellectual, and moral development 
that Siegel and Shuster had originally imagined” (410).   
497 Greg Rucka, “The Road to Ruin, Conclusion.” The Adventures of Superman #640 (New York: DC 
Comics, 2005), n.p. In The Adventures of Superman #646, Mr. Mxyzptlk marvels at Superman’s faith in people, 
thinking, “Even when he’s been proven wrong again and again … he still keeps his faith.” See Greg Rucka, “Rack 
and Ruin: Part 1,” The Adventures of Superman #646 (New York: DC Comics, 2006), n.p. In Action Comics #1000, 
we read that Superman helped a former criminal turn his life around and find a job after getting out of jail, and the 
criminal later spoke at an event honouring Superman. See Dan Jurgens, “From the City That Has Everything,” 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
108 
 
writer Jeph Loeb wrote: “Superman shows me ... humankind is capable of greatness. He explains 
to me the best we can be as parents and children .... He is, quite simply, an inspiration.”498 All of 
these quotes are important because they point to the fact that Superman does not need to be 
understood as a Jesus figure to be an inspiration. Therefore, when the films compare Superman 
to Jesus, they are using imagery that is not intrinsic to what the character represents; it is 
inorganic. Superman does not need to be made into a Jesus figure to be understood as an 
exemplar or inspiration, but that Jesus imagery keeps getting applied to the films (which are seen 
by a wider audience), and to a lesser extent the comics. That is because the films are marketed to 
a mass audience and the filmmakers find it advantageous to use these parallels.  
Now, in a review of a comic that compares Superman to angels, reviewer Neal Bailey 
wrote that as an atheist, he did not  
see or desire the continuing need to place Superman in religious situations in order to 
show how he and religion complement each other .... the fundamental issue I dispute, is 
why in hell Superman can’t simply do right for the simple sake that it’s the right thing to 
do? Why is he constantly seen as a messiah, an angel, a reflective figure of the 
disillusioned consciousnesses of a people who see evil all about and want some kind of 
answer to it, in the form of a God or Gods? (emphasis mine). Doesn’t that hurt 
Superman's inherent intent as a figure for all?499 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Action Comics #1000 (New York: DC Comics, 2018). The films Man of Steel and Batman v Superman acknowledge 
the idea of Superman as a symbol of hope, but the plots of the films do not convey that as well as they could.   
498 Jeph Loeb, Foreword to Scott Beatty, Superman: The Ultimate Guide to the Man of Steel (New York: 
Dorling Kindersley, 2002), 6. In an article he co-authored with Tom Morris, Loeb says that, by nature, superheroes 
are defined by the fact they inherently need to make sacrifices because they use their powers for others. See Jeph 
Loeb and Tom Morris, “Heroes and Superheroes,” in Superheroes and Philosophy: Truth, Justice and the Socratic 
Way, Popular Culture and Philosophy 13, eds. Tom Morris and Matt Morris (Chicago and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 
2005), 15. Loeb also said that while Batman intimidates people, Superman tries to show that “there are good 
people.” See Tye, Superman, 263.  
499 Neal Bailey, review of Superman #659 by Kurt Busiek, Superman Homepage, https://www.superman 
homepage.com/comics/2007-post-crisis-reviews/c-review-2007.php?topic=sup659 (accessed June 11, 2018). Bailey 
himself is the author of comic-book biographies of Sarah Palin, Hillary Clinton, and Michelle Obama. Alternatively, 
in an interview with Larry Tye, a man named Tom Maguire said that “Superman was an escape for me from those 
who asked me to believe in their god. Superman protected the oppressed and downtrodden and the poor, regardless 
of their religion or race .... I’m agnostic today, in part because of Superman.” See Tye, Superman, 71–72.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
109 
 
Kurt Busiek, the author of the issue in question, is not a Christian—nor are Bryan Singer 
(the Jewish director of Superman Returns), nor David S. Goyer (the screenwriter of Man of 
Steel). The films use this religious imagery more because they have to reach a broader audience.  
In the graphic novel Superman: Peace on Earth, Superman tries to combat world hunger 
by transporting excess food to poorer regions all over the world; in one striking image, Superman 
is carrying a large load of food above his head to Brazil, and is juxtaposed beside the statue of 
Christ the Redeemer in Rio, even holding a slightly similar pose (except Superman’s arms are 
bent upwards from the elbows on).500 Adam Barkman writes that this is “perhaps the right 
balance between seeing Superman as a Christ-type that enables, rather than a god-tyrant that 
stifles,” because “the book makes it clear that Superman’s mission is not to usurp Christ but to be 
a Christ-like inspiration to people”.501 Barkman’s reading is insightful and accurate.  
 
Superman’s Own Religion 
 
When evaluating the Jesus/Superman parallels, a few words might be said about 
Superman’s own religious beliefs and relationship to God in the comics.502 These points are 
                                                           
500 Alex Ross and Paul Dini, Superman: Peace on Earth (New York: DC Comics, 1998).    
501 Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 118.  
502 Does God exist in Superman’s universe? In a 1987 issue, Superman encounters a race of supernatural, 
magical beings called “The Circle,” led by a female leader, and the reader learns that the Circle was created before 
humankind, but cannot use their powers “against God’s second creation.” See Marv Wolfman and Jerry Ordway, 
“The Circle Turns,” The Adventures of Superman #435 (New York: DC Comics, 1987), 9. Superman later thinks, 
“She said the circle was formed before man ... God’s first experiment, I guess” (22). That may not be orthodox 
theology. After Superman’s death, a friend of Superman named Bibbo Bibbowski prays to God, saying, “been a 
while since we talked. I know my pal Superman is with ya now ... so I guess he don’t really need my prayers ... But 
the rest o’ use sure do.” He prays a Hail Mary, and then finishes, “God? I gotta ask ya ... why? Why should 
Superman die ... when a washed-up ol’ roughneck like me goes on livin’? It ain’t right God ... it just ain’t right.” Of 
course, Superman eventually returns, so perhaps “God” was at work. See Roger Stern, “Re: Actions,” Action Comics 
#685 (New York: DC Comics, 1993), 22. In the miniseries Infinite Crisis, a character wonders if God exists or what 
humans did to make him angry. See Johns, Infinite Crisis, 123. The story does have a happy ending, though there are 
losses. Later in the story, a Catholic Church has a Mass for those with capes (139–42).    

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
110 
 
important to consider because the way Superman sees himself has a direct bearing on whether he 
should be understood as a messianic figure. On that point, comics writers Elliot S. Maggin and 
Mark Millar have independently identified Clark Kent’s family background as Methodist.503 In 
most continuities, Superman grew up in the farmlands of Kansas in Middle America, and thus 
grew up in a mostly Christian culture.504 The script of Superman: The Movie says that when 
Martha and Jonathan find the infant Kal-El’s rocket, they are wearing their “Sunday best” 
clothes, and the script describes them as “Christian folk whose morals are as basic as the soil 
they till.”505 If Superman is a Christian, he cannot be the messiah.  In a 1993 comic, after 
Superman has died, Lois Lane says to Martha Kent, “I guess if my faith were stronger, I’d 
believe I could join Clark in an afterlife, Martha ... but not before it was my time to pass on.”506 
Martha replies, “Our faith believes in Heaven, and Clark was raised with those beliefs.”507 
Alternatively, according to John Byrne’s Superman reboot, Superman at least knows “the name 
                                                           
503 Mark Millar, “Is It a Bird? Is It a Plane? No, It’s Superman, But Not as We Know Him,” The Sunday 
Times, April 27, 2003. See Bruce Bachand, “Interview: Elliot S. Maggin.” In one of Maggin’s novels, we read that 
Clark’s mother made him read the Bible from an early age. See Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, 73. 
We also read: “Superman could only hope that someday God would have mercy on Lex Luthor’s tortured soul” 
(148). Note that Maggin is Jewish and Millar is Roman Catholic. In an episode of the children’s animated TV series 
Justice League, Superman has been captured and is taunted by an alien named Draaga but does not respond in kind; 
later, he references Jesus in Matthew 5:39 and says, “It’s called ‘turning the other cheek.’” Justice League, “War 
World, Part I” S01, E10, directed by Butch Lukic, written by Stan Berkowitz, Cartoon Network, February 24, 2002. 
See Barkman, “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type,” 115; Ken Schenck, “Superman: A Popular Culture 
Messiah,” 34. In Tom De Haven’s novel It’s Superman!, the reader is told that when his wife Martha is sick, Clark 
Kent’s adoptive father Jonathan Kent “is not a believer in the way that his wife is, but still he finds it hard not to 
pray for a miracle, even when he knows it’s—what? Hopeless? Hopeless.” See De Haven, It’s Superman, 31. 
Contrary to most versions of the character, although Martha Kent is buried at the local Methodist church, in this 
book the reader learns that Jonathan has a contentious relationship with that church, because he believed in bits and 
pieces of Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Hinduism, and Spiritualism (67–68). Clark Kent does not believe in god in this 
story either, though his mother taught him some things, and he reflects on his “Methodist guilt” (111, 185, 239).   
504 Tye, Superman, 68. His hometown is not identified in the earliest stories. Ironically, in Elliot S. 
Maggin’s novel Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, Jonathan Kent dreams that Superboy is “being worshipped as a 
messiah,” and a Bantu tribe considered Superman to be their “messiah.” See Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of 
Krypton, 8, 74.  
505 Mario Puzo, David Newman, Leslie Newman, Robert Benton, Tom Mankiewicz, Superman: The Movie 
Shooting Script, https://www.supermanhomepage.com/movies/superman_I_shoot.txt (accessed June 23, 2018). In 
the film, Martha Kent wears a cross at Jonathan Kent’s funeral. See Superman: The Movie, directed by Richard 
Donner. Larry Tye also observes that they are portrayed as devout Christians. See Tye, Superman, 204.   
506 Jerry Ordway, “Life After Death,” The Adventures of Superman #500 (New York: DC Comics, 1993), 
22.  
507 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
111 
 
of Krypton’s god, and all the prayers that praised his name,” and some stories use Krypton’s god 
Rao, even if Superman does not worship Rao.508  
Superman interacts with God in the afterlife in a novel by Elliot S. Maggin; late in the 
novel, Superman is in a dreamy state, close to death, and then he is directly “introduced to 
God.”509 Superman says: “There is a tradition ... in every religious culture I have ever 
encountered, which holds that anyone who looks upon the face of God will certainly die” (as in 
Exodus 33:20).510 He hears an answer: “We have all seen the face of God, as well as that of His 
Adversary whom He created. We are born with both in our hearts because they live in our souls 
forever.”511 The text adds:  
It seemed probable to Superman that this particular event was at least as significant as 
stories of visions and prophesies [sic] and such as they were recorded in sacred writings 
of the various religions. He often wondered if the people in those stories were as 
forthright and no-nonsense ... as the writings made them out to be .... In the Bible ... 
nobody messed around. If somebody wanted to say something, he said it .... If somebody 
disagreed, there was a big fight …. But here Superman was, on the threshold of Eternity, 
with enough questions to fill up most of that time in the asking.512  
 
                                                           
508 John Byrne, The Man of Steel, Book Six, (New York: DC Comics, 1986), 21. “Rao” is the name of 
Krypton’s sun, and is often the subject of proverbial expressions in Superman comics (“Great Rao!”), but is also the 
name of Krypton’s god. Allegedly, the first direct identifications of “Rao” as Krypton’s god were in E. Nelson 
Bridwell, “The Demons from the Green Hell,” The Super Friends #47 (New York: DC Comics, 1982) and Steve 
Gerber, Phantom Zone, vols. 1–4 (New York: DC Comics, 1982). In Superman Adventures #31, Superman ends up 
in a parallel universe where Krypton was not destroyed, but when his adoptive father sends him back to his own 
reality, he says, “May Rao always be there to guide you.” See Mark Millar, “Family Reunion: Part Two,” Superman 
Adventures #31 (New York: DC Comics, 1999), 20. In Action Comics #887, a Kryptonian criminal “creates” a 
beastly version of Rao that begins a destructive path on Earth, and a number of superheroes struggle to stop it. Greg 
Rucka, “Truth to Power,” Action Comics #887 (New York: DC Comics, 2010); Greg Rucka, “Truth to Power, Part 
Two” Action Comics #888 (New York: DC Comics, 2010); Greg Rucka, “Truth to Power, Part Three” Action 
Comics #889 (New York: DC Comics, 2010). One of the Kryptonians trying to stop “Rao” calls the creation “a 
mockery of my people’s faith.” See Rucka, “Truth to Power, Part Two.” A storyline in Smallville involved the 
Kryptonian Bible “the Book of Rao.” See Smallville, “Kandor,” S09, E07, directed by Jeannot Szwarc, written by 
Turi Meyer and Al Septien, The CW, November 6, 2009; Smallville, “Upgrade,” S09, E17, directed by Michael 
Rohl, written by Drew Landis and Julia Swift, The CW, April 16, 2010, and other episodes throughout the season.  
509 Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, 175.  
510 Ibid., 178.  
511 Ibid.  
512 Ibid., 179.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
112 
 
Superman has a choice: he can die and go to Heaven, or he can be sent back to life to stop 
the villain “the Master” from destroying the universe.513 God says: “You are as a wild card in the 
scheme of Creation … there have been few I have sent to your Galaxy whose power of destiny 
was as great as your own.”514 Superman chooses to live and saves the day, as was prophesied.515 
He gets a visit from God thanking him for saving the universe.516 Superman is a messianic figure 
in this novel, but not a divine Jesus. He is not identified with God, but he encounters God. 
Again, this is an important distinction because it demonstrates—once again—that when the films 
compare Superman to Jesus or God, they are presenting a different understanding of the 
character. Although this example comes from a novel rather than a comic, it was nonetheless 
written by an influential Superman comics writer.  
Sometimes, Superman wrestles with religious questions.517 In Jeph Loeb’s miniseries 
Superman For All Seasons, when Clark Kent is a young man, a twister hits his hometown of 
Smallville, and Clark is concerned he did not do enough, so he talks to the pastor of his local 
church.518 Clark asks: “Pastor. What if one man—just one man—could’ve stopped all this 
destruction? And he didn’t.”519 The pastor replies, “We each do what we’re able to, Clark. Some 
less, some more. But when the Almighty sets a course, there’s nothing—any man—can do about 
it.”520 Clark asks, “But, what if there was one?”521 But the pastor walks away.522 The fact that 
                                                           
513 Ibid., 180. Similarly, in All-Star Superman, Superman finds himself in a sort of Kryptonian afterlife, but 
chooses to go back to go back to his weakened earthly body to face evil one last time. See Morrison, All-Star 
Superman, vol. 2, 133–39.  
514 Maggin, Superman: The Last Son of Krypton, 180.  
515 Ibid., 181–226. In the book, Superman the “Star Child” was foretold by an ancient alien prophet and 
moral teacher named Sonnabend, but the prophecy foretells his death as well. Lex Luthor resuscitates him!  
516 Ibid., 226. Glen Weldon writes that Maggin’s novel had “a puzzling religiosity.” See Weldon, 
Superman: The Unauthorized Biography, 180.   
517 In the Doomsday story, Superman seems to “pray” that he can save a family from Doomsday in time, 
and he does. See Jerry Ordway, “Under Fire,” The Adventures of Superman #497 (New York: DC Comics, 1992).  
518 Jeph Loeb, Superman for All Seasons (New York: DC Comics, 1999), 40–41.  
519 Ibid., 41.  
520 Ibid.  
521 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
113 
 
Superman wrestles with these kinds of questions is evidence that he is not to be understood like 
God or Jesus in the comics.  
In a 2007 story, a super-powered Evangelical Christian calling himself “Redemption” 
flies to a war-torn fictional country called Nyasir that is hostile to his church (First Church of the 
Redemption); missionaries from the church have evangelized to locals, and Redemption is trying 
to protect them from the country’s anti-Christian militia.523 As will be seen, this storyline is 
notable because in this story, Superman’s views on religion are more ambivalent than they in 
some portrayals—but he definitely does not fulfill the role of Jesus in the story. This story 
provides further examples from the comics that do not directly link Superman and Jesus—even 
in a story about Christianity.  
In the story, Redemption’s powers are unpredictable, and when the local soldiers open 
fire, he cannot control himself and vaporizes everyone.524 Superman traces Redemption (a young 
man named Jarod Dale) back to the United States and finds the young man praying to God for 
forgiveness at home and lamenting his inability to control his gifts.525 Clark Kent meets Rev. 
Hightower (the pastor at Dale’s church).526 Later, missionaries in Nyasir are murdered by the 
government, and Superman finds that Redemption is fighting the local authorities with zeal.527 
Superman takes Redemption away from the city.528 As Superman had recently been out of 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
522 Ibid.  
523 Fabian Nicieza, “Redemption (Part I of II)—If You Believe a Man Can Fly,” Action Comics #848 (New 
York: DC Comics, 2007), n.p.  
524 Ibid.  
525 Ibid.  
526 Ibid.  
527 Ibid.  
528 Fabian Nicieza, “Redemption (Part II of II)—In Good Faith,” Action Comics #849 (New York: DC 
Comics, 2007), n.p.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
114 
 
action, Redemption tells him, “It’s God’s will to have you back ... But it’s also his will to serve 
my church.”529 As Superman and Redemption fight, Superman thinks:  
I would really rather not turn this into me vs. God .... This is about a good—if 
misguided—young man who needs to control his actions ... I have no problem with 
religion. I have a problem with abusing one’s power in the name of anything .... The 
missionary family was converting a small tribe called the Sakira. They were killed after 
ignoring repeated warnings by the military government to stop their proselytizing. Their 
murder was an unconscionable act ... but in looking to spread the faith, is the Church of 
First Redemption creating the problem?530  
 
 
That quotation is significant because the story is treating the church’s evangelistic efforts 
as a problem. Then, in the comic, Superman meets his friend Barbara Johnson at a community 
Outreach Center and asks for advice, as Superman says that his perspective on religion has been 
affected by visiting alien worlds with different gods, or meeting Ares and Zeus (Ares is one of 
Wonder Woman’s adversaries), and the following dialogue ensues:  
Barbara: The only thing that matters is what you believe in. Faith is meant to sustain you, 
so you can help others.  
Superman: But what if in trying to help others—by sharing your faith with them—you’re 
causing more harm than good?  
Barbara: Someone of true faith—an’ by that I mean true to their own faith—can be Jesus 
or Mohammed or even your X’Hal lady [the God of the planet Tamaran]—they know in 
their heart the simple difference between helpin’ others ... or just helpin’ themselves.531  
 
 
This discussion provides a view of religion that Evangelical Christians would likely not 
agree with because they would find it too synchronistic. In any event, Superman discovers that 
Redemption does not have powers, but his abilities are derived from Rev. Hightower—and that 
during the Second World War, the pastor once lost control and killed 2300 men in one day.532 
Dale confronts Rev. Hightower, and Hightower gets angry and uses his powers, forcing 
                                                           
529 Ibid.  
530 Ibid. 
531 Ibid. 
532 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
115 
 
Superman to intervene.533 Earlier, Rev. Hightower pointed to the housing and medical clinics his 
church brought to foreign countries, but Clark said, “Reverend, all of those good works come 
with strings attached—and often an intrusion into the culture or laws of other lands.”534 As 
church members criticize Rev. Hightower, Superman asks him if he put the lives of his church 
members at risk for his faith or because of a “guilty conscience.”535  
 
It is a problematic story that makes Superman the mouthpiece for an anti-missionary 
viewpoint. This story addresses Christianity but clearly does not make Superman any kind of 
allegorical Jesus figure. In that respect, it shows the difference between the films and the comics. 
Reviewer Neal Bailey agreed with Superman’s viewpoints in the issue, but asked:  
why do the people with the power to control Superman and his aspirations ABUSE that 
power by putting a particular moral viewpoint on Superman, even if I agree with it? Now 
people who attend church regularly are estranged, people who believe a congregation the 
route to salvation, suddenly they have to assume, what, Superman doesn’t do the same 
thing I do? Am I wrong? Is he wrong? ... Superman should never make you have to ask 
these questions. He’s simply a hero for everyone.536  
 
 
To build on Bailey’s analysis, it is unlikely that a Superman feature film would present 
churches and Christianity so negatively. That is also because the films are targeted to have mass 
market appeal. Still, the issue ends with a notable depiction of Clark Kent’s religious beliefs. 
Lois Lane asks Clark why he stopped going to church when he was younger, and he tells her,  
It was ... when all my different powers started kicking in for the first time—X-ray vision, 
super-hearing ... I knew too much about their lives—their problems ... their lies ... I 
thought I was going to lose my faith ... in people. So I did some ... soul-searching ... and 
eventually I decided to put my faith in the best that humanity has to offer.537  
 
                                                           
533 Ibid.  
534 Ibid.  
535 Ibid. The members of the church desert Rev. Hightower.  
536 Neal Bailey, review of Action Comics #849 by Fabian Nicieza, Superman Homepage, 
https://www.supermanhomepage.com/comics/2007-post-crisis-reviews/c-review-2007.php?topic=action849, 
(accessed June 11, 2018).    
537 Nicieza, “Redemption (Part II of II)—In Good Faith,” n.p.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
116 
 
Apparently, Superman would lose his faith in people by going to church, and prefers to 
be optimistic about humanity. Yet is a church worse than other settings Superman encounters? 
Overall, the story is important because it deals with Christianity in some detail without ever 
explicitly relating Superman to Jesus. The films are different in this regard.   
Superman and religion were explored again in James Robinson’s 2018 storyline “The 
Last Days”—written in Trump’s America.538 By then, Superman and Lois had a young 
superpowered son named Jonathan, and Superman and his son visit an alien world that is going 
to explode (like Superman’s home planet Krypton exploded).539 The aliens will not let Superman 
save them because it goes against their apocalyptic religious beliefs.540 A priest says: “We are a 
race of deep and abiding faith in our Lord God Dhermet, the Creator of all things. If it is his will 
that this orb and we its people perish … we do not wish to be saved.”541 The priest thinks 
Superman is a heretic, and says: “Leave us to die by the light of his divine grace.”542 They chant 
their god’s name, and the priest says: “You were foretold of by our seers—‘the monster who will 
come and try to change us. ‘Rule us. ‘Deny us our faith.”543 Like the antichrist? The aliens try to 
kill Superman, but he and his son escape and find the one scientist on the planet who agrees with 
them.544 The scientist (who is named Klain) parallels Superman’s own father on Krypton. The 
scientist says, “Perhaps it’s the same on your world—how those who claim to be saintly are 
often the most savage,” and Superman replies, “that seems a universal truth.”545 The story may 
be an allegory on the American Religious Right’s disregard of global warming and science.  
                                                           
538 James Robinson, “The Last Days: Part One,” Superman #40, (New York: DC Comics, 2018); James 
Robinson, “The Last Days: Part Two,” Superman #41, (New York: DC Comics, 2018). 
539 Robinson, “The Last Days: Part One,” n.p.  
540 Ibid.  
541 Ibid.  
542 Ibid.  
543 Ibid.  
544 Ibid.  
545 Ibid. The “faith” of the aliens has magical properties that weaken Superman’s powers.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
117 
 
The allegory deepens. Klain says: “This is a planet of religious zealots, all willing to die 
along with it ... I am a man of science. One of the few who survived the purge.”546 Superman 
asks: “They killed all the scientists?”547 Klain replies, “They’d rather believe in myths and 
whimsy,” and laments that his own people think he is “the embodiment of evil. They think me 
not just an unbeliever, but one who would rip apart their credo.”548 The mob of “religious” 
people attacks Klain, and as he lies dying, he tells Superman he can at least see his wife again.549 
Superman is surprised that Klain believes in God, but Klain says, “I believe in God. And 
Science. And truth. They can all go together if one chooses to let them.”550 After Klain dies, 
again, Superman pleads to the priest and the populace to save themselves, but the planet 
explodes, leaving Superman and his son Jonathan alone in outer space, where they talk:   
 
Jonathan: All of this was about God. A whole planet chose to die.  
 
Superman: Their God. That’s their right.  
 
Jonathan: Should I believe in God? Rao or whoever? Dad … do you believe in God?  
Superman: Honestly, Jon, I’ve seen too much not to believe in “something.” But this is 
the important part … “something” isn’t everything.551     
 
 
Superman’s beliefs are ambiguous here, but the story shows that Superman comics can 
explore religion. In this example, like others in this section, Superman does not see himself as a 
god or a messiah.  
This thesis has shown that Superman became a Jesus figure because multiple later writers 
grafted those parallels on—sometimes inorganically, and onscreen more than in the comics. For 
Man of Steel and Smallville, Jesus parallels were a marketing tool. The attention generated by 
Superman’s death in the comics was accidental and unexpected—but it inspired other mediums 
                                                           
546 Robinson, “The Last Days: Part Two,” n.p.  
547 Ibid.  
548 Ibid.  
549 Ibid.  
550 Ibid.  
551 Ibid.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
118 
 
to try to cash in and use Jesus symbolism for his death and battle with Doomsday. Nonetheless, 
even when analyzing some of the comics storylines that use Christianity the most, it is clear that 
the comics do not present Superman as a Jesus figure as wholeheartedly as the films do.   
 
Conclusions: Superman and Jesus 
 
In a book on Superman, Tom De Haven writes: “I couldn’t not mention Superman’s 
religious, or parareligious, trappings: savior from the sky, messiah from heaven, looks human but 
isn’t. The Christian symbolism. And the Jewish. Moses in the reeds, all of that.”552 Yet while 
later writers have exploited Superman’s religious significance, it is evident that originally, some 
of these resonances were unintentional, or at the very least implicit; as Les Daniels writes,  
Siegel seems to have touched upon a mythic theme of universal significance. Superman 
recalled Moses, set adrift to become his people’s savior, and also Jesus, sent from above 
to redeem the world …. what is significant is that Siegel, working in the generally 
patronized medium of the comics, had created a secular American messiah. Nothing of 
the kind was consciously on his mind apparently: his explanation for dropping Superman 
down from the sky was that “it just happened that way.” And Shuster echoed him: “We 
just thought it was a good idea.”553  
 
 
This quote makes it clear that the later relationship between Superman and Jesus was not 
intended by the character’s creator. What started out as Siegel’s wish-fulfillment for his 
awkwardness with girls (and perhaps his dead father) turned into something bigger. Siegel’s 
rough and tumble Superman turned into a Jesus figure over time, but that has more to do with the 
films than the comics. Later writers and directors tried to make Superman relevant in popular 
culture by transplanting Jesus imagery onto him, but this imagery did not always fit naturally 
onto the character. His death in the comics was unexpectedly a moneymaking sensation and 
                                                           
552 De Haven, Our Hero, 6.  
553 Daniels, Superman, 19. Gerard Jones notes that there are chronological inconsistencies in Siegel’s 
accounts of his creation of Superman. See Jones, Men of Tomorrow, 109–10.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
119 
 
films and television tried to exploit that. The promoters of Smallville and Man of Steel exploited 
Jesus imagery for financial gain. Some Christians were suspicious, while others used Superman 
for evangelism. Superman does not need to be a Jesus figure; it is enough for him to be an 
inspiring symbol. Still, sometimes there are financial benefits to using Jesus parallels.  
 
Earlier in this study, I referenced Thomas Andrae’s study “From Menace to Messiah: The 
Prehistory of the Superman in Science Fiction Literature.”554 One of the key contentions of my 
thesis—that Superman did not start as a Jesus figure—builds on the progression charted in 
Andrae’s article (and observed by others), as Andrae effectively demonstrated how Jerry Siegel 
and Joe Shuster’s original radical version of Superman was turned into something else over time. 
Having said this, Andrae’s article was first published in 1980. In nearly four decades since, my 
study shows how the association between Superman and Jesus became further entrenched in the 
public consciousness in subsequent adaptations. It also shows the importance of distinguishing 
the films and the comics, because the former appropriated Christian imagery much more 
frequently. My study used the theoretical frameworks of allusion and intertextuality to evaluate 
the connections between Superman stories and Jesus. Although there have been other books that 
observed the parallels between Superman and Jesus in different media, not enough attention has 
been paid to tracking the progression over time and why it came about. Also, although many of 
the parallels between Superman and Judaism that this study covers have been written about 
before (and I follow Martin Lund by rejecting many of those interpretations), the specific 
correlation between Superman’s adoptive parents and all of the childless couples in the Hebrew 
Scriptures has not been tracked in the scholarly literature in depth before.    
Finally, my study also makes a contribution to the subject matter by showing the 
interplay between Christians, churches, and film studios with this particular character. The 
                                                           
554 Andrae, “From Menace to Messiah,” 84–112. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
120 
 
ethical and theological implications of using popular media in sermons in the ways discussed in 
this paper pose a comparatively new set of issues in Christian history. It is one thing for a pastor 
to talk about popular culture to illustrate a point about Jesus in a sermon, but it is quite another to 
do so at the behest of a multinational corporation that wants the pastor to promote a movie at the 
same time. While Christian authors since Clement or Origen could compare Christians using 
Greek knowledge to the Israelites taking the spoils of Egypt,555 metaphorically speaking, they 
were not being asked to help sell Egyptian products while doing so. If Hollywood marketers 
continue to target Christians in this way, it remains to be seen if Christian pastors will continue 
to cooperate.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
555 See Thomas Guarino, “ʻSpoils from Egypt’: Contemporary Theology and Non-Foundationalist 
Thought,” Laval théologique et philosophique 51, no. 3 (1995): 573–87.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
121 
 
Bibliography 
 
Adventures of Superman. “Double Trouble.” S01, E16. Directed by Tommy Carr. Written by  
Eugene Solow. ABC, December 26, 1952.  
Aichele, George. “Rewriting Superman.” In The Monstrous and the Unspeakable: The Bible as  
Fantastic Literature, edited by George Aichele and Tina Pippin, 75–101. Sheffield:  
Sheffield Academic Press, 1997.  
Allen, Graham. Intertextuality. New Critical Idiom. London: Routledge, 2000.  
———. Roland Barthes. Routledge Critical Thinkers. New York: Routledge, 2003.  
Allison, Dale C., Jr. The New Moses: A Matthean Typology. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press,  
1993.  
Anders, Lou. “A Tale of Two Orphans: The Man of Steel vs. The Caped Crusader.” In The Man 
 from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 69–75. Smart Pop.  
Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005. 
Anderson, Judith H. Reading the Allegorical Intertext: Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton.  
New York: Fordham University Press, 2008.  
Anderson, Patrick D. “From John Wayne to E.T.: The Hero in Popular American Film.”  
American Baptist Quarterly 2, no. 1 (1983): 16–31. 
Andrae, Thomas. “From Menace to Messiah: the Prehistory of the Superman in Science Fiction  
Literature.” In American Media and Mass Culture: Left Perspectives, edited by Donald  
Lazere, 124–38. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1987. 
———. “From Menace to Messiah: the Prehistory of the Superman in Science Fiction  
Literature.” Discourse 2, no. 1 (1980): 84–112.  
Anker, Roy M. Catching Light: Looking for God in the Movies. Grand Rapids, MI: William B.  
Eerdmans, 2004. 
Arnaudo, Marco. The Myth of the Superhero. Translated by Jamie Richards. Baltimore, MD: The  
John Hopkins University Press, 2013.  
Azzarello, Brian. “For Tomorrow, Part 1.” Superman #204. New York: DC Comics, 2004.   
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 2.” Superman #205. New York: DC Comics, 2004. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 3.” Superman #206. New York: DC Comics, 2004.  
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 4.” Superman #207. New York: DC Comics, 2004. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 5.” Superman #208. New York: DC Comics, 2004. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 7.” Superman #210. New York: DC Comics, 2004.  
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 8.” Superman #211. New York: DC Comics, 2005.  
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 9.” Superman #212. New York: DC Comics, 2005. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 10.” Superman #213. New York: DC Comics, 2005. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 11.” Superman #214. New York: DC Comics, 2005. 
———. “For Tomorrow, Part 12.” Superman #215. New York: DC Comics, 2005.  
Babka, Susie Paulik. “Arius, Superman, and the Tertium Quid: When Popular Culture Meets  
Christology.” Irish Theological Quarterly 73, no. 1 (2008): 113–32. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
122 
 
Bachand, Bruce. “Interview: Elliot S. Maggin.” 1998. Fanzing. http://www.fanzing.com/mag/ 
fanzing09/iview.shtml (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Baer, Elizabeth. The Golem Redux: From Prague to Post-Holocaust Fiction. Detroit, MI: Wayne  
State University Press, 2012.  
Bailey, Neal. Review of Action Comics #849 by Fabian Nicieza. Superman Homepage.  
https://www.supermanhomepage.com/comics/2007-post-crisis-reviews/c-review-2007.  
php?topic=action849 (accessed June 11, 2018).  
———. Review of Smallville, “Eternal.” Superman Homepage. https://www.superman  
homepage.com/tv/ tv.php?topic=reviews/smallville8-ep18 (accessed July 13, 2018).  
———. Review of Superman #659 by Kurt Busiek. Superman Homepage. https://www.super  
manhomepage.com/comics/2007-post-crisis-reviews/c-review-2007.php?topic=sup659  
(accessed June 11, 2018). 
Bainbridge, Jason. “Beyond the Law: What Is So So Super about Superheroes and 
Supervillains?” International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 30, no. 3 (2017): 367–88. 
Barkman Adam. “Superman: From Anti-Christ to Christ-Type.” In Superman and Philosophy:  
What Would the Man of Steel Do?, edited by Mark D. White, 111–20. Blackwell  
Philosophy and Pop Culture Series. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013. 
Barthes, Roland. “From Work to Text.” In Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, translated by  
Stephen Heath, 155–64. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977. 
———. “Textual Analysis of Poe’s ‘Valdemar.’” In Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist  
Reader, edited by Robert Young, 133–61. Translated by Geoff Bennington. Boston:  
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981.  
———. “The Death of the Author.” In Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, 142–48. Translated  
by Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977. 
———. “Theory of the Text.” In Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist Reader, edited by  
Robert Young, 31–47. Translated by Ian McLeod. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul,  
1981.  
Barton, John. “Déjà Lu: Intertextuality, Method or Theory.” In Reading Job Intertextually, edited  
by Katharine Dell and Will Kynes, 1–16. Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament  
Studies 574. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2013.  
Batchelor, Bob. “Brains versus Brawn: The Many Lives (and Minds) of Lex Luthor, the World’s  
Greatest Villain.” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by  
Glenn Yeffeth, 199–210. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005. 
Bates, Cary. “Superman’s Energy Crisis!” Action Comics #454. New York: DC Comics, 1975.   
Bates Cary, and Elliot S! Maggin. “Superman 2001!” Superman #300. New York: DC  
Comics, 1976. 
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Directed by Zack Snyder. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers  
Pictures, 2013. 
Beal, Timothy K. “Ideology and Intertextuality: Surplus of Meaning and Controlling the Means  
of Production.” In Reading between the Texts: Intertextuality and the Hebrew Bible,  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
123 
 
edited by Danna Nolan Fewell, 27–39. Literary Currents in Biblical Interpretation.  
Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992.  
———. “Intertextuality.” In Handbook of Postmodern Biblical Interpretation, edited by A. K. 
M. Adam (St. Louis, MO: Chalice Press, 2000), 128–30.  
Best, Mark. “Domesticity, Homosociality and Male Power in Superhero Comics of the 1950s.”  
Iowa Journal of Cultural Studies 6, no. 1 (2005): 80–99.   
Biblical Images in Literature. Edited by Roland Bartel, with James S. Ackerman and Thayer S.  
Warshaw. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1975. 
Bland, Archie. “Comic Book Superheroes: The Gods of Modern Mythology.” May 27, 2016. The  
Guardian. https://www.the guardian.com/books/2016/may/27/comic-book-superheroes- 
the-gods-of-modern-mythology (accessed June 27, 2018).  
Bloch, Chayim. The Golem: Mystical Tales from the Ghetto of Prague. Translated by Harry  
Schneiderman. Blauvelt, NY: Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1972. 
———. A Map of Misreading. New York: Oxford University Press, 1975. 
———. Poetry and Repression: Revisionism from Blake to Stevens. New Haven, CT: Yale  
University Press, 1976.  
Bodkin, Maud. Archetypal Patterns in Poetry. London: Oxford University Press, 1934.  
Bogaerts, Arno. “Rediscovering Nietzsche’s Übermensch in Superman as a Heroic Ideal.” In  
Superman and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, edited by Mark D. White,  
85–100. Blackwell Philosophy and Pop Culture Series. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell,  
2013.  
Bogdanove, Jon, and Louise Simonson. Superman: The Man of Steel #81. New York: DC  
Comics, 1998.  
———. Superman: The Man of Steel #82. New York: DC Comics, 1998. 
Boulton, Marsha. “The Man of Steel.” In The Just a Minute Omnibus: Glimpses of Our  
Canadian Heritage, 478–80. Toronto: McArthur & Company, 2000.  
Boyarin, Daniel. Intertextuality and the Reading of Midrash. Bloomington, IN: Indiana  
University Press, 1990.  
Bridwell, E. Nelson. “The Demons from the Green Hell.” The Super Friends #47. New York:  
DC Comics, 1982. 
Brod, Harry. Superman Is Jewish? How Comic Book Superheroes Came to Serve Truth, Justice,  
and the Jewish-American Way. New York: Free Press, 2012.  
Brower, J.K. “The Hebrew Origins of Superman.” Biblical Archaeology Review 5, no. 3 (1979):  
22—26.   
Brown, Harold O.J. “Superman on the Screen: Counterfeit Myth.” Christianity Today, April 20,  
1979. https://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2007/julyweb-only/128-14.0.html (accessed  
June 29, 2018).  
Bruce, David. “You’ll Believe a Man Can Fly.” Hollywood Jesus. October 1998.  
http://www.hollywoodjesus.com/superman.htm (accessed June 28, 2018).  
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
124 
 
Burke, Liam. The Comic Book Film Adaptation: Exploring Modern Hollywood’s Leading Genre.  
Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi, 2015.  
Busiek, Kurt, and Geoff Johns. “Up, Up, and Away! Part VII of VIII: Up in the Sky.” Superman  
#653. New York: DC Comics, 2006. 
Busiek, Kurt, and Fabian Nicieza. Trinity. Vols. 1–3. New York: DC Comics, 2009.   
Byrne, John. The Man of Steel. New York: DC Comics, 1986.  
———. “The Price.” Superman #22. New York: DC Comics, 1988. 
———. “The Suicide Snare.” Action Comics #593. New York: DC Comics, 1987.   
Cancalon, Elaine D., and Antoine Spacagna, eds. Intertextuality in Literature and Film: Selected 
Papers from the Thirteenth Annual Florida State University Conference on Literature 
and Film. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1994. 
Cardona, Ian. “Zack Snyder Explains Why Batman Used a Kryptonite Spear in Dawn of  
Justice.” CBN. April 4, 2018. https://www.cbr.com/batman-v-superman-kryptonite-spear-
explained/ (accessed June 29, 2018). 
Chabon, Michael. The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay. New York: Random House,  
2000. 
Clanton Dan W., Jr. “The Origin(s) of Superman: Reimagining Religion in the Man of Steel.” In  
Religion and Popular Culture in America, 3rd ed., edited by Bruce David Forbes and 
Jeffrey H. Mahan, 33–50. Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2017. 
Clark, Noelene. “ʻMan of Steel’: Zack Snyder Says Superman ‘Must Be Taken Seriously.’”  
April 25, 2013. Hero Complex. http://herocomplex.latimes.com/movies/man-of-steel- 
zack-snyder-says-superman-must-be-taken-seriously/#/0 (accessed June 27, 2018).   
Clayton, Jay, and Eric Rothstein. “Figures in the Corpus: Theories of Influence and  
Intertextuality.” In Influence and Intertextuality in Literary History, edited by Jay  
Clayton and Eric Rothstein, 3–36. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press,  
1991.  
Cohen, Jason. “Bendis Signals a Welcome Return to Superman’s Jewish Roots.” February 2,  
2018. CBR. https://www.cbr.com/bendis-dc-superman-jewish-roots/ (accessed June 27,  
2018).  
Cohen, Stanley. “Messianic Motifs, American Popular Culture, and the Judeo-Christian  
Tradition.” Journal of Religious Studies 8, no. 1 (1980): 24–34.  
Cohn, Alicia. “Superman Isn’t Jesus.” June 19 2013. Christianity Today.  
https://www.christianitytoday.com/women/2013/june/superman-isnt-jesus.html (accessed  
June 27, 2018). 
Comic Books and Super Heroes. Disc 2, Unbreakable. Burbank, CA: Buena Vista, 2001.  
Corliss, Richard. “Man of Steel: Super Man … Or Human God?” June 12, 2013. Time.  
http://entertainment.time.com/2013/06/12/man-of-steel-super-man-or-human-god/  
(accessed June 28, 2018). 
———. “The Gospel of Superman.” Review of Superman Returns, directed by Bryan Singer.  
Time. June 26, 2006. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
125 
 
Cornell, George W. “Superman/Jesus Similarities Explained.” Los Angeles Times. February 24,  
1979.  
Craig, Justin. “ʻMan of Steel’ Filled with Jesus, Christianity References.” June 14, 2013. Fox  
News. http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2013/06/14/man-steel-filled-with-jesus- 
christianity-references.html (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Culler, Jonathan. On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism. London:  
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982. 
———. The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. Oxon, UK: Routledge,  
2001. First published 1981. 
D’Angelo, Frank J. “The Rhetoric of Intertextuality.” Rhetoric Review 29, no. 1 (2010): 31–47. 
Daniels, Les. Comix: A History of Comic Books in America. New York: Bonanza Books, 1971.  
———. DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World’s Favorite Comic Book Heroes. New York:  
Bulfinch Press, 1995.  
———. Superman: The Complete History: The Life and Times of the Man of Steel. San  
Francisco, CA: Chronicle Books, 1998.  
Davis, Grant. “Batman v. Superman Had Hidden Allusion to the Book of Revelation.” Heroic 
Hollywood. April 2, 2018. https://heroichollywood.com/batman-v-superman-book-
revelation/ (accessed June 29, 2018). 
De Haven, Tom. It’s Superman!: A Novel. London: HarperCollins, 2006. 
———. Our Hero: Superman on Earth. Icons of America. New Haven, CT: Yale University  
Press, 2010.  
Dell, Katharine, and Will Kynes, eds. Reading Ecclesiastes Intertextually. Library of  
Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 587. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014. 
———. Reading Job Intertextually. Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 574. 
London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2013.  
DelVecchio, Rosa Maria. “Why Is Superman Still a Virgin?” In Superman at Fifty: The  
Persistence of a Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 171–73.   
Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988. 
Dennert, Brian C. “ʻThe Rejection of Wisdom’s Call’: Matthew’s Use of Proverbs 1:20–33 in the  
Parable of Children in the Marketplace (Matthew 11:16–19/Luke 7:31–35.” In Searching  
the Scriptures: Studies in Context and Intertextuality, edited by Craig A. Evans and  
Jeremiah J. Johnston, 46–63. Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Early  
Christianity 19, published under Library of New Testament Studies 543. London and  
New York: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2015.  
Dentith, Simon. Parody. The New Critical Idiom. New York: Routledge, 2000.  
Detweiler, Craig. “Superman: Sermon Notes from Exile.” Christianity Today, June 2013. 
https://www.christianitytoday.com/pastors/2013/june-online-only/superman-sermon-
notes-from-exile.html (accessed June 27, 2018). 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
126 
 
DiChristopher, Steve. “Is Superhero Movie Fatigue a Myth?” CNBC. May 15, 2016.  
https://www.cnbc.com/2016/05/14/is-superhero-movie-fatigue-a-myth.html (accessed  
May 18, 2018).   
DiPaolo, Marc. War, Politics and Superheroes: Ethics and Propaganda in Comics and Film.  
Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company, 2004.  
Dittmer, Jason. “American Exceptionalism, Visual Effects, and the Post 9/11 Cinematic  
Superhero Boom.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29, no. 1 (2011):  
114–30. 
Donner Richard, and Tom Mankiewicz. “Audio Commentary.” Disc 2. Superman: The Movie.  
DVD. Directed by Richard Donner. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2001. 
Dooley, Dennis. “The Man of Tomorrow and the Boys of Yesterday.” In Superman at Fifty: The  
Persistence of a Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 19–34.  
Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988.  
Dooley, Dennis, and Gary Engle. Preface, in Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend,  
edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 11–14. Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988.  
Donovan, Barna William. “A Superman for Our Time: How the Man of Steel Tries to Make  
Superman Relevant Again—and Why It Succeeds.” Cinephile 9, no. 2 (2013): 20–28. 
Dougherty, Michael, Dan Harris, and Bryan Singer. Superman Returns: The Complete Shooting  
Script. London: Titan Books, 2006.   
Eagan, Patrick L. “A Flag with a Human Face.” In Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a  
Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 88–95. Cleveland, OH: Octavia,  
1988. 
Eco, Umberto. “The Myth of Superman.” Translated by Natalie Chilton. Diacritics 2, no. 1  
(1972): 14–22. 
Engle, Gary D. “What Makes Superman So Darned American?” in Superman at Fifty: The  
Persistence of a Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 79–87.  
Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988. 
Eury, Michael. “Dennis O’Neil Interview.” In The Krypton Companion, edited by Michael Eury,  
115–19. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006. 
———. “Elliot S! Maggin Interview.” In The Krypton Companion, edited by Michael Eury,  
141–146. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006. 
———. “Superman Roundtable Discussion.” In The Krypton Companion, edited by Michael  
Eury, 208–35. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006.  
Evanier, Mark. Superman & Bugs Bunny #1–4. New York: DC Comics, 2000. 
Evans, Craig A., and H. Daniel Zecharias, eds. Early Christian Literature and Intertextuality. 
Vol. 1, Thematic Studies. Library of New Testament Studies 391, Studies in  
Scripture and Early Judaism 14. New York: T&T Clark, 2009.  
———. Early Christian Literature and Intertextuality. Vol. 2, Exegetical Studies. Library of New 
Testament Studies 392, Studies in Scripture and Early Judaism 15. New York: T&T 
Clark, 2009. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
127 
 
Evans, Margery A. Baudelaire and Intertextuality: Poetry at the Crossroads. Cambridge Studies  
in French 38. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.  
Evans, Nicola Jean. “Undoing the Magic: DVD Extras and the Pleasures behind the Scenes.”  
Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 24, no. 4 (2010): 587–600. 
Feiffer, Jules. Backing into Forward: A Memoir. New York: Doubleday, 2010. 
———. “The Minsk Theory of Krypton.” New York Times Magazine, December 29, 1996, 14– 
15. 
Finger, Bill. “Superman Duels the Futuremen!” Superman #128. New York: DC Comics, 1959.  
———. “Superman Returns to Krypton!” Superman #61. New York: DC Comics, 1949. 
Fingeroth, Danny. Disguised as Clark Kent: Jews, Comics, and the Creation of the Superhero.  
New York: Continuum, 2007.  
Fingeroth, Danny. Superman on the Couch: What Superheroes Really Tell Us about Ourselves  
and Our Society. New York: Continuum, 2005. 
Fisch, Sholly. “Baby Steps.” Action Comics #5. New York: DC Comics, 2012. 
Fleming, Mike, Jr. “Birdman’s Alejandro G. Iñárritu and ‘Birdman’ Scribes on Hollywood’s  
Superhero Fixation: ‘Poison, Cultural Genocide’—Q & A.” Deadline. October 15, 2014.  
http://deadline.com/2014/10/ birdman-director-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-writers- 
interview-852206/ (accessed May 9, 2018).  
Fletcher, Michelle. Reading Revelation as Pastiche: Imitating the Past. Library of New  
Testament Studies 571. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2017.  
Freiman, Barry. “Long Live Superman in the ‘Hereafter.’” Review of Justice League,  
“Hereafter.” Superman Homepage. https://www.supermanhomepage.com/tv/  
tv.php?topic= reviews/ jl2-ep20 (accessed July 14, 2018). 
Friedrich, Otto. “Up, Up, and Awaaay!!!” June 24, 2001. Time. http://content.time.com/time/ 
magazine/article/0,9171,148856,00.html (accessed June 28, 2018). 
Frown, John. “Intertextuality and Ontology.” In Intertextuality: Theories and Practices, edited  
by Michael Worton and Judith Still. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990. 
Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,  
1957. 
———. “The Archetypes of Literature.” The Kenyon Review 13, no. 1 (1951): 92–110.   
Galloway, John T., Jr. The Gospel According to Superman. Philadelphia and New York: A. J.  
Holman Company, 1973. 
Garrett, Greg. Holy Superheroes: Exploring the Sacred in Comics, Graphic Novels, and Film.  
rev. ed. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2008.  
Gatti-Taylor, Marisa. “Silone’s ‘Moses’ at the Bitter Fountain: Exodus as Subtext.” In  
Intertextuality in Literature and Film: Selected Papers from the Thirteenth Annual  
Florida State University Conference on Literature and Film, edited by Elaine D.  
Cancalon and Antoine Spacagna, 61–73. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida,  
1994.  
Gerber, Steve. Phantom Zone. Vols. 1–4. New York: DC Comics, 1982. 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
128 
 
Gilmore, Barry. “E. J. in Focus: Superman Is Dead: How We Help Students Make Sense of  
Literary Characters.” The English Journal 102, no. 1 (2012): 27–33. 
Goldberg, Danny. “The ADL vs Superman.” Tikkun 14. January/February 1999, 5–7.  
Goldsmith, Arnold L. The Golem Remembered, 1909–1980: Variations of a Jewish Legend.  
Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1981.  
Golem!: Danger, Deliverance and Art. Edited by Emily D. Bilski. New York: The Jewish  
Museum, 1989.   
Goodwyn, Hannah. “Superman and Jesus: Superman’s Origin and Parallels to Jesus.”  
CBN. 2016. http://www1.cbn.com/movies/superman-and-jesus-supermans-origin-and-
parallels-jesus (accessed June 28, 2018). 
Gopnik, Adam. “What Did Jesus Do?” May 24, 2010. The New Yorker. https://www.newyorker. 
com/magazine/2010/05/24/what-did-jesus-do (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Gordon, Ian. Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers  
University Press, 2017.  
Gough, Alfred, Miles Millar, and David Nutter. “Audio Commentary.” Disc 1. “Pilot.” DVD.  
Directed by David Nutter. Smallville: The Complete First Season, DVD. Burbank, CA:  
Warner Brothers Pictures, 2003.  
Gross, Ed. “SUPERMAN EXCLUSIVE: Bryan Singer Looks Back at Superman Returns.”  
March 25, 2011. ComicBookMovie.com. https://www.comicbookmovie.com/superman/  
superman-exclusive-bryan-singer-looks-back-at-superman-returns-a33821(accessed June  
27, 2018). 
Guarino, Thomas. “ʻSpoils from Egypt’: Contemporary Theology and Non-Foundationalist  
Thought.” Laval théologique et philosophique 51, no. 3 (1995): 573–87. 
Gundry, Robert H. Matthew: A Commentary on His Literary and Theological Art. Grand Rapids,  
MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1982.  
Guralnik, David B. “Superstar, Supermom, Super Glue, Superdooper, Superman.” In Superman  
at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle,  
103–7. Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988.  
Hamilton, Edmond. “The Untold Story of the Phantom Zone!” Superboy #104. New York: DC  
Comics 1963. 
Hanley, Tim. Investigating Lois Lane: The Turbulent History of the Daily Planet’s Ace Reporter.  
Chicago, IL: Chicago Review Press, 2016. 
Harper, Steven. “Supermyth!” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by  
Glenn Yeffeth, 93–99. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005.  
Hays, Richard B. Echoes of Scripture in the Gospels. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2016. 
———. Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,  
1989.   
 
 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
129 
 
Hatfield, David. “Superman’s Revelation: The Problem of Violence in Kingdom Come.” In  
Superman and Philosophy: What Would the Man of Steel Do?, edited by Mark D. White,  
133–44. Blackwell Philosophy and Pop Culture Series. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell,  
2013.   
Hatina, Thomas R. “Intertextuality and Historical Criticism in New Testament Studies: Is There 
a Relationship?” Biblical Interpretation 7, no. 1 (1999): 28–43.  
Hatten, Robert S. “Intertextuality in Music Studies.” American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4  
(1985): 69–82. 
Hinds, Stephen. Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of Appropriation in Roman Poetry. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.   
Hoffman, Jordan. “‘Man of Steel’ No Longer Man of Shtetl.” June 14, 2013. Times of Israel.  
https://www.timesof israel.com/man-of-steel-no-longer-man-of-shtetl/ (accessed July 11,  
2018). 
Hopkins, David. “A History of Violence.” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at  
Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 9–21. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books,  
2005. 
Horsley, Richard A. Jesus in Context: Power, People and Performance. Minneapolis: Fortress  
Press, 2008.  
Hughes, Mark. “Exclusive: Bendis to Write Superman, Revive Jinxworld, and Oversee New  
Custom Imprint at DC Comics.” Forbes. February 1, 2018. https://www.forbes.com/ 
sites/mark hughes/2018/ 02/01/exclusive-bendis-to-write-superman-revive-jinxworld- 
and-oversee-new-custom-imprint-at-dc-comics/#29 eeed695c40 (accessed June 27,  
2018). 
Huizenga, Leroy A. The New Isaac: Tradition and Intertextuality in the Gospel of Matthew.  
Supplements to Novum Testamentum 131. Leiden: Brill, 2009. 
Inside Out. Directed by Pete Docter. Emeryville, CA: Pixar Animation Studios, 2015.  
Irwin, William. “Against Intertextuality.” Philosophy and Literature 28, no. 2 (2004): 227–42.  
Jacobs, Evan. “Dan Harris & Michael Dougherty Talk about Writing Superman Returns.” June  
28, 2006. https://movieweb.com/dan-harris-michael-dougherty-talk-about-writing- 
superman-returns/ (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Jack, Alison M. The Bible and Literature. SCM Core Text. London: SCM Press, 2012.  
Jaffee, Robert David. “ʻSupermanʼ Director Lives Out His Dream.” June 22, 2006. Jewish  
Journal. http://jewish journal. com/culture/arts/13264/ (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Jensen Jeff. “Superman as Jesus—Christian Imagery in Man of Steel.” June 17, 2013.  
Entertainment Weekly. http://ew.com/article/2013/06/17/man-of-steel-jesus/ (accessed  
June 29, 2018). 
“Jerry Siegel Attacks!” Das Schwarze Korps. April 25, 1940. Translated by Randall Byrtwerk.  
“The SS and Superman.” German Propaganda Archive. http://research.calvin.edu/ 
german-propaganda-archive/superman.htm (accessed June 5, 2018). 
Johns, Geoff. Infinite Crisis. New York: DC Comics 2006.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
130 
 
———. Superman: Secret Origin: The Deluxe Edition. New York: DC Comics, 2010.    
Johns, Geoff, and Richard Donner. “Last Son.” Action Comics Annual #11. New York: DC  
Comics, 2008. 
Jones, Gerard. Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book. New  
York: Perseus, 2004.  
Jurgens, Dan. “Back for Good!” Superman #82. New York: DC Comics 1993. 
———. “Deadly Alliance.” Superman #80. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
———. “Doomsday!” Superman #75. New York: DC Comics, 1992. 
———. “Down for the Count.” Justice League America #69. New York: DC Comics 1992.   
———. “From the City That Has Everything.” Action Comics #1000. New York: DC Comics,  
2018. 
———. “No Escape!” Superman #108. New York: DC Comics, 1996. 
———. “Resurrections.” Superman #81. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
———. Superman/Doomsday: Hunter Prey Book Two. New York: DC Comics, 1994. 
———. “The Death of Clark Kent.” Superman #100. New York: DC Comics, 1995.  
———. Zero Hour #0. New York: DC Comics, 1994. 
Justice League. Directed by Zack Snyder. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2017. 
Justice League. “Hereafter.” S02, E19. Directed by Butch Lukic. Written by Dwayne McDuffie.  
Cartoon Network, November 29, 2003.  
Justice League. “War World, Part I.” S01, E10. Directed by Butch Lukic. Written by Stan  
Berkowitz. Cartoon Network, February 24, 2002.  
Kaplan, Arie. From Krakow to Krypton: Jews and Comic Books. Philadelphia: The Jewish  
Publication Society, 2008.   
———. “How the Jews Created the Comic Book Industry, Part 1: The Golden Age (1933– 
1955).” Reform Judaism 32, no. 1 (Fall 2003). 
http://reformjudaismmag.net/03fall/comics.shtml (accessed June 6, 2018). 
Keesmaat, Sylvia C. “Exodus and the Intertextual Transformation of Tradition in Romans 8.14– 
30.” Journal for the Study of the New Testament 54, no. 1 (1994): 29–56. 
Keim, Katharina E. Pirqei deRabbi Eliezer: Structure, Coherence, Intertextuality. Ancient  
Judaism and Early Christianity 96. Leiden: Brill, 2017.  
Kelly, Joe. “A Hero’s Journey.” Action Comics #800. New York: DC Comics, 2003.  
Kelly, Joe, and Michael Turner. “Godfall, Part 3 of 6: Goddess.” Superman #202. New York:  
DC Comics, 2004.  
———. “Godfall, Part 4 of 6: Heaven.” Action Comics #813. New York: DC Comics, 2004.  
———. “Godfall, Part 5 of 6: Tempest.” The Adventures of Superman #626. New York: DC  
Comics, 2004. 
———. “Godfall, Part 6 of 6: Divinity.” Superman #203. New York: DC Comics, 2004.  
Kesel, Karl. “Assault on Engine City!” The Adventures of Superman #504. New York: DC  
Comics, 1993.  
———. Superman King of the World #1. New York: DC Comics, 1998.   

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
131 
 
Klaehn, Jeffery. “Some Real Shit Winds-Up Selling Like Hotcakes”: Bob Layton.” In Inside the  
World of Comic Books, edited by Jeffery Klaehn, 43–51. Montreal: Black Rose Books,  
2007.  
Knowles, Christopher. Our Gods Wear Spandex: The Secret History of Comic Book Heroes. San  
Francisco: Weiser Books, 2007.  
Kobre, Michael. “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?” Michigan Quarterly Review  
53, no. 2 (2014): 149–165.   
Kozloff, Sarah R. “Superman as Savior: Christian Allegory in the Superman Movies.” Journal of  
Popular Film and Television 9, no. 2 (1981): 78—82. 
Kozlovic, Anton K. “Superman as Christ-Figure: The American Pop Culture Movie Messiah.”  
Journal of Religion and Film 6, no. 1, article 5 (2002): 1–33. 
———. “The Holy, Non-Christic Biblical Subtexts in Superman: The Movie (1978) and  
Superman II (1981).” Journal of Religion and Film 6, no. 2, article 5 (2002): 1–30.  
———. “The Unholy Biblical Subtexts and Other Religious Elements Built into Superman: The  
Movie (1978) and Superman II (1981).” Journal of Religion and Film 7, no. 1, article 7  
(2003): 1–33.  
Kundu, Rama. Intertext: A Study of the Dialogue between Texts. New Delhi: Sarup & Sons,  
2008.  
Kriegel, Larry. “Superman’s Shoulders: On the Healing Power of Illusion.” Southwest Review  
91, no. 2 (2006): 258–67. 
Kristeva Julia. “The Bounded Text.” In Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature  
and Art, edited by Leon S. Roudiez, 24–51. Translated by Thomas Gora, Alice Jardine,  
and Leon S. Roudiez. New York: Columbia University Press, 1980.  
———. Revolution in Poetic Language. Translated by Margaret Waller. New York: Columbia  
University Press, 1984. 
Lang, Jeffrey S., and Patrick Trimble. “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? An  
Examination of the American Monomyth and the Comic Book Superhero.” Journal of  
Popular Culture 22, no. 3 (1988): 157–73. 
Lawrence, John Shelton, and Robert Jewett. The Myth of the American Superhero. Grand Rapids,  
MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2002.  
Lee, Suk Yee. An Intertextual Analysis of Zechariah 9–10: The Earlier Restoration Expectations  
of Second Zechariah. Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 599. London:  
Bloomsbury T & T Clark, 2015.  
Lewis, A. David. “Superman Graveside: Superhero Salvation beyond Jesus.” In Graven Images:  
Religion and Comic Books and Graphic Novels, edited by A. David Lewis and Christine  
Hoff Kraemer, 113–32. New York: Continuum, 2010. 
Liebman, Robert Leslie. “Rabbis or Rakes, Schlemiels or Supermen?: Jewish Identity in Charles  
Chaplin, Jerry Lewis, and Woody Allen.” Literature Film Quarterly 12, no. 3 (1984):  
195–201. 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
132 
 
Litwak, Kenneth Duncan. Echoes of Scripture in Luke–Acts: Telling the History of God’s  
People Intertextually. Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplement Series  
282. London: T&T Clark, 2005.  
Lloyd, Peter B. “Superman’s Moral Evolution.” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at  
Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 181–98. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books,  
2005.  
Loeb, Jeph. Foreword to Scott Beatty, Superman: The Ultimate Guide to the Man of Steel. New  
York: Dorling Kindersley, 2002. 
———. Superman for All Seasons. New York: DC Comics, 1999.  
Loeb, Jeph, and Tom Morris. “Heroes and Superheroes.” In Superheroes and Philosophy: Truth,  
Justice and the Socratic Way, edited by Tom Morris and Matt Morris, 11–20. Popular  
Culture and Philosophy 13. Chicago and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 2005. 
Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman. “Sex, Lies, and Videotape.” S04, E13. Directed  
by Philip J. Sgriccia. Written by Andrew Dettmann, Daniel Truly, and Dan Wilcox. ABC.  
January 19, 1997. 
Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman. “Tempus Fugitive.” S02, E18. Directed by  
James Bagdonas. Written by Jack Weinstein and Lee Hutson. ABC. March 26, 1995.  
London, Herbert. “The Death of Superman.” First Things. March 1993, 11–12. 
Look, up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman. Directed by Kevin Burns. Burbank, CA:  
Warner Home Video, 2006.  
Lowther, George. The Adventures of Superman. Bedford, MA: Applewood, 1995 [1942]). 
Lund, Martin. Re-Constructing the Man of Steel: Superman 1938–1941, Jewish American  
History, and the Invention of the Jewish–Comics Connection. Contemporary Religion  
and Popular Culture. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.  
Lyden, John C. Film as Religion: Myths, Morals, and Rituals. New York: New York University  
Press, 2003. 
Lyne, Raphael. Memory and Intertextuality in Renaissance Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge  
University Press, 2016.  
Lytle, Paul. “The Golden Shield: Image as Superman’s Greatest Power.” In The Man from  
Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 137–47. Smart Pop.  
Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005.  
Macmillan, Graeme. “ʻBatman v. Superman’: The Problem with Turning the Man of Steel into  
the Son of God.” The Hollywood Reporter. March 25, 2016. https://www.hollywood  
reporter.com/ heat-vision/batman-v-superman-ending-problem-878463 (accessed June  
27, 2018). 
Maggin, Elliott S. Superman: Miracle Monday. N.p.: Caveat Corner Books, 2017. First 
published 1981. 
———. Superman: The Last Son of Krypton. New York: Warner Books, 1978.  
———. “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter One.” Superman #400. New York: DC  
Comics, 1984.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
133 
 
———. “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter Five.” Superman #400. New York: DC  
Comics, 1984. 
———. “The Living Legends of Superman: Chapter Seven.” Superman #400. New York: DC  
Comics, 1984.   
———. “The New Bards.” Introduction in Mark Waid, Kingdom Come, 5–7. New York: DC  
Comics 1997. 
Man of Steel. Directed by Zack Snyder. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2013. 
“ʻMan of Steel’ Marketers Target Christians by Sending Pastors Prepared Sermon Notes That  
Compare Superman to Jesus Christ.” June 17, 2013. DailyMail.com. http://www.daily  
mail.co.uk/news/article-2343165/Man-Steel-marketers-target-Christians-sending-pastors- 
prepared-sermons-compare-Superman-Jesus-Christ.html (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Marrapodi, Eric. “Superman: Flying to a Church near You.” June 14, 2013. CNN Belief Blog.  
http://religion.blogs.cnn.com/2013/06/14/superman-coming-to-a-church-near-you/  
(accessed June 27, 2018). 
Mautner, Michael E. “From the Pit to the Peak: Superman and the Ascension of America.”  
http://ws.fortress.net.nu/americanway/ thesis.php (accessed June 23, 2018).  
McCloud, Scott. “The War Within.” Superman Adventures #11. New York: DC Comics, 1997. 
McD, Ross. “Man of Steel: The Top 20 Reasons Why Superman Is Jesus.” June 11, 2013. Metro  
News. https://metro.co.uk/2013/06/11/man-of-steel-the-top-20-reasons-why-superman-is- 
jesus-3837465/ (accessed June 27, 2018)  
McDaniel, Anita K. “Obama-Man: The Fan-Boy Ideograph for ‘Hope and Change.’”  
International Journal of Comic Art 15, no. 1 (2013): 338–53. 
McNair, Wesley C. “The Secret Identity of Superman: Puritanism and the American Superhero.”  
American Baptist Quarterly 2, no. 1 (1983): 4–16. 
Mehok, Edward. “St. Clark of Krypton.” In Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend,  
edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 123–29. Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988.  
Merritt, Jonathan. “Superman Spirituality: Is Hollywood Manipulating Christians?” June 18,  
2013. Religion News Service. https://religionnews.com/2013/06/18/is-hollywood- 
manipulating-christians/ (accessed July 25, 2018). 
Meyer, Bruce. Heroes: From Hercules to Superman. Toronto: HarperCollins, 2008.  
Meyer, Michaela D. E. “Slashing Smallville: The Interplay of Text, Audience and Production on  
Viewer Interpretations of Homoeroticism.” Sexuality & Culture 17, no. 3 (2013): 476–93.  
Meylikhov, Matthew. “Jesus Christ, Superman: How Warner Bros Is Marketing Man of Steel to  
Pastors.” Multiversity Comics. June 17, 2013. http://www.multiversitycomics.com/news/ 
jesus-christ-superman-how-warner-bros-is-marketing-man-of-steel-to-pastors/ (accessed 
June 27, 2018).  
Michelinie, David. “Hazard’s Choice.” Action Comics #719. New York: DC Comics, 1996. 
Millar, Mark. “Family Reunion: Part Two.” Superman Adventures #31. New York: DC Comics,  
1999. 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
134 
 
———. “How Much Can One Man Hate?” Superman Adventures #27. New York: DC Comics,  
1999.   
———. “Is It a Bird? Is It a Plane? No, It’s Superman, But Not as We Know Him.” The Sunday 
Times, April 27, 2003.   
———. Superman: Red Son. New York: DC Comics, 2004. 
Miller, Frank. “The Dark Knight Falls.” Batman: The Dark Knight Returns. New York: DC  
Comics, 1986. 
Miller, Geoffrey D. “Intertextuality in Old Testament Research.” Currents in Biblical Research  
9, no. 3 (2011): 283–309.  
Miscall, Peter D. “Isaiah: New Heavens, New Earth, New Book.” In Reading between the Texts:  
Intertextuality and the Hebrew Bible, edited by Danna Nolan Fewell, 41–57. Literary  
Currents in Biblical Interpretation. Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992.  
Moore, Alan. “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? Part Two.” Action Comics #583.  
New York: DC Comics, 1986. 
Morgan, Thaïs E. “Is There an Intertext in This Text? Literary and Interdisciplinary Approaches  
to Intertextuality.” American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4 (1985): 1–40.  
Moring, Mark. “The ʻSavior’ Returns.” Christianity Today. June 26, 2006.  
https://www.christianitytodaycomct2006juneweb-only/bryansinger.html?start=2  
(accessed June 27, 2018). 
Morris, Nicola. The Golem in Jewish American Literature: Risks and Responsibilities in the  
Fiction of Thane Rosenbaum, Nomi Eve and Steve Stern. Twentieth-Century American  
Jewish Writers. New York: Peter Lang, 2007. 
Morris, Wesley. “Jesus Christ Superman: Man of Steel Flies for Our Sins.” June 13, 2013.  
Grantland. http://grantland.com/features/man-steel-flies-our-sins/ (accessed June 27,  
2018). 
Morrison, Grant. All-Star Superman. Volume 1. New York: DC Comics, 2007.  
———. All-Star Superman. Volume 2. New York: DC Comics, 2009. 
———. “Rocket Song.” Action Comics #5. New York: DC Comics, 2012. 
———. Supergods: What Masked Vigilantes, Miraculous Mutants, and a Sun God from Krypton  
Can Teach Us about Being Human. New York: Spiegel & Grau, 2011.  
Morrison, Grant, and Rags Morales. “Action Comics Sketchbook.” In Superman in Action  
Comics Volume 1: Superman and the Men of Steel, n.p. New York: DC Comics, 2012. 
Muir, John Kenneth. “Cult Movie Review: Superman: The Movie (1978).” John Kenneth Muir’s  
Reflections on Movies and Classic TV. August 7, 2012. http://reflectionsonfilmand  
television.blogspot.com/ 2012/08/cult-movie-review-superman-movie-1978.html  
(accessed June 23, 2018).  
———. “Superman Week: Superman II (1981).” John Kenneth Muir’s Reflections on Movies  
and Classic TV. June 11, 2013. http://reflectionsonfilmandtelevision.blogspot.com/2012/  
08/cult-movie-review-superman- movie-1978.html (accessed June 23, 2018).  
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
135 
 
———. The Encyclopedia of Superheroes on Film and Television. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland &  
Company, 2004. 
Murray, Will. “Superman’s Editor Mort Weisinger.” In The Krypton Companion, edited by  
Michael Eury, 8–15. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing, 2006.  
Neumann, Harry. “Nietzsche: The Superman, the Will to Power and the Eternal Return.”  
Ultimate Reality and Meaning 5, no. 4 (1982): 280–95. 
Neusner, Jacob. Canon and Connection: Intertextuality in Judaism. Studies in Judaism. Lanham,  
MD: University Press of America, 1987.  
Nicieza, Fabian. “Redemption (Part I of II)—If You Believe a Man Can Fly.” Action Comics  
#848. New York: DC Comics, 2007. 
———. “Redemption (Part II of II)—In Good Faith.” Action Comics #849. New York: DC  
Comics, 2007. 
Nolte, S. Philip, and Pierre J. Jordaan. “Ideology and Intertextuality: Intertextual Allusions in  
Judith 16.” HTS Teologiese Studies 67, no. 3 (2011): 1–9.  
O’Donnell, Dick. “It’s Magic.” In The Comic Book Book, edited by Don Thompson and Dick  
Lupoff, 145—72. New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1973. 
O’Ehley, James. “Sci-Fi Movie Page Pic: Batman Returns.” Review of Batman Returns. May  
1997. http://www.scifimoviepage.com/pick3.html (accessed May 18, 2018). 
O’Neil, Dennis. “The Man of Steel and Me.” In Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend,  
edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 46–58. Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988. 
O’Neil, Dennis, and Neil Adams. Superman vs. Muhammad Ali. New York: DC Comics, 1978.  
Ordway, Jerry. The Adventures of Superman #500. New York: DC Comics, 1993.  
———. “Under Fire.” The Adventures of Superman #497. New York: DC Comics, 1992. 
Orr, Mary. Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003.  
Oster, Marcy. “DC Comics’ Newest Writer is Poised to Make Superman Jewish Again.”  
The Times of Israel. February 17, 2018. https://www.timesofisrael.com/dc-comics- 
newest-writer-is-poised-to-make-superman-jewish-again/ (accessed June 27, 2018); 
Pagello, Federico. “The ‘Origin Story’ Is the Only Story: Seriality and Temporality in Superhero  
Fiction from Comics to Post-Television.” Quarterly Review of Film & Video 34, no. 8  
(2017): 725–45.  
Parham, Thom. “Superheroes in Crisis: Postmodern Deconstruction and Reconstruction in  
Comic Books and Graphic Novels.” In The Gospel According to Superheroes: Religion  
and Popular Culture, edited by B. J. Oropeza, 197–214. New York: Peter Lang, 2005.  
Partible, Leo. “Superheroes in Film and Pop Culture: Silhouettes of Redemption on the Screen.”  
In The Gospel According to Superheroes: Religion and Popular Culture, edited by B.J.  
Oropeza, 229—254. New York: Peter Lang, 2005.  
Peebles, Gustav. “God, Communism, and the WB.” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at  
Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 77–92. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books,  
2005.  
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
136 
 
Peyer, Tom, and Mark Waid. “Identity Crisis I: Cages.” The Adventures of Superman #536. New  
York: DC Comics, 1996.  
———. “Identity Crisis II: Keys.” Action Comics #723. New York: DC Comics, 1996.  
———. “Identity Crisis III: Snares.” Superman: The Man of Steel #58. New York: DC Comics,  
1996.  
———. “Identity Crisis IV: Worldwide Web.” Superman #114. New York: DC Comics, 1996. 
Pérez, George. “A Cold Day in Hell.” Superman #3. New York: DC Comics, 2012. 
Price, Robert M. “The Seven-Sealed Comic Book: The Book of Revelation in the Graphic Novel  
Kingdom Come.” Journal of Unification Studies 13, no. 1 (2012): 215–33.  
Pumroy, Ryan. “Recruiting Soldiers of Steel: The Cross-Promotion of Man of Steel and the  
National Guard.” The Journal of Popular Culture 48, no. 4 (2015): 762–75.  
Puzo, Mario, David Newman, Leslie Newman, Robert Benton, and Tom Mankiewicz.  
Superman: The Movie Shooting Script. https://www.supermanhomepage.com/movies/  
superman_I_shoot.txt (accessed June 23, 2018). 
Raab, Scott. “Is Superman Jewish?” In Superman at Fifty: The Persistence of a Legend, edited  
by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 166–67. Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988.  
Ratner-Rosenhagen, Jennifer. “Conventional Iconoclasm: The Cultural Work of the Nietzsche  
Image in Twentieth-Century America.” The Journal of American History 93, no. 3  
(2006): 728–754. 
Reader, Keith A. “Literature/Cinema/Television: Intertextuality in Jean Renoir’s Le Testament  
du docteur Cordelier.” In Intertextuality: Theories and Practices, edited by Michael  
Worton and Judith Still, 176–89. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990.  
Reeve, Dana. Care Packages: Letters to Christopher Reeve from Strangers and Other Friends.  
New York: Random House, 1999. 
Reynolds, Richard. Super Heroes: A Modern Mythology. Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi  
Press, 1992. 
Ricca, Brad. Super Boys: The Amazing Adventures of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster—The  
Creators of Superman. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2013.  
Rich, Frank. “Term Limit for the Man of Steel: Yes, It’s Time for Him to Go.” New York Times,  
November 22, 1992.  
Ricker Parks, Aaron. “The Devil’s Reading: Revenge and Revelation in American Comics.” In  
Graven Images: Religion and Comic Books and Graphic Novels, edited by A. David  
Lewis and Christine Hoff Kraemer, 15–23. New York: Continuum, 2010. 
Riffaterre, Michael. “Compulsory Reader Response: The Intertextual Drive.” In Intertextuality:  
Theories and Practices, edited by Michael Worton and Judith Still, 56–78. Manchester:  
Manchester University Press, 1990.  
Roberson, Chris. “Jewel Mountains and Fire Falls: The Lost World of Krypton.” The Man from  
Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 33–49. Smart Pop.  
Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005. 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
137 
 
Roberts, Adam. “Is Superman a Superman?” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at  
Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth, 115–25. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books,  
2005.   
Robinson, James. “The Last Days: Part One.” Superman #40. New York: DC Comics, 2018. 
———. “The Last Days: Part Two.” Superman #41. New York: DC Comics, 2018. 
Rose, Peter W. “Teaching Greek Myth and Confronting Contemporary Myths.” Bucknell Review 
35, no. 1 (1991): 17–39.  
Rosenberg, Yudl. “The Golem or The Miraculous Deeds of Rabbi Liva.” In The Great Works of  
Jewish Fantasy and Occult, 162–225. Translated by Joachim Neugroschel. New York:  
The Overlook Press, 1976.  
Ross, Alex. JSA Kingdom Come Special #1. New York: DC Comics, 2008.  
Ross, Alex, and Paul Dini. Superman: Peace on Earth. New York: DC Comics, 1998.    
Rossen, Jake. Superman vs. Hollywood: How Fiendish Producers, Devious Directors, and  
Warring Writers Grounded an American Icon. Chicago, IL: Chicago Review Press, 2008.  
Roudiez, Leon S. “Introduction.” In Julia Kristeva, Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to  
Literature and Art, edited by Leon S. Roudiez, 1–20. Translated by Thomas Gora, Alice  
Jardine, and Leon S. Roudiez. New York: Columbia University Press, 1980.   
Rucka, Greg. “Rack and Ruin: Part 1.” The Adventures of Superman #646. New York: DC  
Comics, 2006. 
———. “The Road to Ruin, Conclusion.” The Adventures of Superman #640. New York: DC  
Comics, 2005. 
———. “Truth to Power.” Action Comics #887. New York: DC Comics, 2010.   
———. “Truth to Power, Part Three.” Action Comics #889. New York: DC Comics, 2010. 
———. “Truth to Power, Part Two.” Action Comics #888. New York: DC Comics, 2010. 
Salkind, Ilya, and Pierre Spengler. “Audio Commentary.” Disc 1. Superman: The Movie.  
Directed by Richard Donner. DVD. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2001. 
Samoyault, Tiphaine. L’Intertextualité: Mémoire de la littérature. Paris: Armand Colin, 2008.  
Sarna, Jonathan D. American Judaism: A History. Yale, CT: Yale University Press, 2004.  
Saunders, Ben. Do the Gods Wear Capes? Spirituality, Fantasy, and Superheroes. New  
Directions in Religion and Literature. New York: Continuum, 2011. 
Schenck, Ken. “Superman: A Popular Culture Messiah.” In The Gospel According to  
Superheroes: Religion and Popular Culture, edited by B.J. Oropeza, 33–48. New York:  
Peter Lang, 2005. 
Schleicher, Marianne. Intertextuality in the Tales of Rabbi Nahman of Bratslav: A Close Reading  
of Sippurey Ma’asiyot. Leiden: Brill, 2007. 
Seitz, Matt Zoller. “Captain America: Civil War.” Review of Captain America: Civil War. Roger  
Ebert.com. May 5, 2016. https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/captain-america-civil-war- 
2016 (accessed May 18, 2018). 
Schelly, Bill. Otto Binder: The Life and Work of a Comic Book and Science Fiction Visionary.  
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2016.  

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
138 
 
Searching the Scriptures: Studies in Context and Intertextuality. Edited by Craig A. Evans and  
Jeremiah J. Johnston. Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Early Christianity 19,  
published under Library of New Testament Studies 543. London and New York:  
Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2015.  
Secret Origin: The Story of DC Comics. Directed by Mac Carter. New York: DC Entertainment,  
2010.   
Shapiro, Michael. The Jewish 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Jews of All Time. New  
York: Citadel Press, 1995. 
Shastri, Sudha. Intertextuality and Victorian Studies. Hyderabad, India: Orient  
Longman, 2001.  
Siegel, Jerry. Action Comics #2. New York: DC Comics, 1939.  
———. “Happy 45th Anniversary, Superman!” In Action Comics #544, n.p. New York: DC  
Comics, 1983.  
———. “Luthor’s Undersea City.” Superman #4. New York: DC Comics, 1940.   
———. “Superman.” Action Comics #1. New York: DC Comics, 1938.  
———. Superman #1. New York: DC Comics, 1940.   
———. “Superman and the Skyscrapers.” Superman #2. New York: DC Comics, 1940.  
———. “Superman Battles Death Underground.” Action Comics #3. New York: DC Comics,  
1938. 
———. “Superman Champions Universal Peace!” Superman #2. New York: DC Comics, 1940.   
———. “Superman Declares War on Reckless Drivers.” Action Comics #12. New York: DC  
Comics, 1939. 
———. “Superman in the Slums.” Action Comics #8. New York: DC Comics, 1939.  
———. “Superman’s Greatest Feats!” Superman #146. New York: DC Comics, 1961.   
———. “Superman’s Return to Krypton!” Superman #141 (New York: DC Comics, 1961).   
———. Superman: The Dailies, 1939—1940. Vol. 1. New York: DC Comics, 1999.   
———. “Terror in the Trucker’s Union.” Superman #4. New York: DC Comics, 1940.  
———. “The Death of Superman!” Superman #149. New York: DC Comics, 1961. 
———. “The One Minute of Doom!” Superman #150. New York: DC Comics, 1962.  
———. “The Redemption of Larry Trent.” Superman #2. New York: DC Comics, 1939.  
Simonson, Louise. “Ambush!” Superman: The Man of Steel #23. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
———. “Doomsday! Part One.” Superman: The Man of Steel #18. New York: DC Comics,  
1992.  
———. “Ghosts.” Superman: The Man of Steel #21. New York: DC Comics, 1993.  
———. “Hard Knocks.” Superman: The Man of Steel #16. New York: DC Comics, 1992.  
———. “Steel.” Superman: The Man of Steel #22. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
Skelton, Stephen. “Exclusive Interview with ʻSuperman Returns’ Director Bryan Singer The  
Messiah of Metropolis.” Dove.org. November 29, 2006. http://www.dove.org/exclusive- 
interview-with-superman-returns-director-bryan-singer/ (accessed June 27, 2018). 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
139 
 
———.  “Superman Returns (2006).” Hollywood Jesus. N.d. http://www.hollywood  
jesus.com/superman-returns-2006/ (accessed June 24, 2018). 
———.  The Gospel According to the World’s Greatest Superhero. Eugene, OR: Harvest House  
Publishers, 2006.  
Skerry, Philip, and Chris Lambert. “From Panel to Panavision.” In Superman at Fifty: The  
Persistence of a Legend, edited by Dennis Dooley and Gary D. Engle, 62–75.  
Cleveland, OH: Octavia, 1988. 
Smallville. “Crush.” S01, E19. Directed by James Marshall. Written by Philip Levens, Alfred  
Gough, and Miles Millar. The WB, May 7, 2002. 
Smallville. “Eternal.” S08, E18. Directed by James Marshall. Written by Kelly Souders and  
Brian Peterson. The CW. April 2, 2009. 
Smallville. “Finale, Part 1.” S10, E21. Directed by Kevin G. Fair. Written by Al Septien and Turi  
Meyer. The CW, May 13, 2011.  
Smallville. “Hidden.” S05, E03. Directed by Whitney Ransick. Written by Kelly Souders and  
Brian Peterson. The WB, October 13, 2005. 
Smallville. “Hothead.” S01, E3. Directed by Greg Beeman. Written by Greg Walker. The WB.  
October 30, 2001.  
Smallville. “Injustice.” S08, E21. Directed by Tom Welling. Written by Al Septien and Turi  
Meyer. The CW. April 2, 2009.   
Smallville. “Kandor.” S09, E07. Directed by Jeannot Szwarc. Written by Turi Meyer and Al  
Septien. The CW. November 6, 2009; 
 Smallville. “Kinetic.” S01, E13. Directed by Robert Singer. Written by Philip Levens. The WB.  
February 26, 2002.  
Smallville. “Odyssey.” S08, E01. Directed by Kevin Fair. Written by Todd Slavkin, Darren  
Swimmer, Kelly Souders, and Brian Peterson. The CW. September 18, 2008. 
Smallville. “Pilot.” S01, E1. Directed by David Nutter. Written by Alfred Gough and Miles 
Millar. The WB. October 16, 2001.   
Smallville. “Quest.” S07, E19. Directed by Kenneth Biller. Written by Holly Harold. The New  
CW. May 8, 2008. 
Smallville. “Reckoning.” S05, E12. Directed by Greg Beeman. Written by Kelly Souders and  
Brian Peterson. The WB. January 26, 2006. 
Smallville. “Resurrection.” S03, E15. Directed by Terrence O’Hara. Written by Todd Slavkin  
and Darren Swimmer. The WB. February 25, 2004. 
Smallville. “Rosetta.” S02, E17. Directed by James Marshall. Written by Alfred Gough and  
Miles Millar. The WB. February 25, 2003.  
Smallville. “Transference.” S04, E06. Directed by James Marshall. Written by Todd Slavkin and  
Darren Swimmer. The WB. October 27, 2004.  
Smallville. “Upgrade.” S09, E17. Directed by Michael Rohl. Written by Drew Landis and Julia  
Swift. The CW. April 16, 2010. 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
140 
 
Stahlberg, Lesleigh Cushing. Sustaining Fictions: Intertextuality, Midrash, Translation, and the  
Literary Afterlife of the Bible. Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 486.  
London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2008. 
Stead, Michael R. The Intertextuality of Zechariah 1–8. Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament  
Studies 506. New York: T & T Clark, 2009.  
Stern, Roger. “An Eye for an Eye.” Action Comics #688. New York: DC Comics, 1993.   
———. “And Who, Disguised as Clark Kent?” Action Comics #692. New York: DC Comics,  
1993. 
———. “Born Again!” Action Comics #687. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
———. “Introduction.” In George Lowther, The Adventures of Superman, xi–xx. Bedford,  
MA: Applewood, 1995. First published 1942.  
———. “Lies & Revelations.” Action Comics #690. New York: DC Comics, 1993.   
———. “Re: Actions.” Action Comics #685. New York: DC Comics, 1993. 
———.  “Two Destinies!” Superman #33. New York: DC Comics, 1989. 
———.  “Who’s Buried in Superman’s Tomb?” Action Comics #686. New York: DC Comics,  
1993. 
Steiner, Wendy. “Intertextuality in Painting.” American Journal of Semiotics 3, no. 4 (1985): 57– 
67. 
Still, Judith, and Michael Worton. “Introduction.” In Intertextuality: Theories and Practices,  
edited by Michael Worton and Judith Still, 1–44. Manchester: Manchester University  
Press, 1990.  
Straczynski, J. Michael. Superman: Earth One: Volume One. New York: DC Comics, 2010.  
Stucky, Mark D. “The Superhero’s Mythic Journey: Death and the Heroic Cycle in Superman.”  
Journal of Religion & Film 10, no. 2 (2006): article 6, 1–11.  
Stuller, Jennifer K. Ink-Stained Amazons and Cinematic Warriors: Superwomen in Modern  
Mythology. New York: I.B. Tauris, 2010.  
Suabseng, Asawin. “How the National Guard Is Using ‘Man of Steel’ to Recruit You.” Mother 
Jones. June 14, 2013. https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/06/man-of-steel- 
national-guard-product-placement/ (accessed June 29, 2018).   
Superman II. Directed by Richard Lester. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 1980.  
Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut. Directed by Richard Donner. Burbank, CA: Warner  
Brothers Pictures, 2006.  
Superman Returns. Directed by Bryan Singer. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures, 2006. 
Superman: The Animated Series. “The Last Son of Krypton: Part II.” S01, E2. Directed by Scott  
Jeralds and Curt Geda. Written by Alan Burnett and Paul Dini. Kids WB! September 6,  
1996.   
Superman: The Animated Series. “The Last Son of Krypton: Part III.” S01, E3. Directed by Dan  
Riba and Bruce Timm. Written by Alan Burnett and Paul Dini. Kids WB! September 6,  
1996.  
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
141 
 
Superman: The Movie. Directed by Richard Donner. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Pictures,  
1978.  
“Superman’s Death Issue to Go to Second Printing.” Wall Street Journal, November 20, 1992. 
Sweeney, Marvin A. Form and Intertextuality in Prophetic and Apocalyptic Literature.  
Forschungen zum Alten Testament 45. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005.  
———. Reading Prophetic Books: Form, Intertextuality, and Reception in Prophetic and Post- 
Biblical Literature. Forschungen zum Alten Testament 89. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck,  
2014.  
Tallon, Felix, and Jerry Walls. “Superman and Kingdom Come: The Surprise of Philosophical  
Theology.” In Superheroes and Philosophy: Truth, Justice and the Socratic Way, edited  
by Tom Morris and Matt Morris, 207–20. Popular Culture and Philosophy 13. Chicago  
and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 2005. 
Terjesen, Andrew. “Is Superman an American Icon?” In Superman and Philosophy: What Would  
the Man of Steel Do?, edited by Mark D. White, 71–81. Blackwell Philosophy and Pop  
Culture Series. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013. 
The 21st Century Superhero: Essays on Gender, Genre and Globalization in Film. Edited by  
Richard J. Gray II and Betty Kaklamanidou. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company,  
2011.   
The Iron Giant. Directed by Brad Bird. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers, 1999. 
“The Second Coming of Superman: Finally, a ‘Christian’ Movie Not Marketed to Churches.”  
Christianity Today. June 2006. https://www.christianitytoday.com/pastors/2006/june- 
online-only/second-coming-of-superman-finally-christian-movie-not.html (accessed June  
28, 2018). 
Thomson, Iain. “Deconstructing the Hero.” In Comics as Philosophy, edited by Jeff McLaughlin,  
100–29. Jackson, MS: The University Press of Mississippi, 2005. 
Tõniste, Külli. The Ending of the Canon: A Canonical and Intertextual Reading of Revelation  
21–22. Library of New Testament Studies 526. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2016.  
Tull, Patricia. “Intertextuality and the Hebrew Scriptures.” Currents in Research: Biblical  
Studies 8, no. 1 (2000): 59–90.  
Tye, Larry. Superman: The High-Flying History of America’s Most Enduring Hero. New York:  
Random House, 2012. 
Unbreakable. Directed M. Night Shyamalan. Burbank, CA: Touchstone Pictures, 2000.  
“US elections: Barack Obama Jokes He Is Superman.” The Telegraph. October 17, 2008.  
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/barackobama/3213768/US-elections- 
Barack-Obama-jokes-he-is-Superman.html (accessed June 29, 2018).    
Vineyard, Jennifer. “ʻMan of Steel’ Director Zack Snyder on Superman’s Christ-Like Parallels.”  
June 16, 2013. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2013/06/14/showbiz/zack-snyder-man-of- 
steel/index.html (accessed June 27, 2018)  
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
142 
 
———. “ʻMan of Steel’: Not the Familiar Superman (Fan)fare.” CNN. April 5, 2013. 
https://www.cnn.com/2013/04/05/showbiz/zimmer-man-of-steel (accessed June 27,  
2018). 
Waid, Mark. “Introduction.” In Grant Morrison, All-Star Superman, Vol. 2, 6–8. New  
York: DC Comics, 2009. 
———. “Introduction.” In Superman in the Fifties, 5–9. New York: DC Comics, 2002.   
———. Kingdom Come. New York: DC Comics, 1997. 
———. “Man of Steel, Since You Asked.” Thrillbent. June 14, 2013. http://thrillbent.com/blog/ 
man-of-steel-since-you-asked/ (accessed July 11, 2018). 
———.  Superman: Birthright. New York: DC Comics, 2004.  
———.  “The Real Truth about Superman: And the Rest of Us, Too.” In Superheroes and  
Philosophy: Truth, Justice and the Socratic Way, edited by Tom Morris and Matt Morris,  
3–10. Popular Culture and Philosophy 13. Chicago and Lasalle, IL: Open Court, 2005. 
Watterson, Bill. The Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book. New York: Scholastic, 1995.   
Waxman, Sharon. “The Passion of the Marketers.” The New York Times. July 18, 2005. 
https://www.ny times.com/2005/07/18/business/media/the-passion-of-the-marketers.html  
(accessed July 25, 2018). 
Weeden, Theodore, J., Sr. Mark—Traditions in Conflict. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971.  
Wein, Len. “The Man Who Murdered the Earth!” Superman #248. New York: DC Comics,  
1972. 
Weinstein, Simcha. Up, Up, and Oy Vey! How Jewish History, Culture, and Values Shaped the  
Comic Book Superhero. Baltimore, MD: Leviathan Press, 2006. 
Weldon, Glen. Superman: The Unauthorized Biography. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,  
2013.  
Welky, David. Everything Was Better in America: Print Culture in the Great Depression.  
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2008. 
Wertham, Fredric. The Seduction of the Innocent. New York: Rhinehart and Company, 1954.  
White, John Wesley. The Man from Krypton: The Gospel According to Superman. Minneapolis, 
MN: Bethany Fellowship, 1978. 
Wilson, Andrew. “Kristeva.” In Handbook of Postmodern Biblical Interpretation, edited by  
A. K. M. Adam, 144–50. St. Louis, MO: 2000. 
Wolfman, Marv. Crisis on Infinite Earths Deluxe Edition. New York: DC Comics, 2015. First 
published 1985–1986.   
Wolfman, Marv, and Jerry Ordway. “The Circle Turns.” The Adventures of Superman #435.  
New York: DC Comics, 1987. 
Wooley, Lynn. “’Twixt Joe and Kurt: The Art of Wayne Boring and Stan Kaye.” Comic Book  
Marketplace. September-October 1998, 26–29.       
Yoe, Craig. Secret Identity: The Fetish Art of Superman’s Co-Creator Joe Shuster. New York:  
Abrahams ComicArts, 2009. 
 

MA Thesis—Robert Revington; McMaster University, Religious Studies 
 
143 
 
Younis, Steve. “Superman Returns Set Visit Report—Part 2 (of 12).” Superman Homepage. July  
 
28, 2005. https://www.supermanhomepage.com/movies/movies.php?topic=set-visit- 
 
report2 (accessed June 27, 2018). 
Zeichmann, Christopher B. “Champion of the Oppressed: Redescribing the Jewishness of  
Superman as Populist Authenticity Politics.” Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 29,  
no. 2 (2017): 132–46.  
Zettel, Sarah. “You Will Believe a Man Can Walk: Christopher Reeve’s Part in the Superman  
Myth.” In The Man from Krypton: A Closer Look at Superman, edited by Glenn Yeffeth,  
23–31. Smart Pop. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2005.  
 

