The Ontological Argument for the Existence of God 
 
Robert Mayhew 
OCON 2023 
Miami 
 
A simple version of Anselm’s ontological argument 
 
 
1. We have an idea of God, i.e. the being than which none greater can be thought. 
 
2. A being that exists solely in thought is not as good as a being that exists in thought and 
 
exists in reality. 
 
3. If God existed solely in thought, then He (the being than which none greater can be 
 
thought) would be a being than which something greater can be thought, which is 
 
absurd. 
∴ 4. God exists in reality as well as in thought. 
 
Descartes’ version of the ontological argument  
 
 
1. I have an idea of a supremely perfect being, i.e., a being lacking no perfections. 
 
2. Existence is a perfection, i.e., to lack existence is to lack a perfection. 
∴ 3. A supremely perfect being does not lack existence. 
∴ 4. A supremely perfect being exists. 
 
The beginnings to a couple of other versions (exempli gratia): 
 
Kurt Gödel’s:  
Definition 1: x is God-like if and only if x has as essential properties those and only those properties 
which are positive. …  
Axiom 5: Necessary existence is positive. 
 
Alvin Plantinga’s:  
1. There is a possible world in which there is an entity which possesses maximal greatness. 
 
 
On the ‘concept’ of God: 
 
From Anselm, Proslogion § 2, referring to Psalms 14:1 (‘the fool has said in his heart, there is no 
God’): “But surely, when this same fool [i.e. an atheist] hears what I am speaking about—
something than which nothing greater can be thought—he understands what he hears, and what 
he understands exists in his understanding….” 
 
From Ayn Rand, Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology, p. 49: “There are such things as invalid 
concepts, i.e., words that represent attempts to integrate errors, contradictions or false 
propositions, such as concepts originating in mysticism—or words without specific definitions, 
without referents, which can mean anything to anyone…” (emphasis added). 
From Ayn Rand, in the appendix to Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology, p. 148: “This is 
precisely one, if not the essential one, of the epistemological objections to the concept ‘God.’ It is 
not a concept. At best, one could say it is a concept in the sense in which a dramatist uses 
concepts to create a character. It is an isolation of actual characteristics of man combined with 
the projection of impossible, irrational characteristics which do not arise from reality—such as 
omnipotence and omniscience.” 

