
ROBOT-PROOF


ROBOT-PROOF
Higher Education in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
JOSEPH E. AOUN
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2017 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form 
by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, 
or information storage) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Scala Pro by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. 
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN: 978-0-262-03728-0
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 
vii
Introduction 
ix
1	
Fears of a Robotic Future 
1
2	
Views from the C-Suite: What Employers Want, in Their Own 
Words 
23
3	
A Learning Model for the Future 
45
4	
The Experiential Difference 
77
5	
Learning for Life 
111
Afterword 
141
Notes 
151
Index 
171


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
A great many people at Northeastern University have contributed 
to the ideas and concepts discussed in this book. Foremost, I thank 
J. D. LaRock and Andrew Rimas, without whom this project would 
not have been completed.
I also thank my colleagues Michael Armini, James Bean, James 
Hackney, Diane MacGillivray, Philomena Mantella, Ralph Martin, 
and Thomas Nedell. Our work together has informed much that  
is written here. Susan Ambrose and Uta Poiger also provided 
invaluable insights, particularly regarding experiential learning, the 
science of learning, and the “experiential liberal arts.”
I have drawn liberally from Northeastern’s academic plan, 
“Northeastern 2025,” for many of the discussions herein, includ-
ing about the new learning model, “humanics.” I thank my faculty 
colleagues, staff colleagues, and students for contributing to this 
deep and forward-looking document.
I also thank Northeastern’s board of trustees, including trustee 
leaders Neal Finnegan, Sy Sternberg, Henry Nasella, and Rich 
D’Amore, who have supported our efforts to bring many of the 
ideas and themes discussed here into practice at the university.
I am continually grateful for the support of former colleagues 
and mentors who have helped to shape my thinking about higher 

Acknowledgments
viii
education and the world, including Lloyd Armstrong and Vartan 
Gregorian.
This book also benefits from insights revealed over the course 
of interviews and conversations with students, scholars, and busi-
ness leaders beyond those quoted in the pages that follow. I thank 
my Northeastern colleagues Chris Gallagher, Dan Gregory, Marc 
Meyer, Dennis Shaughnessy, Maria Stein, Alan Stone, Cigdem 
Talgar, and Michelle Zaff for their reflections.
Finally, I owe everything to the love and support of my wife, 
Zeina, and my sons, Adrian and Karim.

INTRODUCTION
Introduction
Introduction
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Thousands of years ago, the agricultural revolution led our forag-
ing ancestors to take up the scythe and plough. Hundreds of years 
ago, the Industrial Revolution pushed farmers out of fields and into 
factories. Just tens of years ago, the technology revolution ushered 
many people off the shop floor and into the desk chair and office 
cube.
Today, we are living through yet another revolution in the way 
that human beings work for their livelihoods—and once again, 
this revolution is leaving old certainties scrapped and smoldering 
on the ash heap of history. Once again, it is being powered by new 
technologies. But instead of the domesticated grain seed, the cotton 
gin, or the steam engine, the engine of this revolution is digital 
and robotic.
We live in a time of technological marvels. Computers con-
tinue to speed up while the price of processing power contin-
ues to plummet, doubling and redoubling the capabilities of 
machines. This is driving the advance of machine learning—the 
ability of computers to learn from data instead of from explicit 
programming—and the push for artificial intelligence. As econo-
mists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee note in their book 
The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time 

Introduction
x
of Brilliant Technologies, we have recently hit an inflection point in 
which our machines have reached their “full force” to transform the 
world as comprehensively as James Watt’s engine transformed an 
economy that once trundled along on ox carts.1 Labor experts are 
increasingly and justifiably worried that computers are becoming 
so adept at human capabilities that soon there will be no need for 
any human input at all.2
The evidence for this inflection point is everywhere. Driverless 
cars are now traversing the streets of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
and other cities. New robots can climb stairs and open doors with 
ease. An advanced computer trounced the human grandmaster of 
the intricate Chinese strategy game Go. Moreover, it is not only the 
processing power of machines that has skyrocketed exponentially 
but also the power of their connectivity, their sensors, their GPS 
systems, and their gyroscopes. Today, we are giving computers not 
only artificial intelligence but, in effect, artificial eyes, ears, hands, 
and feet.
Consequently, these capacities are enabling computers to step into 
roles—and jobs—once held exclusively by members of our species. 
Robots now analyze stocks, write in deft and informative prose, and 
interact with customers.3 Semi-autonomous machines may soon 
join soldiers on the battlefield.4 In China, “co-bots”—machines that 
can work in factories safely alongside human beings—are upend-
ing that country’s vaunted manufacturing sector, allowing fewer 
laborers to be vastly more productive. In 2015, sales of industrial 
robots around the world increased by 12 percent over the previous 
year, rising to nearly a quarter of a million units.5
At the same time, Big Data is revolutionizing everything  
from social science to business, with organizations amassing  

Introduction
xi
information in proportions that flirt with the infinite. Algorithms 
mine bottomless troves of data and then apply the information 
to new functions, essentially teaching themselves. Machine learn-
ing now powers everything from our spam filters to our Amazon 
shopping lists and dating apps, telling us what to watch, what 
to buy, and whom to love.6 “Deep learning” systems, in which 
artificial neural networks identify patterns, can now look at an 
image and recognize a chair or the face of a human individual or 
teach themselves how to play a video game without ever reading 
the instructions.7
In many ways, these new technologies are an astonishing boon 
for humanity, giving us the power to mitigate poverty, hunger,  
and disease. For example, Stanley S. Litow, vice president of cor-
porate citizenship and corporate affairs at IBM, is overseeing an 
initiative between Memorial Sloan Kettering Hospital in New York 
City and Watson, the computer that famously beat the human 
champions of the television game show Jeopardy! A doctor who 
had watched the show approached IBM with the idea to collabo-
rate. Thus, Watson was reborn as an oncology adviser. Computer 
scientists at IBM embedded it with information from the hos-
pital’s clinical trials (“not just some, all of them,” said Litow)8 
and trained it through data analytics to respond to oncologists’ 
questions.
“So it proceeds as if talking to a potential patient,” said Litow. “On 
a mobile device I can say, ‘She has the following characteristics. Do 
we have any information on clinical trials that would help me figure 
out whether this is the problem or that is the problem?’” Watson 
then analyzes the data and responds to the oncologist’s question 
in normal English. “There’s a lot of clinical trial information, but 

Introduction
xii
a lot of doctors don’t have access to it,” said Litow. “It is actually 
helping some of the best oncologists in the United States make a 
better, faster diagnosis and move toward a treatment plan quickly. 
In treating cancer, that’s critical.”
Watson’s next challenge is to improve teaching in the New York 
City public school system, advising educators on effective teaching 
practices by using the same data analytics and communication 
techniques it is deploying with such success at Sloan Kettering. 
Technologies like Watson are helping people save lives, teach frac-
tions, and—in their less sophisticated iterations—find the nearest 
parking space. They are helping people work better.
Or they are, for the moment. Automation long has been con-
sidered a threat to low-skilled labor, but increasingly, any predict-
able work—including many jobs considered “knowledge economy” 
jobs—are now within the purview of machines.9 This includes 
many high-skill functions, such as interpreting medical images, 
doing legal research, and analyzing data.
As advanced machines and computers become more and more 
proficient at picking investments, diagnosing disease symptoms, 
and conversing in natural English, it is difficult not to wonder 
what the limits to their capabilities are. This is why many observ-
ers believe that technology’s potential to disrupt our economy—and 
our civilization—is unprecedented.
Over the past few years, my conversations with students entering 
the workforce and the business leaders who hire them have revealed 
something important: to stay relevant in this new economic reality, 
higher education needs a dramatic realignment. Instead of educat-
ing college students for jobs that are about to disappear under the 
rising tide of technology, twenty-first-century universities should 

Introduction
xiii
liberate them from outdated career models and give them owner-
ship of their own futures. They should equip them with the litera-
cies and skills they need to thrive in this new economy defined by 
technology, as well as continue providing them with access to the 
learning they need to face the challenges of life in a diverse, global 
environment. Higher education needs a new model and a new ori-
entation away from its dual focus on undergraduate and graduate 
students. Universities must broaden their reach to become engines 
for lifelong learning.
There is a great deal of evidence that we need such an educational 
shift. An oft-quoted 2013 study from Oxford University found that 
nearly half of U.S. jobs are at risk of automation within the next 
twenty years.10 In many cases, that prediction seems too leisurely. 
For example, new robotic algorithmic trading platforms are now 
tearing through the financial industry, with some estimates holding 
that software will replace between one-third and one-half of all 
finance jobs in the next decade.11 A 2015 McKinsey report found 
that solely by using existing technologies, 45 percent of the work 
that human beings are paid to do could be automated, obviating 
the need to pay human employees more than $2 trillion in annual 
wages in the United States.12
This is not the first time we have faced a scenario like this. In past 
industrial revolutions, the ploughmen and weavers who fell prey to 
tractors and spinning jennies had to withstand a difficult economic 
and professional transition. However, with retraining, they could 
reasonably have expected to find jobs on the new factory floors. 
Likewise, as the Information Age wiped out large swaths of manu-
facturing, many people were able to acquire education and training 
to obtain work in higher-skilled manufacturing, the service sector, 

Introduction
xiv
or the office park. Looking ahead, education will remain the ladder 
by which people ascend to higher economic rungs, even as the 
jobs landscape grows more complex. And it undoubtedly is getting 
knottier. One of the reasons for this is that the worldwide supply of 
labor continues to rise while the net number of high-paying, high-
productivity jobs appears to be on the decline.13 To employ more 
and more people, we will need to create more and more jobs. It is 
not clear where we will find them.
Certainly, the emergence of new industries—such as those 
created in the tech sector—will have to step up if they are going 
fill this gap. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the 
computer and information technology professions are projected to 
account for a total of 4.4 million jobs by 2024.14 In the same period, 
the labor force, aged sixteen and older, is expected to reach 163.7 
million. Adding to the disjoint is the remarkable labor efficiency 
of tech companies. For instance, Google, the standard bearer for 
the new economy, had 61,814 full-time employees in 2015. At 
its peak in 1979, in contrast, General Motors counted 600,000 
employees on its payroll.15 To address the deficit, we’ll need creative  
solutions.
Apart from automation, many other factors are stirring the eco-
nomic pot. Globalization is the most apparent, but environmen-
tal unsustainability, demographic change, inequality, and political 
uncertainty are all having their effects on how we occupy our time, 
how we earn our daily bread, and how we find fulfillment. Old veri-
ties are melting fast. The remedies are not obvious.
Some observers have been encouraged by the growth of the “gig 
economy,” in which people perform freelance tasks, such as driving 
a car for Uber, moving furniture through TaskRabbit, or typing text 

Introduction
xv
for Amazon Mechanical Turk. But earnings through these plat-
forms are limited. Since 2014, the number of people who earn 50 
percent or more of their income from “gig” platforms has actually 
fallen.16 In general, these platforms give people a boost to earnings 
and help to pay the monthly bills. But as an economic engine, they 
have not emerged as substitutes for full-time jobs.
Of the new full-time jobs that are appearing, many are so-called 
hybrid jobs that require technological expertise in programming 
or data analysis alongside broader skills.17 Fifty years ago, no one 
could have imagined that user-experience designer would be a 
legitimate profession, but here we are. Clearly, work is changing. 
All these factors create a complex and unexplored terrain for job 
seekers, begging some important questions: How should we be 
preparing people for this fast-changing world? How should edu-
cation be used to help people in the professional and economic 
spheres?
As a university president, this is no small question for me. As 
a matter of fact, the university I lead, Northeastern, is explicitly 
concerned with the connections between education and work. As 
a pioneer in experiential learning, grounded in the co-op model 
of higher education, Northeastern’s mission has always been to 
prepare students for fulfilling—and successful—roles in the pro-
fessional world. But lately, as I have observed my students try to 
puzzle out their career paths, listened to what employers say they 
are looking for in new employees, and take stock of what I read 
and hear every day about technology’s impact on the world of pro-
fessional work, I have come to realize that the existing model of 
higher education has yet to adapt to the seismic shifts rattling the 
foundations of the global economy.

Introduction
xvi
I believe that college should shape students into professionals 
but also creators. Creation will be at the base of economic activity 
and also much of what human beings do in the future. Intelligent 
machines may liberate millions from routine labor, but there will 
remain a great deal of work for us to accomplish. Great under-
takings like curing disease, healing the environment, and ending 
poverty will demand all the human talent that the world can muster. 
Machines will help us explore the universe, but human beings 
will face the consequences of discovery. Human beings will still 
read books penned by human authors and be moved by songs 
and artworks born of human imagination. Human beings will still 
undertake ethical acts of selflessness or courage and choose to act 
for the betterment of our world and our species. Human beings 
will also care for our infants, give comfort to the infirm, cook our 
favorite dishes, craft our wines, and play our games. There is much 
for all of us to do.
To that end, this book offers an updated model of higher 
education—one that will develop and empower a new generation 
of creators, women and men who can employ all the technological 
wonders of our age to thrive in an economy and society transformed 
by intelligent machines. It also envisions a higher education that 
continues to deliver the fruits of learning to students long after 
they have begun their working careers, assisting them throughout 
their lives. In some ways, it may seem like a roadmap for taking 
higher education in a new direction. However, it does not offer a 
departure as much as a continuity with the centuries-old purpose 
of colleges and universities—to equip students for the rigors of an 
active life within the world as it exists today and will exist in the 
future. Education has always served the needs of society. It must 

Introduction
xvii
do so now, more than ever. That is because higher education is the 
usher of progress and change. And change is the defining force 
of our time.
A UNIQUELY HUMAN EDUCATION
Education is its own reward, equipping us with the mental furni-
ture to live a rich, considered existence. However, for most people 
in an advanced society and economy such as ours, it also is a pre-
requisite for white-collar employment. Without a college degree, 
typical employees will struggle to climb the economic ladder and 
may well find themselves slipping down the rungs.
When the economy changes, so must education. It has happened 
before. We educate people in the subjects that society deems valu-
able. As such, in the eighteenth century, colonial colleges taught 
classics, logic, and rhetoric to cadres of future lawyers and clergy-
men. In the nineteenth century, scientific and agricultural colleges 
rose to meet the demands of an industrializing world of steam and 
steel. In the twentieth century, we saw the ascent of professional 
degrees suited for office work in the corporate economy.
Today, the colonial age and the industrial age exist only in history 
books, and even the office age may be fast receding into memory. 
We live in the digital age, and students face a digital future in which 
robots, software, and machines powered by artificial intelligence 
perform an increasing share of the work humans do now. Employ-
ment will less often involve the routine application of facts, so 
education should follow suit. To ensure that graduates are “robot-
proof” in the workplace, institutions of higher learning will have to 
rebalance their curricula.

Introduction
xviii
A robot-proof model of higher education is not concerned solely 
with topping up students’ minds with high-octane facts. Rather, it 
refits their mental engines, calibrating them with a creative mindset 
and the mental elasticity to invent, discover, or otherwise produce 
something society deems valuable. This could be anything at all—a 
scientific proof, a hip-hop recording, a new workout regimen, a 
web comic, a cure for cancer. Whatever the creation, it must in 
some manner be original enough to evade the label of “routine” 
and hence the threat of automation. Instead of training laborers, a 
robot-proof education trains creators.
The field of robotics is yielding the most advanced generation 
of machines in history, so we need a disciplinary field that can do 
the same for human beings. In the pages that follow, I lay out a 
framework for a new discipline—“humanics”—the goal of which is 
to nurture our species’ unique traits of creativity and flexibility. It 
builds on our innate strengths and prepares students to compete in 
a labor market in which brilliant machines work alongside human 
professionals. And much as today’s law students learn both a spe-
cific body of knowledge and a legal mindset, tomorrow’s humanics 
students must master specific content as well as practice uniquely 
human cognitive capacities.
In the chapters ahead, I describe both the architecture and the 
inner workings of humanics, but here I begin by explaining its 
twofold nature. The first side, its content, takes shape in what I 
call the new literacies. In the past, literacy in reading, writing, and 
mathematics formed the baseline for participation in society, while 
even educated professionals did not need any technical proficien-
cies beyond knowing how to click and drag through a suite of office 
programs. That is no longer sufficient. In the future, graduates 

Introduction
xix
will need to build on the old literacies by adding three more—data 
literacy, technological literacy, and human literacy. This is because 
people can no longer thrive in a digitized world using merely analog 
tools. They will be living and working in a constant stream of big 
data, connectivity, and instant information flowing from every click 
and touch of their devices. Therefore, they need data literacy to read, 
analyze, and use these ever-rising tides of information. Technologi-
cal literacy gives them a grounding in coding and engineering prin-
ciples, so they know how their machines tick. Lastly, human literacy 
teaches them humanities, communication, and design, allowing 
them to function in the human milieu.
As noted earlier, knowledge alone is not sufficient for the work 
of tomorrow. The second side of humanics, therefore, is not a set 
of content areas but rather a set of cognitive capacities. These are 
higher-order mental skills—mindsets and ways of thinking about 
the world. The first is systems thinking, the ability to view an enter-
prise, machine, or subject holistically, making connections between 
its different functions in an integrative way. The second is entrepre-
neurship, which applies the creative mindset to the economic and 
often social sphere. The third is cultural agility, which teaches stu-
dents how to operate deftly in varied global environments and to see 
situations through different, even conflicting, cultural lenses. The 
fourth capacity is that old chestnut of liberal arts programs, critical 
thinking, which instills the habit of disciplined, rational analysis 
and judgment.
Together, the new literacies and the cognitive capacities inte-
grate to help students rise above the computing power of brilliant 
machines by engendering creativity. In doing so, they enable them 
to collaborate with other people and machines while accentuating 

Introduction
xx
the strengths of both. Humanics can, in short, be a powerful toolset 
for humanity.
This book also explores how people grasp these tools. To acquire 
the cognitive capacities at a high level, students must do more than 
read about them in the classroom or apply them in case studies or 
classroom simulations. To cement them in their minds, they need 
to experience them in the intensity and chaos of real work environ-
ments such as co-ops and internships. Just as experiential learning 
is how toddlers puzzle out the secrets of speech and ambulation, 
how Montessori students learn to read and count, and how athletes 
and musicians perfect their jump shots or arpeggios, it also is how 
college students learn to think differently. This makes it the ideal 
delivery system for humanics.
A new model of higher education must, however, account for 
the fact that learning does not end with the receipt of a bachelor’s 
diploma. As machines continue to surpass their old boundaries, 
human beings must also continue to hone their mental capacities, 
skills, and technological knowledge. People rarely stay in the same 
career track they choose when they graduate, so they need the 
support of lifelong learning. Universities can deliver this by going 
where these learners are. This means a fundamental shift in our 
delivery of education but also in our idea of its timing. It no longer 
is sufficient for universities to focus solely on isolated years of study 
for undergraduate and graduate students. Higher education must 
broaden its view of whom to serve and when. It must serve every-
one, no matter their stage in life.
By 2025, our planet will count eight billion human inhabitants, 
all of them with human ambition, intelligence, and potential.18 Our 
planet will be more connected and more competitive than the one 

Introduction
xxi
we know today. Given the pace of technology’s advance, we can 
predict that computers, robots, and artificial intelligence will be 
even more intricately intertwined into the fabric of our personal 
and professional lives. Many of the jobs that exist now will have 
vanished. Others that will pay handsomely have yet to be invented. 
The only real certainty is that the world will be different—and with 
changes come challenges as well as opportunities. In many cases, 
they are one and the same.
Education is what sets them apart.


1
FEARS OF A ROBOTIC FUTURE
Chapter 1
Fears of a Robotic Future
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The upshot is simply a question of time, but that the time will come when 
the machines will hold the real supremacy over the world and its inhabit-
ants is what no person of a truly philosophic mind can for a moment 
question.
—Samuel Butler, “Darwin among the Machines” (1863)
In 2015, Chapman University published the results of a survey 
ranking the U.S. public’s worst fears. “Man-made disasters” such 
as terrorism and nuclear attacks stood at the top of the list of 
popular horrors. But in close second place—even more terrifying 
than crime, earthquakes, and public speaking—was fear of tech-
nology. In fact, technology appears to frighten many of us more 
than the absolute unknown. According to the survey, Americans 
fear robots replacing people in the workforce more than they fear 
death—and by a full seven percentage points.1

Chapter 1
2
But it is not paranoia if they really are out to get you. Machines 
have been replacing human labor ever since a piece of flint proved 
to be sharper than a fingernail. The history of workplace obso-
lescence is almost as old as the history of work. As technologies 
increase our capacity for labor, the nature of labor changes. The 
question is whether the evolution of work in the twenty-first century 
is qualitatively different from the evolution of work in the twentieth, 
the nineteenth, or indeed, the tenth century BCE.
ELEMENTS AND WORK
In physics, work is done when a force is applied to an object, 
moving it in a direction. This expends energy. In biology, all organ-
isms expend energy to obtain nourishment and to continue the 
process of living, expending, and feeding.
Throughout history, human beings have spent most of their exis-
tence expending energy on work to obtain food. But unlike many 
other organisms, we have invented ways to amplify that energy 
by harnessing forces far greater than those available to us in our 
teeth and musculature. Perhaps as early as a million years ago, our 
ancestors tamed the element of fire.2 Controlled fire was among 
the greatest of all work innovations. By cooking food, our ances-
tors were able to spend less energy in digestion, allowing us to eat  
useful plants like wheat and rice, destroying bacteria that taxes our 
bodies, and reducing the work we spend in chewing and process-
ing. This freed us to expend more energy on evolving our enormous 
brains.3
Much more recently, human beings tamed plants and livestock, 
vastly increasing the amount of energy we could consume and, 

Fears of a Robotic Future
3
in the case of draft animals, deploy for work. We also harnessed 
the element of air through the invention of sails and windmills. 
But when we tamed the power of steam, we found a truly reliable 
elemental force.
The Industrial Revolution began with the realization that heat 
could cause movement, which performs work. By boiling water, 
you could move a piston, which could in turn move anything  
an eighteenth-century engineer might attach to it. Beginning with 
water pumps in mineshafts, machines started to do work that  
previously had been the provenance of strong limbs and strained 
backs. Within decades, this process of industrialization transformed 
almost every aspect of human society.
The world turned mechanical, tapping into coal and then oil  
to generate seemingly unlimited amounts of energy. Factories and 
mills roared to life, railroads chugged across the countryside, gas-lit 
cities mushroomed with brick and iron, their populations teeming 
on the fruits of the seed drill and the Dutch plough. Not since the 
dawn of agriculture had humanity experienced such incontrovert-
ible change.
Yet only at the end of the nineteenth century did the full  
power of the technological revolution come into force. This was 
brought on with the taming of electricity by scientific discoverers 
such as Michael Faraday and inventors such as Thomas Edison 
and Joseph Swan. In 1881, Swan used his incandescent bulbs to 
illuminate London’s Savoy Theater, and in a few short years, elec-
tricity freed humanity from billions of years of nocturnal dark-
ness. With the development of high-voltage alternating current, 
engineers were able to power assembly lines and mass production, 

Chapter 1
4
again amplifying our capacity for physical work and revolutionizing 
the way we live.
Fire, steam, and electricity have been the three elemental forces 
that amplified humanity’s energy to perform work. Then, in the 
middle of the twentieth century, a new force appeared with the 
potential to be equally transformative. Information—the ones and 
zeroes that fuel our digital machines—is proving just as titanic a 
force for change as any of its predecessors. Indeed, because digital 
power amplifies our capacity for mental work, it may be more trans-
formative than any force since an ancient hominid first learned to 
strike a fire.
As in physics, when a body performs work, applying force to 
move an object in a particular direction, the object simultaneously 
exerts a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction on the 
first body. In other words, for every action, there is an equivalent 
opposition. And that surely has been the case as the force of tech-
nology has acted on human society.
THE RETURN OF ROBIN HOOD
On February 27, 1812, the young George Gordon Byron, the sixth 
Baron Byron, stood before the House of Lords to deliver his first 
address. Although a few days later, Lord Byron published the first 
two cantos of Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage and became an instant 
celebrity, when he took the podium in Parliament, he was still a 
relatively unknown scribbler of satire and amorous verse, not yet 
the “mad, bad and dangerous to know” character who shocked 
drawing room society. Even so, his first speech as a politician was 
about a scandalous event.

Fears of a Robotic Future
5
As well as being the legendary home of Robin Hood, the city of 
Nottingham long had been a center for the manufacture of hosiery. 
However, by 1812, technological innovations were upending the 
stocking business as the town’s factory owners introduced steam-
powered mechanical frames, replacing the labor of skilled artisans. 
These artisans possessed highly developed—but very particular—
skill sets that the marketplace no longer needed. Consequently,  
desperate to save their livelihoods, the indigent laborers formed 
secret societies under the banner of an invented character, Ned 
Ludd—a Robin Hood figure updated for the industrial age. Calling 
themselves “Luddites,” in November 1811, they broke into the hosiery 
factories and smashed the owners’ new machines. The uprising 
soon spread to surrounding communities, forcing the government 
to call in the military. At one point, more British soldiers were 
battling the Luddites than were deployed against the French in the 
Iberian peninsula.4
Lord Byron owned land in Nottinghamshire and had witnessed 
the violence and disruption firsthand. So when the House of Lords 
sat to debate whether to make frame-breaking a capital offense, 
he spoke passionately in defense of the Luddites, arguing that the 
rioters’ “own means of subsistence were cut off, all other employ-
ment preoccupied; and their excesses, however to be deplored and 
condemned, can hardly be subject to surprise.”5 In other words, if 
machines took the weavers’ work, they hardly could be blamed for 
wanting them smashed.
Byron’s eloquence notwithstanding, the act passed. Several 
days later on March 2, the London Morning Chronicle published an 
anonymous poem titled “Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill,” 

Chapter 1
6
although its authorship by Byron was not hard to figure out. Among 
its more scathing verses:
Men are more easily made than machinery—
Stockings fetch better prices than lives—
Gibbets on Sherwood will heighten the scenery,
Showing how Commerce, how Liberty thrives!6
For two hundred years, the Luddites have been a symbol of resis-
tance to technological displacement—and over those two hundred 
years, there has been a great deal of displacement to symbolize. The 
invention of the tractor took manual laborers off the land and into 
factories. The development of automated processes in factories took 
employees off the assembly lines and into the corporate office park. 
Karl Marx warned of the effects of automation on the proletariat, 
and John Maynard Keynes believed that machines would cause 
“technological unemployment.”7
By the middle of the twentieth century, people’s fear of displace-
ment by machines did not apply just to factory laborers. Even as 
the postwar economy of the 1940s and 1950s saw a huge shift away 
from manual work to clerical and professional work, as early as 
1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson received an open letter from a 
group of prominent academics warning of technology’s potential 
to undermine the value of all human labor.8
When farm laborers left their ploughs for city jobs, they needed 
new skills to function effectively in industrial workplaces. Genera-
tions later, when they abandoned their lathes and welding irons 
for typewriters and dictation machines, their descendants needed 
to upskill once more. As a matter of fact, when grappling with 
technological and social changes, people have always responded by 
improving their education.

Fears of a Robotic Future
7
THE ENGINE OF PROGRESS
At its best, higher education does not mirror society from a dis-
tance. It is not apart from it but runs like a thread through its 
fabric, conforming to its patterns. Since the emergence of uni-
versities in medieval Europe, their chief purpose has always been 
to equip students for the economic and professional roles of the 
day. Before Nicolaus Copernicus and Isaac Newton, universities 
were largely concerned with training ministers, lawyers, and teach-
ers. The economies of medieval Italy, England, and Spain needed 
literate individuals to conduct affairs of the soul and the state, to 
record agreements, and to administrate property and institutions. 
So that is what the colleges of Bologna, Oxford, and Salamanca  
produced.
In the 1850s, the United States was mostly rural, agrarian, and 
unlearned. There was no need for more higher education than what 
was offered by a handful of colonial colleges dealing in what Car-
dinal John Henry Newman, the theologian and nineteenth-century 
intellectual, called “liberal knowledge,” the purpose of which was to 
prepare men “to fill any post with credit, and to master any subject 
with facility.” Moreover, Newman believed that the most valuable 
education would cultivate a man who “is able to converse … is able 
to listen … can ask a question pertinently … [is] yet never in the way 
... [and has] a sure tact which enables him to trifle with graceful-
ness and to be serious with effect.”9 In short, the colleges of that 
age largely prepared men to become gentlemen who would thrive 
in a technologically undemanding but culturally rich economy and 
society.

Chapter 1
8
Yet even as Newman wrote, that world was changing. Just 
as the Industrial Revolution remade society in the image of its 
machines and companies, it also remade higher education. Less 
than a hundred years after James Watt fired his engine, the U.S. 
Congress passed the Morrill Act of 1862, giving public land to 
endow universities that would train a new generation of techno-
logical masters. Their goal was “without excluding other scientific 
and classical studies and including military tactic, to teach such 
branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanic 
arts,” the new technologies of the day. They accomplished this by 
modeling the United States’ new colleges and universities on the 
great German research universities that had emerged after the 
Napoleonic wars.10
The new land grant and research universities evolved past the old 
liberal arts curricula to focus on nonclassical languages, the newly 
emerging field of the social sciences, and scientific and techno-
logical discovery. Building on scientific principles, new branches 
of ingenuity shot forth from the laboratories and lecture halls. Dis-
ciplines like economics, biology, and engineering coalesced around 
growing faculties. Instead of teaching knowledge dating back to the 
Greeks and Romans, higher education began to devote its energies 
to the active creation of new knowledge. Instead of simply culti-
vating the individual, universities took on the work of cultivating 
economic and social progress.11
Progress required the individual’s participation, so the indi-
vidual needed the appropriate schooling. As early as the 1830s, 
educators in the United States were looking overseas to Prussia for  
ideas on how to formalize a system of education for the nation’s  
children. Reformers such as Horace Mann advocated a form of 

Fears of a Robotic Future
9
schooling that was free, universal, and nonsectarian and that 
would teach children how to be good citizens and participants in 
a modern republic.
In 1848, Mann introduced this Prussian model to Massachusetts, 
establishing the basis for much of the K–12 system that persists 
to this day. And although it now is fashionable to criticize it as 
a “factory model” designed to batch-process masses of students 
to enter roles in an industrial economy—cutting cogs to fit the 
machine—it successfully educated generations of young Ameri-
cans for the demands of their times. Until the 1940s, that meant 
joining a massive migration to urban centers and the rapid mecha-
nization of work.
On June 22, 1944, with American troops still battling through 
the hedgerows behind Omaha Beach, U.S. higher education  
undertook its next pivotal transformation. Anticipating the return  
of millions of veterans into the fold of civic life and the need to 
integrate them into the economy, Congress passed the Service-
men’s Readjustment Act—better known as the G.I. Bill—one of 
the benefits of which was provision of tuition and living expenses 
for college attendance.
Not since the land-grant movement of the 1860s had there been 
such a dramatic widening of access to higher education. The return-
ing veterans flooded in, soon becoming more than 50 percent of the 
country’s college population. By 1956, the G.I. Bill had helped more 
than 2.2 million Americans attend college.12 To accommodate these 
huge numbers of new students, universities needed to expand radi-
cally, and they did so through a huge investment to expand state’s 
public higher education systems, including creating a new type of 
school—the community college.

Chapter 1
10
Accommodating these new students also meant shifting what col-
leges and universities taught. In April 1947, Life magazine featured 
a cover story on the influx of student veterans, about whom the 
magazine wrote: “The veteran student is poor and hard-working. 
He has been around enough to make subjects like geography tough 
to teach. He wants a fast, business-like education and is doing his 
best to see that he gets it.”13 In other words, colleges’ new custom-
ers were taking stock of the economy and society around them and 
demanding something different from higher education institutions 
than what they provided before.
World War II did not only transform the demographics and 
culture within university classrooms. It also changed the way they 
operated their laboratories and institutes. When the Germans 
invaded France in 1940, Vannevar Bush, then head of the Carn-
egie Institution, approached President Franklin D. Roosevelt with 
a brief, one-page proposal for a National Defense Research Com-
mittee. The idea was to coordinate research between military offi-
cials and academics, effectively adding the weight of universities 
to the war effort by throwing them wholeheartedly into scientific 
and technological discovery. It also opened the sluices for a flood 
of federal money. Federal dollars launched wartime laboratories 
at universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, the University of California at Berkeley, and the University of  
Chicago.14
The collaboration between the military and academy reached its 
most famous apotheosis in the Manhattan Project, but the cessa-
tion of hostilities did not mean the end of research. Throughout 
the Cold War and beyond, government funding continued to flow 
to universities, buoying the creation of scientific and technologi-

Fears of a Robotic Future
11
cal knowledge. In the 1960s, federal funding accounted for 73 
percent of university research and development budgets. Today, it 
has dropped to about 60 percent but still amounts to approximately 
$30 billion annually.15 To say that this marriage of government and 
academy proved fruitful is a gross understatement: it has given the 
world everything from the digital computer to the jet airliner to 
the commercial polio vaccine. More than ever before, universities 
became loci of creativity.
Since the war, then, higher education has acted as a force for 
progress in two ways. Through knowledge creation, universities are 
themselves the engines of technological progress. When the twen-
tieth century began, 86 percent of the world’s 1.6 billion human 
beings lived on farms, living and dying by firelight.16 When the 
century ended, about half of the world’s six billion people lived in 
cities humming with electricity.17 Human beings had walked on 
the moon, split the atom, and leveled whole cities using knowledge 
discovered by university scientists. They treated their ailments and 
extended their lifespans through technologies invented in univer-
sity research labs. Their computers communicated through net-
works developed by universities spending government dollars.
Just as powerfully, higher education is also a force for individual 
progress. Universities deliver the skills people need to advance 
their careers as technology and the economy pushes forward. This 
happened when the G.I. Bill extended the benefits of higher educa-
tion to millions of Americans, equipping them for the knowledge 
economy as the first tremors of globalization and automation began 
to tilt work from the factories to the service sector.
It is not a coincidence that the emergence of widespread higher 
education and the growth of the middle class coincided in the latter 

Chapter 1
12
half of the twentieth century. As companies grew more complex, 
people needed more training to fill the roles of accountant, lawyer, 
and manager. There was a clear link between a university degree 
and an employee’s ascent up the corporate ladder. Indeed, the con-
nection between the two remains immutable. The so-called wage 
premium for having a college degree had risen steadily since the 
1960s, eventually reaching a median of about 80 percent higher 
hourly earnings over people with solely high school diplomas.18
A WRENCH IN THE ENGINE
For thousands of years, human beings worked the land. Two 
hundred years ago, machines displaced farm laborers because they 
were physically stronger and faster at the grueling tasks demanded 
by agriculture. Some of these farmers found better lives working 
in the industrial economy, applying themselves to rote work that 
required some, but not much, education. In turn, their descendants 
eventually began to surrender those factory jobs to machines that 
were more efficient at routine tasks, requiring industrial employees 
to educate themselves further in order to rise to better positions in 
corporate offices. Finally, in the late twentieth century, computers 
began to perform routine cognitive tasks with an efficiency that no 
human being could match, invading the accountancy office, the call 
center, and the secretarial pool.
Cycles of automation and disruption generally have led to 
elevated living standards and economic growth as people found 
jobs performing work that machines could not. But as machines 
have sped up, so have the cycles. As computers and advanced 
machines take the next leap forward and attain high levels of cogni-

Fears of a Robotic Future
13
tion, they are poised to replace professionals who make decisions 
based on information: in other words, they are poised to replace 
thinkers. We now have machines that write news articles, translate 
foreign languages, and interact pleasantly with customers. We have 
machines that edit the genomes of the life we know and scan the 
universe for the life we do not. Machines build our automobiles 
and will soon drive them. On Wall Street, they are ousting finan-
cial analysts by the hundreds, with some observers estimating that 
between one-third and one-half of all finance employees will be 
replaced by software within the next ten years.19 In a few years, 
they may stand in for human surgeons in performing operations 
like appendectomies.20
Scott Semel, the chief executive officer of “cloud-based Content 
Collaboration Network” Intralinks, has said that machines are 
much better than legal associates at scanning and summariz-
ing large numbers of leases or licensing agreements. “The A.I. 
just does the same thing over and over and over and over again,” 
said Semel. “People get tired. Two different people could read the 
same contract. Somebody could finish half of it and go home, 
stay out too late, come back hungover. There are lots of variables 
around that. And that kind of work, which is summarizing, distill-
ing lots of data into buckets, it’s something that machines can  
do well.”21
Shelves of recent books have delved into the economic implica-
tions of the emergence of intelligent machines. Klaus Schwab, 
founder of the World Economic Forum, released a title on the 
subject prior to the group’s 2016 annual meeting, where automa-
tion was, not coincidentally, at the top of the agenda.22 Magazines 
and news sites do a brisk business in headlines forecasting the end 

Chapter 1
14
of work, the new machine age, and the debasement of the value 
of human labor. A sizeable share of this pontification and analysis 
has a Cassandra timbre, warning of woeful consequences unless 
we undertake drastic and politically thorny steps like instituting a 
universal basic income. Most of them conclude that employment 
will grow scarcer.
But not everyone views AI as a threat to human labor. Colin 
Angle, CEO and cofounder of robot manufacturer iRobot Corpora-
tion, has noted, “When computers came in, it was going to revolu-
tionize how people did business. It didn’t. It certainly helped people 
be more efficient, but it didn’t eliminate jobs so much as create 
opportunities to do more.”23
Angle’s company produces the popular Roomba robotic 
vacuum cleaner, which is essentially a time-saving device, a direct 
descendant of the dishwasher. He believes the new technologies 
emerging today—artificial intelligence, advanced machines, and 
supercomputers—are inherently similar. We should not make the 
mistake of “thinking the world is a closed, zero-sum system and 
new opportunities won’t be created by these technologies,” said 
Angle. “I think history has proven that’s a very inaccurate view of 
how the world works.”
Historically, he is right. There is a Malthusian gloom to the idea 
that the labor market is a singular clump, of which the lion’s share 
is eaten by robots and the scraps are divvyed up by ever-hungrier 
humans. But over the centuries, Malthus’s idea of abundance 
leading to overpopulation and collapse has proved spectacularly 
incorrect. Since the Industrial Revolution first put machines in the 
roles of human beings, we always have found new industries and 
new frontiers for our talents. Instead of fighting for the same jobs, 
we have invented new ones.

Fears of a Robotic Future
15
At the same time, it is clear that the current digital revolution 
is different from previous technological leaps because machines 
now seem to have no limit to their potential processing power—
no limit to their intelligence. In any predictable task, computers 
have humans at a cognitive disadvantage. And because software 
is cheap to copy, any digital advance can be instantly replicated 
throughout the world. As the technology writer Martin Ford has 
observed, “Imagine the impact of a large corporation being able 
to train a single employee and then clone him into an army of 
workers, all of whom instantly possess his knowledge and experi-
ence but, from that point on, are also capable of continuing to 
learn and adapt to new situations.”24 If this is, indeed, the tech-
nological near future—and there are many reasons to believe that 
it is—we could be living in a time in which paid human labor 
becomes an anomaly.
Nor are smart machines the only source of pressure on the labor 
market. Globalization, itself abetted by the rise of digital technol-
ogy, has added a billion people to the world economy in the past 
generation.25 The impact of their arrival has been felt most keenly in 
manufacturing. In 2000, manufacturing jobs in the U.S. employed 
17 million human beings.26 Today the number is about 12 million.27 
Many of the jobs that moved abroad are in low- or middle-skill posi-
tions that are themselves now under threat from automation. At  
the same time, the digital economy has not directly replaced the lost 
jobs in the United States. A company like Facebook counts more 
than a billion active daily users but employs only 14,495 people.28 
Twitter has a mere 3,860 employees—internationally.29
There is some suspicion that global trade may be running out 
of steam and that its relentless expansion is slowing down. Tech-
nological developments such as three-dimensional printing and 

Chapter 1
16
the Internet of Things may reduce supply-chain costs and lead to 
a renaissance of domestic manufacturing. If this is the case, then 
any new manufacturing jobs will not be open to low-skilled laborers 
but will require high levels of education and technological savvy. 
To universities, this is an enormous opportunity to serve learn-
ers throughout their working lives. To learners, it is a compelling 
reason to find ways to distinguish themselves from machines. And 
unless our machines evolve to surpass our capacity for creativ-
ity and mental flexibility, our most powerful skill is our unique 
ability to be creative. Therefore, we should educate ourselves to do 
it well—especially considering the unpredictable nature of work.
When the Great Recession struck in 2007, more Americans 
stayed out of work for longer than in previous downturns. Not  
until mid-2014 did the employment rate return to its prerecession 
levels, and although the numbers have rebounded, these are not 
the same jobs. Many of the new positions are either high-wage 
professional jobs that require extensive training or low-wage, part-
time work.30 Some Americans have responded to this polarized 
landscape of economic opportunity by turning to new technological 
tools, joining the “gig economy” as freelancers through websites like 
Amazon Mechanical Turk and apps such as Uber. They earn money 
by performing short online tasks or driving a car for a few hours  
a day.
In theory, “gig economy” jobs give people the autonomy and the 
freedom to earn in proportion to the time they invest. Some studies 
suggest that many people prefer the idea of freelance work for its 
flexibility and work-life balance. For example, one found that 86 
percent of survey respondents at least “somewhat agree” that they 
would like to work independently.31

Fears of a Robotic Future
17
Analysts, however, say that most people who make money from 
these new labor platforms are earning only supplemental income. 
They do not make enough to support themselves.32 Furthermore, 
participants in the gig economy lack the security of salaried posi-
tions, and many of the jobs they do, such as driving cars and 
performing routine tasks, are precisely those at highest risk from 
automation in the near future—witness self-driving cars.33
As such, just as previous generations of people turned to educa-
tion to help them master the economic exigencies brought on by 
technology, it is once more a very good time to go back to college.
AN EDUCATIONAL FIX
In the past, education has been the surest antidote to displace-
ment by automation. An unemployed weaver could learn to operate 
machinery. A displaced machinist could learn engineering or man-
agement. This upward path was always available because even as 
lower-skill jobs vanished, economies grew more complex, and 
so did the work that powered them. Ever-higher skill sets com-
manded ever-richer salaries. This dynamic is still borne out in the 
age of intelligent machines. The difference is that with the explosive 
growth of technology, the educational incline is getting steeper, 
and universities have a duty to meet this growing demand for  
learning.
A generation ago, a person could spend four years of her life 
earning a bachelor’s degree and confidently expect entry into a life-
time of steady middle-class employment. This is no longer the case. 
The pressures of automation and globalization and the increasing 
complexities of available work have led to stagnating pay among 

Chapter 1
18
college graduates.34 College-educated professionals still command 
an enormous wage premium over high school graduates, but the 
depressed value of routine labor means that their pay is no longer 
rising as fast as before. When college-educated workers take jobs 
for which they are overqualified, they put even more downward 
pressure on the less educated, driving down wages further at the 
bottom.
The workers who command the most value on the market today 
are those with advanced degrees—particularly ones that equip them 
to work alongside intelligent machines in highly technical areas 
such as bioinformatics or cybersecurity. Recognizing this, people 
have responded by signing up for classes. From 2000 to 2010, 
postbaccalaureate enrollment in the United States soared by 36 
percent, while between 2014 and 2025, it is projected to surge an 
additional 21 percent to 3.5 million students.35
But the fact remains that machines will keep getting better at 
performing skilled work. Consequently, many people are recogniz-
ing that education needs to transform into a lifelong pursuit that 
enables them to upskill and retrain continuously as they try to 
stay a step ahead of the job-eating robots. Coding boot camps, for 
example, have seen an enormous rise in popularity among college 
graduates, with enrollment skyrocketing by 138 percent in 2014 
alone.36 Even so, the day when neural networks simply program 
themselves may not be much further off than the day when self-
driving cars steamroll Uber drivers out of the gig economy.37
Just as Uber drivers face a future of disruption, so will many other 
workers. For the time being, though, lifelong learning remains the 
surest answer to a long, resilient, and remunerative career. But its 
form and content may not be quite what the past has taught us to 

Fears of a Robotic Future
19
expect. As a matter of fact, a truly useful lifelong education may 
take a different form from anything that has preceded it.
THINKING DIFFERENTLY
Just as our ancestors could not compete with a steam engine in 
pulling a load of coal along a railway track, we cannot compete with 
thinking machines for their sheer brainpower and computational 
heft. In 1996, Garry Kasparov could not outthink Deep Blue, the 
chess-playing IBM supercomputer, and since then machines have 
had twenty years of exponential growth in processing power. As 
such, the most useful education for today’s age will not teach people 
just how to calculate chess moves or pull metaphorical coal. It will 
teach people how to do what machines cannot. This means educat-
ing people to think in ways that cannot be imitated by networks of 
machines.
Until now, keeping ahead of technology meant escalating levels 
of education. The ability to read a handbook once qualified you 
to operate a mechanical loom; a high school diploma was all the 
schooling you needed for a lifetime on the factory floor. A college 
degree was once enough to put you behind a manager’s desk, while 
a master of business administration or law degree opened the doors 
to the boardroom and the corner office. Look at the LinkedIn pro-
files of successful tech workers today, and you often will find that 
they have a master’s degree in information technology or project 
management. But because machines are becoming exponentially 
smarter, we will need more than simply greater amounts of educa-
tion to keep pace.

Chapter 1
20
Nor will we simply need education in the content that currently is 
in vogue among employers. One of higher education’s primary pur-
poses has always been to impart content, but intelligent machines 
are upending the utility of simply knowing things. Information is 
now instant, ubiquitous, and free. As a result, we need an education 
that teaches people to learn throughout their lives, bolstering their 
talents to do what machines cannot.
Which raises a question: what are human beings singularly good 
at doing? Compared to other animals, we have enormous brains 
and a knack for digital manipulation that makes us deft with sharp-
ened stones or computer keyboards. But unlike economic eras of 
the past, we no longer are comparing ourselves to other animals. 
Robots and advanced machines will soon surpass our most obvious 
evolutionary strengths, dwarfing us in cognition, precision, and 
power. But human beings also have evolved as supremely social 
animals. To survive, our offspring required the social bonds of 
family and tribe and the imprint of learned knowledge—in other 
words, of education. This mental flexibility—the ability to learn to 
speak Mandarin, to catch antelope, or to ride a bicycle—is perhaps 
our species’ greatest survival tactic. At an early age, we can learn 
almost anything and adapt to any cultural circumstance.
Another result of our sociability is what the historian Yuval Noah 
Harari, channeling Lewis Carroll, calls “the ability to believe six 
impossible things before breakfast.”38 We can invent, communi-
cate, and buy into social fictions and abstract concepts (such as 
money) that unite us and allow us to work together in vast numbers, 
far exceeding the social capacities of other animals. These fictions 
can be myths, religions, or ideologies; they can be ideas like human 
rights, market economics, or national identities. The unique power 

Fears of a Robotic Future
21
of these fictions is that they enable us to cooperate on scales vastly 
larger—to the point of abstraction—than those of our genetic 
groups or physical communities.39
In other words, we have evolved to imagine. We have evolved to 
be creative. Other animals apply intelligence to solving problems: 
crows fashion tools to pluck bugs out of wood, and sea otters wield 
rocks to crack clamshells. But only human beings are able to create 
imaginary stories, invent works of art, and even construct carefully 
reasoned theories explaining perceived reality. Only human beings 
can look at the moon and see a goddess or step on it say we are 
taking a leap for all mankind. Creativity combined with mental 
flexibility has made us unique—and the most successful species 
on the planet.40 They will continue to be how we distinguish our-
selves as individual actors in the economy. Whatever the field or 
profession, the most important work that human beings perform 
will be its creative work. That is why our education should teach 
us how to do it well.
As it has throughout its history, higher education has an impor-
tant role to play in preparing people for active, engaged lives within 
society. But as before, it must reflect society’s demands. Increas-
ingly, society will demand graduates who possess a heightened 
power for thinking creatively and flexibly—for thinking differently 
than machines. Universities already possess an extremely power-
ful system for teaching this way of thinking. As we have seen, for 
many decades already, colleges and universities have functioned as 
loci for creativity. For generations, their research has driven social 
and economic progress by creating knowledge and translating it 
into real solutions. It is something higher education institutions 
do extremely well. Thus, they are ideally positioned to transfer the 

Chapter 1
22
creative tenets of their research mission with their educational one, 
using them to help students develop the mental capacity to create 
new knowledge.
To master the economic and societal challenges brought on by 
robots, AI, and advanced machines, higher education must con-
tinue to keep abreast of change. We cannot educate students as 
we did in the early decades of the twenty-first century. But if our 
goal is to train people of the next generation to apply their inher-
ent human strengths to work in the digital economy, universities 
will have to update their own skill sets. To train both students and 
current employees for the jobs of tomorrow, universities will have to  
adapt.
The exact nature of this adaptation depends in large part on the 
exact nature of tomorrow’s jobs. And as the next chapter shows, to 
find out what that might be, there is no better source than today’s 
managers and CEOs.

2
VIEWS FROM THE C-SUITE: WHAT EMPLOYERS WANT, IN THEIR 
OWN WORDS
Chapter 2
Views from the C-Suite
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The town of Westwood, Massachusetts, rests in a green suburban 
cocoon at the southern edge of Boston’s I-95 ring road. A place of 
shaded streets, well-manicured lawns, and minivans with bumper 
stickers touting the town’s sports teams, Westwood regularly appears 
on lists of “best” places to live in the state. It is the sort of town 
that appears to be a stronghold of U.S. socioeconomic prosperity— 
a bastion of middle-class values, appearances, and incomes. It is a 
town for the gainfully employed. And in a newly erected shopping 
mall adjacent to the roaring interstate and the Amtrak station, it is 
home to a 135,000-square-foot Target megastore.
Target, with its walls and signage an instantly recognizable shade 
of bold red, is among the breed of “big box” retailers that have 
become synonymous with the globalized economy. Under a single 
roof, these stores sell the entire contents of twenty-first-century 
American life, from baby clothes to patio furniture to prescrip-
tion drugs. Most important, they do it cheaply. They are able to 
fill American closets with inexpensive athletic wear and American 
living rooms with inexpensive televisions because their products 
are the endpoint of an intricate mesh of supply chains that span 
the breadth of the world. The teenager earning $10 per hour as a 
cashier at Target tucks his phone assembled in Shenzen, China, 

Chapter 2
24
by laborers earning about $17 per day1 into pants made by Bangla-
deshi garment stitchers whose minimum wage is as little as $68 
per month.2 As consumers in a consumer economy, all of us are 
inextricably bound in these complex networks of financing, design, 
production, transportation, marketing, and consumption.
This inexpensive consumption has its price. Although you might 
not guess it from looking at the overflowing shopping carts and 
the new Japanese SUVs in the parking lot outside Target, more 
than one-third of Americans believe that globalization has been 
a mostly harmful phenomenon.3 From calls to build walls along 
the U.S. border to the “Brexit” vote that will remove the United 
Kingdom from the European Union, this backlash against the 
global economy is one of the defining aspects of recent world poli-
tics, fueling populist rage against “global elites” and rattling our 
contemporary political and economic orders.
In the United States, much of the anger is a result of the hollow-
ing out of the middle class. Whereas middle-class households once 
comprised a majority of people in the United States, members of 
the middle class are now outnumbered by members of the com-
bined lower- and upper-income households. This has bifurcated  
the country, pushing its economic and social climate to what the 
Pew Center calls “a tipping point.”4 Although in previous gen-
erations, the economy possessed an expansive middle, over recent 
years, it has become increasingly hourglass-shaped. At the upper 
end, in 2015, the top 10 percent of earners in the United States took 
home more than half of all income in 2015. Meanwhile, the top 1 
percent—those earning an average of $1.4 million—took home 22 
percent.5 And although wealth at the top has grown, more people 
have slipped to the bottom. Since 1971, the share of adults living 

Views from the C-Suite
25
in lower-income households rose from 25 percent to 29 percent.6 
Economic inequality presently has become one of the defining 
qualities of American life.
But globalization is not the only culprit. The Great Recession, 
the decline in the power of labor unions, and automation all have 
taken their toll on the middle class. According to the Pew Center, 
middle-income households today are those that, after adjusting for 
size, earn an income two-thirds to double that of the U.S. median. 
In 2014, this meant that a three-person household would have to 
draw in between $42,000 to $126,000 annually.7 However, the 
manufacturing economy that once provided many of the jobs that 
fall within that income range has now gone the way of Pontiacs 
and Oldsmobiles. In its place, we have seen a massive shift to the 
service economy, often in the form of jobs with lower wages and 
fewer benefits than in the past.
For example, on the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ list of the 
thirty fastest-growing professions, only twelve fall within a salary 
range that would meet the definition of middle-income. Among 
the ones that do, there is a healthy representation of technically ori-
ented and hybrid careers, such as computer software and systems 
software engineer, database administrator, computer systems 
analyst, and network systems analyst. But most of the expanding 
professions, including the booming fields of home and personal 
care aides, earn wages that fall far short of placing their members in 
the middle-income bracket.8 And although the gig economy offers 
people wide opportunities to augment their wages with freelance 
work, for most families, juggling multiple forms of employment to 
stay afloat is not an optimal choice.

Chapter 2
26
The difference between a person’s ability to obtain a middle-
income job versus a lower-income one is largely a matter of his 
or her qualifications. This makes the middle class increasingly—
perhaps inexorably—the province of the college educated, a trend 
that has been holding steady ever since the dawn of the global 
economy. Since 1980, the number of U.S. jobs that require more 
than a high school education has grown by 68 percent. This is more 
than double the rate of job growth in fields requiring less training 
or education.9 Simply put, to obtain and keep a foothold in the 
middle class—to say nothing of stepping up to the upper echelon 
of the economy—it seems that Americans will require more and 
more knowledge.
Yet even this time-tested premise may be coming into question, 
given the rise of robots and advanced machines. In the past, even 
as technology put some employees out of work, the economy gener-
ated new jobs. Displaced employees could fill these jobs by getting 
further education and training and acquiring greater amounts of 
knowledge than they needed for their obsolete positions. Today, 
however, as intelligent machines move into the workplace, the cor-
relation between knowledge and value in the labor market is shift-
ing. Knowledge economy sectors like finance and law are feeling 
the impact of machines that perform knowledge work. Some jobs 
that once offered salaried employment are moving into the gig 
economy. In the digital age, it seems that even high-paying, pres-
tigious jobs are not safe.
In a world increasingly driven by computers, software, and algo-
rithms, people who have knowledge in these domains remain in 
strong demand. For example, at a recent job recruitment event  
put on by Facebook, it was clear who was being sought. As the 

Views from the C-Suite
27
presenters spoke about optimization, petitioning algorithms, and 
data fetching, they handed out information cards stating, “Who 
are we looking for? Bachelors, Masters and PhD students who are 
studying Computer Science (or related subject).”
“Anyone with strength in data and analytics, you can apply,” 
explained one of the Facebook representatives. “But if you have 
coding experience, it’s a big plus.”
“When you join us,” added another presenter, “you get involved 
in every change in the world.”
Scenes like this augur well for college students studying high-
tech subjects, as well as current employees skilled in such fields. 
But does it also mean that those of us who do not possess such skills 
are doomed to an economically inferior future? In a roboticized 
world, will we, unlike the students recruited at the session that day, 
be shut out from our chance to change the world?
As it turns out, not necessarily. According to a 2016 survey  
of employers, the skill cited as most desirable in recent college 
graduates is the very human quality of “leadership.” More than 80 
percent of respondents said they looked for evidence of leadership  
on candidates’ résumés, followed by “ability to work in a team” 
at nearly 79 percent.10 These are both social skills that people 
develop through real-world interactions with others. They are also, 
until someone instills a computer with the commanding pres-
ence of Winston Churchill or the coalition-building skills of James 
Madison, not vulnerable to automation. Written communication 
and problem solving—skills more commonly attributed to a liberal 
arts education than a purely technical one—clocked in next at 70 
percent. Curiously, technical skills ranked in the middle of the 
survey, below strong work ethic or initiative.

Chapter 2
28
At the same time, many employer surveys skew to pessimism 
about today’s employees. It is common, for example, to hear com-
panies cite the “skills gap,” in which new hires lack the training to 
cope with the demands of a fast-paced modern work environment.11 
Some economists dismiss this perspective as groundless, citing 
the stagnant median wage as evidence that the job market is a 
buyer’s one and that employers feel no compulsion to raise wages to 
attract talent. But that only proves that there is stagnant demand for  
the commonplace skills of median employees. Premium employees 
possess skills that command premium wages. As a matter of fact, 
since the 1980s, the compensation for the top-paid 10 percent of 
people in the workforce has risen sharply in comparison to those 
at the median.12 Regardless of compensation, premium jobs—
meaning the most fulfilling, creative work in either the private or 
public sectors—are plums for the most qualified.
There also are openings at the lower bulge of the economic 
hourglass. At the front of the Target in Westwood, a display board 
informs shoppers that the store is hiring. Customer service associ-
ates, as always, are wanted.
WORKING WITH MACHINES
In late 2016, the White House’s National Science and Technol-
ogy Council’s Committee on Technology released a report titled 
“Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence.” In its heavily 
footnoted fifty-eight pages, the report offers policy recommenda-
tions for dealing with machines’ imminent capacity to “reach and 
exceed human performance on more and more tasks.”13 As the 
report ominously notes, “In a dystopian vision of this process, these 

Views from the C-Suite
29
super-intelligent machines would exceed the ability of humanity to 
understand or control. If computers could exert control over many 
critical systems, the result could be havoc, with humans no longer 
in control of their destiny at best and extinct at worst.”14
The report observes that the implications of an AI-suffused  
world are enormous—especially for the people who work at jobs 
that soon will be outsourced to artificially intelligent machines. 
Although it predicts that AI ultimately will expand the U.S. economy, 
it also notes that “because AI has the potential to eliminate or drive 
down wages of some jobs … AI-driven automation will increase 
the wage gap between less-educated and more-educated workers, 
potentially increasing economic inequality.” The report ends with 
a recommendation for further study of the matter.
Such a study might start by examining how technology is already 
transforming the workplace, changing the nature of skills even 
in sectors that traditionally have been insulated from automation. 
For example, the banking business is now comprised largely not 
of accounting tables but of complex computer models. According 
to David Julian, executive vice president at Wells Fargo, one of 
the largest retail banks in the United States, “We have enormous 
models that have enormous implications to how we manage our 
business. We’ve got millions of loans, and some system has to 
calculate the interest.”15 At a more sophisticated level, he adds, 
a computer model may attempt to predict losses in the housing 
market in ten years’ time by tallying and analyzing quantities of 
data that are unfathomable by the human mind.
Indeed, today’s banks no longer need just tellers and accoun-
tants. Increasingly, they need engineers and data scientists. They 
need to construct complex computer models and understand their 

Chapter 2
30
inner mechanics so they can test them. “We can easily test input, 
data into a system,” said Julian. “We can test the data that we get 
back. But it’s hard to test that black box. And there’s so much more 
reliance on that black box. I’ve had to hire a lot more folks with 
background skills who understand how to open up the box to see 
if it’s doing what it’s supposed to be doing.”
Those background skills are similar to the ones that might appear 
on the résumé of a Facebook employee. “It’s both math and tech-
nology majors,” Julian said of his recruits. “You have to have folks 
who can build the models, but more importantly, it’s the math 
majors who can figure out correlation.”
This shift to a reliance on computer models has banks scram-
bling for talent. Julian’s risk management team has grown from 
550 employees to 950 in three years, and he expects to hire  
another 100 to 200 per year: “They are a very, very sought after 
commodity. The geeks are the rock stars in financial institutions 
right now.”
Perhaps the fastest-rising rock stars are the geeks designing the 
software that already has replaced swaths of Wall Street analysts 
and traders. For instance, a 2016 New York Times Magazine article 
describes Kensho, a software company that analyzes and predicts 
the performance of investments by digesting enormous sets of 
data.15 It can do this far more quickly and reliably than a team of 
human analysts, making its creators and investors very wealthy. 
The fortunes of the displaced bankers are another story.
Even so, according to Julian, demand for technologically skilled 
employees at U.S. banks is outpacing domestic supply. Wells Fargo 
actively recruits around the world: “Quite frankly, we’re not the 
only company obviously trying to hire them, so we’re over in India 

Views from the C-Suite
31
a lot more, we’re down in the Philippines. We’re trying to bring 
people in.”
Scott Semel, the CEO of Intralinks, a legal technology company, 
has seen a similar shift in the legal profession—one that most 
people might think is “robot-proof.” In the past decade or so, law 
firms have outsourced much of the yeoman’s work of the legal 
profession—research, fact checking, citation cross-referencing, and 
the like—to countries such as India, which has a strong tradi-
tion of professional legal training. More recently, however, this 
outsourcing has given way to complete automation at the hands 
of artificial intelligence. For instance, Semel has said, many con-
tract lawyers now use AI to verify the accuracy of research on the 
revenue of a company involved in an acquisition. The software 
undertakes the laborious task of double-checking 80 percent of a 
company’s revenue, while human lawyers spot-check the remain-
ing 20 percent. According to Semel, “You can red-flag things using 
AI that you simply couldn’t get done without an army of associates,” 
and AI does a better job: “The lower-level kind of legal work, those 
guys should be worried.”17
Prior to AI, clients paid handsomely for teams of associates to 
conduct discovery by individually reading each letter and e-mail. 
“You would have an army of young lawyers in diligence popping 
up red flags,” said Semel. Today, search engines have replaced this 
function: “No one wants to pay for lawyers to read through a million 
documents. They’re going to do a keyword search.”
Not all keyword searches are created equal, however. Joe Basile, 
a partner at Foley Hoag, a leading U.S. law firm, has observed that 
the choice of search terms can yield drastically different results 
and that the person typing the words still requires linguistic skills, 

Chapter 2
32
analytical ability, and a deep understanding of the underlying law. 
According to Basile, “A lawyer who didn’t make the right connec-
tions would do a partial job. They would come up with a bunch of 
cases but potentially overlook something relevant.” Lawyers today 
still have to understand legal principles, draw analogies, make ana-
lytical connections, and give advice. To put it another way, they have 
to exercise sound judgment.
As a result, Semel and Basile believe that law firms are staking 
more of their fortunes on the provision of higher-level advice from 
senior lawyers. “Firms that cultivate that ability to make experi-
enced judgments and provide high-level advice are highly valued,” 
said Semel. Lawyers are increasingly freed from the annoyance of 
routine tasks so they can perform complex, even creative, cognitive 
work. To established lawyers, this is exciting and welcome. Entry-
level employees, on the other hand, lose the chance to practice law 
at a more basic stratum and accumulate experience and institu-
tional knowledge. For recent graduates, it may seem like a window 
of opportunity slammed shut.
Perhaps the most far-reaching impact of all these changes 
is downward pressure on the wages of lawyers as a profession.  
“Law firms could still have plenty of associates,” said Semel. “The 
question is, how much are they going to make? Maybe they don’t 
make $160,000 or whatever to go work in a law firm. It hap-
pened in medicine.” As in all matters of economics, it is a ques-
tion of supply and demand. Routine legal services have become 
cheaper because automation has increased the supply of labor. 
On the other hand, the high-level legal counsel proffered by sea-
soned professionals still commands a robust hourly rate. Thus, 
until machines learn to give wise counsel, the higher-level legal 

Views from the C-Suite
33
services will still be in demand—and those who provide it will still 
find lucrative work.
Like law, other professions that once seemed far from the tech-
nological sphere are also reacting to its encroachment. For example, 
today’s media companies, advertising firms, and marketers have 
enlisted the power of big data and advanced software to maximize 
page views and reach more human eyeballs. “The media industry 
is run by robots,” said Grant Theron, executive vice president of 
global production and partnerships at advertising and marketing 
giant Young & Rubicam. “It runs on computers and algorithms 
and targeting.”18
William Manfredi, executive vice president of global talent man-
agement at Young & Rubicam, agrees that marketing today has 
essentially been transformed into a process of data analytics: “It’s 
about how you interpret the data to understand people’s behavior. 
What’s the insight? What’s the ‘creative’ around that, and then what 
are the channels?”19
Increasingly, these channels are automated. “The expression of 
the creative idea is slowly being pulled into an automated space,”  
said Theron. When you tap into your device, you are not fully 
in control of your experience. The technology knows tremendous 
amounts of information about you, including your consumer 
choices and where you live, allowing it to customize what you 
see instantly. “The gap between creativity and actually getting 
something on screen is slowly being swallowed up by technology,”  
he said.
“It’s more of a science than ever before,” agreed Manfredi. “And 
the people who can see that process from end to end: they are going 
to be driving the business in the future.”

Chapter 2
34
WORKING WITH SYSTEMS
In contrast to law and advertising, technical sectors like heavy 
manufacturing might seem susceptible to automation from top to 
bottom. When Pete McCabe was vice president of global services 
organization for GE Transportation, he oversaw the services side 
of a branch of the venerable multinational that constructs, deploys, 
and manages heavy transportation machinery—massive railroad 
engines and the like. Much of McCabe’s purview was the stuff of 
complicated software. For instance, his organization manages the 
flow of traffic on 800-mile-long stretches of single-track railway, 
determining when to shunt trains to the side to optimize delivery 
times. According to McCabe, “We have some very, very sophisti-
cated algorithms to drive up to a 10 percent change in velocity, and 
improvement in on-time schedules and deliveries. The difference 
of one mile per hour for a small railroad is worth $200 million. 
For a big railroad it’s $400 to $500 million.”20
Over the past decades, industrial titans such as GE increasingly 
have moved their business strategies away from hardware and 
toward software. Instead of staking their fortunes on the sale of 
giant trains or jet engines or industrial turbines, they now also gen-
erate revenue from monitoring them, diagnosing them, and opti-
mizing their performance. McCabe cited the example of a hospital 
CT scanner. In the past, he said, “you had a sophisticated supply 
chain, and then you had sophisticated people who could trouble-
shoot. When a piece of equipment broke, you sent somebody out. 
They analyzed it, they replaced a part, and got the machine back 
up and running.”

Views from the C-Suite
35
That was before the emergence of diagnostic software. Today, 
GE operates “what looks like a NASA control center,” McCabe 
said. “You have a room in Waukesha, Wisconsin” in which tech-
nicians monitor the machine constantly, watching its “harmonic 
signature” against its historical norm to spot any deviations. If 
a deviation occurs, algorithms check it against other variables to 
determine if the deviation is abnormal. They then can proactively 
adjust the software settings to attempt to fix the problem before the 
machine breaks. “In the best case, we eliminate all unscheduled 
downtime,” said McCabe. In other words, GE makes an increasing 
share of money nowadays not from selling products or replacing 
them but from monitoring oceans of data to keep its products 
running.
The shift in emphasis from hardware to software has cut costs, 
improved efficiencies, and upended the skill sets needed by 
employees. In the past, McCabe said, “99 percent of your work-
force was mechanically trained—a trade school type education in 
electronics, or mechanics, or HVAC. People who could go out, and 
diagnose and repair these pieces.” In contrast, today, he is hiring 
engineers, data scientists, and software programmers: “I’ve got a 
two-hundred-person software team. In 2000, or even in the 1990s, 
I had none.”
Nonetheless, McCabe added, the skills needed by these two 
hundred software specialists do not begin and end with a fluency 
in C++. Domain-specific training—even in high-demand domains 
like data science—is not enough. According to McCabe, “The prob-
lems that are going to change outcomes fundamentally, whether 
it be in productivity, or health care, or wherever else, are going 
to be systems problems. It’s the interconnection points of all the 

Chapter 2
36
discrete problems inside a function. We’ve optimized the hell out 
of them, and there’s always more room, but the exponential value 
is delivered when you start connecting the dots.”
For instance, GE recently set out to address the problem of 
“wind blow-over derailments.” On open, blustery stretches of the 
Great Plains, ferocious gusts of wind occasionally hit boxcars  
at a 90-degree angle, pummeling them clear off the track.  
This threatens public and environmental safety, ruins schedules, 
damages the company’s reputation, and wrecks the bottom line. 
But McCabe knew that GE’s power business had created a model 
for predicting which trees might fall over in a storm, helping utility 
companies position their repair trucks in advance. Thus, despite 
the lack of anemometers on the desolate flats of Nebraska, his 
group decided to apply the concept to predicting wind blow-over  
derailments.
“We said, ‘In ninety days, we’re going to build a prototype and 
test it and validate the hypothesis,’” said McCabe. Software engi-
neers set to writing applications and interfacing with core systems. 
Data scientists started looking at wind velocities. “It’s the kind of 
crazy thing that nobody conceived of yesterday, and no single func-
tion could solve, or no single kind of profession. The software guys 
can’t do this by themselves. It really is cross-functional.”
To oversee systemwide projects like this, McCabe was always 
looking for the Holy Grail of employees—what he calls “the quar-
terback.” “I can find engineers, I can find software guys, and I can 
find good data scientists,” he said. It is harder to find someone who 
can draw all the threads together to oversee the team of specialists: 
“Knowing how they plug, knowing where to push. I’d give my left 
pinky for ten more of those guys.”

Views from the C-Suite
37
Holistic, systems thinking is a quality needed in any complex 
operation. Take the example of building an airplane engine. 
According to Andrea Cox of GE Aviation’s engineering quality and  
compliance division, an engine contains between five thousand 
to ten thousand individual parts, of which an engineer can “own” 
anywhere “between five and a hundred part numbers.”21 In the 
past, it was sufficient for a materials engineer to understand the 
material characteristics of the pieces, a manufacturing engineer to 
understand how the parts are made, and a mechanical engineer 
to understand how they operate. Only the design engineer needed 
to understand how an individual part operates in its own design, 
how it fits into the design of the module, how the module fits into 
the engine, and how the engine fits into the airplane. Likewise, the 
vice president of engineering would have to understand how all 
the engines delivered on customer expectations, how they fit into 
the company’s strategy, and how they set up the next generation 
of sales.
As the digital age opens the floodgates to vast new oceans of data, 
however, it now is possible to accumulate ever-greater amounts of 
information about systems such as airplane engines. Using the data 
that airplane engines collect about themselves, engineers can now 
predict the future operation of a specific part much more accurately, 
factoring in the details of its situation—for instance, if it is being 
operated in a hot, sandy climate or in a cold, wet one. “Instead of 
saying the engine has a life of three thousand hours,” said Cox, “we 
can say, with carrier A, you can probably run it for four thousand 
hours, but carrier B, you need to take it out at twenty-five hundred 
hours.” Instead of being reactive, engineers are now expected to 

Chapter 2
38
be predictive. They are expected to harness the available data to get 
better results from the holistic product.
“The expectation,” said Cox, “is to look at that part as a whole—
how it’s going to end up and where and how the customer is going 
to feel. How can I use that data to make my customer’s world 
better with the hardware?” This sort of holistic thought is valued 
by all sorts of companies. Indeed, it is what all companies look for 
in managers.
WORKING WITH IDEAS
More and more, managerial abilities such as cross-functionality 
are now a requirement for entry-level positions. Some companies, 
such as Google, even make it a cornerstone of their hiring process. 
“When you interview for Google, you don’t interview for a job,” 
said Steve Vinter, engineering director and site lead at Google’s 
offices in Cambridge, Massachusetts.22 Vinter said that Google 
likes to hire generalists. The interview process gauges candidates’ 
responses to broad challenges, rather than quizzing them on 
any specific area of knowledge: “How do you think? How do you 
analyze problems? How do you develop algorithms? How do you 
measure the performance of those algorithms?” Because verbal 
answers to questions like these reveal only so much, Google’s job 
application process tests candidates through collaborative problem-
solving activities. One of the upshots of this hiring system is that it 
measures candidates’ sense of curiosity, their instinct for innova-
tion, and their knack for working well with others. Consequently, 
the interview process mimics the actual work a candidate would 
perform if hired.

Views from the C-Suite
39
To get a foot in the door, though, candidates first need to demon-
strate advanced technical knowledge and judgment—what Vinter 
called “fluency and fundamentals.” He described fluency as a 
person’s ability to solve a problem for which she previously was 
trained. For instance, said Vinter, “you can describe the algorithm 
you’re using to solve a problem. You can write code for it that’s 
correct, straight, simple, and clear. You can describe what it does 
and test it.”
Fundamentals, on the other hand, are the understanding of the 
many data structures that can be applied to a problem. As Vinter 
described it: “If there are twenty ways to solve a problem and only 
two or three that are very good, you have to know how to focus on 
those and creatively think about how to apply them.” Analytical 
reasoning is the basis of both fluency and fundamentals.
Technical expertise and good reasoning skills are not enough, 
however. Google’s company culture also demands a particular tem-
perament. Employees will not succeed unless they are both highly 
collaborative and socially accountable to each other. For instance, 
one of the defining features of the Google workday is the “scrum.”
“Scrums are basically daily check-ins in which everybody stands 
around and talks about what they’re going to do during the day,” 
explained Vinter. “Sometimes it’ll be fifteen people. Some of them 
are doing things that appear to be unrelated, but you discover their 
relation by virtue of telling everyone what you’re going to work on. 
You have a chance to say, ‘Oh, I know something that’s relevant to 
what you’re doing.’”
This structured serendipity is reinforced by employees having to 
report back to the group about their daily progress: “It creates this 
team sense of ownership,” said Vinter. In other words, the system 

Chapter 2
40
taps into the fortuitous side of peer pressure but also of conceptual-
izing, synthesizing, and communicating ideas.
“Demo days” are another feature of Google’s operational culture. 
“Everyone demonstrates what they’ve done during the week or 
something that they’re thinking about,” said Vinter. It is like  
a show-and-tell for extremely accomplished technologists: “This 
creates involvement in what other people are doing.” As such, 
Google’s system taps into the fortuitous side of employees’ pride 
and inquisitiveness but also their natural tendencies to evaluate the 
ideas of others and creatively build on them. These very human 
qualities are a crucial component of Google’s astounding success 
in bridging the gap between the digital and living worlds.
Other technical and professional industries have a similar appe-
tite for the ability to absorb ideas, evaluate them, and apply them 
productively. Darren Donovan, managing principal at the con-
sulting giant KPMG, has talked about the need for employees to  
demonstrate “deep listening skills.”23 Likewise, Sjoerd Gehring, 
global vice president of talent acquisition at Johnson & Johnson, has 
looked for a honed sense of reasoning in his employees: “Number 
one is developing a thorough understanding of the demographics, 
behaviors, and buying values of the user base, target audience, 
or end user. It is really hard for us to become more digital, more 
focused on user interface and user experience, and to tell our story 
if our own employees don’t have a sense of what we mean when we 
talk about those energies. Can you find a consumer parallel to your 
own life and apply it to the user base we’re targeting? What’s behind 
spending so much time designing things in a certain way?”24
These are complex questions requiring intellectual discipline and 
nuanced thought—and the professional workplace of tomorrow is 

Views from the C-Suite
41
only getting more complex. Soon enough, professionals will func-
tion in tandem with intelligent machines. Whatever the industry—
finance, law, manufacturing, media, or any other—it will require 
cognitive capacities that equip it for tasks we might not even be able 
to imagine yet. These capacities are mindsets rather than bodies 
of knowledge—mental architecture rather than mental furniture. 
Going forward, people will still need to know specific bodies of 
knowledge to be effective in the workplace, but that alone will not 
be enough when intelligent machines are doing much of the heavy 
lifting of information. To succeed, tomorrow’s employees will have 
to demonstrate a higher order of thought.
As we have heard from employers, automation is revolutioniz-
ing many industries and driving up the value of technological skills 
in obvious sectors like tech but also in finance and advertising. 
It seems as certain as the law of natural selection: if people are 
gifted coders or are versed in the more desirable flavors of math 
or engineering, they will find the gates of the labor market wide 
open and welcoming—or they will for the moment. Software is 
eating the world,25 so we need software developers. But it is less 
clear what we will need when software finishes its meal and settles 
down to digest. What happens when robots learn to program  
themselves?
Perhaps an instructive example can be found in sectors, such as 
law, that are responding to automation with an increased call for 
sophisticated critical thinking. As we have seen, highly developed 
critical thinking is essential to work in places as varied as account-
ing, pharmaceuticals, and leading tech firms like Google. Even the 
most technical of industries, heavy manufacturing, is reliant on 
hiring good systems thinkers—on people who can comprehend 
and act on a broad perspective.

Chapter 2
42
A honed capacity for critical and systems thinking is tremen-
dously valuable in today’s workplace. It is essential for the work-
place of tomorrow. Every team will still need strong players as well 
as quarterbacks.
CRITICAL AND SYSTEMS THINKING
The definition of critical thinking is somewhat fluid, but for the 
purposes of this book, we can say that it involves analyzing ideas 
in a skillful way and then applying them in a useful one. To do this 
well, a person needs to be able to observe, reflect, synthesize, and 
imagine concepts and information and to communicate the results 
of the process. In short, critical thinking is the desired end product 
of much of what we do in education.
Machines are getting better at many of the elements that fall 
under the umbrella of critical thinking, including observation and 
communication. But they have not grasped all of them. Thus, when 
a lawyer mulls a thorny contract dispute and figures out how to 
position a client for a victory and when a marketer crafts the content 
of a website that engages a target audience and keeps eyes on 
the screen, they are using cognitive capacities that are exclusively 
human. Critical thinking will therefore remain a cornerstone of 
human work in the digital age.
Similarly, systems thinking involves seeing across areas that 
machines might be able to comprehend individually but that they 
cannot analyze in an integrated way, as a whole. Why certain 
hashtags on Twitter are trending, why the global commodities 
markets are rising and falling, why the Antarctic ice shelf is melting: 
all of these are examples of complex systems in action.

Views from the C-Suite
43
Given their intricacy, conceptualizing systems may seem like a 
task for which digital minds are better suited than human ones, and 
we do, indeed, rely on computers to understand complex networks. 
But computers cannot decide what to do with that information. For 
example, a computer can model climate change, but it takes human 
beings to devise and enact policies to stem it. Likewise, in the case 
of wind blow-over derailment, computers can help a team of engi-
neers predict when it is likely to occur, but they cannot marshal 
the different talents needed for the project, give them direction, 
interpret the wider ramifications of the findings, and decide how 
to implement change. Indeed, a computer would not have had the 
idea for the project in the first place. Only humans exhibit that sort 
of creativity.
Because critical thinking and systems thinking are crucial for 
the human employees of the future, it is imperative that we instill 
them through the education of the present. Universities will have 
to develop methods to nurture these cognitive capacities in students 
if they hope to maintain their age-old social compact, equip gradu-
ates for fulfilling, productive lives, and generate new knowledge. To 
compete with intelligent, advanced machines, we will need to think 
intelligently about advancing higher education.


3
A LEARNING MODEL FOR THE FUTURE
Chapter 3
A Learning Model for the Future
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The season of discontent is not winter. According to the popular 
professional networking site LinkedIn, it is October, the month  
in which worldwide job applications spike. In homage to this 
annual burst of restlessness, LinkedIn delves through its copious 
data on hiring and recruiting activity every autumn to compile a 
list of skills that have proved most in demand by employers for 
that year.1 According to its 2016 version of “The Top Skills That 
Can Get You Hired Today and Tomorrow,” the most desirable 
skill in the global job market is “Cloud and Distributed Comput-
ing.” Next up is “Statistical Analysis and Data Mining,” with “Web 
Architecture and Development Framework” rounding out the top 
three. The list continues in a similar vein: “Middleware and Integra-
tion Software,” “User Interface Design,” “Network and Information 
Security.” According to LinkedIn’s list, every single one of the ten 
most desirable skills on the planet is technological.
Even as technology-related jobs continue their ascendance and as 
technology is integrated ever more thoroughly into every industry, 
the fact remains that technology will not provide jobs for every-
one. Even if technological work were available to everyone who is 
qualified, the advance of robots, advanced machines, and artificial 
intelligence suggests that ultimately, technology itself will become 

Chapter 3
46
the best candidate for many jobs. A great many economists, jour-
nalists, and thinkers argue that deep learning in machines and the 
exponential growth of big data and processing power are rendering 
the human mind an economic relic. In Rise of the Robots: Technology 
and the Threat of a Jobless Future, Silicon Valley entrepreneur and 
author Martin Ford paints a convincing picture of the tsunami of 
automation that is about to wash away white-collar jobs. “Exponen-
tial progress is now pushing us toward the endgame,” he writes. 
If technology can replace human beings on the job, it will. Pre-
venting business owners from adopting labor-saving technology 
“would require modifying the basic incentives built into the market 
economy.”2
Ford and the others are entirely correct that machines will 
destroy jobs. Historically, this has been the case, going back to 
the days of the Luddite weavers. Nonetheless, technology also has 
given rise to new industries, bringing new forms of employment. 
Once again, this is the case, as can be seen with the invention 
of jobs that did not exist a generation ago, before the rise of the 
Internet era, such as search-engine optimization specialists or user-
experience designers. But as journalist Ryan Avent observes in his 
2016 book, The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the 
Twenty-first Century, “New technologies will create new, good work, 
which might often benefit the less skilled. But it will not be scal-
able mass employment. And it will not solve the problem of labor 
abundance.”3 Despite the invention of unforeseen jobs, the conflu-
ence of “automation, globalization, and the rising productivity of 
a highly skilled few” will continue to suppress the value of human 
labor across the globe.4

A Learning Model for the Future
47
Nonetheless, when these analysts and futurists argue that the 
current technological revolution is different and that the value of 
human labor will be irretrievably lost, they are overlooking two 
salient facts. First, much of the world remains terra incognita. There 
is more to find, in the heavens and on earth, than we can dream of 
in our blinkered present. We have a universe of scientific secrets 
to uncover and shoreless oceans of knowledge yet to cross. We 
have an infinite canvas to paint and endless music to play. From 
curing disease to restoring the environment to writing the next 
great novel, there is everything left to do. And for most of us, 
this involves finding fairly compensated, satisfying employment. 
Thus, even as machines take over routine labor, freeing us from 
repetitive or mundane tasks, human beings have a great deal left 
to occupy them. The only question is whether we possess the tools 
to accomplish it.
This relates to the second point that many of the current analysts 
overlook—the historic role played by education in elevating the 
majority of people to the next level of economic development. In 
the nineteenth century, free, public elementary schools raised the 
mass of Americans out of illiteracy. When technological progress 
built steam, public secondary schooling helped the merely literate 
ascend to the next rung of the ladder, giving them basic skills they 
needed to work in the new industries. Then, as corporate America 
rose in the postwar order, public colleges and universities raised 
mass education levels another notch again, teaching a sizeable 
portion of the workforce advanced knowledge skills. Now, once 
more, technology is raising the educational bar.
If the work of tomorrow demands more from us, we must 
demand more from our education—particularly at the college level. 

Chapter 3
48
Consequently, an education for the digital age needs to focus not 
just on technology and understanding what technology can do but 
also on what it cannot do—at least for now and perhaps never. In 
other words, a robot-proof education nurtures our unique capacities 
as human beings. And the most elevated of all human capacities 
is the one that may be the most elusive and difficult to define and 
therefore is trickiest to teach. This is humanity’s unique talent for 
creativity.
THINKING CREATIVELY
Few would contest that Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was one of the 
most creative people who has ever lived. The man who wrote Sym-
phony no. 40 in G Minor and Don Giovanni is the quintessential 
example of a creative genius, a person whose talent transcended 
all boundaries of genre, context, and culture. In 1756, the year of 
his birth, the human population on earth numbered approximately 
795,000,000.5 Today, the world’s population is almost ten times 
that amount, at 7,000,000,000. Mathematically, we can induce 
that there are about ten creative geniuses alive today who were 
born with an extreme but not unique genius for musical composi-
tion identical to Mozart’s. Chances are, many of them are currently 
living in China or India.
In addition to having more and more human competition, 
budding composers and songwriters now have to contend with 
musical algorithms. For instance, Flow Machines, an artificial 
intelligence program from Sony’s computer science lab in Paris, 
recently released original jazz and pop compositions. At the time 
of this writing, it is working on its debut album.6 The recording 
industry appears to be getting more crowded.

A Learning Model for the Future
49
Education cannot teach everyone to be Mozart. However, in  
a global, automated economy in which more and more exception-
ally talented people compete on the same plane, a useful education  
will assist those of us without singular abilities in achieving sin-
gular outcomes. Education should therefore cultivate our creativ-
ity. But to teach creativity, we first have to understand what it  
actually is.
Cognitive psychology has given us a rich and varied body of 
scholarship on creativity. In the 1960s, Paul Torrance developed a 
sequence of tests that attempted to quantify a person’s creativity. 
For example, they might ask a child to draw details around a neutral 
shape, incorporating it into a picture that tells a story. These tests 
are still widely used, especially in schools for assessing children for 
the purposes of gifted education but also in corporate contexts.7 Yet 
even the most ardent proponents of the tests agree that creativity is 
a phenomenon of such astounding complexity that it is extremely 
hard to tease out its mental constituents.
Nonetheless, one of the most useful concepts on which the tests 
are built is J. P. Guilford’s articulation of convergent and diver-
gent thinking.8 When a person employs convergent thinking, she 
focuses on finding the single, “correct” answer to a problem or task. 
Answering questions on a multiple-choice test is an example of 
convergent thinking at work. When we use convergent thinking, we 
weigh data and alternatives to achieve the one best, black-and-white 
result. This is exactly the type of mental activity at which advanced 
computers and machines are now becoming adept.
Divergent thinking, on the other hand, is the creative genera-
tion of multiple responses in a free flow of ideas. Examples of this 
include brainstorming and free writing—the outpour of ideas on 

Chapter 3
50
the page without regard to structure or grammar. Divergent think-
ing is often associated with playfulness, curiosity, and willingness 
to take risks.
Divergent and convergent thinking share many of the same  
elements. For example, both require the ability to assess and elabo-
rate. However, divergent thinking requires creativity—a sensitivity 
to the changing nuances of a problem, a facility to reframe it as 
circumstances demand, and ultimately, an ability to generate a 
result or resolution that contains things that were not there when 
one started.9
Generally speaking, the educational system in the United States—
both K–12 and college—focuses primarily on training students to 
master convergent thinking. When we ask students to determine 
which of two trains traveling to Chicago from different points at 
different velocities will arrive first, we are flexing their convergent 
thinking muscles. Yet this is precisely the sort of thinking that 
increasingly is a robot’s specialty. Even academic challenges that 
mix convergent and divergent thinking may be automatable. For 
example, by studying vast numbers of writing samples, algorithmic 
programs can assign accurate grades to essays written by human 
students.10 And with machine learning on the rise, it probably will 
be no great leap for them to write A+ essays themselves sometime 
soon.
Divergent thinking, however, is another matter. Whereas 
machines can grade essays on the causes of the Napoleonic Wars—
and may soon be writing them—they cannot produce War and 
Peace starting from a blank screen. To accomplish this type of work, 
we still need human brains. But our schools often do not do an 
especially good job of cultivating them.

A Learning Model for the Future
51
The most popular TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) 
Talk of all time is Sir Ken Robinson’s “Do Schools Kill Creativity?” 
recorded in 2006.11 In it, he famously argues that creativity, which 
he defines as “the process of having original ideas that have value,” 
is as important to today’s children as literacy. However, by stigma-
tizing failure and wrong answers in school, we train children to 
stifle it. “We don’t grow into creativity,” says Robinson. “We grow 
out of it, or rather we get educated out of it.”
Because the U.S. education system was designed largely to  
meet the needs of the industrial economy of the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, it tends to emphasize the skills most valu-
able in a world made up of factories, bureaucracies, and ledger 
ink. Often, though not exclusively, it pushes students to learn 
mathematics, language, science, and other “hard skills,” with less 
emphasis on the liberal arts, creative disciplines (such as music and 
art), and metacognitive skills typically referred to as “soft skills.” 
As Robinson observes, our educational system tends to reify aca-
demic performance above all else, such that the ideal product of 
the educational process, if all the tests are aced and all the course-
work assimilated, is a university professor. However, as he correctly 
notes, this lopsided view of intelligence ignores the richness of 
human capacity. “Our education has mined our minds like we’ve 
strip-mined the earth, for a particular commodity,” says Robinson, 
insisting that there are greater treasures to be uncovered than mere 
academic performance.
The view that mastery of facts and knowledge is what makes 
a person “smart” or “prepared” is a lopsided view of human 
intelligence—and never more so than in the present moment, 
when robots, advanced machines, and AI are increasingly able to 

Chapter 3
52
master facts and knowledge as effectively as the “smartest” of us. 
And yet colleges and universities tend to reinforce this lopsided 
view. Colleges and universities, in their DNA, are mechanisms for 
the transmission of knowledge about specific subjects. As far back 
as the invention of universities in the Middle Ages, they organized 
themselves around the separation of disciplines, with faculties  
specializing in the content of theology, law, or medicine.
Today, most colleges’ curricula and pedagogy still place inordi-
nate weight on the transfer of information into students’ minds. 
Development of students’ higher-order mental capacities, like  
critical thinking or elegant communication, is certainly one of the 
objectives of a college education, but all too often it is secondary 
to the ingestion of content. More often than not, college courses 
are not designed to nurture metacognitive skills explicitly and 
systematically.
The problem is that even if we aim to teach these skills, we do 
not necessarily do it well, much less nurture students’ creativity. 
In their 2011 study, Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on College 
Campuses, professors Richard Arum and Josipa Roksa found that 
“at least” 45 percent of the undergraduates they surveyed showed 
“exceedingly small or empirically nonexistent” gains in critical 
thinking, complex reasoning, and written communication during 
their first two years in college. After four years, 36 percent of their 
sample still showed no improvement at all: “They might graduate, 
but they are failing to develop the higher-order cognitive skills that 
it is widely assumed college students should master.”12
Other data reinforce this grim prognosis. Under its Program for 
the International Assessment of Adult Competencies, the Orga­
nisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 

A Learning Model for the Future
53
conducts surveys of life skills in adults from thirty-three different 
countries, testing them on literacy, numeracy, and problem solving 
in a technology-rich environment. Americans have not performed 
with particular aplomb. For instance, the most recent survey found 
that 30 percent of Americans aged thirty-four or younger with bach-
elor’s degrees failed to score above two out of a five-level numeracy 
assessment. For its assessment of problem solving, this dismal 
figure rose to 34 percent.13
You may ask, “What does it matter if students can’t think, if 
machines will increasingly do the thinking for us?” But rather 
than raise the white flag on humanity and wipe the educational 
slate clean, we need to reconsider what we teach. If we rebalance 
our approach—by helping students to acquire the content they 
need to understand their chosen domain of study, as well as the 
broader cognitive capacities they need in a highly automated profes-
sional workplace—future generations will not be abandoned to the 
economic dust heap. However, we need a new model of learning 
that enables learners to understand the highly technological world 
around them and that simultaneously allows them to transcend it 
by nurturing the mental and intellectual qualities that are unique 
to humans—namely, their capacity for creativity and mental flex-
ibility. We can call this model humanics.14
Much as engineering and philosophy are both disciplines that 
involve the study of a body of knowledge and the development of 
a way of thinking, humanics is a discipline that teaches mastery 
of content as well as the development of particular skills. It helps 
people understand the components of the technological world while 
giving them the ability to utilize it, manipulate it, and ultimately 
transcend it. Humanics is a discipline tailored for our era that is 

Chapter 3
54
grounded in the mastery of content knowledge I call the new litera-
cies and in the development of “robot-proof” ways of thinking I refer 
to as the cognitive capacities.
THE NEW LITERACIES15
The word literacy, meaning in its plainest sense the ability to read 
and write, stems from the Latin littera, a letter of the alphabet. 
The term usually encapsulates numeracy, which makes sense 
considering that human writing originally began as a means of 
recording mathematical data. Both letters and numbers allow us to 
represent verbal expression through symbols, so we can preserve 
them and transmit them to other people. This ability to telegraph 
ideas into the minds of other people simply by showing them 
a few abstract marks is one of humanity’s most powerful tools. 
And as anyone who has ever lost themselves in a good book—
or a financial spreadsheet—well knows, it also is an early form 
of virtual reality. Literacy delivers information and ignites the  
imagination.
Before the Internet, writing was the way that human beings 
enshrined facts, encoding all the accepted truths about a civili-
zation’s history, property rights, genealogy, law, and culture. 
Mastery of the written word made a person wholly human. It was 
the basis of a person’s ability to live a full life within society. 
It was power. That is why it sometimes was restricted to privi-
leged groups, with its secrets forcibly withheld from marginal-
ized ones. Frederick Douglass wrote that literacy is the path from 
slavery to freedom—conversely, a deficit of literacy is a slide into  
powerlessness.

A Learning Model for the Future
55
Literacy gives us the power to network with the ideas and infor-
mation produced by other people at any distance of time or space. 
Written language allows us to communicate ideas, mathematics 
allows us to communicate about quantities and dimensions, and 
scientific literacy allows us to communicate about the natural  
world. In a digital milieu, human beings require more complex 
literacies that enable us to do more than simply transmit con-
cepts between human minds. Humanics’ three new literacies—
technological, data, and human—enable us to network with both 
other people and machines. Even more so, they empower us to use 
the digital world to its fullest potential.
Technological Literacy
The first of these new literacies is technological literacy—knowledge 
of mathematics, coding, and basic engineering principles. Today’s 
“digital natives” have grown up immersed in digital technologies 
and possess the technical aptitude to utilize the powers of their 
devices fully. But although they know which apps to use or which 
websites to visit, they do not necessarily understand the work-
ings behind the touchscreen. People need technological literacy if 
they are to understand machines’ mechanics and uses. In much 
the same way as factory workers a hundred years ago needed to 
understand the basic structures of engines, we need to understand 
the elemental principles behind our devices. This empowers us to 
deploy software and hardware to their fullest utility, maximizing 
our powers to achieve and create.
Because coding is the lingua franca of the digital world, every-
one should be conversant in it. But before people can learn the 
syntax of computers, they need to understand the conceptual  

Chapter 3
56
elements. It is rapidly becoming the established wisdom among 
early educators that coding has a place in the classroom next to the 
ABCs and 123s. Toymakers are increasingly rolling out new prod-
ucts that inculcate the concept of coding in young minds. Within 
the next generation, it seems inevitable that coding will stake out 
a place in the required high school curriculum—and perhaps  
in the college curriculum as well. Indeed, one of the most noted 
developments in the higher education marketplace in recent years 
is the rapid growth coding boot camps, such as those operated 
by General Assembly and Dev Bootcamp. According to a recent 
market report, coding boot camps are expected to graduate nearly 
eighteen thousand students in 2016, growing by a vigorous 74 
percent over the previous year.16
“Coding is as important now as math was ten, twenty, thirty years 
ago,” according to Sjoerd Gehring, the Johnson & Johnson execu-
tive. “Of course, the two are very, very connected.”17 Indeed, many 
efforts like Scratch are underway to democratize coding, wresting 
its mysteries from a cabal of mathematically gifted programmers. 
Tools like Ready and Hopscotch are designed for even the math-
ematically bereft to jump into creating original software. Hailing 
the rise of this sort of “pop computing,” David S. Bennahum, 
cofounder and CEO of programming tool Ready, writes, “It’s only a 
matter of time before the process of making software itself is trans-
formed, from one that requires a mastery of syntax—the precise 
stringing of sentences needed to command a computer—to the 
mastery of logic.”18 Until democratic programming comes to pass, 
it is essential to gain a grounding in specific computer languages 
and the basics of computer science.

A Learning Model for the Future
57
Data Literacy
One of the consequences of technology’s encroachment throughout 
our lives is the concurrent explosion of data. In 2010, The Economist 
reported that Dutch cows were getting “smart” sensors implanted 
in their ears to track their health and activities—a sort of confla-
tion of Big Data and Big Brother to create Big Cow. We now hear 
about the Internet of Things bringing connected, “smart” physical 
objects to every part of our homes, our clothing, and our environ-
ment. By 2020, it is estimated that we will live in a world of fifty 
billion smart objects, creating a true ecosystem of information.19 
And this is not happening solely in the home. Even pieces of heavy 
machinery, like earth movers, are no longer simply gears and metal 
but are equipped with sensors that analyze data and feed it back to 
the operator to optimize the machine’s accuracy and efficiency.20 
We are awash in data, so the next of our new literacies is data 
literacy, the capacity to understand and utilize Big Data through 
analysis. By understanding both interpretation and context, data 
literacy enables us to find meaning in the overwhelming flood of 
information pouring from our devices.
There is little use in accumulating massive amounts of data 
unless we can arrange it into usable information and thence into 
understanding. Data analysis allows us to do this by sifting through 
these giant sets of data to find the correlations in them that yield 
useful findings. Indeed, this is the basis of Google’s business and 
that of countless other digital companies today. Based on the cor-
relations we discover, we are able to understand the real meaning 
of the information and then extrapolate accurate predictions from 
it. Data analysis can foresee everything from the spread of a virus 
across a continent to an individual’s dating preferences. It is an 

Chapter 3
58
extraordinarily powerful tool that is getting more powerful every 
time someone clicks on the Internet. However, to be fully func-
tional actors in our digital world, people need to understand how 
to use this tool—and to grasp its limitations.
As Michael Patrick Lynch observes in his book The Internet of 
Us: Knowing More and Understanding Less in the Age of Big Data, 
the information we derive from making correlations with big data 
often can be misleading unless we understand its context.21 He cites 
the example of a famous video map of cultural history that was 
created by using a data set of births and deaths of “notable” people 
over the past two thousand years. The shape and findings of the 
map were entirely dependent on the creators’ assumptions of their 
data’s parameters, including what constitutes a “notable” person. 
In other words, the answers we get are only as meaningful as the 
questions we frame. And for that, we need an understanding not 
just of correlations but of how and why the facts are so.22 Instead 
of seeing strands of information, we need to view the intercon-
nected tapestry of relationships in a system. Thus, it is not enough 
to see that “culture” spread to different geographical hotspots in a 
particular pattern. We would need to study the social, economic, 
and political contexts. The purpose of data literacy, then, is to give 
us the tools to read the digital record and also to understand when 
we ought to look elsewhere.
Human Literacy
The last of the three new literacies is the most important and 
perhaps requires the least explication—human literacy. Even in the 
robot age—or perhaps, especially in the robot age—what matters 
is other people. Human literacy equips us for the social milieu, 

A Learning Model for the Future
59
giving us the power to communicate, engage with others, and tap 
into our human capacity for grace and beauty. It encompasses the 
humanities traditionally found in a liberal arts education but also 
includes elements of the arts, especially design, which is integral 
to much of digital communication.
Neoclassical poet Alexander Pope wrote that the proper study 
of mankind is man. He was not entirely correct—the rest of the 
natural world holds its wonders—but intellectually, morally, and 
spiritually, the humanities are among the most fertile grounds on 
which to nurture a complete human being. They form the foun-
dation of a life well-lived and the furnishings of a civilized mind. 
That is reason enough to study them. But they also happen to 
be starkly practical. Professionals need a strong grasp of human 
literacy because despite our digital landscape, we live and interact 
with humans. Even in a fully networked space, the most power-
ful networks are personal relationships. Workplaces are, as we 
saw in the previous chapter with Google’s “scrums,” more collab-
orative than ever. In academia, for example, the days of the solo 
researcher are at an end. As fields become more interdisciplinary 
and complex and work becomes more hybrid, more and more  
discovery is undertaken by teams—and the teams are getting  
bigger.23 In every workplace context, we have to know how to play  
well with others, so skills like brainstorming, negotiating, and 
making collective decisions are increasingly important. Effec-
tive relationship work, not just knowledge work, is the key to a 
winning team.24
In this regard, understanding the importance of diversity is 
essential to human literacy. If students are to be lifelong learners, 
they must engage with a diversity of perspectives, including ones 

Chapter 3
60
that challenge their presuppositions. Only through the full and 
respectful inclusion of people of different backgrounds, identities, 
and creeds can we learn, cooperate, and create to our full potential. 
Divided communities are weaker than unified ones, and although 
the notion of a global community has suffered from a backlash 
recently, the fact remains that technology, economics, and mass 
culture bind us closer than at any time in history. No one can afford 
to pretend that the world, in all its variety, can be locked outside our 
doors, much less our devices. Instead of dividing us, human diver-
sity is an astonishing source of beauty and strength, proving the 
limitless nature of humanity. By immersing students in diversity 
and celebrating its lessons, we enrich their minds, broaden their 
thinking, and build their valuable human literacy.
In addition to getting along well with other people, we have to 
know how to communicate and motivate them. We may glean 
factual information on human behavior through data literacy, 
showing us the what and the how, but the humanities teach us the 
why. As the boundaries between technology and the humanities 
dissolve, even the engineer needs to consider human interfaces, 
and even the programmer must learn to be a storyteller.
The extension of technology into every aspect of life has very 
human ramifications that we have to address through politics, eco-
nomics, law, philosophy, and especially ethics—subjects that must 
evolve with the growth of AI. Almost ironically, a fundamental 
aspect of human literacy involves the ethical quandaries raised 
by intelligent machines. The old trolley problem—do you swerve 
a moving vehicle into a crowd of bystanders, or do you doom its 
occupants?—is now a very material question for the makers of 
autonomous vehicles. The military faces thickets of ethical and 

A Learning Model for the Future
61
legal conundrums as autonomous weapons become a technologi-
cal reality: What ethical principles should govern the design and 
development of AI? How do we align these new machines with 
our values—and which values do we favor? If they cause harm, 
who is morally culpable? Only human beings can unleash the free 
agency of machines in situations that will result in human death. 
To take that step or not, we will need philosophers as well as 
lawyers.
Another ethical dilemma raised by intelligent machines is the old 
specter of inequality. In part, this is a continuation of the ongoing 
polarization of wealth. But in an economy in which more and more 
labor is performed by robots, more and more of the value of labor 
adheres to the robots’ owners—to capital. Employees lose out even 
more, so some form of redistribution becomes necessary. Human 
literacy therefore must steer our social policies, striving to bend the 
arc of history toward social justice. But another, less familiar facet 
of inequality is just as pressing. Artificial implants and enhance-
ments will soon be a reality for people who can afford them. By 
augmenting their human abilities with cybernetic upgrades, some 
people will boost their lifespans, senses, physiques, and perhaps 
even intelligence. Furthermore, families that can afford to purchase 
genetic modifications might snip away bothersome genes (like 
nearsightedness or a predisposition to weight gain) but also cus-
tomize sons and daughters to their most exacting specifications. In 
the future, the rich might truly be different from you and me. The 
question for ethicists is whether such powers are to be restricted, 
freely granted, or hoarded by the wealthy. Human literacy will help 
us make the right choices.

Chapter 3
62
THE COGNITIVE CAPACITIES
The new literacies (technological, data, and human) are the foun-
dation of humanics—its core curriculum, in a sense—but they are 
not sufficient to educate people to master a highly technologized 
world. To do that, students also need a higher order of four cog-
nitive capacities that will serve them in the digital economy. As 
we encountered in the previous chapter, these capacities include 
critical thinking and systems thinking—metaskills that everyone 
needs to analyze and apply ideas and to understand and command 
complex systems. Two other cognitive capacities are necessary to 
help make learners robot-proof. The first is entrepreneurship—
the act of creating value in original ways. The second is cultural 
agility—a capacity that enables students to operate deftly in a 
global milieu and to appreciate the varying understandings and 
values that people from different cultures bring to an issue or  
situation.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is about analyzing ideas skillfully and then apply-
ing them fruitfully. Machines are certainly improving in elements 
of this capacity. Their powers to observe, analyze, and communicate 
are growing stronger with every upgrade, but they lack the ability 
to synthesize and imagine. Although a machine might be much 
better than a human being at using data inputs to tackle a spe-
cific problem—winning at chess, organizing a global supply chain, 
finding you a compatible date for a Saturday evening—they are not 
as impressive at more unquantifiable thinking.

A Learning Model for the Future
63
The act of critical thought involves numerous layers and stria-
tions. Some of these are quantifiable forms of thinking, like under-
standing and applying facts to a question. Others are inchoate, 
even intuitive, such as envisioning how people’s motivations, emo-
tions, and histories influence them. True critical thinking requires 
all these layers for a full understanding of the context in any  
situation.
If a problem can be reduced to a train of yes and no questions, no 
matter how complex, then a machine can resolve it. But many real-
world problems defy such reduction. For example, imagine that a 
social media app sees that its user base is flat. By answering yes 
and no questions such as, “Are users aged eighteen to thirty-four in 
Korea decreasing in number?” or “Does this particular ad generate 
clicks during peak hours?,” the computer might be able to crunch 
all the relevant data about pricing, distribution, marketing, and 
strategy. It even might be able to identify the exact color of design 
most likely to catch a user’s eye and calculate the precise keywords 
that would resonate on social media with the target customer base. 
This is the data analysis side of critical thinking, and computers are 
getting better at this every day.
Despite this analytical rigor, the computer would not be able 
to guess at other vital factors that could affect the success of the 
company’s plan just as much as more quantifiable data does. 
For example, it would not be able to gauge customers’ reservoirs 
of brand loyalty. It would not be able to measure their visceral 
response to the company’s advertising or take into account the 
personal and cultural associations customers have with particular 
images. Without this layer of contextual analysis, a machine might 
go ahead and greenlight a marketing plan that looks good in terms 

Chapter 3
64
of data and metrics but that, for lack of considering other important 
contextual factors, will be a flop. In contrast, humans are alone in 
their ability to assess both sides of the critical thinking coin—data 
analysis and context—and say, “This plan will or won’t work.”
Very often, the difference between successful and botched criti-
cal thinking boils down to questioning assumptions—choosing to 
ask if an accepted input is, indeed, correct. For example, on several 
space shuttle missions, the National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration observed pieces of foam breaking off the external tanks 
during launches. It happened again during the doomed Columbia 
launch, with foam striking the left wing. But NASA scientists made 
the decision that the foam breakage was no cause for concern, 
unwittingly condemning the shuttle to disintegration on reentry.25 
They operated on their existing assumptions instead of taking the 
critical leap to wonder, “What if this time things are different?”
That same fault in critical thinking led to the catastrophic 2005 
levee failures in New Orleans. For years before Hurricane Katrina 
struck, studies and investigations had warned of the potential for 
disaster, with authorities even running exercises in preparation 
for a category 3 storm over the previous year. But when it actu-
ally happened, the city’s flood protection system failed, triggering 
the greatest engineering disaster in U.S. history. The cause was 
not lack of information but a presumption that the designs were 
sound. It was a failure of critical imagination among those who 
held responsibility.
Systems Thinking
Machines are adept at understanding the elements of complex 
systems and the ways their variables cascade into one another, but 

A Learning Model for the Future
65
they are less skilled at knowing how to apply this information to 
different contexts. So, for example, a machine can model the impact 
of climate change on a coastal area, assessing water temperature, 
pollution, currents, weather patterns, and a host of interweaving 
factors. By assessing all the data, a machine could yield conclusions 
about how to improve nearby architecture and combat erosion. But 
that same machine would not imagine how to deploy the data in 
different fields like economics, law, or health sciences. It would 
not, for example, make the decision to use the information in a 
study on human migration, apply it to operations in the fisheries 
industry, or write environmental legislation. Locked in the silos of 
its programming, it would not imagine the value of breaking out 
of domain-specific thinking.
Computers could be programmed to think across a variety of 
silos, enabling them to engage in systems thinking of a sort, but 
the big creative leaps that occur when humans engage in it are as 
yet unreachable by machines. For example, Dutch architect Koen 
Olthuis fanned such a systems thinking spark into a creative flame 
when he began to think about the intersection of climate change, 
urban planning, and architecture. Understanding that rising sea 
levels threaten cities around the entire world, he invented float-
ing buildings—ranging from cargo containers buoyed by recycled 
plastic bottles in Bangladeshi slums to luxury artificial islands in 
the Maldives—that can withstand the long-term effects of higher 
seas and blurring coastlines.26 Olthuis tackled the challenge of 
climate change through the foundational lens of an architect but 
also through the simultaneous frameworks of an environmentalist, 
a materials scientist, an engineer, and a design pioneer to come 
up with a solution no computer can yet muster. He thought about 

Chapter 3
66
urban sustainability as a forest of interconnected subjects, not a 
single disciplinary tree.
Systems thinkers possess the ability to tackle the problems that 
challenge us most. To address the tragic contaminated drinking 
water crisis in Flint, Michigan, systems thinkers would not treat it 
solely as a public health issue. They also would address it from the 
perspectives of civic infrastructure, taxation, leadership, and justice. 
Biologists combatting the Zika virus would view it as a medical 
emergency but also model its progress using network science and 
think about public outreach campaigns through a marketing lens. 
In the same vein, economists examining the Great Recession would 
consider the roles played not only by subprime lending but also by 
mortgage-backed securities and credit default swaps, failures in 
government regulation, and macroeconomic conditions.
Systems thinking is a critical cognitive capacity for anyone in a 
position of leadership but also for anyone attempting to discover 
new knowledge, launch a business, or create something original. 
It sees the details and the entire tableau, exercising our mental 
strength to weigh complexity while also testing our grasp on mul-
tiple strands of thought. Educational groups like the Waters Foun-
dation are working to bring such systems thinking exercises to K–12 
classrooms, embedding it in language, math, and social studies.27 
Colleges, too, can explicitly draw out the systems thinking lessons 
in their courses.
Entrepreneurship
As machines invade the labor market, the third cognitive capac-
ity, entrepreneurship, will be increasingly valuable as a means for 
people to distinguish themselves in the digital workplace. To put 

A Learning Model for the Future
67
it plainly, as machines fill old jobs, we will need to invent new 
ones. Indeed, because of the technologizing of the workforce, we 
probably will feel more pressure as a society to do so. One esti-
mate from the World Economic Forum claims that 65 percent of 
children entering primary school today will eventually work in jobs 
that do not yet exist.28 These jobs will be invented by entrepreneurs 
who strive to push the boundaries of discovery and invention, as 
well as to generate wealth. From this point of view, technology is 
not a threat but a source of opportunity. It does not destroy jobs; 
it generates potential new ones. The distinction is a matter of 
entrepreneurship.
This is one of the most compelling reasons that entrepreneurship 
should be a baseline capacity for all college learners. This capacity 
functions in two dimensions. The first dimension is the traditional 
startup model. As machines fill our existing roles in the labor 
market, we need to think of new roles in which we can expand that 
market by launching new ventures and new industries. The second 
dimension functions within the context of established institutions 
and businesses. Employees with an innovative mindset will invent 
new ways to bring value to their companies and new fields that no 
technology can yet master. In this way, entrepreneurial energies 
are reformative. For example, it was through an entrepreneurial 
mindset that GE’s management pushed the firm to reinvent itself 
from a twentieth-century manufacturing company into one that 
now focuses primarily on twenty-first-century technology and ser-
vices. This shift fundamentally reinvented the company but did 
not start a business from scratch. These two sides of the entrepre-
neurial coin—startup and evolution—harness the same drive for 
creation but latch it onto different entities.

Chapter 3
68
As a matter of fact, entrepreneurship is a capacity that can be 
applied to any business context, including ones that have no inten-
tion of generating profits. Entrepreneurs who bring original ideas 
to bear on social inequities can use the tools of the marketplace 
to ease poverty, boost development, and advance social justice. 
Teaching entrepreneurship—especially social entrepreneurship—
should thus be a matter of national consequence and a priority for 
universities.
Yet despite popular appearances, such as the cultural promi-
nence of celebrity entrepreneurs, entrepreneurship rates in the 
United States are down. Since 1994, the number of Americans 
employed in newly launched businesses has dropped by more than 
one million.29 As a society, we have to turn this trend around, and 
our success depends on whether our cultural and social climate is 
conducive to supporting innovation, change, and experimentation. 
The whole world may not be Silicon Valley, but the whole world 
can be inspired by it.
Desh Deshpande is the founder of Sycamore Networks and the 
Deshpande Foundation, a nonprofit aimed at accelerating entre-
preneurship for social and economic impact. In 2010, President 
Barack Obama appointed him as the cochair of the National Advi-
sory Council on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, and he has 
given a great deal of thought to how the entrepreneurial mindset  
functions.
According to Deshpande, “There are three types of people in 
the world. There are some people who are oblivious to everything, 
some people who see a problem and complain, and some people 
who see a problem and get excited to fix it. The difference between 
a vibrant community and an impoverished community is the mix 

A Learning Model for the Future
69
of those people.”30 The need for a preponderance of entrepreneurial 
people is even more pronounced as advanced machines prolifer-
ate in the workplace. People will have to think of creative ways  
to work.
Universities, with their critical masses of active minds, are  
ideal entrepreneurial ecosystems. In addition to developing aca-
demic programs that teach entrepreneurship, higher education can 
support initiatives that empower students to experiment with busi-
ness ideas. “The entrepreneur’s journey has to be experienced,” 
said Deshpande. “It’s a bit like having kids. You can talk all about 
what it’s like, but unless you do it, you’ll never know what that 
experience is like.”
A large part of that experience is failure. Machines, unlike people, 
are designed to always succeed at their tasks. If there is a systems 
failure of some sort, the consequences are usually unpleasant. 
Yet when human beings fail, the consequences can sometimes 
be providential. For example, Alexander Fleming famously discov-
ered penicillin after accidentally contaminating a petri dish with 
mold. Entrepreneurship requires an acceptance and a sideways 
view of failure. The saying “Fail fast, fail often” has now become 
a mantra in Silicon Valley. FailCon, a global conference for tech 
entrepreneurs to relate their tales of loss, is held everywhere from 
Toulouse to Tel Aviv.31 The term “failing upward” has entered the 
tech lexicon, and a corpus of business literature extols the lessons 
of noble failure. Yet in the business world, those lessons come at 
the heavy human cost of lost investments and curdled dreams. 
The beauty of entrepreneurship education in universities is that 
students can learn those lessons before they incur the real pain of 
ruined credit, unpaid bills, and broken relationships.

Chapter 3
70
Learning from failure is also an integral part of the scientific 
method lesson that students grasp through original research proj-
ects. Research is a form of intellectual entrepreneurship in that 
it is the creation of valuable knowledge. It teaches critical think-
ing, systems thinking, and creativity, pushing students to contex-
tualize their ideas within the framework of existing knowledge 
and then to imagine new avenues of discovery. For example, a 
student studying environmental science might work on research-
ing changes to coastal ocean temperatures. In addition to creat-
ing a method for gathering data and drawing conclusions from 
her findings, she would have to consider the ramifications of her 
work within the larger system of coastal sustainability. She would 
exercise her ability to think in detail, in broad strokes, and in new  
dimensions.
Cultural Agility
Experience is also an essential component in the final of our cogni-
tive capacities—cultural agility. This is, according to my colleague 
Paula Caligiuri, “the mega-competency that enables profession-
als to perform successfully in cross-cultural situations.”32 In the 
past, cultural agility might have seemed mostly the provenance of 
jet-setting business travelers and diplomats, but globalization has 
vaulted this skill into a mainstream imperative. Furthermore, no 
matter how accurate iTranslate becomes, true cultural agility is 
beyond the reach of machines. It requires empathy, discretion, and 
a very human nuance—protocol droids like Star Wars’ C-3PO will 
remain a figment of Hollywood for a long time to come.
Cultural agility involves more than just knowing how to behave 
in a video conference or at a foreign restaurant. It requires a deep 

A Learning Model for the Future
71
enough immersion in a culture so that we can fit seamlessly into 
multicultural teams or get results from people who have dramati-
cally different lives from our own. It also is applicable closer to 
home. Organizations have different corporate cultures and expect 
different behaviors from their employees, so it is a useful skill when 
switching between jobs. Consider, for example, the potential for 
disconnect between professionals moving from a casual California 
tech startup to a hierarchical Wall Street firm.
So, too, the flow of digital commerce is resetting workplace 
norms. Although international trade in goods stalled after the 2008 
downturn, digital flows—which comprise a snowballing portion 
of GDP—have increased dramatically. A 2016 McKinsey report 
found that the amount of cross-border bandwidth used globally has 
grown by forty-five times since 2005.33 A full 12 percent of global 
goods trade is now e-commerce. Increasing amounts of the traffic 
are performed between machines. One estimate suggests that, by 
2019, 40 percent of global connections between devices will be 
performed by machines with other machines.34 Even so, humans 
are fully immersed in this global movement. The McKinsey study 
found that 361 million people e-shop across international borders, 
44 million work online in other nations, and fully 914 million cross 
borders in their social networks.35
Increased global commerce means increased complexity in busi-
ness dealings due to cultural differences. And increased complex-
ity means increased chances of misunderstanding. Even simple 
assumptions may be fraught. For instance, a few years ago there 
was a popular trend for challenging people to donate money to 
ALS research or dump a bucket of ice water over themselves. In 
the United States, this was seen as a harmless meme that helped 

Chapter 3
72
raise donations for an important cause. In India, it was regarded 
as a shocking waste of clean water, so participants replaced it with 
the idea of donating a bag of rice to someone in need.36
We all need to understand, empathize, and collaborate with 
people from starkly different backgrounds. As of 2014, foreign-
born inhabitants of the United States numbered a historic high of 
42.4 million, or 13.3 percent of the total population. If you count the 
U.S.-born children of immigrants, that number rises to 81 million, 
or 26 percent.37 In our culturally diverse economy, the most suc-
cessful professionals will be those who can step lightly across 
divides, showing psychological ease in making decisions in differ-
ent contexts, integrating or adapting, and succeeding at different  
roles.38
There is not a machine in the world that can advise us on how 
to respond to a stranger at a crowded bar or how to react to the 
vocal tone and body language of a new colleague (although we 
have seen enormous leaps in software that can read facial expres-
sions).39 Machines might be able to tell us the exact meaning of a 
businessman’s words, but they would not be able to negotiate a deal 
while accounting for subtexts, unspoken meanings, and cultural 
assumptions.
Cultural agility is crucial for problem-solving across borders. A 
marketer selling an automobile would invent completely different 
publicity campaigns for Dubuque or Dubai. Likewise, a medical 
administrator in New England could call for the purchase of an 
expensive magnetic resonance imaging machine for her hospital, 
but the same machine might prove useless in another context—say, 
a clinic in Bangladesh that does not have the necessary electricity 
grid or maintenance support. In such a case, the best answer would 

A Learning Model for the Future
73
be reverse innovation—looking at how to fill a need cheaply or with 
the resources available in the developing world. In the case of the 
clinic, it might mean using inexpensive, battery-powered medical 
devices.
Context is everything—and that context is not easily appreciated 
by even the most intelligent of machines. The globalized economy 
has lifted the borders on business but not on the multiplicity of 
contexts in which human beings live and work. Until advanced 
machines learn to navigate the infinite variety of human belief and 
behavior, humans will continue to be the masters of our shared 
intercultural milieu.
BUT HOW TO TEACH IT?
If the goal of higher education is simply to insert information into 
a student’s brain, a library card or Internet connection would be 
the only tool we need. But most people are not autodidacts, and 
most college students do not master the content of their degree 
programs simply by reading. We employ seminars, essay assign-
ments, exams, and a multiplicity of other tools to teach academic 
content. Thus, when we rebalance the objective of a college educa-
tion away from its current overemphasis on content delivery and 
toward teaching the new literacies and cognitive capacities, we 
likewise need to expand our pedagogical toolbox. This involves 
thematic study across disciplines, project-based learning, and real-
world connections.
In thematic study, instructors can turn an implicit process of 
learning into an explicit one. A traditional liberal arts program, 
for instance, might see professors leading students through  

Chapter 3
74
rigorous consideration of gender in the Victorian novel while 
implicitly teaching strong writing and critical thinking skills. In 
our new model, teachers have to expose the underlying fabric of 
learning to their students, like turning a sweater inside out. They 
need to delineate clearly what is being studied, practiced, and 
acquired, explicitly identifying process and goals in every com-
ponent of a course. This does not necessarily require subscribing 
to all the prescriptions of the assessment movement in higher 
education, with its emphasis on student testing and institutional 
metrics. But it does mean that instructors should be explicit about  
their goals.
As such, their syllabi ought to describe the four cognitive capaci-
ties developed through each step of study and discussion. Each 
lecture would include a clear learning outcome along these lines. 
Exercises, exams, and simulations would be designed with similar 
goals. So, for example, a program teaching sustainability would 
map out how each assignment builds students’ systems thinking 
skills while exposing students to relevant concepts from environ-
mental science to data analysis, urban planning, physics, and health 
sciences. A business professor would explain how a case study 
imparts lessons on entrepreneurship. An assignment in a class on 
international contract law would denote how it develops cultural 
agility.
Furthermore, students would not consider their subjects in silos 
but would undertake hands-on projects that give them the oppor-
tunity to synthesize knowledge across different fields. They might, 
for example, apply the lessons of a business course and a computer 
science one to launch a tech startup out of their dorm room.

A Learning Model for the Future
75
Another tool available to instructors stands just outside the class-
room door. Because the world itself is the most effective teacher, 
educators also should be more mindful about connecting their 
teaching of the four cognitive capacities to applications outside the 
academic cloister. Students who practice systems thinking need to 
understand how their mental skills can serve them in real life. In 
this instance, perhaps, their instructor could help them see how 
the ability to assess a complex problem through multiple inter-
disciplinary lenses will help them manage a project team in a 
nonprofit fighting climate change. The key is to enable students to 
understand how, exactly, their acquisition of the new literacies and 
development of the cognitive capacities will serve them in their life 
goals—not simply as scores on a transcript.
These tools—explicit learning across disciplines, project-based 
learning, and real-world connections—are imperative in teaching 
the robot-proof model of higher education. But if the lessons are 
frozen in the classroom environment, they lose immediacy. It is 
one thing to hear a story told; it is another to act as the protagonist. 
Human beings, unlike robots, acquire their deepest programming 
through their senses as they explore the fullness of their environ-
ments and of their lives. Unlike machines, our greatest teacher is 
experience.


4
THE EXPERIENTIAL DIFFERENCE
Chapter 4
The Experiential Difference
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In 2011, IBM’s supercomputer, Watson, became the first machine 
ever to compete on the game show Jeopardy! Its opponents were 
the two greatest human champions in the game’s history—Ken 
Jennings, who held the record for the longest winning streak, and 
Brad Rutter, who was the show’s biggest all-time money winner. 
But although Watson soundly defeated his biological competitors, 
it did not play an entirely flawless game.
In one clue, host Alex Trebek said, “It was the anatomical oddity 
of U.S. gymnast George Eyser, who won a gold medal on the par-
allel bars in 1904.” Jennings incorrectly answered that Eyser was 
missing an arm. Watson then chimed in, “What is a leg?” Although 
it guessed the body part correctly, it failed to note that the limb 
was, in fact, missing. David Ferrucci, who led the Watson project, 
observed that the computer had probably tripped up on the word 
“oddity.” It would not have known, he said, that a missing leg is 
necessarily odd.1
Its biggest mistake, however, occurred in the final round of day 2. 
Under the “U.S. Cities” category, the clue read: “Its largest airport 
was named for a World War II hero; its second-largest, for a World 
War II battle.” Both of the human beings correctly answered, “What 
is Chicago?” But Watson had been programmed to focus on the 

Chapter 4
78
precise wording of the clue, giving less weight to the category title. 
Because “U.S. city” never appeared in the phrasing, it incorrectly 
guessed, “What is Toronto???”
Despite this hiccup, Watson handily routed the humans, and in 
the aftermath Jennings published an essay in Slate describing his 
defeat. “Just as factory jobs were eliminated in the 20th century 
by new assembly-line robots,” he wrote, “Brad and I were the first 
knowledge-industry workers put out of work by the new generation 
of ‘thinking’ machines. ‘Quiz show contestant’ may be the first job 
made redundant by Watson, but I’m sure it won’t be the last.”2
Jennings was certainly correct, but a more intriguing observation 
came during a moment of consolation. One of the IBM engineers 
told Jennings that his streak of game show victories had helped 
inspire the Watson project. “We looked at your games over and 
over, your style of play,” the engineer said. “There’s a lot of you 
in Watson.”
Machine learning, as the engineer’s comments suggest, is 
similar to human learning in some ways and very different in 
others. Computers such as Watson improve by casting their nets 
across inputs, trawling through them for patterns. The computer 
picks the “correct” answer based on the broadest consensus of its 
data sets. In many ways, it is a display of informational crowdsourc-
ing. In Watson’s case, some of those inputs included Jennings’ play 
style and strategies.
Intelligent machines get better through exposure to wider and 
wider pools of information. At a certain point, this learning tech-
nique is not unavailable to us because human brains cannot pos-
sibly absorb data at such a scale. But human brains have their 
advantages, too.

The Experiential Difference
79
The human Jeopardy! players erred through lack of knowledge, 
sluggish reflexes, nerves, or perhaps simply a hiccup of the syn-
apses. Watson’s mistakes, however, were due to context—or lack 
thereof. In the case of Eyser’s leg, a human being, having observed 
other mostly bipedal human beings on a near-constant basis for her 
entire conscious life, instantly would have known that it is atypical 
to be missing a limb. Likewise, in making an error most school-
children would have avoided in guessing Toronto, Watson did not 
show a lapse in its elementary geographic knowledge. Rather, it 
failed to think outside the parameters of the exact question. It failed 
to recognize context.
Computers have a problem with interpreting contexts because 
they do not live in the chaos of the human world, even though  
they do straddle the digital and physical environments. As com-
puters equipped with sensors become more and more adept, they 
increasingly are able to operate in and learn from the realities of 
the city street, the workplace, and the home. But they cannot experi-
ence human life—and because they cannot know the world through 
human experience, they cannot fully account for or fully appreciate 
human contexts.
In the previous chapter, we saw that an education in humanics—
based in the three new literacies and designed to develop the four 
cognitive capacities—is an evolution beyond traditional higher 
education teaching and learning. However, it still is not enough 
to make learners robot-proof for their entire careers. To catalyze 
their mastery of humanics, people need experiential learning  
in the contexts of different live—rather than classroom-based or 
digital—environments. As machine learning advances, computers 
will continue to grow more sophisticated cognitive capacities such 

Chapter 4
80
as critical thinking, systems thinking, and even cultural agility.  
But they will lack the very human lens from which we view life, 
learning to interpret contexts to assess, act, and make sound deci-
sions. Human beings possess this lens because we learn from 
experience.
Intelligent machines learn when their artificial neurons form 
stronger or weaker connections by gradually altering through trial 
and error. Human beings learn in much the same way, with our 
synaptic connections getting stronger or weaker. The key differ-
ence is that instead of pure numerical data inputs, we strengthen 
or weaken our mental connections through experience. In chapter 
3, we saw that human learning works best when it follows a pro-
gression of steps: learners should understand that they are actively 
building a cognitive capacity, and they need to understand how 
to apply that capacity. Most important, they then should actually 
apply it, actively using it in real-world situations while assessing 
the results and reflecting on the consequences. The goal of expe-
riential learning is to remove the boundaries between the class-
room and real life, creating a constant, multidimensional learning 
ecosystem. This steeps learners in randomness, in the serendipity 
and weirdness of life that diverts the brain down unmapped chan-
nels. It gives them the chance to improvise in contexts they never 
have encountered before, interacting, inventing, and thinking on 
their feet. When human learners are immersed in the incalculable 
variety of experience, they escape the strictures of predetermined 
input—which computers cannot do. They break free of their pro-
gramming, and they upgrade their minds.

The Experiential Difference
81
WHAT IS EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING?
Experiential learning is a model unlike any traditional format in 
that it integrates classroom and real-world experiences. It flings 
open the gates of the campus and makes the entire world a poten-
tial classroom, library, or laboratory. Typically, students engage in 
experiential learning through internships, co-ops, work-study jobs, 
global experiences, and original research opportunities. However, 
its principles extend to any situation that does not involve the 
passive absorption of information. In other words, if you do some-
thing outside of an academic environment and you learn as you do 
it, you are engaged in experiential learning.
As we all know, practice makes perfect. But the power of experi-
ential learning is that it places practice in novel contexts. Experience 
means contact with and observation of facts and events. To make an 
obvious point, learning occurs when we act and think. Experiential 
learning’s potency, however, is greatly amplified when it purpose-
fully integrates the self, humanics, and the real world. Learners 
follow an ongoing process of checking, testing, and refining their 
knowledge, but they do not do it in a random way. Genuine inte-
gration is paramount. There must be a two-way street between 
the application of classroom learning in the context of life and the 
application of real-world knowledge in the context of the classroom. 
If this is done purposefully—if it is done mindfully—learners peel 
back the layers of assumption or habit that cloud their insights into 
themselves. In clear light, they see their abilities, their present skills 
and knowledge, their predilections, and their room for growth. Con-
sequently, as they better understand the world, they better under-
stand their own minds.

Chapter 4
82
In many ways, experiential learning is life’s most sophisticated 
engine for personalized education. Because learners’ experiences 
are molded by the unique contexts of their lives, they are learning in 
ways unavailable to any machine. By constantly adapting to shifting 
reality, learners make unexpected connections. They find inspira-
tion in places they never would have thought to Google, stretching 
creative muscles and mental flexibility. Through this process, they 
become more robot-proof.
But how exactly do experience and learning connect? The  
value of experience in education has been debated for millennia. 
Some thinkers hold that context is a critical aspect of learning. For 
example, rationalists contend that reason alone is sufficient means  
to arrive at the truth about immutable realities, but empiricists  
argue that knowledge of reality must stem from observations 
incurred by the senses—from the context of experience. The great 
American educator and philosopher John Dewey thought that the 
validity of ideas should be tested against human experience, so 
he argued for a form of schooling based on such experiences.  
A student is not a blank slate, he wrote. Rather, he builds on the 
accretion of previous experiences and knowledge: “What he has 
learned in the way of knowledge and skill in one situation becomes 
an instrument of understanding and dealing effectively with the  
situations which follow. The process goes on as long as life and  
learning continue.”3
In contrast to Dewey, traditionalist educators rejected experience 
as the basis of knowledge, demanding a return to “the logic of 
ultimate first principles expressed in the logic of Aristotle and St. 
Thomas.” Dewey thought this choice was “so out of touch with all 
the conditions of modern life that I believe it is folly to seek salva-

The Experiential Difference
83
tion in this direction.” Instead, he called for lived experience to 
form the grounds of an education, with the “systematic utilization 
of scientific method as the pattern and ideal of intelligent explora-
tion and exploitation of the potentialities inherent in experience.”4 
In other words, he sought to take education out of the context of 
the closed mind and open it to the entirety of the world.
Dewey and his ideas on experiential education inspired many 
followers. In the 1970s, educational theorists Ronald Fry and  
David Kolb followed up on his notions by articulating “an integra-
tive framework for understanding the teaching-learning process.”5 
They devised a four-stage cycle based around the process of check-
ing, testing, and refining. In the first stage, the learner begins by 
doing—by having an immediate, concrete experience. This leads 
to a second stage of observation and reflection. The third stage is 
thinking—forming abstract concepts and generalizations. The final 
stage is planning—testing the implications of these concepts in 
new settings. The cycle repeats, and learning continues.
For example, an investor in a tech company sees her stock 
price rise. She observes that this happened immediately after the 
company announced the launch of a new product. Next, it dawns 
on her that the company plans to launch another product in six 
months—so this, too, may boost the stock price. Lastly, she deter-
mines to see if her investment in a competing company gets a boost 
immediately after it launches a rival product.
WHY IS EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING EFFECTIVE?
Although practice does bring learners closer to perfection, a vio-
linist, for example, will not become a virtuoso simply by running 

Chapter 4
84
a bow along the strings of her instrument ad infinitum. To be 
effective, her learning must follow a structured sequence. Learn-
ing science tells us that to master any complex subject, learners 
must first acquire component skills.6 Second, they need to practice 
integrating them into a given context. Third, they need to apply 
what they have learned in different contexts.7 So, for instance, an 
aspiring chef first learns basic knife skills, culinary terminology, 
and the preparation of stocks and sauces in a classroom. Next, she 
integrates these components by practicing recipes in a culinary 
school. Finally, she applies this knowledge by working the dinner 
shift at a busy restaurant.
The result of this sequence—acquisition, integration, application 
—is expertise. We can think of a student’s progress from igno-
rance to mastery as an advancement through four stages of devel-
opment within the dimensions of consciousness and competence.8 
In the first stage, students are unconsciously incompetent. They 
lack the knowledge to realize the extent of what they do not know. 
In the second stage, as the extent of this begins to dawn on them 
and they understand they have much to learn, they advance to a 
state of conscious incompetence. Further advancing, they reach a 
state of conscious competence in which they can perform well but 
must do so with deliberation and intent. At the final stage, they 
achieve the liberating state of unconscious competence, instinc-
tively operating at the highest level in their domain. So carrying 
on the example of our chef, she enrolls in culinary school without 
having ever heard of a mirepoix. Next, she begins to fathom how 
many stocks and sauces she has never tasted, much less attempted 
to make from scratch. Later, after months of practice, she finally is 
able to cook an acceptable beef Wellington. Finally, the day comes 

The Experiential Difference
85
when she can run a full kitchen while absent-mindedly whipping 
up a dessert soufflé.
To achieve a high level of mastery, a chef—or any learner—must 
first follow the aforementioned sequence of acquisition of skills or 
knowledge, integration, and application. Acquisition and integra-
tion can be undertaken in academic settings. So returning to our 
robot-proof learning model, students acquire content knowledge 
such as the new literacies in the classroom. They integrate them 
through controlled assignments such as writing essays, complet-
ing projects, or conducting laboratory experiments. But when they 
apply them to a novel context, they actually achieve mastery. This is 
where experiential learning comes into play. Experiential learning 
is effective because it completes the three-part learning sequence, 
giving learners the opportunity to take the components they have 
integrated and apply them to complex, living contexts.
Application is the crucial, final step in the sequence, and its oper-
ating principle is transfer. Transfer occurs when skills or knowledge 
are learned in one context and the student successfully applies 
them to another. If the contexts are similar—say, when students 
take ideas they learned in a class on Elizabethan drama and apply 
them to one on Restoration poetry—the transfer is near. The stu-
dents take a theory, concept, or body of knowledge and put it to 
work in a new but largely familiar situation. If the contexts are 
largely disparate—for example, when critical thinking skills honed 
in a Restoration poetry seminar are used to create a public rela-
tions campaign for a marketing company—the transfer is far. The 
students are encountering an entirely novel situation but are able 
to step back and understand how, embedded in the context, they 
can use their knowledge to solve a problem.

Chapter 4
86
Some educators argue that far transfer is the ultimate goal of 
education. Learning is not much use, after all, if its efficacy sputters 
out the instant it leaves the classroom. But far transfer is difficult 
to do. Studies have shown that students rarely exhibit the ability 
to apply relevant learning to unfamiliar situations.9 They may find 
themselves overly dependent on familiar contexts and inflexible 
to new applications. They also may lack a deep understanding of  
their domain, knowing the what but not the why. This blinds them 
from seeing how their knowledge could be utilized in a different 
setting.
The combination of theoretical knowledge that crosses contexts 
with lived experience is the key to overcoming these difficulties, 
helping students become adept at far transfer.10 For example, in a 
study cited by the authors of How Learning Works, a seminal book 
in learning science, researchers asked two groups of students to 
throw darts at targets placed one foot under water.11 Both groups got 
better at hitting the targets with practice. Then teachers instructed 
one group about the principle of light refraction. When the targets 
were readjusted to a different depth, the students who had learned 
the abstract concept were better able to adapt their throwing tech-
niques, scoring much higher than the ignorant group. In other 
words, academic or theoretical knowledge enabled them to transfer 
their experiential knowledge to a new context successfully.
Exercises that prompt students to consider problems in different 
contexts can help build transfer, as can immediate feedback from 
instructors or supervisors. This is especially effective in situations 
in which learners face real-life consequences, such as workplace 
environments. For instance, our chef may have learned in culinary 
school how to whisk together Hollandaise sauce, but a sous chef 

The Experiential Difference
87
might remind her to avoid overheating it while working a busy 
brunch service. The lesson is cemented under the pressure of living 
action. She incorporates the feedback, successfully plates the eggs 
Benedict, and improves her mastery.
WHY DOES EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING MAKE YOU ROBOT-PROOF?
We have seen that when learners put their knowledge into prac-
tice in real-life situations, they develop a better understanding of 
themselves, their strengths and weaknesses, and their drives and 
possibilities. They also sharpen their cognitive capacities, leading 
to the robot-proof qualities of creativity and mental flexibility—both 
aspects of far transfer. By contrast, no computer has yet displayed 
creativity, entrepreneurialism, or cultural agility. And although 
machines are continually improving in their ability to map knowl-
edge onto recognizable problems—in other words, improving in 
their near transfer abilities—they cannot perform far transfer well, 
at least not in the infinite contexts of real life.
Some enterprising machines in the future might launch their 
own financial services consultancy, resolve a fraught negotiation 
over intellectual property between American and Chinese lawyers, 
or post an original video that garners a hundred million likes. But 
they have not done these things yet, and they do not appear to able 
to do so anytime soon. Human beings need to use their robot-
proof cognitive capacities for those purposes. In other words, our 
potential to master far transfer is our competitive advantage over 
intelligent machines.
Practicing far transfer stretches not only the mind but also the 
mindset. Psychologist Carol Dweck has articulated a concept of 

Chapter 4
88
mindset that cuts to the core of why experiential learning is power-
ful. According to Dweck, people respond to situations with either a 
“fixed mindset” or a “growth mindset.” The fixed mindset is unable 
to view adverse contexts as anything but impediments. In this 
mindset, people believe that their qualities and capabilities are set 
and immovable. Their thinking is rigid: you are either intelligent, 
outgoing, or good at math, or you’re not. This mindset is reinforced 
in schoolchildren when we punish failure by awarding bad grades. 
In many traditional classrooms, the swing between punishment 
and reward teaches kids to value success and affirmation above 
anything else. They learn to see setbacks not as opportunities but 
as personal failures. People stuck in this mindset tend to believe 
that circumstance is a fence that cannot be breached. They think 
that great artists, athletes, and scholars are born that way or get 
lucky. It is a constrained point of view that consequently limits 
people’s potential.
A growth mindset, on the other hand, believes you can change 
the contexts in which you find yourself—even simply the context 
of your own thinking. Personal qualities are mutable. From this 
point of view, adversity is not a negative context but an opportu-
nity for learning and improvement. For example, you may not be 
particularly outgoing, but you can choose to step up and make the 
introductions at a cocktail party. You may not be good at math right 
now, but you can keep practicing your calculus problems.
Growth mindsets see that natural talent and circumstance are 
not anchored contexts but are merely starting points from which to 
improve. People with a growth mindset possess the conviction that 
they can, though effort and diligence, change their abilities. They 
become self-reliant. This is of obvious use in converting setbacks 

The Experiential Difference
89
into future successes, although people with this mindset do not see 
success as merely winning. To them, the real value in any context 
is the opportunity to learn.
In other words, the growth mindset posits that in general, situ-
ations, contexts, and the state of one’s own learning are not inher-
ently good or bad. Their value lies in how we think about them. The 
growth mindset is essential to nurturing the cognitive capacities of 
critical thinking and systems thinking because both demand that 
students cast the nets of their minds on wide, and often unexplored, 
waters. And it is the key to becoming the most robot-proof person 
of all—the self-directed, lifelong learner.
Dweck observes that this mindset is also the foundation of some-
thing else. “In a poll of 143 creativity researchers,” she writes, “there 
was wide agreement about the number one ingredient in creative 
achievement. And it was exactly the kind of perseverance and resil-
ience produced by the growth mindset.”12 Indeed, we already have 
glimpsed this in our earlier discussion of divergent versus conver-
gent thinking. The questions that arise, then, are how do you teach 
students to identify when they are stuck in a fixed mindset, spin-
ning their wheels, and what sort of mental boost will push them 
back onto the track of the growth mindset?
Classroom instruction can help. Evidence shows that simply 
pointing out the idea of mindsets to students compels them to 
take notice of it and make efforts to change. But reading about 
Dweck’s theory in a traditional learning context is not sufficient. 
To exercise the growth mindset and build a student’s creativity, she 
has to experience using it. She has to learn by doing.
Experience is the catalyst for the suprarational aspects of learn-
ing. By experiencing different situations and contexts, we trigger 

Chapter 4
90
our emotions, challenge our beliefs, and test the fabric of our 
minds. These almost subconscious elements of thinking spur our 
minds to grow—and these subconscious elements cannot be mim-
icked by computer processors. Deep learning in machines works by 
scanning data for patterns. Experiential learning in humans works 
through exposure to the full universe of stimuli. The outcomes 
are as complex and incalculable as the effects of a rainstorm on a 
woodland or the flow of water through a riverbed.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING THROUGH CO-OP
For college students, one of the most direct forms of experiential 
learning is cooperative education—an educational model in which 
students alternate their classroom learning with sustained, full-
time immersion in the professional workplace and then integrate 
the two. “Co-op,” as it often is called, is an approach with a long 
history in institutions of higher education. It began as the brain-
child of Herman Schneider, an architect, engineer, and educator 
who first instituted the model soon after joining the faculty of the 
University of Cincinnati in 1903. A few years later, Northeastern 
University adopted the model. Over time, Northeastern and other 
co-op universities have developed a robust institutional architec-
ture to support this way of learning, integrating it into academic 
departments and curricula. Establishing and maintaining these is 
no small task.
Northeastern’s co-op program is built on a century of deliber-
ate cultivation, advances in learning science, trial and error, ser-
endipity, and elbow grease. When it began in the first decade of 
the twentieth century, it provided work experience to fledgling  

The Experiential Difference
91
automobile mechanics and electrical engineers. Today, it is a full-
fledged experiential learning model that includes partnerships with 
3,300 employers in more than 130 countries around the world—
including the occasional placement in Antarctica.
This global character is fundamental to the program’s success. 
We believe that the best way to educate students to understand the 
world—and ultimately, to change the world—is to immerse them in 
it. As such, we offer students opportunities to live, learn, and gain 
professional experience in as wide a variety of countries, companies, 
and institutions as they can. By immersing themselves in different 
cultures, proving themselves in different professional settings, and 
experiencing different problems, challenges, and understandings 
of societal issues, our students gain a deeper understanding of the 
world, the subjects they are studying, and themselves. When they 
return to the university from their co-op experiences, they apply all 
of this in their subsequent academic learning.
Co-ops typically last six months, after which students return 
to the academic nest. Because most Northeastern undergradu-
ates pursue co-ops—indeed, most complete multiple co-ops—the 
program needs to work for a wide variety of disciplinary majors. 
Some students seek out co-ops that hew closely to the subjects they 
are studying, such as the business major who does a co-op at a 
financial services firm. Others look for co-ops that are at the leading 
edge of their fields, such as the health sciences major who seeks out 
a co-op at a medical center that is implementing a “personalized 
medicine” model of care. Still others seek out co-ops that are far 
from their field of study, such as the design major who pursues a 
co-op with NASA. They may do this out of sheer curiosity and love 

Chapter 4
92
of learning or because they have an interesting idea about how their 
discipline and the focus of their co-op may interrelate.
The process of researching, interviewing for, and undertaking a 
co-op helps many students decide what they want to study or pursue 
professionally. Others decide, after completing a co-op in a certain 
field, that the area they thought they wanted to study or pursue as 
a career actually is not for them, after all. Still other students are 
burgeoning entrepreneurs who use co-ops to understand the area 
in which they want to launch a business—and then do just that 
after their co-op is complete.
To match students with co-ops, the university maintains a sizable 
network of coordinators who work with both students and employ-
ers, as well as career development coordinators who work with 
students. These dedicated staff members perform a twofold func-
tion. First, they help students seek out co-ops, determine learning 
outcomes on the job, and reflect productively on the experiences 
after their completion. Northeastern students must apply and be 
accepted to a co-op, and not all students are accepted for the oppor-
tunities for which they apply. This in itself becomes a learning 
experience for students to assess and reflect on as they prepare to 
apply to another co-op.
Second, our coordinators collaborate with employers to ensure 
that they provide a meaningful, high-quality experience for the 
student. Likewise, they work to ensure that students will provide 
solid value for employers by defining the deliverables and outcomes 
that the company, agency, or business concern seeks from the 
co-op student.
A typical undergraduate embarks on her first co-op during 
sophomore year. After having the established some foundational 

The Experiential Difference
93
knowledge in her discipline, she will enroll in a preparatory class 
that establishes practical skills such as writing a résumé and sitting 
for a job interview, honing in on her career interests and goals, 
and developing job-search strategies. Class exercises also expose 
her to principles of mindful learning so that she enters her co-op 
with an open mindset. The idea is for the student to approach the 
professional environment of a co-op with a clear view of how her 
experiences there will connect with her classroom learning, as well 
as a deliberate idea of what she wishes to achieve.
After the student discovers a good fit, she and the supervisor at 
her co-op location delineate her exact job responsibilities and learn-
ing objectives. By applying their classroom learning to workplace 
tasks, students in co-ops repeatedly practice far transfer, cementing 
the cognitive capacities—critical and systems thinking, entrepre-
neurship, and cultural agility. Furthermore, they experience the 
tangible consequences of their actions. In a classroom setting, a 
lack of preparation or a failure to think three steps ahead might 
result in a flunked quiz or botched experiment. In a workplace, 
it could undermine the bottom line, to say nothing of adult lives 
and careers.
At the conclusion of six months, the student returns to campus 
to share her experiences living, learning, and working in her co-op 
with her peers, writing essays analyzing her experiences, and bring-
ing her stories to discussion groups. This debriefing is an essential 
component of the model. It helps students consciously integrate 
what they have learned in their professional environment, as well 
as in their broader immersion in the world, into their course of 
study and their lives on campus.

Chapter 4
94
Ultimately, a co-op is as different from an internship as a  
narrative poem is from a haiku. For the students, co-ops are deep 
and sustained learning experiences, charged with purpose. After a 
co-op, students better understand their academic disciplines, the 
rhythms and nuances of the professional workplace, and the part 
of the world in which they have lived and worked. Most important, 
they better understand themselves.
There also is compelling empirical evidence that co-ops help 
students develop a wide range of higher-order skills that make 
them more robot-proof. In 2015, Northeastern conducted a scien-
tifically designed survey of one thousand employers across twenty-
five industries, including manufacturing, science and technology, 
finance, and insurance. Some of the employers had hired recent 
Northeastern graduates (all of whom had completed co-ops), while 
others had not.
We then asked the employers for their perceptions of recent 
graduates’ skills. The results were eye-opening—and demon-
strate the power of experiential learning. For example, across a 
spectrum of nine higher-order skills—including critical thinking, 
analytical reasoning, problem solving, obtaining and processing 
information, and working with diverse groups—employers rated 
Northeastern graduates significantly higher than graduates from 
other colleges and universities. Likewise, across a range of eleven 
additional attributes—including leadership, initiative, teamwork, 
flexibility, willingness to learn, and creativity—employers again 
rated recent graduates of our university well ahead of those who 
presumably had not had the benefit of co-ops or other experiential 
learning opportunities. All of these differences were statistically  
significant.13

The Experiential Difference
95
It is not surprising, then, that when employers are asked 
whether co-op and experiential learning models should be more 
prevalent in higher education, they respond resoundingly in the 
affirmative. For example, in a national study Northeastern con-
ducted of C-suite executives and business leaders, 96 percent 
said that integrating education programs with practical experience 
was important. Nearly half reported that learning new skills and 
industry-relevant competencies is the most important thing new 
employees should do in their first five years on the job.14 Conse-
quently, learning models like co-op that begin this process before a 
person joins the professional workforce full-time are advantageous. 
The general public in the United States sees widespread benefits to 
co-op and experiential learning, too. In a separate national study, 
more than 85 percent of respondents agreed that the co-op model 
helps students develop more applied skills, develops job candi-
dates who are better prepared for the real world, and better pre-
pares college graduates to find professional employment in today’s  
job market.15
CO-OP IN ACTION
To see how co-op and experiential learning translates into the devel-
opment of robot-proof skills in human terms, consider Catherine 
Erdelyi, a math and business administration major at Northeastern. 
She arrived at college planning to explore a career as a math teacher, 
but after her first experience volunteering in the community, she 
realized that path was not to her taste, so she switched to a more 
analytical direction. After her faculty adviser suggested she look 
at career possibilities as an actuary, she went on a co-op with a 

Chapter 4
96
company that developed software used by insurance companies to 
model risk. “Mostly what I did was work with catastrophe bonds,” 
Catherine told me. “Investors would pay into this bond thinking 
that if a hurricane is not going to happen, they would get interest 
from it but that if it does happen, they lose a lot of money. So we 
would figure out at what threshold they would lose some of their 
money or all of their money, to determine the risk of the bond.”16 In 
short, she applied her critical thinking skills to a complex, real-life 
project, transferring the math skills she acquired in the classroom 
to the faraway context of the workplace.
In subsequent co-ops with companies such as Liberty Mutual 
Insurance and John Hancock, Catherine employed systems think-
ing to interpret the results from computer models. “I worked in the 
catastrophe management space,” she explained, describing how she 
used the models to determine the losses the company would incur 
if, for example, a hurricane hit Florida. “My job as an analyst was to 
know how to interpret the data, who to tell, and why it’s important. I 
had to send it up the chain, so if our loss was going to be X amount, 
to make sure we were prepared for that. I would have to consider, 
from a strategic point of view, if that meant buying reinsurance or 
maybe stopping insuring so many homes in Florida.”
Catherine’s systems thinking meant the difference between 
profit and loss, success or failure in very vivid terms. No algorithm 
could have mimicked her mental flexibility in assessing the entire 
field of questions, events, numbers, and strategies. No computer 
could have taken such a broad view of the situation and improvised 
the correct decisions within the live context of a working company. 
Through these experiences, Catherine not only practiced her cog-
nitive capacities but also learned to be a more flexible thinker and 
brought enormous value to her employers.

The Experiential Difference
97
Or consider the example of Mackenzie Jones, a political science 
and international affairs major at my university. During a co-op 
with the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, she was assigned to monitor the daily news 
in the Balkans and other parts of Europe and Central Asia, looking 
for stories that would fit the organization’s mission. If she found 
a story of interest, she might be tasked with writing a brief on it. 
But first she had to research its veracity—not always a straightfor-
ward job when speaking with people from the contexts of different 
cultures. “With the Internet, you never really know what you can 
trust,” observed Mackenzie. “I was expected to call news organi-
zations and be like, ‘Hi, does anyone in your organization speak 
English, and could you tell me what happened?’”17
A machine mind—namely, Google Translate—helped Mackenzie 
in her work. But it could not help her ascertain whether a story was 
true or a total fabrication. Thus, although a computer might easily 
aggregate news stories and translate them, it would show poor judg-
ment in weighing their merit. In this important regard, Mackenzie 
had a competitive advantage over any piece of software.
“You have to be careful because if you misinterpret something 
and repeat it and then you spread the lie, we would lose credibil-
ity,” she said. “Also, it’s illegal to defame somebody.” Recently, 
the proliferation of “fake news” on social media has shown the 
danger of mixing false information with technology unchecked by 
any gatekeepers. Technology lacks the discernment to filter truth 
from deceit. And although human judgment can be grossly flawed, 
humans are also adept at sniffing out the truth by using context, 
such as people’s visible and not-so-visible motivations, to ascertain 
what are facts and what are lies.

Chapter 4
98
This sense of nuance and relativity is an important part of cul-
tural agility. A receptive, adaptable mindset is also the wellspring 
of empathy—a commodity much in need in our increasingly 
global and technologically complex era. For example, Mary Tobin, 
a finance and political science major, spent five weeks in Swit-
zerland at the United Nations in Geneva, studying disarmament 
diplomacy. “I got to meet many ambassadors to the U.N. from a 
lot of different countries,” she said. “People working toward creat-
ing regulations around the use of mines or mine cleanup in places 
like Cambodia that have really awful problems with people still 
getting legs or arms blown off because of mines that have been 
there for decades.”18
Her immersion in these difficult questions led Mary to pursue 
a research project on human rights, international law, and the 
use of autonomous robotic weapons. “There’s no human actually 
interacting with the decision to pull the trigger on another human, 
and [there are] not even any verification systems. Studying this was 
a really enlightening experience.” By interacting with people from 
places directly affected by tragedies that often are encountered only 
in news feeds, Mary was inspired to delve deeper into subjects of 
enormous legal complexity and moral nuance. She explored the 
idea that while some of us fret about technology threatening our 
livelihoods, others harbor genuine terror about software weighing 
the scales of life or death.
Empathy is what led Ali Matalon, a business and political science 
major with a concentration in entrepreneurship and innovation, to 
apply her classroom lessons to a seemingly intractable problem. 
On a co-op with a nonprofit in Jamaica, Ali witnessed the desper-
ate social and economic situation of unemployed young people. 

The Experiential Difference
99
Wanting to help train them for employability and connect them 
with paid work, Ali and her colleagues had to think entrepreneur-
ially about what resources they had at their disposal. Her project 
recruited sixteen- to twenty-nine-year-olds from communities at 
high risk from gang culture. The majority of them lacked a high 
school education. They had few prospects and little opportunity to 
break the cycle of poverty. What they did possess, however, were 
smartphones.
“Ninety percent of them have worked with Word, PowerPoint, 
or even Excel at some point,” said Ali. “They have used things like 
WhatsApp or Facebook or a number of other technology applica-
tions. Those skills become very easily transferable.”19
Applying the entrepreneurship training she received in class, Ali 
helped launch a microwork center to assist the young Jamaicans in 
developing their coding and software skills. Then, using business 
processing outsourcing (BPO), they set up the trainees to accept 
contract work. “It’s data management and manipulation services,” 
she said. “Someone might need a blog updated, so they throw that 
up on the BPO system to be sent out as a job. Or a consulting group 
might need an Excel file sorted but doesn’t want to run the sorting 
software on it because shifts in the data could cause a problem. So 
humans deal with that work.”
Through innovative thinking and entrepreneurship, Ali and her 
colleagues created a novel approach to tackling a complex chal-
lenge. And although this sort of digital piecemeal work does not pay 
much, the increments accumulate enough to make a difference in 
people’s lives. “This is the nose to the grindstone, get it done—not 
the most exciting work,” said Ali. “But it helps to pay the bills.” 
Hiring young Jamaican contractors for low-skill technology work is 

Chapter 4
100
cheaper and more efficient than trying to automate it. Technology, 
in this case, is not destroying jobs but is helping to lift people out 
of poverty while inspiring students like Ali to use their talents for 
the greater good. Social entrepreneurship co-ops such as this are a 
powerful reminder of our common humanity and a powerful way 
to practice the robot-proof cognitive capacities.
LEVERAGING EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING IN THE RESIDENTIAL UNIVERSITY
Northeastern has benefited from taking a framework that our pre-
decessors established a century ago as a basic applied learning 
approach and evolving it into a global experiential learning model 
that provides a unique level of breadth and depth for learners. As 
they make their way into their careers and the world, our students 
profit from having used co-op to find out what they like and do not 
like, to discover what they are good at and what they are not good at, 
and to understand the diversity of the human family and the human 
experience in meaningful ways. At the same time, all colleges and 
universities have the opportunity to leverage elements of experien-
tial learning, particularly in the residential campus setting. After 
all, a campus is simply another environment to experience, and 
it is a particularly rich one that pools a concentration of resources 
and people.
First and most obviously, the residential college model inher-
ently cultivates cultural agility, drawing together students from 
diverse backgrounds and philosophies. When disparate people see 
each other every day in class or in the dormitory, they have no 
choice but to observe their commonalities and differences. Years 
ago, two freshmen, a Muslim student and a Jewish student, were 

The Experiential Difference
101
assigned to be roommates and immediately demanded (but did not 
get) alternate lodging partners. By the Thanksgiving break, they 
were celebrating the holiday in each other’s homes. Because many 
undergraduates have grown up with limited exposure to other cul-
tures, the educational importance of a diverse student body cannot 
be overstated.
Although the foremost purpose of the college is to educate stu-
dents through challenging coursework, students can hone their 
critical and systems thinking in many other ways. Clubs and 
student organizations provide goals, projects, and experience with 
leadership and teamwork. Volunteering and service learning oppor-
tunities do similarly, with the additional force of having real con-
sequences. For example, a student joins the campus chapter of a 
national mentorship organization in her freshman year, thereby 
developing her cultural agility but also her human literacies and 
communication skills. During her sophomore year, she further 
hones her human literacy as a writer for a student magazine, then 
practices her critical and systems thinking as an outreach coordina-
tor for Black History Month, connecting people from the campus 
and the surrounding community. In her junior year, she takes 
a yoga teacher-training class, which she parlays into organizing 
and leading a yoga retreat to South America—a great example of 
the intersection of cultural agility and entrepreneurship. Learning 
happens everywhere. The salient point is for students to be cogni-
zant of and hence reflective about their experiences.
Entrepreneurship experiences do this especially well because they 
yield very measurable results. Given the right conditions, entrepre-
neurship can be fully woven into the fabric of campus life, greatly 
expanding its educational reach. One study showed that, within the 

Chapter 4
102
workplace, peers influence each other to spot opportunities and act 
on them: the more entrepreneurs you have working together in an 
office, the more likely their colleagues will catch the bug.20 A study 
of Stanford University alumni found that those “who have varied 
work and educational backgrounds are much more likely to start 
their own businesses than those who have focused on one role at 
work or concentrated in one subject at school.”21
To cultivate an entrepreneurial culture, colleges and univer-
sities need to offer students a broad choice of experiences and  
wide exposure to different ideas. They are uniquely positioned to 
do this by combining the resources of academic programming, 
residential life, student groups, and alumni networks. Student-
run venture incubators, for example, can take students through 
the comprehensive process of launching startups—from idea gen-
eration through business planning, development, investment, and 
implementation.
Consider a young engineer and entrepreneur who has an idea 
for a special coating that protects implantable medical devices—and 
the people who have them—by repelling bacteria. She takes it to 
the venture incubator, where her peers studying biochemistry help 
her assess the biological interactions the coating would have with 
the device and with human tissue. Colleagues from the business 
school could help her research the market for her product and roll 
out a business plan, while design majors might help her develop 
the branding for the product. She could also connect with alumni 
mentors from the health sciences and venture capital communi-
ties who would offer advice on product launch, leadership, or even 
financial support. Meanwhile, faculty provide oversight and advice 
from an academic perspective.

The Experiential Difference
103
Because faculty members already assist students in exploring 
original research opportunities beyond the usual curricular require-
ments, they can do this in a way that promotes reflection, iteration, 
and integration with coursework. By generating new knowledge in 
contexts outside the classroom, students are creatively energized 
and tested on the mettle of their critical and systems thinking. 
The undergraduate whose name appears on a piece of original 
research may furthermore make discovery a fulfilling, robot-proof 
career path.
Global experiences, too, take advantage of the educational rich-
ness that comes with a radical shift in the student’s learning context. 
By stepping away from the controlled setting of the campus into 
the maelstrom of a broader reality, the student’s experiential learn-
ing goes into overdrive. Just as important, sustained interaction 
and observation of people from different cultures teaches cultural 
agility. It gives students culture-specific knowledge as well as prac-
tice in reading contexts, weighing responses, and learning how best 
to integrate, adapt, or tactfully deflect a situation. For example, a 
U.S. college student who spends six months working for a New 
York bank may learn about international finance, but if she works 
for a bank in Hong Kong, she also will learn to negotiate the 
unfamiliar terrain of Chinese office politics, grocery shopping in 
Cantonese, and riding the Star Ferry to Kowloon. Swimming deep 
in these unfamiliar contexts, she exercises her mental flexibility and 
creative problem-solving.
THE EXPERIENTIAL LIBERAL ARTS22
With all the possibilities offered by co-curricular experiences,  
most colleges will have no difficulties in incorporating experiential 

Chapter 4
104
learning into their programs. Yet liberal arts institutions may seek 
a more structured approach that explicitly integrates the arts and 
humanities with real-life experience. Called “experiential liberal 
arts,” this model advances past the old juxtaposition of the humani-
ties versus the applied disciplines, tapping into the complexity and 
rigor of both.23
The liberal arts are, regrettably, all too often dismissed as 
impractical—as a student’s quickest route to her parents’ base-
ment by way of an anthropology degree. Nothing could be more 
mistaken. The study of applied disciplines such as engineering sets 
a steep academic challenge, but so does the study of any complex 
system. Engineers must learn the dizzying intricacies of a struc-
ture’s composition and context, including materials, environment, 
the forces of physics, time, and logic. Such complexity spurs intel-
lectual development, yet the study of human culture and behavior 
is just as complex. Both demand the grasp of intricate systems, with 
the humanities and social sciences offering an elaborate mesh of 
history, art, geography, economics.
For instance, when an engineer fills her automobile with gaso-
line, she might muse about the workings of her car’s engine or 
about the process of oil extraction and refinement. A person edu-
cated in the liberal arts, on other hand, might reflect on the history 
of OPEC, international energy use, and global warming. Recall-
ing her philosophy classes, she might think it ethically necessary 
to drive less or consider the role of oil in fueling international 
conflicts. In regards to rigor, then, the liberal arts can be just as 
demanding as any “harder” disciplines.
Perhaps the reason that applied studies and hard science often 
possess a reputation for greater utility is that they feature a strong 

The Experiential Difference
105
laboratory or workplace component while liberal arts classes are 
often framed by written self-expression. There is an arguably 
arbitrary distinction between the abstract and the real, but it may 
account for the conceit that a liberal arts education does not lead 
to a solid paycheck. However, by reproducing the lessons from 
engineering laboratories or business school internships, liberal arts 
programs can counter this misperception. They need an experi-
ential component. This means combining the rigor of traditional 
academics with active participation in workplaces, laboratories, or 
volunteer opportunities.
For example, an English major might intern with a media 
company, applying ideas she encountered in a class on the tech-
nology of text to writing in new publishing formats. A philosophy 
major could parlay a work-study program at the United Nations 
Human Rights Council into a research project on labor ethics in 
the global economy. A history major could apply content knowledge 
and research skills to write a report analyzing plans for a proposed 
civic construction project. I know one undergraduate who applied 
his English major to designing a customer support system and 
performing financial analysis for a cloud computing startup firm. 
“Doing financial analysis is surprisingly similar to doing literary 
analysis,” he told me. “When you read a poem or a novel, your 
professor tells you to look between the text and dig as deep as you 
can to find out everything the author is trying to say. When you’re 
looking at a spreadsheet of numbers, you’re doing the same thing: 
What are these numbers trying to tell me?”
An experiential liberal arts model also integrates traditional liberal 
arts skills with technological proficiencies. This gives students the 
tools of the digital humanities and computational social sciences, 

Chapter 4
106
teaching them to apply data and technological literacies to human 
literacy, but it also pushes students to explore the social dimensions 
of our machines, including the ethical implications of technological 
change. Advances in computational analytics have revolutionized 
the humanities, so students should be prepared to utilize these 
technologies in full. They can now make connections that had, 
until recently, been impossible. For instance, a recent study out of 
the University of California at Santa Barbara, “Network Science on 
Belief System Dynamics under Logic Constraints,” used a math-
ematical model to examine how people’s shared belief systems are 
interlocked and affected by interpersonal influences.24 Using tools 
such as this, humanities and social science scholars can untangle 
extremely knotty questions with unprecedented accuracy.
Experiential liberal arts students can use these new technological 
methods to work on original research, engage in student-faculty  
collaborations, and integrate learning and outreach through proj-
ects based in their communities. History students, for example, 
could compile digital archives of nineteenth-century black intellec-
tuals in their cities or create networks of historical texts and maps. 
The humanities are expanding their digital toolbox. As we expand 
the scope of what they can do, we have to expand the scope of what 
we must teach.
The marriage of liberal arts skills with experiential learning and 
technological proficiencies is an ideal method for growing stu-
dents’ cognitive capacities and their appetites for ongoing study 
in new learning situations throughout their lives. Bates College, a 
leader in U.S. liberal arts education, is tapping into this method 
through its strategic priorities of “engaged liberal arts” and “pur-
poseful work.” Not long ago, Bates resolved to orient its curriculum 

The Experiential Difference
107
toward helping “students identify and cultivate their interests and 
strengths and acquire the knowledge, experiences and relation-
ships necessary to pursue their aspirations with imagination and 
integrity.” This initiative involves skills-specific courses, as well as 
an emphasis on building workplace skills through co-curricular 
programs, paid internships, and practitioner-taught courses. In 
the college’s intensive, short Spring Term, such courses include 
practical titles like “Business of the Arts,” “Project Management,” 
or “Brand Culture Building.”25 This embrace of workplace realities 
hasn’t betrayed the ideals of this liberal arts college, but rather 
helps students develop their critical thinking and creativity in novel 
ways, while the stress on internships brings them to flower in the 
hotbed of the real world.
But experiential liberal arts experiences should not be only for 
liberal arts students. Even brilliant computer scientists have to 
thrive in a human context or risk having their work overlooked. 
Even trailblazing biochemists need to understand the social impli-
cations of their research. By enhancing their courses of study with 
the humanities and social sciences, programs in the “harder” dis-
ciplines can better prepare their graduates to succeed. By bleeding 
a little into each other, both approaches to higher education give 
graduates a powerful, practical education.
ASSESSING EXPERIENCE
Whether it is through co-op, co-curricular experiences or the experi-
ential liberal arts, experiential learning in higher education aims to 
level the walls between the classroom and the rest of life. Learning 
happens everywhere, so educators must help students grow from 

Chapter 4
108
their experiences wherever they occur. To that end, we need to 
consider how students can turn implicit, even unconscious learn-
ing opportunities into explicit learning outcomes.
One way to do this is to map students’ growth as they move 
through the learning ecosystem. This would mean that classroom 
grades are only one facet of their developmental assessment. Educa-
tors also would track students’ advancement in their new literacies 
and cognitive capacities, wherever they practice them. A student 
who volunteers as a mentor for disadvantaged girls, for example, 
would significantly boost her human literacy and cultural agility. If 
she publishes articles in a campus magazine, she would improve 
her critical thinking and creativity. Throughout the entire run of 
her time in college, each class, activity, and experience would add 
to the tally of her overall development.
So much learning occurs in the particulars of daily existence 
that it may seem futile to attempt to quantify them. Educators can 
log students’ co-ops, trips abroad, and even yoga classes, but it is 
hard to envision an assessment of student learning throughout 
the entire learning ecosystem. What about the inspiring political 
event they attend at the student center? Or the debate on business 
and environmental regulation that erupts, after pizza, in a dorm’s 
common room? These, too, are microlearning experiences, and 
students can benefit from them even more if they are cognizant of 
their learning as it occurs, remembering to reflect on the lessons 
afterward.
Educators are not going to shadow students around the clock, 
whispering words of mindfulness. But universities can use technol-
ogy to equip students with tools to make them aware of the process 
of continual learning. At the university I lead, students can use their 

The Experiential Difference
109
devices to tap into an app called SAIL (Student Assessed Integrated 
Learning), in which they record learning experiences—including 
serendipitous ones—and track their progress in different develop-
mental dimensions and skills.26
For example, a student who auditions for an improv troupe 
would record that she practiced creativity, teamwork, and com-
munication, and she could see her progress visualized in a clear, 
intelligible graphic. She might even use the app to upload pictures 
of her experiences and share her self-reflections, articulating what 
she learned and how. Tapping into the techniques of gamification 
and social media, tools such as this can help us better personal-
ize students’ learning and give them greater control of their own 
development.
The greatest teacher is life itself. Through innovative approaches, 
universities can find new ways to draw on that power. Then our 
graduates will be ready for all of life’s challenges.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING FOR LIFE
We have explored how a humanics education catalyzed by experi-
ential learning is the surest route to a robot-proof future. Yet there 
remains the outlying fact with which this book began: computers, 
software, and artificial intelligence are getting better on an expo-
nential curve. The machines are marching on.
Much as our devices require periodic software updates, so do our 
biological brains. A fundamental consequence of technological pro-
gress is that people need to shift their belief that higher education 
is something that takes place at only one or two pivotal times in life 
to an understanding that it is a process that is lifelong.

Chapter 4
110
Some learners are long on time and short on experience, so we 
can reach them through the methods articulated in this chapter. 
Other learners are short on time but long on experience, so we have 
to create learning opportunities within their existing careers and 
institutions. The realities of our time demand that we redefine our 
notion of what it means to be a student and an alumnus. To that 
end, universities must build on the existing architecture of higher 
education, creating a new model for lifelong learning beyond the 
scope of today’s online classes and after-work programs.
Higher education, like all of us, will have to adapt.

5
LEARNING FOR LIFE
Chapter 5
Learning for Life
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
In A Study of History, the British historian Arnold Toynbee argues 
that civilizations, like individuals, thrive when they successfully 
answer challenges with creative responses. Faced with a growing 
population and limited means of subsistence, for example, ancient 
Athens avoided revolution by developing mercantile trade and dem-
ocratic institutions.1 But the wheels of progress slip from their axles 
when a civilization stops responding to new challenges in a creative 
way. After struggling in the aftermath of the Peloponnesian War, 
Athenian democracy could find no answer to the rise of Macedon, 
and Athens ceased to be an independent power. Without innova-
tion, a society slumps into decay and eventually ruin.
Toynbee’s argument is that decline is essentially a cultural 
failure—a willful stagnancy born from what Carol Dweck might call 
a “fixed mindset” but that Toynbee characterized as stifled creativity. 
History is littered with the fossils of societies that, as the dinosaurs 
or the dodo, were unable to adapt to circumstance. Carrying Toyn-
bee’s admonitions further, historian Jared Diamond describes how 
societies such as those on Easter Island and the Viking settlements 
in Greenland clung to cultural habits despite creeping change—in 
these cases, the self-inflicted ecological wounds of deforestation 
and soil erosion. Despite the visible encroach of doom—spoiled 

Chapter 5
112
landscapes, hungry winters—they refused to change their ways and 
let themselves sink into the archeological record.2
Modern colleges and universities are among the fullest expres-
sions of human culture that have ever flowered. As fertile grounds 
for cultivation of the mind, they are unprecedented; as hothouses 
for knowledge, they have no equal. They are perhaps the most 
effective institutions for intellectual advancement ever developed by 
humanity. Nonetheless, if colleges and universities fail to respond 
creatively to the challenges they face, they, too, will wither into 
irrelevance.
The university today is an ideal engine for delivering a standard-
ized form of higher education in a defined period of time. It is 
a mechanism structured for offering deep but often depersonal-
ized access to knowledge. Its culture is shaped by the goals and 
forms of that mechanism, serving the components of disciplin-
ary departments, degrees, and faculties. It is very good at what it 
does. The problem is that in the twenty-first century we need it to  
do more.
In the previous chapters, I argue that advanced machines  
are revolutionizing the global economy and hence are poised to 
disrupt every other aspect of society. If our avenues for work, 
wealth, and well-being fork in new directions, then education, by 
extension, must follow. Therefore, universities have the opportu-
nity to respond to changing realities by evolving their curricula, 
yes, but also by adapting the mechanisms for advancing those cur-
ricula. They have a chance to update their structural components.  
In other words, we can strip the engine down to its frame and  
rebuild it.
In addition to serving students as a group, higher education can 
be refit to serve the individual learner in a personalized and cus-

Learning for Life
113
tomized way. As is shown in previous chapters, this is a response 
to the intricacy of the AI economy and the demands it will make of 
human professionals. Moreover, instead of serving people during 
isolated fragments of time (four years in early adulthood and 
perhaps additional years in midcareer), higher education increas-
ingly will be compelled to serve people throughout careers defined 
by continuous technological change. To do this, the university  
must be rethought in all its parts, bringing lifelong learning to its 
center.
As machines leapfrog in their abilities, they will continue to elim-
inate entire categories of white-collar, knowledge economy jobs. 
At the same time, technology also will bring about new jobs and 
new industries that will require people to acquire more advanced 
knowledge and skills. Hence, as machines advance, all people will 
need to retool, refresh, and advance their knowledge and skill sets 
on an ongoing basis. The logical conclusion is that to stay relevant 
in the AI economy, lifelong learning will be an imperative for all 
professionals—and not only professionals. By helping everyone 
develop and maintain valuable skills, lifelong learning is necessary 
to alleviate social inequality. A learning model oriented on that goal 
will serve both those who are long on time but short on experi-
ence (namely, recent graduates) as well as learners who are short 
on time but long on experience (namely, seasoned professionals). 
Consequently, colleges and universities will see benefits in making 
lifelong learning a focal point of what they do.
THE HUMBLE BEGINNINGS OF LIFELONG LEARNING
In many ways, the rise of the lifelong learning imperative  
today is a case of past as prologue. In a previous era of intense  

Chapter 5
114
technological change—the years leading up to and during the 
Industrial Revolution—most people lacked the opportunity to 
earn a college degree. However, they responded to changing times 
and working environments by acquiring various types of lifelong 
learning.
For example, in 1831, the year Charles Darwin set sail on the 
Beagle for his famous encounter with the fauna of South America, 
another young Englishman named Isaac Pitman began earning 
his certification as a teacher. A lifelong educator, Pitman, like his 
better-known contemporary, had particular views about the rela-
tionship between life and time. Whereas Darwin thought about 
natural selection over generations, Pitman liked to say that “time 
saved is life gained”—a creed he served by inventing a system for 
taking phonetic shorthand notes. Known as “Pitman shorthand,” 
it became the most popular language for transcription around the 
English-speaking world. It still remains the most widely used pho-
netic system in the United Kingdom.
The Pitman system’s rapid spread and popularity was no acci-
dent. To reach potential students who did not live near his home 
in the city of Bath, Pitman took advantage of a newly invented 
technology—the standard postage stamp. He mailed exercises to 
subscribers and then corrected the returned postcards to provide 
them feedback.3 This long-range format of instruction and response 
was the world’s first distance learning course.
Ever since Pitman first tapped into a cheap and reliable postal 
network, distance learning has been a staple of lifelong learning, 
although it is by no means the only way in which to deliver it. In 
early nineteenth-century London and Boston, for instance, learned 
gentlemen banded together to found the Society for the Diffusion 

Learning for Life
115
of Useful Knowledge, which offered educational lectures and pub-
lications to the working public. The Boston group hosted talks by 
thinkers ranging from Daniel Webster on “The Progress of Popular 
Knowledge” to Oliver Wendell Holmes on “Homeopathy, and Its 
Kindred Delusions.”4 In 1836, Boston philanthropist John Lowell 
Jr. left a large bequest to pay for edifying public lectures. This was 
the basis of the Lowell Institute, which, over the decades, has given 
rise to educational institutions ranging from public broadcasting 
stations to Harvard’s extension school and the Lowell Institute 
School at my own university.5 To this day, the Lowell Institute helps 
learners with a partial college education complete their degrees. It 
is a further chapter in a long tradition of tackling inequality and 
straitened circumstances through lifelong learning.
Early lifelong learning formats also grew out of a mission  
for moral, as well as more worldly, instruction. In 1844, George 
Williams—a displaced farmer learning to navigate the perils and 
temptations of modern London—founded the first Young Men’s 
Christian Association (YMCA) to promote Bible study and social 
cohesion in the swelling ranks of the new urbanites.6 A few years 
later, Thomas Valentine Sullivan brought the institution to Boston. 
Soon, YMCAs were teaching immigrants English as a second 
language, helping them ease the dislocation of abandoning their 
native lands for the tumult and change of the New World, and 
offering vocational classes to working people dreaming of higher 
pay and better conditions. In all these cases, lifelong learning was 
a way for already experienced workers to adapt to their evolving 
circumstances.
Darwin and Pitman lived in a time of extraordinary technological 
and social change, and both of their careers were deeply informed 

Chapter 5
116
by ideas about the nature of progress. On his voyage, Darwin began 
to formulate his theory of natural selection by observing variations 
in how species adapt to their environmental contexts, passing down 
traits that promote survival. For instance, he noticed that some 
Galapagos finches had differently shaped beaks that gave them 
an advantage at acquiring particular foods. Meanwhile, as Darwin 
pondered his theories, Pitman’s correspondence pupils were learn-
ing a valuable office skill, enabling them to survive better in the 
quickly expanding environment of the modern, industrial cities of 
the British empire and the United States. In a competitive system, 
education was an equalizer.
But although finches can pass down the genes that give them 
long beaks to drill into the fleshy parts of a prickly pear, human 
beings cannot pass down a gene for writing shorthand. Instead, we 
evolve by getting ourselves educated. That is why as we take stock 
of what many are calling the Fourth Industrial Revolution, lifelong 
learning is again as important as it was during the last one.
THE DEMAND FOR LIFELONG LEARNING
Higher education has ample experience serving older and non-
traditional learners. Of the 20.5 million students attending U.S. 
colleges and universities in 2016, 8.2 million were twenty-five 
years or older.7 A full 40 percent of students, therefore, are older 
than the age generally viewed as “traditional” for college. By 2025, 
the number of students aged twenty-five or older is projected to 
increase to 9.7 million.8
Many of these students are served by the more than one thousand 
community colleges in the United States.9 For generations, these 

Learning for Life
117
have been the standard-bearers for extending the promise of higher 
education to the most vulnerable and underserved populations 
in U.S. society, including lifelong learners such as the employee 
whose factory has closed, the recent immigrant from a country with 
a less-developed educational system, or the single parent who did 
not complete high school. The ranks of the vulnerable now include 
those threatened by technological change. This renders the mission 
of community colleges even more vital—a mission that they tradi-
tionally have met by giving students a conduit to a four-year degree 
and teaching career-oriented skills. The demand is clearly great: 
some 12.8 million students attend them annually.
Thus, it is somewhat surprising that other types of colleges and 
universities often consider lifelong learning to be peripheral to 
their mission. Today, it is not uncommon for institutions of higher 
education to have some kind of organized enterprise for lifelong 
learning, such as an extension school, a college of professional 
studies, or a continuing education division. All too often, however, 
they are relegated to secondary, even second-class status. Educat-
ing undergraduates, preparing graduate students, and creating new 
knowledge by conducting research are seen as the real, serious 
endeavors of the university, while lifelong learning is viewed as 
ancillary.
Undergraduate education, graduate education, and research are 
indeed critical for core priorities. But the traditional approaches 
will not work for the millions of adult learners finding themselves 
compelled to return to higher education to stay ahead of techno-
logical change. In the past, universities adopted a Field of Dreams  
sort of approach to their enterprise: build it, and they will come, 
they said. As such, they constructed departments and programs 

Chapter 5
118
offering the expected stable of traditional, monolithic degrees such 
as the bachelor’s, the professional master’s, and the PhD. This is 
no longer enough.
By choosing not to adapt to—and prioritize—the needs of life-
long learners, colleges and universities are overlooking a vital 
educational need, especially in our hypertechnological reality. In 
many ways, their attitude is reminiscent of the posture that rail-
road companies took during the early decades of the twentieth 
century, when airplanes first came on the commercial scene. At 
the time, the railroads had cornered the market for long-distance 
passenger transportation. When the first airlines also began to offer 
long-range commercial flights, the railroads largely ignored this 
development, considering air transportation to be a fundamentally 
different endeavor from the business in which they were occupied. 
They saw the airlines as being in the airplane business, while they 
saw themselves, naturally, as being in the train business.
The railroads failed to realize that both they and the airlines 
were actually in the same business—namely, transportation. Con-
sequently, they missed the warning signs pointing to the impend-
ing disruption of their industry. And when commercial air travel 
took off, as it were, they were shocked to see their new competi-
tors quickly dismantle their longstanding dominance in passenger 
transport.
As AI, robotics, and high technology give rise to an unprec-
edented need for people to learn, retool, and upskill throughout 
their lives, higher education would do well to consider shifting its 
perspective in the way the railroads failed to do. Going forward, 
colleges and universities have the chance to recognize that they are 
not merely in the specific businesses of undergraduate education, 

Learning for Life
119
graduate education, and research—although all of those remain 
vitally important. Rather, they are in the larger business of lifelong 
learning.
As a matter of fact, precisely because the higher education sector 
largely has yet to shift its perspective in this way, others—most 
notably, for-profit colleges—have stepped in to fill the breach. 
Between 1990 and 2010, enrollment in for-profit colleges boomed 
in the United States and around the world. Much of this demand 
came from older students and working professionals who were 
attracted by the flexibility of the online model used by most for-
profits. In academic year 2007–2008, for example, only 11 percent of 
students enrolled in for-profit colleges were the “traditional” college 
ages of eighteen to twenty-three.10 And although for-profit college 
enrollment has since receded as some have become embroiled in 
scandals over allegations that they overstated their graduates’ job 
placement rates, the overall trend clearly shows that the appetite for 
lifelong learning in the market is strong.11
It is not only for-profits that have taken up the banner of lifelong 
learning. There also has been an upsurge in “corporate universi-
ties,” or in-house academies for training managers. General Elec-
tric is credited with pioneering the approach in the 1950s, and the 
model has exploded in recent decades.12 Boston Consulting Group 
estimates that their number doubled between 1997 and 2007, 
recently reaching about five thousand corporate universities world-
wide.13 As a corollary to this model, some companies are partnering 
with nontraditional providers to offer further education to their 
employees. For example, AT&T is working with MOOC (massive 
open online course) provider Udacity to offer its employees the 

Chapter 5
120
chance to upskill—and giving them negative performance reviews 
if they choose not to invest their own time in taking courses.14
The “corporate university” model has many appealing facets. It 
allows companies to tailor employees’ learning to their particular 
business needs. It also can serve as a pipeline for training manag-
ers within the firm’s culture. At the same time, it fails to account 
for one of Warren Buffett’s basic investment tenets: stick to what 
you know. Very few enterprises besides colleges and universities 
are in the business of higher education. Thus, when companies 
set up in-house education programs, they are not playing to their 
strengths.
The rise of in-house corporate education is further evidence that 
higher education is sidelining lifelong learning to its detriment. 
Education is what colleges and universities do best, so companies 
should not have to take up the academic mantle. It makes better 
business sense to partner with the experts. If my university is inter-
ested in selling clothing in our school colors, instead of building 
our own garment factory, we outsource the job to an established 
clothing manufacturer. The very fact that for-profits and corporate 
universities have seen such growth shows that higher education is 
failing to serve its natural constituencies.
This missed opportunity is especially unfortunate because today’s 
professionals are facing challenges as profound as those faced by 
the workers of Pitman’s and Darwin’s day. Just like them, they are 
immersed in rapidly changing work environments to which they 
must adapt or risk losing their competitiveness. Just like them, 
the escalation of technology means that they must increase their 
uniquely human skills through further education. And just like 
them, in an increasingly complex economy, lifelong learning may 

Learning for Life
121
well be the difference between their professional evolution and 
their economic extinction. In this context, the old Field of Dreams 
approach no longer suffices: universities cannot simply build mono-
lithic programs and expect lifelong learners to show up. Instead, 
effective programs will have to be customized and personalized for 
the growing cadre of lifelong learners.
A CUSTOMIZED, PERSONALIZED MODEL
Customized and personalized lifelong learning begins with a 
simple admission. It accepts that as technological change drives 
workplace realities, higher education has an obligation, and an 
opportunity, to respond. This simple truth distinguishes it from 
the “build it and they will come” model, which may or may not 
be swayed by factual changes in the real world. The old model is 
university-centric, with course design often dictated from on high, 
often predicated on assumptions about the workplace that may be 
obsolete by the time the ink in the textbooks is dry. That approach 
will not work for learners stepping into complex, evolving roles in 
the AI economy. To adapt to their needs, we might consider how 
customization is relevant to lifelong learning in two dimensions—
design and delivery.
Customization and Design
In the past, universities determined curricular design largely by 
themselves, assuming that they understood learners’ needs and 
desired outcomes. In the lifelong learning model of the future, 
universities will codesign curricula in full partnership with 
employers and learners. From a conceptual point of view, this 

Chapter 5
122
means they will have to sit down with learners to map out their 
professional needs and outcomes candidly. Just as important, they 
will respond to changes in the workplace by inviting employers to 
discuss their business demands. This means that in the concep-
tualization of new academic programs, universities will account 
for the business strategies employers are seeking to accomplish, 
their professional workforce requirements, and the ways technol-
ogy is changing the shape of their industry. In other words, the 
employer will become an equal partner in delineating the contours 
of educational content, helping to keep it streamlined and relevant 
to the moment.
We can see some good examples of this dynamic at work at the 
undergraduate level, but the lessons can apply to lifelong learn-
ing programs. For instance, the University System of Maryland is 
spearheading a multipartner collaboration between higher educa-
tion institutions, businesses, and government agencies to address 
the state’s and the nation’s cybersecurity workforce challenges.15 
This includes numerous initiatives between employers and uni-
versities, such as the Advanced Cybersecurity Experiences for Stu-
dents program developed between Northrop Grumman and the 
University of Maryland at College Park. Designed to educate cyber-
security professionals and future leaders, the program is grounded 
in honors-level academic courses that have been codeveloped by 
industry representatives and complemented by cocurricular expe-
riences and real world project-based learning. In a similar mode, 
Illinois State University has partnered with State Farm, the large 
insurance company, to develop more robust cybersecurity pro-
grams, including sponsoring cybersecurity “hacker challenges” to 
foment student interest.16

Learning for Life
123
These sorts of partnerships have emerged in broader contexts 
as well. Not long ago, IBM partnered with a number of universi-
ties, including Carnegie Mellon and the University of California at 
Berkeley, to design cognitive computing courses using the Watson 
technology.17 The goal of the courses is to meet the booming demand 
for data analytics professionals by embedding IBM’s technology in 
the classroom and pairing students with the company’s “technical 
mentors.” In this way, learners are educated in the industry’s latest 
concepts and tools well before their first day on the job.
Another iteration on university-employer collaboration is North-
eastern’s ALIGN program, based at our Seattle campus. This initia-
tive is explicitly designed to funnel people from diverse backgrounds 
into technology careers such as bioinformatics or cybersecurity. 
Exploring opportunities on the West Coast, we found that many 
potential students possessed bachelor’s degrees that did not match 
with local job openings. They wanted on-ramps into high-demand 
technology fields driven by local employers. Thus, we worked with 
employers to develop a program to allow liberal arts graduates to 
become computer scientists, providing them with a master’s degree 
and up to twelve months of co-op or internship experience in the 
tech sector.
The result combines intense curricular work with immersion  
in the workplace. Learners gain new high-tech skills—for example, 
in big-data analytics—by tackling content that is chunked out  
into on-the-job projects. These projects are coupled with online 
learning units to help learners master the latest technologies. 
Further, the program leverages learners’ experiences in the liberal 
arts, integrating these with their newfound talents, giving them 
an edge on communication and critical thinking—crucial skills 

Chapter 5
124
for management positions. At the end of the program, their new 
knowledge is bolstered by the competencies they have acquired in 
the past, prepping them for success.
Lifelong learning curricula need employer input for content but 
also for other elements. For instance, it is not much use if educa-
tors concoct a brilliant, transformative curriculum that clashes with 
workers’ time commitments on the job. Employers and lifelong 
learners need to agree on working hours invested in education, 
much as they need to decide on appropriate rewards and incen-
tives for employees who are lifelong learners, including promotions 
and financial support. Also, universities and groups of employers 
within an industry may even consider providing credentials jointly 
so that learners can move seamlessly between different employ-
ers in their field and have their education, knowledge, and skills 
appropriately recognized.
Customization and Delivery
In addition to customized design, the lifelong learning imperative 
driven by technological change also will require higher education 
delivery to be customized. In the past generation, online programs 
have been higher education’s main answer to learners’ need for a 
customized delivery format, and as a general strategy to assist learn-
ers who need flexibility and are short on time in how they receive an 
education, they are serviceable. They deliver learning wherever and 
whenever learners need it. However, from the standpoint of what 
they deliver in terms of knowledge and skills, many online pro-
grams do not go far enough. Often, they suffer from being overly 
generic. They typically are designed for large cohorts of learners, 

Learning for Life
125
without necessarily taking the specific learning needs of people in 
specific industries into account.
Although studies vary, some indicate that purely online learning 
is less effective than a blended, hybrid mix of online and face-to-
face components. For example, one meta-analysis from Stanford 
University found that on average, students performed about equally 
when receiving purely online instruction or in-person instruction, 
but those receiving hybrid learning performed best.18 This may 
be because hybrid programs tend to involve “additional learning 
time, instructional resources, and course elements that encourage 
interaction among learners.”19 People are, after all, social animals. 
Hybrid formats possess the dual advantages of greater engagement 
through personal interaction and greater customization through 
online options.
But where both typical online and hybrid formats fall short is 
that their value is ultimately limited unless they include experiential 
components. Truly transformative learning results are the product 
of integrating academic and real world experiences. Yet the ques-
tion of experiential components in lifelong learning also raises 
something of a paradox. Experience is vital for younger learners, 
but if learners are long on experience already, why do they need 
more learning experiences?
The answer is that in an AI economy, older learners will need 
to capitalize on the valuable lessons they have acquired in work 
and in life. By revisiting past experiences and using them as a 
compass to recalibrate their actions and ideas, they better position 
themselves to achieve their goals and create new opportunities and 
experiences. Lifelong learning programs that do this well will meet 
learners where they are—including in the professional workplace. 

Chapter 5
126
Such programs are especially useful in serving the people who need 
lifelong learning the most—the enormous subset of current white-
collar employees who have always considered themselves secure 
from automation but who now suddenly hear the tramp of robot 
feet. This format embeds the education within employees’ work 
itself, bringing lifelong learning directly to learners at the ground 
zero of technological upheaval. We can reach them where they see 
automation firsthand, while seamlessly integrating education with 
learners’ existing experience.
As an example of this in action, Northeastern, with support  
from the U.S. Department of Education’s Education Quality 
through Innovative Partnerships (EQUIP) program, collaborated 
with General Electric to develop an accelerated degree in advanced 
manufacturing. This is a customized, in-house program for upskill-
ing GE employees to work alongside the next generation of tech-
nologies, training them for the jobs of the future even as they 
perform their jobs today. It operates on a project-based format that 
capitalizes on employees’ experience and utilizes online compo-
nents so they can learn on a “short on time” schedule. Students 
still perform their full-time jobs, but they simultaneously learn to 
undertake work in critical areas necessitating advanced training—
in other words, robot-proof work.
While customization means designing programs to serve learn-
ers’ and employers’ needs jointly, personalization means molding 
the learning experience to students’ strengths, weaknesses, ambi-
tions, and schedules. For example, in the last chapter we encoun-
tered personalization through SAIL, the gamified technology for 
tracking students’ experiential learning. Similarly, highly personal-

Learning for Life
127
ized career services and professional guidance help keep learners 
on course to achieve their educational goals.
Personalization also makes lifelong learning more accessible to 
gig economy freelancers, who face the same challenges as full-time 
employees but without the supportive infrastructure. A recent study 
from the Brookings Institution found that the number of these 
freelancers is increasing even more dramatically than generally 
believed.20 In the past twenty years, according to one calculation, 
the number of people engaged in the gig economy grew by 27 
percent more than growth in payroll employees.21 Yet just like every-
one else, freelancers face a labor market in which jobs increasingly 
will disappear and emerge with startling speed. Just like everyone 
else, they are witnessing the impact of AI and automation. And just 
like everyone else, freelancers in the gig economy can benefit from 
a learning model powered by experience.
By embedding in a variety of companies through lifelong learn-
ing programs, enterprising freelancers can learn different roles, 
ascertain talent gaps, spy opportunities for future work, and grow 
their personal networks. They can establish relationships with dif-
ferent hiring managers and gain a fluency in different company 
cultures. They may even set themselves up for a full-time position 
because many companies seek to “test drive” potential employees 
before committing to the investment of a long contract. As the 
number of gig economy freelancers grows, companies will increas-
ingly rely on them for labor. Lifelong learning programs give both 
parties an opportunity to determine whether there is an amicable 
alignment.

Chapter 5
128
SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR THE UNIVERSITY
Degrees and Credentials
Lifelong learners, by necessity, typically approach education in 
some different ways from the traditional full-time student. They 
usually do not have the luxury of committing to a fully articulated 
academic degree program, much as they might like to. Instead, 
they need an educational experience that is more focused and tacti-
cal. Often, lifelong learners are looking to acquire a targeted set of 
knowledge, skills, or competencies in order to meet a specific goal 
in their professional employment or the larger arc of their careers 
and their lives. They want to acquire this knowledge efficiently and 
operationalize it quickly and effectively.
As an example of this, I once advised an entrepreneur who was 
building a new type of Internet search engine and wanted to under-
stand the contributions of linguistics (my field) to that endeavor. He 
did not want a degree: all he cared about was the knowledge itself. 
He needed a crash course in the application of linguistics to search 
technology, tailored to his precise goal. To do this, he needed to 
learn some fundamental knowledge about syntax, phonology, and 
semantics. At the same time, he also needed to grasp some of the 
much more advanced computational aspects of linguistics simul-
taneously. Pursuing a traditional university degree in linguistics 
would not have helped him achieve his goal of building a search 
engine. But I was able to help him—and so would a university that 
could nimbly curate and tailor the knowledge he needed.
The rising imperative to meet the needs of people like my entre-
preneur colleague is one reason behind the growth of “boot camps” 
for lifelong learners offered by newly established players such as 

Learning for Life
129
General Assembly, Bit Bootcamp, and Data Science Dojo, as well 
as by traditional universities. For example, Northeastern’s Level 
program is a data analytics boot camp designed for lifelong learn-
ers. Instead of enrolling in a lengthy master’s program in that 
subject, students can sign up for a burst of focused content. Level’s 
design is customized for professional outcomes: it is structured to 
align with job openings in growing fields and places learners in 
experiential projects with potential employers. Delivered in less 
time than a typical college semester, the program is also remark-
ably efficient.
Innovative program forms such as boot camps are helpful, but 
higher education does not need to stop there. The burgeoning 
demand for lifelong learning—and the acceleration of this demand 
as people seek to upskill in the AI age—suggests that we reimagine 
the larger issue of how colleges and universities organize knowl-
edge, as well as how we parcel it out.
Today, colleges and universities erect artificial divides between 
knowledge taught to undergraduates and knowledge included in 
graduate-level curricula. As the population of lifelong learners 
grows and as colleges and universities focus more intently on the 
needs of these learners, we will need additional ways to organize 
and segment knowledge. Instead of fitting it into old categories 
such as undergraduate and graduate courses, we can chunk it into 
smaller modular blocks that can be assembled according to learn-
ers’ targeted objectives. These blocks can then be combined and 
stacked in a way that is akin to a traditional degree, except that 
there will be many more permutations and combinations of these 
blocks than is possible in a typical degree program. Moreover, each  

Chapter 5
130
possible combination will be much more tightly coupled to the 
specific needs of the learner than a typical degree allows.
For example, consider three learners who wish to study bioengi-
neering. The first is a career changer who is seeking to break into 
the life sciences from a position in the technology field. Thus, the 
sequence of curricular blocks she takes might include four blocks of 
basic bioengineering content, combined with three advanced blocks 
that leverage her existing knowledge of technology. The second 
learner already works in bioengineering but is seeking to move up 
from a midlevel position at her company to the managerial ranks. 
In this case, the sequence of blocks she takes might include three 
blocks of bioengineering content to get her up to speed on the latest 
advances in her field combined with two blocks that focus on mana-
gerial competencies and business development. Finally, consider 
the third learner—a senior manager at a health care company that 
is seeking to expand the uses of health-related nanotechnology in 
the delivery of health care. In this case, the manager might take 
two blocks focused on health-related nanotechnology applications 
and nothing more.
The tight coupling of these educational sequences with these 
learners’ needs is self-evident, but what really is novel is how the 
university might translate these stacked curriculum blocks into 
formal academic credentials. For example, we can imagine a uni-
versity awarding the first learner a bachelor’s degree in bioen-
gineering, in recognition of the longer sequence of blocks she 
has taken as well as the more basic content she has studied. The 
second learner might be awarded a master’s degree, seeing as 
how she has taken a briefer but more advanced series of blocks. 
Finally, the senior manager could be deemed as having earned 

Learning for Life
131
a certificate, in view of the short but highly specialized series of 
blocks she has taken.
The possibilities are endless, but the point is straightforward. 
By segmenting knowledge in a more finely tuned way, universities 
can impart that knowledge in ways that are much more effective 
at meeting learners’—and especially lifelong learners’—targeted 
needs. They can emphasize immediately functional knowledge, as 
opposed to ancillary knowledge that a results-oriented learner may 
never use.
Faculty
Elevating lifelong learning in the university’s mission carries pro-
found implications for students but also for all the other members 
of the university community. Increased demand for lifelong learn-
ing necessarily means that there will be an increased demand for 
teaching. As such, it is reasonable to expect that there will be a 
need for colleges and universities to expand their teaching faculties 
going forward.
This is not a new trend. According to the National Center for 
Educational Statistics, of the approximately 1.5 million college and 
university employees engaged mainly in instruction, research, or 
public service, nearly 1.2 million are primarily instructors.22 In com-
parison, employees who balanced teaching and research amounted 
to a little more than 270,000, while pure researchers counted for a 
mere 65,000.23 Moreover, the number of university-level teachers 
is growing further. Between 2004 and 2010, total campus teach-
ing staff in the United States grew by about 200,000.24 Full-time 
instructors increased by about 11 percent, while part-time adjuncts 
increased their number by nearly 30 percent.25 This growing 

Chapter 5
132
demand for instructors is only going to intensify when large groups 
of lifelong learners join the classroom.
The forthcoming influx of teaching faculty may also have conse-
quences for the way in which faculty members do (and sometimes 
do not) work together. Nowadays, university faculties are tiered, 
with tenured professors who are mostly concerned with research 
occupying the upper echelon of the hierarchy. Outside this tier 
are nontenure-track faculty who typically specialize in teaching, 
professors of practice who come to the university to teach after dis-
tinguished careers in industry, as well as research fellows, adjunct 
professors, and more.
This system is called into question, however, in an institution 
premised on serving more lifelong learners, offering more stackable 
content, and puncturing disciplinary boundaries. Going forward, 
the vital role of the university teacher will be recognized more 
fully—and rightfully so. As more universities implement ways to 
deliver content in modular, stackable forms that are customized 
to learners’ needs, teaching faculty across disciplines are likely to 
collaborate more often. Learners themselves will drive this change 
because they will increasingly ask their professors to bring diverse 
content blocks together in a way that meets their highly targeted 
needs, thus encouraging cross-disciplinary collaboration. Similarly, 
as universities expand their efforts to educate lifelong learners, it 
also is likely that faculty themselves will be encouraged to invest 
more time in their own lifelong learning by staying abreast of 
new program forms, delivery modes, and pedagogical techniques 
attuned to this population.

Learning for Life
133
Alumni
Finally, augmenting the place of lifelong learning at the university 
will also test traditional notions of who alumni are and how alumni 
view their university. Most graduates of four-year higher education 
consider their alma mater to be the place where they received their 
bachelor’s degree—whether or not they subsequently obtained a 
graduate or professional degree. Typically, alumni return to their 
college sporadically to attend sporting events and reunions or to tap 
into established relationships—in other words, to engage with the 
past. In contrast, the growth of lifelong learning at universities—
and the need for more college-educated individuals to obtain it—can 
transform graduates’ relationship with their alma mater, making 
them members of a widespread, active network engaged with the 
present and the future.
In addition to relying on their university for continuous learn-
ing, alumni will also stay connected through the ongoing use of 
career services and other support, with the operation evolving from 
a social capacity to a functional one. This is already happening in 
many universities, and it will soon become the norm. Thus, the 
standard alumni operation of the future will provide lifelong learn-
ers with access to venture incubators and startup assistance. It will 
connect professionals with accomplished mentors, offering coach-
ing and institutional support. It will connect alumni businesses 
with faculty expertise and research. Furthermore, it will be the 
focal point for communities of interest, drawing together alumni 
who share professional goals, hobbies, or philanthropic objectives.
In this way, the literal meaning of alma mater (“nourishing 
mother”) will be reinforced as graduates continue to be nourished 
and supported by their institution for their entire lives. In effect, 

Chapter 5
134
they will become members of a lifelong club that fills enormous 
social, professional, and educational niches. This dynamic also has 
the potential to transform university giving. For example, in addi-
tion to writing an annual check to a class fundraising drive, alumni 
may enroll in a subscription model, signing up for continued access 
to services and learning opportunities. The entire advancement 
enterprise may evolve to rely less on alumni emotion and more on 
a manifest list of benefits, courses, and services rendered.
The expanded importance of alumni in a lifelong learning–
oriented university raises a number of questions as well. As noted, 
alumni of U.S. colleges and universities tend to feel the most loyalty 
to their undergraduate alma maters. When people spend several 
of their most exuberant, youthful years living in a residence with 
their closest friends, they are likely to feel more attachment than if 
they sign up for a targeted chunk of learning delivered in a hybrid 
format. After all, students don’t buy college sweatshirts to celebrate 
having completed a boot camp—at least not yet.
As people adopt a lifelong learning mode of education in the 
future, however, we may see traditional alumni loyalties change. 
People may have even more alma maters than they do today. The 
demarcation of gaining a standard undergraduate degree may give 
way to new credential forms. Consequently, alumni may end up 
feeling the strongest tug of loyalty to the university that has given 
them the most value over their lifelong careers. This is not necessar-
ily a shift to a strictly transactional relationship, but when numer-
ous institutions are competing for a person’s limited attention, the 
standout will likely be the one that produces tangible results. If 
a university remains a dependable presence and support in their 
lives, learners are more likely to return to it for help, education, 
and enjoyment.

Learning for Life
135
THE RISE OF THE MULTI-UNIVERSITY NETWORK
To this point, we have considered the internal implications for a 
college or university that seeks to elevate lifelong learning by shift-
ing from a “build it and they will come” educational model to a 
model that is built around the learner. But the implications are not 
just internal. They also herald changes and opportunities for the 
overall structure of the university. It is no surprise that this should 
be the case. Throughout history, higher education ultimately has 
responded to changes in technology and to the landscape of learn-
ers it aims to serve by evolving its institutional forms and its overall 
shape as a sector. That is how, in previous eras, higher education in 
the United States came to encompass the agricultural and mechani-
cal university, liberal arts college, research university, public univer-
sity system, community college, and online university.
Today, we have once again reached such an inflection point. 
The oncoming wave of automation, AI-powered machines, and 
integration of high technology into all forms of work necessitates 
that virtually everyone become a lifelong learner—and that, in turn, 
necessitates that universities go to where the learners are. In the 
preceding section, I have outlined how this would be done in the 
figurative sense of aligning courses of study, faculties, and alumni 
experiences in ways that are learner-centered. But I mean this in 
literal sense as well. In an AI-driven economy in which the need for 
lifelong learning is ascendant and must be met, universities have 
the opportunity to go beyond existing as one institution or even a 
set of institutions within a state system. The opportunity is to take 
what I believe is the next step in higher education’s evolution—the 
multi-university network.

Chapter 5
136
Knowledgeable readers will note the similarity between this 
phrase and the term multiversity that Clark Kerr described in his 
classic volume The Uses of the University. But although the names are 
similar, the concepts are distinct. Kerr was describing the agglom-
eration of activities, interests, and people that comprised the U.S. 
research university as an institution in the 1960s.26 In contrast, the 
multi-university network is a multilocation entity existing across mul-
tiple states and even multiple countries. Each node of the network 
is connected to the other, such that learners can circulate through 
it to take advantage of academic programs, learning resources, and 
experiential learning opportunities. In many ways, it is the next 
logical iteration of a university, taking into account the forthcoming 
need to serve a growing population of lifelong learners.
How Would a Multi-University Network Operate?
Consider, for example, a U.S.-based multi-university network  
with locations in Boston, Charlotte, Seattle, and Silicon Valley, and 
a young learner—a budding social media entrepreneur—whose 
future will be buffeted by the winds of AI-driven technological 
change. She might begin her lifelong learning trajectory by pur-
suing a customized series of modules in computer science and 
business at the Boston node of the network. She rounds out this 
experience with Seattle-based co-ops at Amazon and the law firm 
Perkins Coie, where she learns about intellectual property law. 
While there, she also takes an analytics bootcamp at the Seattle 
node of the network.
After utilizing this knowledge and experience to launch a new 
social media venture, she returns to the network a few years later 
when she predicts that her company, now successful, may soon 

Learning for Life
137
founder because her customers are rapidly gravitating to virtual 
reality–based technology platforms rather than the traditional 
Internet platform on which her company relies. Consequently, she 
decides to enroll (along with key members of her company team) 
in a pair of modules offered at the Silicon Valley location that focus 
on how to transition businesses to VR-based platforms quickly and 
efficiently. Her gambit is successful, and her company continues 
to grow.
Five years later, as she sees even more technological changes 
emerging on the business horizon, she decides that the time 
is right to sell her company. So she returns to the network one 
more time—this time, to Charlotte, where she takes a refresher 
module on business acquisition and negotiation and encounters 
a new experiential learning opportunity that connects her to the 
area’s financial institutions and potential financing for her next  
venture.
The Global Multi-University Network
Although the foregoing example is hypothetical, the reality of a 
true multi-university network is not far off. Indeed, Northeastern 
has been putting the fundamentals of such a network in place by 
establishing new, light-footprint campuses in the locations used in 
my example, as well as a non-U.S. location in Toronto. We are not 
alone: Carnegie Mellon has taken a similar approach in expanding 
its graduate degree programs throughout the world. Yale offers 
liberal arts education in Singapore, and New York University now 
boasts more than ten locations outside the United States. By adopt-
ing a multicampus, multimodal design, our institutions and others 

Chapter 5
138
like ours will better meet the immense demand for lifelong learning 
that will present itself in the AI age.
Not every university will aspire to establish multiple locations 
in the U.S. or beyond—and not every university should. Linking 
disparate locations together to form a truly connected system is an 
enormously complex endeavor. Aligning academic programs and 
learning opportunities to allow learners to circulate through the 
network in a way that also is highly customized to their learning 
needs would require extraordinary coordination. Moreover, to serve 
lifelong learners most effectively, such a network ideally would also 
incorporate experiential learning and elements of the humanics 
model discussed earlier in this book.
Universities that seek to establish a multi-university network 
that crosses national boundaries will need to address an especially 
important dynamic—how to operate in manner that is truly global 
as opposed to merely international. Other industries have grappled 
with this dynamic. Years ago, when U.S. automobile companies 
began to expand outward, they adopted an international approach. 
They opened factories in new countries, but all decisions regarding 
products and strategy remained centralized at U.S. headquarters. 
This may have been efficient, but it was not particularly effec-
tive because the automakers (not surprisingly) often turned out 
new cars that were copies of the U.S. versions as opposed to dis-
tinct vehicles that captured the needs of customers in the new  
markets.
In contrast, when the pharmaceutical industry began exploring 
new frontiers, its leaders adopted a more global approach. They 
also built new facilities in untapped markets, but instead of simply 
replicating the strategies that had worked in the United States, they 

Learning for Life
139
allowed their new operations to adapt to the immediate facts on the 
ground. Instead of pronouncing product design or marketing from 
on high, a decentralized approach prevailed that accounted for the 
opportunities and idiosyncrasies of place.27
Given the choice between going international and going global, I 
would argue that institutions of higher education seeking to estab-
lish a multi-university network would do well to follow the example 
of the pharmaceutical industry. By adapting to the realities of each 
locale in which they exist, such a network would embed an unpar-
alleled degree of nuance in the education it provides. As learners 
circulate through the network, they would reap the rewards of this 
nuance—for instance, with deep cultural agility skills and extraor-
dinarily nimble systems thinking abilities. By cycling them through 
different experiences and environments, a global multi-university 
network would foster in learners an outstanding appreciation for 
the diversity and variety of the world, enabling them to become 
creative and mentally flexible beyond the reach of machines.
Thus, consider the example of a lifelong learner whose twin 
passions are engineering and climate change and who enrolls as a 
student in a multi-university network with locations in New York, 
Vancouver, Dubai, and New Delhi. Circulating throughout this 
network, she could immerse herself in understanding urban coastal 
sustainability issues on the eastern U.S. seaboard and then pivot 
to the studying the questions engineers face in building effective 
water delivery systems in the Middle East. Pivoting once more, she 
might turn her attention to the understanding the health impacts 
of inadequate municipal sewer systems on the Indian subcontinent 
and then focus on assessing the impact of Vancouver’s policies that 
promote renewable energy and green practices. The opportunity for 

Chapter 5
140
this learner to learn this way, benefiting from customized programs 
and co-ops as she proceeds, would give her a truly unsurpassed edu-
cation. Over time, she would obtain a more comprehensive—and 
complex—grasp of her subjects, gaining both a bird’s-eye global 
perspective as well as a specialist’s understanding of the subjects 
as they impact local communities. Once again, bringing this vision 
to full fruition would be no easy task. However, if an institution 
of higher education did so, it would produce robot-proof learners 
par excellence.
Clark Kerr’s multiversity was a reflection of its world, just as 
the multi-university network is a reflection of ours. As our world 
doubles and redoubles in complexity, we cannot hope to under-
stand it, affect it, and improve it except through commensurate 
complexity—in other words, through networks. To face the techno-
logical and economic challenges of the twenty-first-century success-
fully, individual learners will benefit from the opportunity to tap 
into global networks of higher education opportunities throughout 
their lives. To help learners seize this promise, many institutions 
of higher education, I believe, will inevitably evolve from their 
present forms.

AFTERWORD
Afterword
Afterword
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Imagine the state of the world on November 17, 1944. The planet 
was home to some 2.5 billion human beings, none of whom had 
ever used a programmable digital electronic computer. The tide 
of war across Europe and the Pacific had shifted enough that in 
the United States, officials were thinking in earnest about how to 
reintegrate the millions of GIs who had been sent to fight back 
into the American economy and society.1 Tuberculosis and prema-
ture birth were among the top ten causes of death among Ameri-
cans.2 Global surface temperatures were beginning their slow climb 
toward the troublingly high levels they would reach at the dawn of 
the twenty-first century.3 The Oxford English Dictionary lacked an 
entry for “mobile phone,” and even the one for “microchip” would 
not appear for several decades.
It was in that world, and on that day, that President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt sent a letter to Vannevar Bush, director of the U.S. 
Office of Scientific Research and Development, urging him to con-
sider how to apply his office’s colossal energies to peacetime. “New 
frontiers of the mind are before us,” wrote Roosevelt. “And if they 
are pioneered with the same vision, boldness, and drive with which 
we have waged this war, we can create a fuller and more fruitful 
employment and a fuller and more fruitful life.”4

Afterword
142
The worlds of 1944 and today seem eons apart, but there are 
important similarities. Then, as now, technology was transform-
ing the way people lived and worked. Then, as now, some feared 
technology’s potential to inflict harm, while others considered it 
humanity’s salvation. Then, as now, government and higher edu-
cation sought to nurture and harness the power of progress. And 
in 1944, they had a clear idea of how to do it: they would forge a 
social compact.
Dr. Bush’s reply to FDR took the form of a now-famous report, 
entitled Science: The Endless Frontier. Laying out a plan for the future 
of university-based research, Bush observed that “[s]cientific pro-
gress is one essential key to our security as a nation, to our better 
health, to more jobs, to a higher standard of living, and to our cul-
tural progress.”5 To achieve these outcomes, he proposed a system 
in which government funding would flow into universities for four 
key purposes: to create new knowledge, educate the next generation 
of scientists, create new products and industries, and advance the 
public welfare. As Bush observed, “The rewards of such exploration 
both for the Nation and the individual are great.”
Bush’s words proved correct. The social compact between gov-
ernment and higher education that was established in the 1940s 
ushered in a new era of prosperity in U.S. society. Government 
delivered funding, while universities delivered new knowledge that 
was transformed into new jobs and new industries. The result was 
the foundation for much of the economic and technological pro-
gress of the twentieth century.
As with the dawn of the atomic age, the threshold of the AI 
age also demands a social compact that harnesses knowledge 
and learning to the service of a broader good. But its overarch-

Afterword
143
ing goals should align with today’s economic and societal impera-
tives. Among other things, it will need to combat society’s growing 
inequality by preparing people for the opportunities and challenges 
offered by a world of miraculous advances. As technology forges 
ahead, it is extremely likely that inequality will worsen. People who 
own advanced machines and capital will benefit immensely, while 
displaced human employees will be at strong risk of losing their 
livelihoods. In a world in which today, a mere eight people own 
an equal amount of wealth to one half of the planet’s population, 
technology seems poised to tip the scales even further.6
Just as the social compact’s goals should expand with the times, 
so can the roster of players who participate in it. For today’s compact 
to be effective in light of radical technological change, employers 
should be included as full participants.
THE ROLE OF EMPLOYERS
Today, the relationship between higher education and employers 
is all too often a loose coupling, lacking in connection. Typically, 
interactions between universities and employers are surface-level 
and episodic, with businesses perhaps sending a manager to 
campus a few times of year to sit on an advisory panel for a degree 
program or discipline. Colleges and universities attempt to ascer-
tain the needs of business but sometimes misread the signals, 
leading to a skills gap between graduates and the job market. A 
much tighter coupling, in which there is no miscommunication, 
is needed.
Under a new social compact, higher education and employers 
have the opportunity to integrate their activities much further,  

Afterword
144
with industry fully participating in designing programs and pro-
ducing them. As in the case of General Electric working with 
Northeastern to develop our in-house program in advanced manu-
facturing, employers and universities can move from a place of 
isolation from each other to one in which their enterprises are 
embedded together. Since the professional workplace is one of 
the key settings in which the impact of technological change will 
be felt most strongly, educational efforts meant to address those 
changes—theoretical and experiential learning alike—can take 
place in companies and offices, not just within the ivory tower.
We can see another form of innovative collaboration in play 
at San Jose State University, which in 2012 partnered with IBM 
to develop a program in “social business,” teaching students to 
parlay their social networking savvy into job-ready skills.7 IBM pro-
vided expertise, mentorship, and technology to help educate future 
members of the workforce in an area of pressing business need. Or 
consider the example of Drake University in Iowa. Known mostly 
for its liberal arts programs, Drake is now moving to integrate its 
academics more closely with demands in the job market. Lately, 
it has partnered with local industries to construct a data analyt-
ics major and minor “with business needs in mind.”8 They asked 
employers what core competencies they sought in employees, then 
mapped those competencies to existing programs, thereby reveal-
ing the gaps. They also engaged corporations in sponsoring the 
start-up costs for the new program. This sort of open communica-
tion and give-and-take is crucial if businesses and universities are 
to unite in fulfilling the social compact.

Afterword
145
GLOBAL LESSONS
Of course, there are myriad approaches to generating social and 
economic progress by fostering collaboration between higher edu-
cation and employers. Many other countries are pursuing innova-
tive ways to deepen that collaboration, sometimes starting from a 
place of long-established integration.
Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, for example, remain the 
torchbearers of apprenticeship, and they continue to build on, and 
update, their educational systems for professional workplace educa-
tion. In Austria, teachers in professionally oriented programs are 
required to have industry experience, and many juggle positions 
in teaching and in industry. Germany upholds its robust “dual 
system” of education by strongly engaging employers and social 
partners, as well as ensuring that it serves broader social and eco-
nomic goals instead of short-term hiring needs. To accomplish 
this, they also prioritize research that focuses on the link between 
education and employment, funding a national network of research 
centers to study and improve their career-training system. For its 
part, Switzerland has prioritized making the value proposition of 
its education-employment collaborations robust, by keeping the 
costs to employers to participate in such programs much lower 
than the benefits they receive from apprentices and educational 
institutions.9
Ireland, which has a less comprehensive tradition of apprentice-
ship than other countries, is attempting to make up ground through 
a program dubbed the “National Skills Strategy 2025.” One of the 
cornerstones of this plan is to increase employer engagement with 
education, creating 50,000 new apprenticeship and traineeship 

Afterword
146
positions by 2020. It also pledges to more than double national 
participation in lifelong learning.10 Of course, paying for this sort 
of ambitious initiative can be problematic. Hungary has answered 
its own need for increased career-oriented education through a 
national levy, which yields a stable source of funding for employer-
focused education, funneling much of the revenue into experiential 
learning opportunities within business enterprises.11
A unique situation is currently unfolding in China: far from 
fearing the robot revolution, national leaders are embracing it. 
Investing billions of renminbi in robotics, Chinese leaders have 
launched an active program of mass automation across the coun-
try’s industrial sector. Over the next few years, it is poised to inte-
grate thousands of advanced robots into factories currently staffed 
mostly by human workers. Guangdong, the country’s foremost 
manufacturing center, aims to automate 80 percent of its factories 
by 2020.12 The goal of this vast investment in technology is to 
shift the entire Chinese economy from its manufacturing base to 
a service one—not dissimilar to the way current knowledge econo-
mies around the world are shifting to an AI economy. Instead of 
remaining the world’s factory, China now aspires to become the 
world’s bank, IT department, and human-resources desk.
To effectuate this transition successfully, Chinese governmental 
leaders and businesses will need to join with universities in prepar-
ing workers for their future roles. They might find a useful model 
in South Korea, where industry works hand in glove with univer-
sities in both education and research. There, it is common for 
industry to sponsor university programs, and regional universities 
receive earmarked financial grants to facilitate collaboration with 
employers. Moreover, South Korea boasts the highest proportion 

Afterword
147
of joint university-industry research in the world—seven of the 
top fourteen collaborations with individual companies are between 
South Korean universities and the national conglomerate Samsung; 
a full 23 percent of published research from Pohang University of 
Science and Technology comes from industry collaborations.13
Clearly, the idea that universities and employers should work 
together for the common good is a global one. And while the specif-
ics of these compacts and arrangements vary between nations, the 
goal of social and economic progress is universal. As the United 
States moves toward redefining its own country’s interrelation-
ships among higher education, industry, and government, it will 
no doubt be instructive to keep an eye on how other countries are 
responding to the challenges and opportunities of the AI age.
FALSE CHOICES, AND A REAL ONE
Much of the popular discourse about colleges and universities has, 
for good or ill, centered on the question of what sort of education is 
best—a discussion that is often reduced to the dichotomy between 
learning to live versus learning to earn a living, or between the value 
of a liberal arts education versus the value of “practical” course of 
study that promotes employability. However, the robot-proof educa-
tion model shows that these are false choices.
The arrival of brilliant machines conclusively dispels the notion 
that a remunerative career is predicated on the study of an applied, 
“practical” subject. Going forward, machines will perform much 
of the work that was once the concern of these subjects, such as 
the simple analysis and application of facts to situations, or the 
management of data. Instead, the jobs of the future will demand 

Afterword
148
the higher-order cognitive abilities and skills that are often associ-
ated with a liberal arts education, and that are pointedly inculcated 
through an education in humanics. As discussed throughout this 
book, the roles that human beings fill will be largely concerned 
with creativity.
It is also time to move beyond the canard that students must 
choose between an economically rewarding career and a fulfill-
ing, elevated inner life. More than ever before, the capacities that 
equip people to succeed professionally are the same as the virtues 
espoused by Cardinal Newman in his paeans to “liberal knowl-
edge”—namely, an agile mind, refinement of thought, and facil-
ity of expression.14 By appropriating our routine work, machines 
will offer human beings a chance at liberation from drudgery, 
freeing us for more creative employment. Tomorrow’s jobs will 
require us to deploy our creativity and higher-order capacities in 
the service of our companies, our economy, and society. Thus, in 
the past, a factory hand would have spent his days in rote man-
ufacturing; tomorrow, he may have the opportunity to work as 
a skilled artisan within a company. Whereas a middle manager 
once engaged in pushing information between boxes, tomorrow 
she’ll be an in-house entrepreneur. Likewise, the gray “Organiza-
tion Man” described by William Whyte in the 1950s used to punch 
the clock and unthinkingly enforce company policies.15 Tomorrow, 
he’ll be developing his company’s global business strategies and 
figuring out how to deploy the company’s automated workforce  
to do it.
Whether the objective is to educate younger learners, older  
learners, company employees, or gig workers, the bottom line is 
the same. Learning is now an ongoing voyage with many ports of 

Afterword
149
call but never a terminus. This continuous journey has implica-
tions that reach far past the campus gates, into our homes, our 
workplaces, and our startups. These implications will shape our 
ambitions and even our laws. Ultimately, they will affect everyone, 
carried throughout the world by multi-university networks built to 
transcend limitations of scale, place, and time.
Education is not a panacea for humanity’s troubles. We cannot 
educate ourselves out of all our social and natural predicaments. 
We can; however, help individuals brace for change and embrace 
the technological miracles that lie ahead. Perhaps, if we educate 
enough of them, society’s weight will shift, making it more equi-
table, more just, and more sustainable. I believe that when people 
are given education, they may still be astonished by the changes and 
mysteries that the future holds, but they will see these as opportuni-
ties rather than threats.
Such a world, I believe, is possible. It is our job to make it 
happen.


NOTES
Notes to Chapter
Notes to Chapter
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Introduction
1.  Eric Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, 
Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: Norton, 
2014), 9.
2.  Martin Ford, Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless 
Future (New York: Basic Books, 2015), xvi.
3.  Alistair Gray, “MasterCard to Start Trialing Pepper the Robot in 
Pizza Hut,” Financial Times, May 24, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/ 
2b78d806-20f2-11e6-aa98-db1e01fabc0c.
4.  Geoff Dyer, “US to Deploy Robot Combat Strategists,” Financial  
Times, April 27, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/29b93562-0c5f-11e6-b0f1 
-61f222853ff3.
5.  Michael Pooler, “Industrial Robot Sales Hit Record,” Financial Times, 
June 22, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/d8d80f32-3874-11e6-a780 
-b48ed7b6126f.
6.  Ravi Kalakota, “Love, Sex and Predictive Analytics: Tinder, Match.
com, and OkCupid,” Business Analytics 3.0 (blog), May 29, 2015, https://
practicalanalytics.co/2015/05/29/love-sex-and-predictive-analytics-tinder 
-match-com-and-okcupid.

152
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION
7.  Elizabeth Lopatto, “Google’s AI Can Learn to Play Video Games,” The 
Verge, February 25, 2015, http://www.theverge.com/2015/2/25/8108399/
google-ai-deepmind-video-games.
8.  Stanley C. Litow, personal interview, February 24, 2016.
9.  Lopatto, “Google’s AI Can Learn to Play Video Games.”
10.  Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment: 
How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?,” Oxford Martin School, 
University of Oxford, September, 2013, http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/
downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf.
11.  Nathaniel Popper, “The Robots Are Coming for Wall Street,” New York 
Times Magazine, February 25, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/ 
magazine/the-robots-are-coming-for-wall-street.html?smprod=nytcore 
-ipad&smid=nytcore-ipad-share.
12.  Michael Chui, James Manyika, and Medhi Miremadi, “Four Fun-
damentals of Workplace Automation,” McKinsey Quarterly, November, 
2015, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/business-technology/
our-insights/four-fundamentals-of-workplace-automation.
13.  Ryan Avent, The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the 
Twenty-first Century (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2016), 5.
14.  U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook Handbook, http://
www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/home.htm.
15.  Danny Hakim, “GM Will Reduce Hourly Workers in US by 25,000,” 
New York Times, June 8, 2005, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/08/
business/gm-will-reduce-hourly-workers-in-us-by-25000.html.
16.  Eric Morath, “Gig Economy Attracts Many Workers, Few Full-Time Jobs,” 
Wall Street Journal, February 18, 2016, http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/ 
2016/02/18/gig-economy-attracts-many-workers-few-full-time-jobs.
17.  General Assembly & Burning Glass Technologies, “Hybrid Jobs: Blur-
ring Lines—How Business and Technology Skills Are Merging to Create 

153
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION AND CHAPTER 1
High Opportunity Hybrid Jobs,” 2015, http://burning-glass.com/research/
hybrid-jobs.
18.  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World 
Population Prospects, the 2015 Revision, July 29, 2015, https://esa.un.org/
unpd/wpp.
Chapter 1
1.  “The Chapman University Survey of American Fears,” 2016, http://www 
.chapman.edu/wilkinson/research-centers/babbie-center/survey-american 
-fears.aspx.
2.  Kenneth Miller, “Archaeologists Find Earliest Evidence of Humans 
Cooking with Fire,” Discover Magazine, December 17, 2013, http://
discovermagazine.com/2013/may/09-archaeologists-find-earliest-evidence 
-of-humans-cooking-with-fire.
3.  Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind (New York: 
HarperCollins, 2015), 12.
4.  Eric Hobsbawm, “The Machine Breakers,” Past and Present 1(1) (1952):  
57–70, http://web.csulb.edu/~ssayeghc/theory/wintertheory/machinebreakers 
.pdf.
5.  Lord Byron’s Speech, Luddites at 200, http://www.luddites200.org.uk/
LordByronspeech.html.
6.  “An Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill,” Luddites at 200, http://www 
.luddites200.org.uk/documents/Byronpoems.pdf.
7.  Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, “Will Humans Go the Way of 
Horses?,” Foreign Affairs, July–August 2015, 8.
8.  Ibid.
9.  John Henry Newman, “Discourse 7. Knowledge Viewed in Relation 
to Professional Skill,” in The Idea of a University, 1858, 178, http://www 
.newmanreader.org/works/idea/discourse7.html.

154
Notes to Chapter 1
10.  The 1890 Land Grant Universities, “The Morrill Acts of 1862 and 1890,” 
2015, http://www.1890universities.org/history.
11.  Clark Kerr, The Uses of the University, 5th ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2001), 3.
12.  Suzanne Mettler, “How the G.I. Bill Built the Middle Class and  
Enhanced Democracy,” The Scholars Strategy Network, January 2012, http://
www.scholarsstrategynetwork.org/brief/how-gi-bill-built-middle-class-and 
-enhanced-democracy.
13.  Eliza Berman, “How the G.I. Bill Changed the Face of Higher Education 
in America,” Time, June 22, 2015, http://time.com/3915231/student-veterans.
14.  Kerr, The Uses of the University, 36.
15.  American Association for the Advancement of Science, “R&D at Col-
leges and Universities,” updated March 24, 2016, https://www.aaas.org/
page/rd-colleges-and-universities.
16.  United States Census Bureau, “World Population: Historical Estimates 
of World Population,” updated December, 2013, http://www.census.gov/
population/international/data/worldpop/table_history.php.
17.  Population Reference Bureau, “Human Population: Urbanization,” 
2016, http://www.prb.org/Publications/Lesson-Plans/HumanPopulation/
Urbanization.aspx.
18.  Jonathan James, “The College Wage Premium,” Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland, August 8, 2012, https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom 
-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2012-economic 
-commentaries/ec-201210-the-college-wage-premium.aspx.
19.  Nathaniel Popper, “The Robots Are Coming for Wall Street,” New York 
Times Magazine, February 25, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/
magazine/the-robots-are-coming-for-wall-street.html?smprod=nytcore 
-ipad&smid=nytcore-ipad-share.

155
Notes to Chapter 1
20.  Clive Cookson, “US Researchers Enter the Cutting Edge with First 
Robot Surgeon,” Financial Times, May 4, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/ 
d23c7a4e-11d9-11e6-91da-096d89bd2173.
21.  Scott Semel, Intralinks, personal interview, March 14, 2016.
22.  Klaus Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution (Geneva: World Eco-
nomic Forum, 2016).
23.  Colin Angle, iRobot Corporation, personal interview, April 4, 2016.
24.  Martin Ford, Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless 
Future (New York: Basic Books, 2015), 75.
25.  Ryan Avent, The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the 
Twenty-first Century (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2016), 5.
26.  Richard Henderson, “Industry Employment and Output Projections to 
2020,” Monthly Labor Review, January 2012, 66, http://www.bls.gov/opub/
mlr/2012/01/art4full.pdf.
27.  Richard Henderson, “Industry Employment and Output Projections to 
2024,” Monthly Labor Review, December 2015, 2, http://www.bls.gov/emp/
ep_table_201.htm.
28.  Facebook, “Stats,” http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info.
29.  Twitter, “What’s Happening,” https://about.twitter.com/company.
30.  Nir Jaimovich and Henry E. Siu, “The Trend Is the Cycle: Job  
Polarization and Jobless Recoveries,” Working Paper No. 18334, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, August 2012, http://www.nber.org/papers/
w18334.
31.  PwC, “Work-Life 3.0: Understanding How We’ll Work Next,” PwC Con-
sumer Intelligence Series, 2016, 11, https://www.pwc.com/us/en/industry/
entertainment-media/publications/consumer-intelligence-series/assets/
pwc-consumer-intellgience-series-future-of-work-june-2016.pdf.

156
Notes to ChapterS 1 AND 2
32.  Emily Symkal, “Flexible Jobs: How the Gig Economy Is Impacting 
Recruiting,” March 7, 2016, https://www.jibe.com/blog/what-recruiters 
-should-know-about-flexible-jobs-today.
33.  Cecilia Kang, “No Driver? Bring It On. How Pittsburgh Became 
Uber’s Testing Ground,” New York Times, September 10, 2016, http://www 
.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/technology/no-driver-bring-it-on-how-pittsburgh 
-became-ubers-testing-ground.html.
34.  Josh Bivens, Elise Gould, and Lawrence Mishel, “Wage Stagnation in 
Nine Charts,” Economic Policy Institute, January 6, 2015, http://www.epi 
.org/publication/charting-wage-stagnation.
35.  National Center for Education Statistics, “Postbaccalaureate Enroll-
ment,” The Condition of Education, May 2016, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/
coe/indicator_chb.asp.
36.  Karen Turner, “Why Students Are Throwing Tons of Money at a Program 
That Won’t Give Them a College Degree,” Washington Post, March 17, 
2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/03/17/ 
why-students-are-throwing-tons-of-money-at-a-program-that-wont-give 
-them-a-college-degree.
37.  Jason Tanz, “Soon We Won’t Program Computers. We’ll Train Them 
Like Dogs,” Wired, May 17, 2016, https://www.wired.com/2016/05/the-end 
-of-code.
38.  Harari, Sapiens, 24.
39.  Ibid., 25.
40.  Ibid.
Chapter 2
1.  Charles Duhigg and Keith Bradsher, “How the U.S. Lost Out on iPhone 
Work,” New York Times, January 21, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/ 
01/22/business/apple-america-and-a-squeezed-middle-class.html?_r 
=1&hp=&pagewanted=all.

157
Notes to Chapter 2
2.  Simon Parry, “The True Cost of Your Cheap Clothes: Slave Wages for 
Bangladesh Factory Workers,” South China Morning Post Magazine, June 11, 
2016, 
http://www.scmp.com/magazines/post-magazine/article/1970431/
true-cost-your-cheap-clothes-slave-wages-bangladesh-factory.
3.  Diana Smeltz, Craig Kafura, and Lily Wojtowicz, “Actually, Americans 
Like Free Trade,” Chicago Council on Global Affairs, September 7, 2016, 
https://www.thechicagocouncil.org/publication/actually-americans-free 
-trade.
4.  Pew Research Center, “The American Middle Class Is Losing Ground,” 
December 9, 2015, 4, http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2015/12/2015-
12-09_middle-class_FINAL-report.pdf.
5.  Emmanuel Saez, “U.S. Top One Percent of Income Earners Hit New 
High in 2015 amid Strong Economic Growth,” Washington Center for Equi-
table Growth, July 1, 2016, http://equitablegrowth.org/research-analysis/ 
u-s-top-one-percent-of-income-earners-hit-new-high-in-2015-amid-strong 
-economic-growth.
6.  Pew Research Center, “The American Middle Class Is Losing  
Ground,” 1.
7.  Ibid., 2.
8.  Bureau of Labor Statistics, table 1.4, Occupations with the Most Job 
Growth, April 18, 2016, http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_104.htm.
9.  Pew Research Center, “The State of American Jobs,” October 6, 2016, 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/10/06/the-state-of-american-jobs.
10.  National Association of Colleges and Employers, “Job Outlook 2016: 
Attributes Employers Want to See on New College Graduates’ Resumes,” 
November 18, 2015, http://www.naceweb.org/s11182015/employers-look-for 
-in-new-hires.aspx.
11.  Northeastern University and FTI Consulting, Business Elite National 
Poll, Third Installment of the Innovation Imperative Polling Series, Topline 

158
Notes to Chapter 2
Report, survey conducted February 3–19, 2014, http://www.northeastern 
.edu/innovationsurvey/pdfs/Pipeline_toplines.pdf.
12.  James Bessen, “Employers Aren’t Just Whining: The ‘Skills Gap’ Is 
Real,” Harvard Business Review, August 25, 2014, https://hbr.org/2014/08/
employers-arent-just-whining-the-skills-gap-is-real.
13.  Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology 
Council Committee on Technology, “Preparing for the Future of Artificial 
Intelligence,” October 2016, 5.
14.  Ibid., 8.
15.  David Julian, Wells Fargo, personal interview, March 3, 2016.
16.  Nathaniel Popper, “The Robots Are Coming for Wall Street,” New York 
Times Magazine, February 25, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/ 
magazine/the-robots-are-coming-for-wall-street.html?smprod=nytcore 
-ipad&smid=nytcore-ipad-share.
17.  See Richard Susskind and Daniel Susskind, The Future of the Professions: 
How Technology Will Transform the Work of Human Experts (Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2015), for a good treatment of how professions 
such as law, medicine, and others may be affected further by oncoming 
technological change.
18.  Grant Theron, Young & Rubicam, personal interview, February 23, 
2016.
19.  William Manfredi, Young & Rubicam, personal interview, February 
23, 2016.
20.  Peter McCabe, GE Transportation, personal interview, February 11, 
2016.
21.  Andrea Cox, GE Aviation, personal interview, February 23, 2016.
22.  Steve Vinter, Google, personal interview, March 9, 2016.
23.  Darren Donovan, KPMG, personal interview, March 2, 2016.

159
Notes to ChapterS 2 AND 3
24.  Sjoerd Gehring, Johnson & Johnson, personal interview, March 3, 
2016.
25.  Marc Andreesen, “Why Software Is Eating the World,” Wall Street 
Journal, August 20, 2011.
Chapter 3
1.  Catherine Fisher, “LinkedIn Unveils the Top Skills That Can Get You 
Hired In 2017, Offers Free Courses for a Week,” LinkedIn Official Blog, 
October 20, 2016, https://blog.linkedin.com/2016/10/20/top-skills-2016 
-week-of-learning-linkedin.
2.  Martin Ford, Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless 
Future (New York: Basic Books, 2015), 256.
3.  Ryan Avent, The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the 
Twenty-first Century (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2016), 64.
4.  Ibid., 5.
5.  Carl Haub, “How Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth?,” Population 
Reference Bureau, October 2011, http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/ 
2002/HowManyPeopleHaveEverLivedonEarth.aspx.
6.  Amy X. Wang, “The Musical AI Is Now Working on Its Debut Album(s)—
and Wants to Do the Beatles Better Than the Beatles,” Quartz, October 18, 2016, 
http://qz.com/812231/sony-is-making-an-artificial-intelligence-algorithm 
-that-writes-perfect-hit-making-songs.
7.  Kyung Hee Kim, “Can We Trust Creativity Tests? A Review of the 
Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking (TTCT),” Creativity Research Journal 
18(1) (2006): 3, http://people.uncw.edu/caropresoe/GiftedFoundations/
SocialEmotional/Creativity-articles/Kim_Can-we-trust-creativity-tests.pdf.
8.  J. P. Guilford, The Nature of Human Intelligence (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1967).

160
Notes to Chapter 3
9.  Kim, “Can We Trust Creativity Tests?,” 4.
10.  Ford, Rise of the Robots, 130.
11.  Ken Robinson, “Do Schools Kill Creativity?,” Talk delivered at TED 
2006, Conference on The Future We Will Create, Monterrey, California, 
February 2006, https://www.ted.com/playlists/171/the_most_popular_talks 
_of_all.
12.  Richard Arum and Josipa Roksa, Academically Adrift: Limited Learning 
on College Campuses (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), 121.
13.  National Center for Education Statistics, “Skills of U.S. Unemployed, 
Young, and Older Adults in Sharper Focus: Results from the Program for 
the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) 2012/2014,” 
March 2016, http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016039.pdf.
14.  The discipline of humanics is articulated in “Northeastern 2025,” 
Northeastern University’s 2016 academic plan (http://www.northeastern 
.edu/academic-plan).
15.  In discussing the idea of a set of new literacies, it is necessary to acknowl-
edge the work of others who have previously articulated similar concepts.  
In particular, the work of economists Frank Levy and Richard Murnane—
who a generation ago articulated the concept of the new basic skills needed 
for students to meet the challenges of the knowledge economy—is key. 
So too are the contributions of media scholar Henry Jenkins, who has 
defined the concept of new media literacies to enable people to navigate 
the complexities of the digital media age. See, e.g., Frank Levy and Richard 
J. Murnane, R., The New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating the 
Next Job Market (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004), and 
Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide (New 
York: New York University Press, 2006).
16.  Liz Eggleston, “Coding Bootcamp Market Sizing Report 2016,” Course 
Report, June 22, 2016, https://www.coursereport.com/reports/2016-coding 
-bootcamp-market-size-research.

161
Notes to Chapter 3
17.  Sjoerd Gehring, Johnson & Johnson personal interview, March 3, 2016.
18.  David S. Bennahum, “Coding Snobs Are Not Helping Our Children 
Prepare for the Future,” Quartz, June 10, 2016, http://qz.com/703335/
coding-snobs-are-not-helping-our-children-prepare-for-the-future.
19.  Dave Evans, “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the 
Internet Is Changing Everything,” Cisco Internet Business Solutions 
Group, April 2011, http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/
innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf.
20.  “Caterpillar and the Internet of Big Things,” Caterpillar, October 15, 
2015, 
http://www.caterpillar.com/en/news/caterpillarNews/innovation/
caterpillar-disrupted.html.
21.  Michael Patrick Lynch, The Internet of Us: Knowing More and Under-
standing Less in the Age of Big Data (New York: Liveright, 2016), 161.
22.  Ibid., 164.
23.  Geoff Colvin, Humans Are Underrated: What High Achievers Know  
That Brilliant Machines Never Will (New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2015),  
121.
24.  Ibid., 128.
25.  Marcia S. Smith, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Columbia: Synopsis of the 
Report of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” CRS Report for Con-
gress, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, September 2, 
2003, https://history.nasa.gov/columbia/Troxell/Columbia%20Web%20
Site/Documents/Congress/CRS%20Summary%20of%20CAIB%20
Report.pdf.
26.  Christopher F. Schuetze, “A Dutch Architect Offshores the Future 
of Housing,” New York Times, November 28, 2016, http://www.nytimes.
com/2016/11/28/arts/design/offshoring-the-future-of-housing.html?_r=0.
27.  Waters Foundation, http://watersfoundation.org.

162
Notes to Chapter 3
28.  World Economic Forum, “Human Capital Outlook: Associa-
tion of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),” WEF, Kuala Lumpur,  
Malaysia, June 1–2, 2016, http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_ASEAN 
_HumanCapitalOutlook.pdf.
29.  U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Entrepreneurship and the U.S. Economy,” 
2015, http://www.bls.gov/bdm/entrepreneurship/entrepreneurship.htm.
30.  Desh Deshpande, Sycamore Networks and Deshpande Foundation,  
personal interview, March 2, 2016.
31.  FailCon, http://thefailcon.com/about.html.
32.  Paula Caligiuri, Cultural Agility: Building a Pipeline of Successful Global 
Professionals (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2012), 4.
33.  J. Manyika, S. Lund, J. Bughin, J. Woetzel, K. Stamenov, and D. 
Dhingra, “Digital Globalization: The New Era of Global Flows,” McKin-
sey Global Institute, February 2016, http://www.mckinsey.com/business 
-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/digital-globalization-the-new 
-era-of-global-flows.
34.  Ibid., 4.
35.  Ibid., 6.
36.  Diksha Madhok, “The Story behind India’s Rice Bucket Challenge,” 
Quartz, August 25, 2014, http://qz.com/254910/india-adapts-the-ice 
-bucket-challenge-to-suit-local-conditions-meet-the-rice-bucket-challenge.
37.  Jie Zong and Jeanne Batalova, “Frequently Requested Statistics on 
Immigrants and Immigration in the United States,” Migration Policy 
Institute, April 14, 2016, http://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/frequently 
-requested-statistics-immigrants-and-immigration-united-states.
38.  Caligiuri, Cultural Agility, 6.
39.  Raffi Khatchadourian, “We Know How You Feel,” New Yorker, January 
19, 2015, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/01/19/know-feel.

163
Notes to Chapter 4
Chapter 4
1.  Dawn Kawamoto, “Watson Wasn’t Perfect: IBM Explains the Jeopardy! 
Errors,” Aol.com, February 17, 2011, http://www.aol.com/article/2011/02/17/
the-watson-supercomputer-isnt-always-perfect-you-say-tomato/19848213.
2.  Ken Jennings, “My Puny Human Brain,” Slate, February 16, 2011, http://
www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox/2011/02/my_puny_human_brain 
.html.
3.  John Dewey, Experience and Education (New York: Touchstone, 1938),  
http://ruby.fgcu.edu/courses/ndemers/colloquium/experienceducationdewey 
.pdf.
4.  Ibid.
5.  Ronald Fry and David Kolb, “Experiential Learning Theory and Learn-
ing Experiences in Liberal Arts Education,” New Directions for Experiential 
Learning, No. 6, Enriching the Liberal Arts through Experiential Learning (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1979), 80.
6.  The contributions of my colleague Susan Ambrose, Northeastern’s 
senior vice provost for undergraduate education and experiential learning, 
to the field of learning science have been critical to the ideas developed in 
this section. I thank her for her assistance.
7.  Susan A. Ambrose, Michael W. Bridges, Michele DiPietro, Marsha C. 
Lovett, Marie K. Norman, and Richard E. Mayer, How Learning Works: 
Seven Research-Based Principles for Smart Teaching (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2010), 95.
8.  Ibid., 97.
9.  Ibid., 108.
10.  Ibid., 110.
11.  Ibid., 110.

164
Notes to Chapter 4
12.  Carol S. Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (New York:  
Ballantine Books, 2008), 12.
13.  Northeastern University, “All College Grads Want to Be Prepared 
for Their Careers. Northeastern Students Actually Are,” http://www 
.northeastern.edu/preparedness.
14.  Northeastern University and FTI Consulting, Business Elite National 
Poll, Third Installment of the Innovative Imperative Polling Series, Topline 
Report, survey conducted February 3–19, 2014, http://www.northeastern 
.edu/innovationsurvey/pdfs/Pipeline_toplines.pdf.
15.  Northeastern University, Innovation in Higher Education Survey 
Toplines, survey conducted October 13–18, 2012, http://www.northeastern 
.edu/test/innovationsurvey/pdfs/survey-results.pdf.
16.  Catherine Erdelyi, personal interview, February 9, 2016.
17.  McKenzie Jones, personal interview, February 11, 2016.
18.  Mary Tobin, personal interview, February 22, 2016.
19.  Ali Matalon, personal interview, February 5, 2016.
20.  Ramanda Nanda and Jesper B. Sorenson, “Workplace Peers and Entre-
preneurship,” Management Science 56(7) (2010): 1116, http://www.edegan 
.com/pdfs/Nanda%20Sorensen%20(2010)%20-%20Workplace%20
peers%20and%20entrepreneurship.pdf.
21.  Edward P. Lazear, “Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Labor Economics 23(4) 
(2005): 649–680, http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/classes/econ521/orazem/
Papers/Lazear_entrepreneurship.pdf.
22.  Portions of this section appeared, in part, in “A Complete Education,” 
Inside Higher Ed, April 20, 2015.
23.  Uta Poiger, dean of Northeastern’s College of Social Sciences 
and Humanities, has been instrumental in articulating the concept of  
“experiential liberal arts” at our university. The discussion in this section 
draws deeply on her insights.

165
Notes to ChapterS 4 AND 5
24.  Noah E. Friedkin, Anton V. Proskurnikov, Roberto Tempo, and Sergey 
E. Parsegov, “Network Science on Belief System Dynamics under Logic 
Constraints,” Science, October 21, 2016, 321–326, science.sciencemag.org/
content/354/6310/321.
25.  “Purposeful Work,” Bates College website, https://www.bates.edu/
purposeful-work.
26.  I again acknowledge Susan Ambrose and her colleagues in North-
eastern’s Center for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning Through 
Research, who developed the SAIL app.
Chapter 5
1.  Arnold J. Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. 1, Introduction: The Geneses of 
Civilizations (London: Oxford University Press, 1934), 24.
2.  Jared Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (New 
York: Viking Press, 2005), 274–275.
3.  Alan Tait, “Reflections on Student Support in Open and Distance Learn-
ing.” International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (2003), 
http://oro.open.ac.uk/1017/1/604.pdf.
4.  Daniel Webster, “Lecture before the Society for the Diffusion of  
Useful Knowledge, Boston, November 11, 1836,” The Writings and Speeches of 
Daniel Webster, vol. 13 (Boston: Little, Brown, 1903), Google Books, https://
books.google.com/books?id=2iF3AAAAMAAJ&pg=PA63&source=gbs_toc
_r&cad=3#v=onepage&q&f=false; Oliver Wendell Holmes, Currents and 
Counter-Currents in Medical Science: With Other Addresses and Essays (Boston: 
Ticknor and Fields, 1861), Google Books, https://books.google.com/books
?id=c8MNAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r 
&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false.
5.  “About the Lowell Institute,” www.lowellinstitute.org/about.
6.  YMCA, “History—Founding,” http://www.ymca.net/history/founding 
.html.

166
Notes to Chapter 5
7.  Institute of Education Sciences (IES) and National Center for Educa-
tional Statistics (NCES), “Fast Facts: Back to School Statistics,” https://nces 
.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372.
8.  Institute of Education Sciences (IES) and National Center for Educa-
tional Statistics (NCES), “Table 303.40. Total fall enrollment in degree-
granting postsecondary institutions, by attendance status, sex, and age: 
Selected years 1970 through 2025,” 2015, https://nces.ed.gov/programs/
digest/d15/tables/dt15_303.40.asp?current=yes.
9.  American Association of Community Colleges, “2014 Fact Sheet,” 
http://www.aacc.nche.edu/AboutCC/Documents/Facts14_Data_R3.pdf.
10.  Institute of Education Sciences (IES) and National Center for Educa-
tional Statistics (NCES), “Web Tables: U.S. Department of Education,” 
December 2011, NCES 2012-173, https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2012/2012173.pdf.
11.  Patrick Gillespie, “University of Phoenix Has Lost Half Its Students,” 
CNNMoney, March 15, 2015, http://money.cnn.com/2015/03/25/investing/
university-of-phoenix-apollo-earnings-tank.
12.  “Keeping It on the Company Campus,” The Economist, May 16, 2015, 
http://www.economist.com/news/business/21651217-more-firms-have-set 
-up-their-own-corporate-universities-they-have-become-less-willing-pay.
13.  Philipp Kolo, Ranier Strack, Philippe Cavat, Roselinde Torres, and 
Vikram Bhalia, “Corporate Universities: An Engine for Human Capital,” 
BCG Perspectives, July 18, 2013, https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/
articles/human_resources_leadership_talent_corporate_universities 
_engine_human_capital/#chapter1.
14.  “Cognition Switch: What Employers Can Do to Encourage Their 
Workers to Retrain,” Special Report on Lifelong Education, The Economist, 
January 14, 2017, 9.
15.  Isabel Carndenas-Navia and Brian Fitzgerald, “The Broad Application 
of Data Science and Analytics: Essential Tools for the Liberal Arts Gradu-
ate,” Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, July 31, 2015, http://www 
.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00091383.2015.1053754.

167
Notes to Chapter 5
16.  Ryan Denham, “Illinois State Meets Growing Need for Cybersecu-
rity Professionals,” Illinois State University News, April 21, 2016, https://
news.illinoisstate.edu/2016/04/illinois-state-meets-growing-need 
-cybersecurity-professionals.
17.  “Ohio State among Select Schools to Launch Curriculum with IBM 
Watson,” The Ohio State University College of Engineering, May 7, 
2014, https://engineering.osu.edu/news/2014/05/ohio-state-among-select 
-schools-chosen-launch-curriculum-ibm-watson.
18.  Barbara Means, Yuki Toyama, Robert Murphy, and Marianne Baki, 
“The Effectiveness of Online and Blended Learning: A Meta-Analysis  
of the Empirical Literature,” Teachers College Record 115, March 2013, 2, 
https://www.sri.com/sites/default/files/publications/effectiveness_of 
_online_and_blended_learning.pdf.
19.  Ibid.
20.  Ian Hathaway and Mark Muro, “Tracking the Gig Economy: New 
Numbers,” Brookings Institution, October 13, 2016, https://www.brookings 
.edu/research/tracking-the-gig-economy-new-numbers.
21.  Nicholas Wells, “The ‘Gig Eeconomy’ Is Growing—and Now We Know 
by How Much,” CNBC, October 13, 2016, http://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/13/
gig-economy-is-growing-heres-how-much.html.
22.  Laura G. Knapp, Janice E. Kelly-Reid, and Scott A. Ginder, “Employees 
in Postsecondary Institutions, Fall 2010, and Salaries of Full-time Instruc-
tional Staff, 2010–11,” National Center for Educational Statistics, November 
2011, p. 5, https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2012/2012276.pdf.
23.  Ibid.
24.  National Association of College and University Business Officers, 
“New Report Shows Recent Trends in Faculty Employment and Salaries,” 
November 29, 2011, http://www.nacubo.org/Research/Research_News/ 
New_Report_Shows_Recent_Trends_in_Faculty_Employment_and 
_Salaries.html.

168
Notes to Chapter 5 AND AFTERWORD
25.  Ibid.
26.  Clark Kerr, The Uses of the University (Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
University Press, 1963).
27.  Martin Ihrig and Ian MacMillian, “How to Get Ecosystem Buy-In,” 
Harvard Business Review, March–April 2017.
Afterword
1.  Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, “Unem-
ployment Rate for United States,” https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/
M0892BUSM156SNBR.
2.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Leading Causes of Death, 
1900–1998,” https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/lead1900_98.pdf.
3.  NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information, Climate at a 
Glance: Global Time Series, March 2017,http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag.
4.  Vannevar Bush, Science: The Endless Frontier (Washington, DC: United 
States Government Printing Office, 1945),https://nsf.gov/about/history/
vbush1945.htm.
5.  Ibid.
6.  Oxfam International, “Just 8 Men Own Same Wealth as Half the World,” 
January 17, 2017, https://www.oxfam.org/en/pressroom/pressreleases/ 
2017-01-16/just-8-men-own-same-wealth-half-world.
7.  “IBM and San Jose State University Collaborate to Advance Social Busi-
ness Skills,” IBM News Room, January 11, 2012, https://www-03.ibm.com/
press/us/en/pressrelease/36486.wss.
8.  “Equipping Liberal Arts Students with Skills in Data Analytics.” Busi-
ness-Higher Education Forum, 2016, http://www.bhef.com/sites/default/
files/BHEF_2016_DSA_Liberal_Arts.pdf.
9.  The information on Austria, Germany, and Switzerland is from 
OECD, “Learning for Jobs,” OECD Reviews of Vocational Education 

169
NOTES TO AFTERWORD
and Training, May 2011, https://www.oecd.org/edu/skills-beyond-school/
LearningForJobsPointersfor%20PolicyDevelopment.pdf.
10.  Department of Education and Skills, “Government Launches Ireland’s 
National Skills Strategy 2025: Ireland’s Future.”, January 27, 2016, http://
www.education.ie/en/Press-Events/Press-Releases/2016-Press-Releases/
PR2016-01-27.html.
11.  OECD, “Learning for Jobs.”
12.  John Pabon, and Lin Wang, “A New Era: Optimizing Chinese Indus-
try in the Age of Automation,” BSR, February 2017, https://www.bsr.org/
reports/BSR_Optimizing_Chinese_Industry_in_the_Age_of_Automation 
.pdf.
13.  John Morgan, “South Korean Universities Lead the Way on Indus-
try Collaboration,” Times Higher Education (March 9, 2017), https://www 
.timeshighereducation.com/news/south-korean-universities-lead-way 
-on-industry-collaboration.
14.  Cardinal John Henry Newman, “The Idea of a University,178. http://
www.newmanreader.org/works/idea/discourse7.html.
15.  William H. Whyte, Jr., The Organization Man (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1956).


INDEX
Index
Index
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
Abstraction, as human trait,  
20–21
Academically Adrift: Limited 
Learning on College Campuses 
(Arum and Roksa), 52
Accidents, happy, 69. See also 
Creativity/creators
Adaptability, flexibility, as human 
trait, 20
Adult education, 114–116. See also 
Lifelong learning/learners
Advanced Cybersecurity 
Experiences for Students 
program (University System of 
Maryland), 122
AI. See Artificial intelligence 
(AI)/robotics
Algorithm construction skills, 
26–27, 29–30, 33–35, 38–39
Alumni, changing definitions 
and roles, 133–134
Amazon Mechanical Turk, 16
Ambrose, Susan, 163n6
Angle, Colin, 14
Application across contexts, 
experiential learning process, 
83–85
Apprenticeship programs, 145
Artificial intelligence (AI)/
robotics. See also Automation/
technology; Intelligent 
machines; Technological 
literacy
ability to adapt and learn, x, 
xviii, 15, 90, 125–126
accelerating speed of 
development, ix–x, 118–119,  
146
and convergent thinking, 50
as economic driver, 14, 121, 127
ethical issues, 60–61
fears about, 1–2, 5–6, 13–15, 46
importance of developing skills 
related to, 118–119
quality control issues, 31
and robot-proof learning 
models; xviii, 48, 54, 62, 75, 
85, 109, 140, 147

Index
172
superiority over humans for 
routine tasks, 13
uses for, x, xiii, 31, 33, 146
and the wage gap, 15, 28–29
Arum, Richard, 52
Assessing experiential learning 
programs, 108–109
Assumptions, recognizing and 
questioning, 58, 64, 71–72,  
121
AT&T, collaboration with 
Udacity, 119–120
Austria, apprenticeship 
programs, 145
Automation/technology. See also 
Artificial intelligence (AI)/
robotics; Intelligent machines; 
Technological literacy; 
Technological unemployment
accelerating role and impacts, 
ix–xii, 12–13
and economic and social 
impacts, xii–xiii, 1–2, 46, 61, 121
ethical issues, 60–61
fears about/resistance to, 1–2, 
5–6, 13–15, 46
impact on the human body, 3–4
and increased need for critical/
systems thinking, 41–42
limitations, 19–20, 79, 97
new jobs associated with, xiv, 
45–46, 147–148
Automotive industry, 
international approach to 
expansion, 138
Avent, Ryan, 46
Banking industry, skills needed 
for, 29–31
Basile, Joe, 31–32
Bates College, experiential liberal 
arts program, 106–107
Bennahum, David S., 45, 56
Body language, importance of 
understanding, 72
Boot camps, 18, 56, 128–129
Boston Consulting Group, on 
“corporate universities,”  
119
Brains, human, unique qualities, 
21
Brookings Institute, on gig 
economy freelancers, 127
Brynjolfsson, Erik, ix–x
Buffett, Warren, 120
“Build it and they will come” 
model, 117–118, 120–121, 135
Bush, Vannevar, 10, 141
Business processing outsourcing 
(BPO), 99
Butler, Samuel, 1
Byron, George Gordon (Lord 
Byron), 4–6
Caligiuri, Paula, 70
Career paths, outdated, xiii–xv
Artificial intelligence (AI)/
robotics (cont.)

Index
173
Career services, importance of 
alumni to, 133–134
Carnegie Mellon University, 
global multi-university network 
approach, 137
Change, resistance to, xvi–xvii, 
1–3, 5–6, 8, 13–15, 46, 114
China, robotics in, x, 146
Classroom learning
and assessments/grading, 
108–109
and content knowledge, 85,  
89
and fostering growth mindsets, 
89
integrating with real-world 
experiences, xx, 75, 79–81, 86, 
90, 93, 98
overemphasis on performance, 
88–89
and teaching young children, 
56, 66
Climate change, finding 
solutions to, 43, 65–66, 
139–140
Co-bots, x
Coding. See Technological 
literacy
Cognitive capacities
approaches to teaching, 53–54, 
73–75
critical thinking, 62
goal setting and evaluations, 
108–109
in humanics curriculum, 
overview, xix
Collaboration, as aspect of 
human literacy, 59. See  
also Colleges and  
universities
Colleges and universities. See 
also Experiential learning; 
Humanics; Lifelong learning/
learners
alumni, 133–134
artificial divisions in curricula, 
18, 129
and collaborations with 
employers, 10, 122–124, 126, 
141–147
and customized learning 
programs, 121–127
debates about types of 
education, 147
experiential liberal arts, 103–107, 
148
faculty, 131–132
and federal funding for 
research, 10–11
for-profit universities, 119
fund-raising, 134
and the G.I. Bill, 9–11
impact of Industrial Revolution, 
8
individualized instruction 
approaches, 112–113
lifelong learners vs. traditional 
full-time students, 128

Index
174
modular block curriculum 
approach, 129–131
multi-university networks,  
135–138
need for expanded teaching 
facilities, 131–132
need to prepare students for  
the jobs of the future, xvi–xvii, 
26, 100–103, 117, 131, 147–148
and responding to times of 
change, xii–xiii, xvii
robot-proof educational models 
for, xviii, 48, 54, 62, 75, 85, 87, 
109, 140, 147
role in educating lifelong 
learners, xvi–xvii, 113, 120–121, 
148–149
role in promoting flexible, 
creative thinking, 21
traditional, outmoded 
approaches and structures, 52, 
121, 132
and the value of a liberal 
education, 7
Columbia disaster, 64
Communication skills, 52, 60, 
101, 109, 123
Community colleges, 9,  
116–117
Compensation. See Wages
Complex reasoning skills, 52
Computers. See Artificial 
intelligence (AI)/robotics; 
Automation/technology; 
Intelligent machines
Computer scientists, need for 
liberal arts training, 107
Conceptual thinking, importance, 
43
Contextual understanding
and critical thinking, 63–64
and cultural agility, 73
and effective data analysis, 58, 
79
Continuous learning programs. 
See Lifelong learning/learners
Convergent thinking, 49
Co-op program, Northeastern 
University. See also 
Experiential learning; Lifelong 
learning/learners
Erdeyli’s experience, 95–96
evolution of, 90–91
internships vs., 94
Jones’s experience, 97
learning process, 92–93
Matalon’s experience,  
98–100
networking and matching 
process, 92
and preparing for future 
employment, 94
scope, 91–92
Tobin’s experience, 98
Corporate universities,  
119–120
Cox, Andrea, 37–38
Colleges and universities (cont.)

Index
175
Creativity/creators
and convergent vs. divergent 
thinking, 49–50
and cross-silo thinking, 65–66
emphasizing in a robot-proof 
curriculum, xviii, 48, 87
and growth mindsets, 88–89
and human imagination/
inventiveness, 20–21, 64–65
importance to the new 
economy, xvi–xvii, 51, 111
positive impacts of technological 
advances on, 14, 32
and things left to learn and 
discover, 47
understanding and identifying, 
48
and university-level research 
and development, 11–12
Critical thinking
characteristics, 42, 62–63
as component of the humanics 
curriculum, xix
data analysis component, 63
importance, 53
and problem-solving skills, 43
and questioning assumptions, 
64
as response to increasing 
automation, 41–42
and understanding context, 
63–64
Cultural agility/understanding, 
58, 60, 70–73
Curricula/syllabi. See Colleges 
and universities; Humanics
Customized learning programs
defined, 126
lifelong learning model, 121–124
making goals specific and 
explicit, 74
and the modular block 
approach, 129–131
Cybersecurity professionals, 
University System of Maryland 
program for, 122
Darwin, Charles, 114–116
“Darwin among the Machines” 
(Butler), 1
Data literacy and analysis  
skills. See also Technological 
literacy
characteristics, 57–58
as component of a humanics 
curriculum, xix
and data mining, x–xi
and digital commerce, 71
importance, xv, xvii, 4, 35,  
57–58
and need for critical thinking, 
63–64
Deep Blue computer, IBM, 19
“Deep learning” systems, xi
Degree programs, lifelong 
learners vs. traditional 
students, 128
Demo days, Google, 40

Index
176
Demographics
foreign-born inhabitants of the 
U.S., 72
human population growth, 48
projected growth in labor force, 
xiv
Deshpande, Desh/Deshpande 
Foundation, 68–69
Dewey, John, 82–83
Diagnostic software, 34–35
Diamond, Jared, 111–112
Displaced workers. See 
Industrial Revolution; 
Social and economic justice; 
Technological unemployment
Distance learning, 114
Divergent thinking, 49–50, 89
Diversity, cultural differences, 
experiencing and 
understanding, 59–60
Donovan, Darren, 40
“Do Schools Kill Creativity?” 
(Robinson), 51
Douglass, Frederick, 54
Drake University, partnerships 
with local industries, 144
Dweck, Carol, 87–89, 111
Economic cycles of automation 
and disruption, 3, 8, 12, 17, 26, 
114–115, 121, 143
Education. See also Colleges and 
universities
and the G.I. Bill, 9–11
role in times of economic 
change, xiii–xiv, xvii, 17, 47, 68
universal public, Mann’s 
advocacy of, 8–9
Electrical energy, discovery and 
harnessing of, 3–4
Employers
and customized learning 
programs, 121–124
on desirable employee skills, 15, 
26–27, 30–31, 34, 36–41
embracing of new technologies, 
46
positive views of experiential 
and co-op learning models, 
94–95
university-employer 
partnerships, 10, 122–124, 126, 
141–147
English majors, experiential 
learning opportunities, 105
Entrepreneurship
as component of a humanics 
curriculum, xix
co-op experiences related to, 
95–100
as a skill, importance, 66–70
Entry-level positions
and cross-functional managerial 
skills, 38
reduced numbers of, in law 
firms, 32
Erdeyli, Catherine, co-op 
experience, 95–96

ndex
177
E-shopping, 71
Experiential learning. See also 
Co-op program, Northeastern 
University; Humanics; 
Lifelong learning/learners
as basis for lifelong learning, 
xix–xx, 89–90, 109–110
characteristics, 81, 87–88
Dewey’s views, 82–83
experiential liberal arts, 103–107, 
148
four-stage framework for, 83–85
goal setting and evaluations, 
108–109, 126–127
and growth vs. fixed mindsets, 
87–89
and hands-on projects, 74
hybrid learning approaches, 125
making learning outcomes 
explicit, 108–109
Northeastern as pioneer in, xv
in residential universities, 
100–103
transfer principle and process, 
85–87
as valid pedagogy, debates 
about, 82–83
and the value of trial and error, 
80
Facebook, employment with, 15, 
26–27
“Factory model” education, 9
FailCon, 69
Failure/mistakes, learning from, 
69–70
Ferrucci, David, 77
Financial industry
and robotic trading platforms, 
xiii
skills needed for, 30–31
Fixed mindset, 88, 111
Fleming, Alexander, 69
Flow Machines, Sony, 48
Foley Hoag (law firm), 
employment needs, 31
Ford, Martin, 15, 46
For-profit colleges, 119
Fourth Industrial Revolution, 115
Fry, Ronald, 83
Gehring, Sjoerd, 40
General Electric (GE)
collaborations with 
Northeastern University, 126, 
144
importance of software, 
algorithm development at, 34
manager training programs, 119
and need for predictive 
engineers, 37–38
need for problem-solvers, 
“quarterbacks,” 36
as technology/services provider, 
67
Generalists, 38
Genetics, genetic modifications, 
61

Index
178
Germany
“dual system” of education, 145
scientific and technical 
education in, 8–9
G.I. Bill (Servicemen’s 
Readjustment Act), 9–11
Gig economy, freelance workers
defined, xiv–xv
income from, 16–17, 25
and personalized learning 
programs, 127
Globalization
American backlash against, 24
and big box retailers, 23
and cultural agility, 70
and e-shopping, 71
and global multi-university 
networks, 137–138
impacts on economies, xiv, 15
and importance of cultural 
context/diversity, 59–60
and international vs. global 
approaches, 138–139
and world-wide recruitment 
efforts, 30–31
Goals, explicit
for experiential learning 
programs, 108–109
and the humanics approach,  
74
Google, employment with, 38–40
Google Translate, 97
Great Recession
long-term impacts, 25
slow recovery from, 16
understanding causes, 66
Growth mindsets, 88–89
Guilford, J. P., 49
Harari, Yuval Noah, 20
Harvard University extension 
school, 115
Higher education. See Colleges 
and universities
High school education
and access to economic 
opportunities, 47
coding boot camps, 56
and employment prospects, 26
Humanics. See also Experiential 
learning; Lifelong learning/
learners
approaches to teaching, xix–xx, 
73–75
critical thinking component, 
62–64
and cross-discipline thematic 
studies, 73
and cultural agility, 70–72
and data literacy, 57–58
entrepreneurship component, 
66–70
goal setting and evaluations, 
108–109
human literacy component, xix, 
58–61, 68
as new learning model, 53–54, 
73–75

Index
179
new literacies and cognitive 
capacities associated with, 
xviii–xiv, xix
systems thinking components, 
64–66
and teaching where the learners 
are, xx
and technological literacy, 55–56
Human literacy
characteristics, xix, 58–61
and embracing diversity, 59–60
and handling ethical issues, 
60–61
need for communication skills, 
60
and working for economic 
equality/social justice, 61, 68
Humans. See also Creativity/
creators
capacity for imagination, 64–65
and doing what machine cannot 
do, 19–20, 62–63, 65, 78–79, 
87
and fears about robots/AI, 1–2, 
5–6, 13–15, 46
and intelligence, 51–52
and liberating potential of 
machines, x, xvi–xvii, 2–3
Hungary, education-employment 
collaborations, 146
Hurricane Katrina, 64
Hybrid jobs, xv
Hybrid learning approaches,  
125
IBM
Deep Blue supercomputer, 19
partnership in cognitive 
computing courses, 123
partnership with Memorial 
Sloan Kettering, xi
partnership with San Jose State 
University, 144
Watson supercomputer, xi, 
77–78
Implants, transplants, unequal 
access to, 61
Income/economic inequality. See 
Social and economic justice; 
Wages
India, out-sourcing of legal work 
to, 31
Industrial Revolution
and displaced workers, 3, 5–5, 8, 
12, 17, 26
and educational opportunity, 8, 
114–115
and the expansion of human 
creativity, 14
and resistance to change,  
xvi–xvii, 1–3, 5–6, 8, 13–15, 46, 
114
Information revolution, 4
Intelligent machines. See also 
Artificial intelligence (AI)/
robotics; Automation/
technology; Humans
ability to understand complex 
systems, 64–65

Index
180
deep learning, 90
and demands on educational 
systems, 17
employment impacts; 14–15, 18, 
41–43
ethical issues raised by, 60–61
liberating potential, x, xvi–xvii, 
2–3
machine learning vs. human 
learning, ix, 13, 78–80
and nonquantifiable thinking, 
62–63
super-intelligent machines, 29
and uniquely human abilities 
and skills, 19–20, 65, 78–79, 
87
International vs. global 
approaches, 138–139
Internet of Things, 15–16
The Internet of Us: Knowing More 
and Understanding Less in the 
Age of Big Data (Lynch), 58
Internships. See also Co-op 
program, Northeastern 
University; Experiential 
learning; Lifelong learning/
learners
contrast with co-op program,  
94
and experiential liberal arts 
programs, 105–106
Intralinks (legal technology 
company), 13, 31
Inventiveness/imagination, as 
human traits, 3, 20–21, 64–65. 
See also Creativity/creators; 
Humans
Ireland, “National Skills Strategy 
2025,” 145–146
Jenkins, Henry, 160n15
Jennings, Ken, 77
Jeopardy (TV show), 77–78
Johnson, Lyndon B., 6
Johnson & Johnson, employment 
with, 40
Jones, Mackenzie, co-op 
experience, 97
Julian, David, 29–31
Kasparov, Gary, 19
Kensho (banking industry 
software company), 30
Kerr, Clark, 136, 140
Keynes, John Maynard, 6
Knowledge economy
impact of machines on, xii, 26, 
113
postwar development of, 11
and things left to learn and 
discover, 47
Kolb, David, 83
KPMG consulting, employment 
with, 40
Leadership skills, importance,  
27
Intelligent machines (cont.)

Index
181
Learning process, machines 
vs. humans, 78–79. See also 
Experiential learning; Humans
Legal profession
automation of, xii, 13, 31–32
dealing with ethical and moral 
issues, 61, 98
human skills needed for, 31–32
and wages, 32–33
Level program, Northeastern 
University, 129
Levy, Frank, 160n15
Liberal arts, experiential, 103–107, 
148, 164n23
Lifelong learning/learners. See 
also Colleges and universities; 
Experiential learning; 
Humanics
and boot camps, 128–129
and constantly changing 
content, need for continuous 
learning, xiii, xvi–xvii, xx, 20, 
116, 148–149, 121
contrast with traditional full-
time students, 128
“corporate universities,” 119–120
customized delivery approaches, 
xx, 124–127
customized program design, 
121–124, 126–127
experiential learning as basis 
for, 109–110
and flexible curricula, 118, 124
for-profit universities, 119
and growth vs. fixed mindsets, 
87–89
historical precedents, 113–116
and the modular block 
approach, 129–131
multi-university networks, 
135–136
and need for expanded teaching 
facilities, 131–132
online courses, 110, 119, 124–126, 
135
outmoded view of as ancillary 
activity, 117
role of alumni, 133–134
role of faculty, 131–132
value for freelance workers,  
127
Life magazine, on educational 
needs of returning veterans,  
10
LinkedIn, job skills most in 
demand, 45
Literacies, new
and the ability to communicate 
ideas, 55
and cognitive capacity, 54
data literacy, 57–58
goal setting and evaluations, 
108–109
human literacy, 58–61
overview, xviii–xix
technological literacy, 55–56
Literacy, defined, 54
Litow, Stanley S., xi

Index
182
Logic, need for mastery of, 56
Lowell, John, Jr. (Lowell 
Institute), 115
Low-skilled labor force, xii, 16
Luddites, 5–6
Lynch, Michael Patrick, 58
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 14
Managerial skills, cross-
functionality, 38
Manfredi, William, 33
Manhattan Project, 10–11
Mann, Horace, 8–9
Manufacturing sector
advanced manufacturing/
manufacturing engineers, 34, 
37, 41, 126, 144
decline of, xiii, 15, 25
need for high-skilled vs.  
low-skilled laborers, 15–16
robots in, x, 146
Marx, Karl, 6
Mastery stage of experiential 
learning, 83–85
Matalon, Ali, co-op experience, 
98–100
McAfee, Andrew, ix–x
McCabe, Pete, 34–36
McKinsey report on job 
obsolescence, xiii
Media industry, contributions of 
robots to, 33
Medical applications, use of 
Watson for, xi–xii
Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Hospital, xi–xii
Microlearning experiences, 108
Middle-class. See also Wages
development of, 11–12
and growing economic 
inequality, 24–26
Military applications
ethical issues, 60–61
robots in, x
and university collaborations, 10
Modular block approach to 
curriculum organization,  
129–131
MOOC (massive open online 
course), 119–120
Morrill Act of 1862, 8
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 47
Multi-university networks
characteristics, 135–136
coordination challenges, 138
global approach, 137–140
how they work, examples, 
136–137
multiversities vs., 136, 140
Murnane, Richard, 160n15
National Advisory Council 
on Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship, 68
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, 64
National Center for Educational 
Statistics, 131–132

Index
183
National Defense Research 
Committee, 10
National Science and Technology 
Council’s Committee on 
Technology, “Preparing 
for the Future of Artificial 
Intelligence,” 28–29
“Network Science on Belief 
System Dynamics under Logic 
Constraints” (University of 
California, Santa Barbara),  
106
Newman, John Henry (Cardinal 
Newman), 7–8, 148
Nonquantifiable information, 
skills needed to evaluate, 63
Nontraditional learners, 116.  
See also Lifelong learning/
learners
Northeastern University. See  
also Co-op, Northeastern 
University
ALIGN program, Seattle, 123
collaborations with General 
Electric, 144
Education Quality through 
Innovative Partnerships 
(EQUIP), 126
experiential learning programs, 
xv, 90
global multi-university network 
approach, 137–138
Level program, 129
Lowell Institute, 115
Nottingham, England, Luddite 
uprising, 5–6
Numeracy, 54
Obama, Barack, 68
“Ode to the Framers of the 
Frame Bill” (Byron), 5–6
Olthuis, Koen, 65–66
Online learning, 110, 119, 124–126, 
135
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), 52–53
“Organization Man” (Whyte),  
148
Outsourcing, 30–31, 99
Oxford University study on job 
obsolescence, xiii
Pedagogy. See also Experiential 
learning; Humanics; Lifelong 
learning/learners
and cross-discipline thematic 
studies, 73
current models, content-based 
emphasis, 52
and encouraging transfer of 
learning to new contexts,  
85–87
experiential learning, debates 
about, 81–83, 94–95
project-based/real-world 
learning, 74
real-world connections, 75

Index
184
Personalized learning programs
and boot camp approach,  
128–129
characteristics, 126–127
modular block approach, 129–131
and traditional degree 
programs, 128
Pharmaceutical industry, global 
approach to expansion, 138–139
Pitman, Isaac/Pitman shorthand, 
114
Pohang University of Science 
and Technology, 147
Poiger, Uta, 164n23
Pope, Alexander, 59
Populations. See Demographics
Practice and integration stage, 
experiential learning process, 
83–85
“Preparing for the Future 
of Artificial Intelligence” 
(Committee on Technology, 
National Science and 
Technology Council), 28–29
Problem-solving skills, 
importance, 27
Program for the International 
Assessment of Adult 
Competencies (OECD), 52–53
Public education
and economic advancement,  
47
emphasis on convergent, 
noncreative thinking, 50–51
universal, Mann’s advocacy of, 
8–9
Railroad industry, failure to 
adapt, 118
Reasoning skills, importance, 40
Recording industry, automation 
in, 48
Residential universities, 
experiential learning 
opportunities, 100–103
Rise of the Robots: Technology and 
the Threat of a Jobless Future 
(Ford), 46
Robinson, Ken, 51
Robot-proof learning models, 
xviii, 48, 54, 62, 75, 85, 
87, 109, 140, 147. See also 
Experiential learning; 
Humanics; Lifelong learning/
learners
Robots. See Artificial intelligence 
(AI)/robotics; Intelligent 
machines
Roksa, Josipa, 52
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 10, 141
Rutter, Brad, 77
SAIL (Student Assessed 
Integrated Learning), 109, 
126–127
San Jose State University, 
partnership with IBM, 144
Schneider, Herman, 90

Index
185
Schwab, Klaus, 13
Science: The Endless Frontier 
(Bush), 141
Scientific method, as learning 
model, 70, 83
Scientific research, federal 
funding for, 10–11
Scrums, at Google, 39
Search engines/keyword 
searches, 31–32
The Second Machine Age: Work, 
Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of Brilliant Technologies 
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee),  
ix–x
Self-driving cars, 17–18
Semel, Scott, 13, 31–32
Service sector, xiii, 11, 25, 146
Skills acquisition. See also 
Employers; Experiential 
learning; Lifelong learning/
learners; Technological  
literacy
Smart machines. See Intelligent 
machines
Sociability, as human trait, 20
Social contexts, and effective data 
analysis, 58
Social and economic justice. See 
also Human literacy
and income inequality, 24–26, 
28–29, 61
and social entrepreneurship, 
11–12, 68, 98–100
Social skills, importance, 27, 
70–71
Society for the Diffusion of 
Useful Knowledge, 114–115
Software development and 
maintenance, 34–36
South Korea, education-
employment collaborations, 
146–147
Stanford University, study of 
online learning, 125
Startups, 67, 102
A Study of History (Toynbee), 111
Sullivan, Thomas Valentine, 115
Switzerland, education-
employment collaborations, 145
Systems thinking
characteristics, 41–43, 64–66
incorporating into K–12 
curricula, 66
as part of a humanics 
curriculum, xix
Target megastore, Westwood, 
Mass., 23–24, 28
Team building skills, importance, 
27
Technical mentorships, IBM, 123
Technological literacy
characteristics, needed skills, 
39, 55–56
coding boot camps, 18, 55–56
and employment prospects, xiv, 
26–27

Index
186
in experiential liberal arts 
programs, 105–106
in the humanics curriculum,  
xix
hybrid learning approaches, 126
importance, 55–56, 118–119
and innovation, 6
and the SAIL assessment tool, 
109
Technological unemployment
accelerating, 13–14, 46, 143
and algorithm-based handling 
of work, xi, xiii, 26, 35, 48, 50
education as antidote to, 17
and the “gig economy,” xiv–xv
and gig economy freelancers,  
127
historical examples, 5–6
and inequality/injustice, 61
white collar workers, 126
Technology. See Artificial 
intelligence (AI)/robotics; 
Automation/technology; 
Humans; Intelligent machines
Theron, Grant, 33
Three-dimensional printing, 
15–16
Tobin, Mary, co-op experience,  
98
Torrance, Paul, 49
Toynbee, Arnold, 111
Transfer principle, in experiential 
learning process, 85–87
Trebek, Alex, 77
Twitter, numbers of employees, 
15
Udacity, and skill upgrades, 
119–120
Unemployment. See 
Technological unemployment
University of Cincinnati, co-op 
teaching model, 90
University System of Maryland, 
Advanced Cybersecurity 
Experiences for Students 
program, 122
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
projections related to 
information technology 
processions, xiv
thirty fastest-growing 
professions, 25
U.S. Department of Education’s 
Education Quality through 
Innovative Partnerships 
(EQUIP) program, 126
The Uses of the University (Kerr), 
136
U.S. Office of Scientific Research 
and Development, 141
Vinter, Steve, 38–40
Wages. See also Social 
and economic justice; 
Technological unemployment
Technological literacy (cont.)

Index
187
and the “gig economy,” xiv–xv, 
16–17, 25, 127
and the service economy, xiii, 25
stagnating, impacts of 
automation and globalization, 
17–18, 28–29, 32–33, 46–47
wage gap for premium 
employees, 15, 28–29
and worker displacement, xiii
Water/steam energy, harnessing 
of, 3, 5–6
Watson (IBM supercomputer)
collaborations with, xi–xii
partnerships fostering use of, 
123
performance on Jeopardy, 77–79
Watt, James, 8
The Wealth of Humans: Work, 
Power, and Status in the 
Twenty-first Century (Avent), 46
Wells Fargo, 29
Whyte, William, 148
Williams, George, 115
Wind blow-over derailment 
problem, 36, 43
Wind energy, harnessing of, 3
Workforce, technological
and the changing nature of 
work, 148–149
collaborative, and human 
literacy, 59
and entry-level positions, 32, 38
and the “gig economy,” xiv–xv, 
16–17, 25, 127
historical responses, 5–6
hybrid jobs, xv
and job creation activities, 67
Workplaces, co-locating 
educational programs in, 126
World Economic Forum, 13, 67
Written communication skills
and employment success, 27
mastery of, as cornerstone of 
literacy, 54
teaching of, in colleges, 53
Yale, global multi-university 
network approach, 137
Young Men’s Christian 
Association (YMCA), 115
Young & Rubicam advertising/
marketing company, 33

