Work Papers of the Summer 
Work Papers of the Summer 
Institute of Linguistics, University 
Institute of Linguistics, University 
of North Dakota Session 
of North Dakota Session 
Volume 37 
Article 5 
1993 
Role and Reference Grammar 
Role and Reference Grammar 
Robert D. Van Valin Jr. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://commons.und.edu/sil-work-papers 
 Part of the Linguistics Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Van Valin, Robert D. Jr. (1993) "Role and Reference Grammar," Work Papers of the Summer Institute of 
Linguistics, University of North Dakota Session: Vol. 37, Article 5. 
DOI: 10.31356/silwp.vol37.05 
Available at: https://commons.und.edu/sil-work-papers/vol37/iss1/5 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by UND Scholarly Commons. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Work Papers of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, University of North Dakota Session by an 
authorized editor of UND Scholarly Commons. For more information, please contact 
und.commons@library.und.edu. 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
1 Introduction 
ROLE AND REFERENCE GRAMMAR 
Robert D. Van Valin, Jr. 
State University of New York at Buffalo 
2 Historical background 
3 Central concepts of the theory 
3. I Clause structure 
3.2 Semantic structure 
3 .3 
FOCUS structure 
3. 4 Grammatical relations and linking 
4 Some implications of RRG 
1 Introduction* 
Role and Reference Grammar [RRG] (Van Valin 1993a) may be termed a 
"structural-functionalist theory of grammar"; this locates it on a range of perspectives from 
extreme formalist at one end to radical functionalist at the other. RRG falls between these 
two extremes, differing markedly from each. In contrast to the extreme formalist view, 
RRG views language as a system of communicative social action, and consequently, 
analyzing the communicative functions of morphosyntactic structures has a vital role in 
grammatical description and theory from this perspective. Language is a system, and 
grammar is a system in the traditional structuralist sense; what differentiates the RRG 
conception of grammar from the standard formalist one is the view that grammatical 
structure can only be understood and explained with reference to its semantic and 
communicative functions. Syntax is not autonomous; rather it is viewed as relatively 
motivated by semantic and pragmatic factors. In terms of the abstract paradigmatic and 
syntagmatic relations that define a structural system, RRG deals not only with relations of 
cooccurrence and combination in strictly formal terms but also with semantic and 
pragmatic cooccurrence and combinatory relations. Hence RRG may be properly 
designated as a structural-functionalist theory, rather than purely formalist or purely 
functionalist. 
2 Historical background 
RRG grew out of an attempt to answer two fundamental questions: 
i) 
what would linguistic theory look like if it were based on the analysis of 
Lakhota, Tagalog and Dyirbal, rather than on the analysis of English?, and 
SIL-UNO Work Papers 
Page65 
1993, Vol. XXXVII 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
ii) 
how can the interaction of syntax, semantics and pragmatics in different 
grammatical systems best be captured and explained? 
These questions reflect issues that were prominent in the mid-1970's in some strands of 
American linguistics. Dixon's grammar ofDyirbal and Schachter & Otanes' grammar of 
Tagalog had been published in 1972, and the implications of these languages for linguistic 
theories were just being recognized. Furthermore, the Prague School and Hallidayan ideas 
regarding the role of discourse-pragmatics in grammar were being explored from a number 
of different perspectives. Many of the typological issues, e.g. the universality of the 
notion of"subject", and theoretical issues, e.g. the relation between "subject" and "topic" 
in grammatical systems, were central in the initial conceptualization of RRG, and this is 
reflected in the early work on the theory (Foley & Van Valin 1977, Van Valin 1977a,b, 
1980, 1981, Van Valin & Foley 1980). 
The theory from which RRG is most directly descended is Fillmore's (1968) Case 
Grammar. As in Fillmore's model, there is a semantic representation employing semantic 
case roles which is mapped into the syntactic surface structure, without any. intervening 
level of syntactic representation. The details of the mapping differ substantially, however, 
and one prime difference is that in RRG discourse-pragmatic factors may play a role in the 
mapping. The RRG theory of clause structure follows the insight of Fillmore's division of 
the clause into "modality" and "proposition" by treating predicates, arguments and their 
modifiers distinctly from grammatical categories such as tense, aspect, modality and 
mood. Finally, RRG, like Fillmore, does not assume grammatical relations to be universal. 
3 Central concepts of the theory 
3.1 Clause structure 
RRG rejects the standard formats for representing clause structure (grammatical 
relations, X-bar syntax), because they are not universal and hence necessarily impose 
aspects of structure on at least some languages where it is not appropriate. The RRG 
conception of clause structure ( originally proposed in Foley & Van Valin 1984 and further 
refined in Van Valin 1993a), the LAYERED STRUCTURE OF THE CLAUSE [LSC], is 
made up of the NUCLEUS, which contains the predicate(s), the CORE, which contains 
the nucleus plus the arguments of the predicate(s), and the PERIPHERY, which contains 
adjunct temporal and locative modifiers of the core. These aspects of the LSC are 
universal; in addition, some languages have a PRE-CORE SLOT [PCS], which is the 
position of WH-words in languages like English and Icelandic, and a LEFT-DETACHED 
POSITION, [LOP], which is the position of the pre-clausal element in a left-dislocation 
construction. Each of the major layers (nucleus, core, clause) is modified by one or more 
OPERA TORS, which include grammatical categories such as tense, aspect, modality and 
evidentiality. In the formal representation of the LSC (proposed in Johnson 1987), 
operators are represented in a distinct projection of the clause from the predicates and 
arguments. This is presented in Figure I . 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
-
(LQP) 
Role and Reference Grammar 
-
SENTENCE 
"1 
CLAUSE 
, 
page67 
(PCS) 
p 
CORE <--------- (PERIPHERY) 
SENTENCE 
-, 
CLAUSE 
XP XP 
~ 
ARG (ARO) NUa.EUS 
I 
PRED 
I 
XP (XP) 
V 
PP/Adv 
l 
NUCLEUS<----Aspect 
I 
NUCLEUS/CORE<--Directionals 
I 
CORE<--Modality 
I 
CORE<---Negation (Internal) 
l 
CLAUSE<----Status 
I 
CLAUSE<-----Tense 
l 
CLAUSE<----Evidentials 
I 
ADV 
l 
Yesterday, 
CLAUSE<---Illocutionary Force 
I 
SENTENCE 
Figure 1 
1 
PCS 
CORE<--------PERIPHERY 
~ 
ARO NUC ARO 
I + I 
NP 
NP 
V 
PP 
PP 
l 
l 
l 
l 
I 
what did John 
give 
to Mary in the library? 
11 
l 
/ 1 NUC,EUS 
I I 
CORE 
I I 
I 
I 'INS--->CLAUSE 
I 
I 
IF-------->CLAUSE 
I 
SENTENCE 
Representations such as these should be viewed as constructional templates; the inventory 
of these templates in a language constitutes an important component of its grammar. The 
LSC applies equally to fixed word-order and free word-order languages, to head-marking 
and dependent-marking languages, and to languages with and without grammatical 
relations. I 
The three central components of the LSC also tum out to be the three fundamental 
building blocks of complex sentences in human language. The unmarked pattern for the 
construction of complex sentences involves combining nuclei with nuclei, cores with 
cores, or clauses with clauses. These are called levels of JUNCTURE in RRG, i.e. nuclear 
juncture, core juncture and clausal juncture. Examples of nuclear, core and clausal 
juncture from English are given in (1).2 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
page 68 
Van Valin 
(1) 
a. 
b. 
C. 
Fred pushed the door open. [two nuclei, push and open, in a single core] 
Fred persuaded Bill to open the door. [two cores, Fred persuaded Bill and 
Bill open the door, in a single clause] 
Fred talked to Mary, and she agreed with his suggestion. [two clauses in a 
single sentence] 
Of equal importance in the RRG theory of complex sentences is the set of possible 
syntactic and semantic relations between the units in a juncture.3 The syntactic relations 
between units are called NEXUS relations in RRG. Traditionally, only two basic nexus 
relations are recognized, coordination and subordination, but RRG, following Olson's 
( 1981) analysis of clause linkage in Barai ( a Papuan language), posits three nexus types: 
coordination, subordination, and COSUBORDINATION, which is essentially dependent 
coordination. Subordination and cosubordination are illustrated in (2) with examples of 
clausal juncture from English; (le) is an example of clausal coordination. 
(2) 
a. 
b. 
Max called Sue, because he was going to be late for the party. 
[Subordination] 
Having called Sue, Max left for the party. 
[Cosubordination] 
The three levels of juncture combine with the three nexus types to generate nine possible 
complex sentence types. Not all of them are instantiated in every language, and the types 
found in a language may be realized by more than one formal construction type. The nine 
juncture-nexus types may be ordered into a hierarchy in terms of the tightness of the 
syntactic link between the units (see the hierarchy in Figure 2 in section 3.2). 
3.2 Semantic structure 
The heart of the RRG approach is the system of lexical representation and 
semantic roles. The system of lexical representation is based on the scheme for lexical 
decomposition proposed in Dowty (1979), which is in tum based on Vendler's (1967) 
classification of verbs into states, activities, achievements and accomplishments. Examples 
of each class and their formal representation are given in (3). 
(3) a. State: 
The lamp is broken. 
b. Achievement: 
The lamp broke. 
c. Accomplishment: Bill broke the lamp. 
d. Activity: 
The lamp is shaking. 
broken' (the lamp) 
BECOME broken' (the lamp) 
[do' (Bill, 0)] CAUSE [BECOME 
broken' (the lamp)] 
do' (the lamp, [shake' (the lamp)]) 
A crucial component of this system is a set of syntactic and semantic tests for determining 
the class membership of a verb in a particular sentence, since the class of the verb 
determines its lexical representation or LOGICAL STRUCTURE [LS] (see Van Valin 
1993a:35). Examination of the verbal systems ofa number oflanguages led to the 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
Role and Reference Grammar 
page69 
conclusion that this set of distinctions is one of the fundamental organizing principles of 
verbal systems in human language. 4 
The RRG theory of semantic roles is rather different from that of other theories, iq 
that it posits two types or tiers of semantic roles. The first are specific thematic relations, 
the traditional ( since Fillmore and Gruber 1965) notions of agent, theme, patient, 
experiencer, etc. The second are generalized semantic roles called SEMANTIC 
MACROROLES; they were introduced in Van Valin (1977b) and have no analog in other 
theories. Following the ideas of Gruber (1965) and Jackendoff (1976); RRG derives 
thematic relations from argument positions in LSs such as those in (3); this is summarized 
in Figure 4 in section 3.4. Because the LS of a verb is determined by syntactic and 
semantic tests which make no· reference to thematic relations, the assignment of thematic 
relations to a verb is independently motivated in RRG. 
The second type of semantic role plays a crucial role in the theory; macroroles act 
as the primary interface between the LS and syntactic representations. There are only two 
macroroles, ACTOR and UNDERGOER, corresponding to the two primary arguments in 
a prototypical transitive relation. They are called "macroroles" because each subsumes a 
number of specific thematic relations; the relationship between the two tiers is captured in 
the Actor-Undergoer Hierarchy in (4). 
(4) 
ACTOR 
UNDERGOER 
-------------------------------------------> 
-<----------------------------------------------------
Agent 
Effector 
Experiencer 
Locative 
Theme 
Patient 
['----->' = increasing markedness of realization of thematic relation as macrorole] 
Given the LS of a verb, the most agent-like argument will be actor, the most patient-like 
undergoer, in the default case. Macroroles are not equivalent to grammatical relations; 
this is illustrated in (5). 
(5) 
a. 
b. 
C. 
d. 
The boy [SUBJ, ACTOR] ate the sandwich [OBJ, UNDERGOER]. 
The sandwich [SUBJ, UNDERGOER] was eaten by the boy [ACTOR]. 
The girl [SUBJ, ACTOR] ran down the stairs. 
The girl [SUBJ, UNDERGOER] got sick. 
The exact role of thematic relations and macroroles in the mapping ( or linking) between 
semantic and syntactic representations will be sketched in section 3. 4 and summarized in 
Figure 4. 
As mentioned in the previous section, an important component of the theory of 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
page 70 
Van Valin 
complex sentences is the semantic relations that obtain between units in a juncture. These 
include causality, psych-action, direct perception, cognition, propositional attitude, 
conditional, and varieties of temporal sequence. These may be ordered into a hierarchy in 
terms of whether the units in the juncture express facts of a single event, state or action or 
distinct events, states or actions. This semantic hierarchy interacts with the syntactic 
hierarchy of juncture-nexus types as follows: there is an iconic relation between the 
semantics and syntax of clause linkage, such that the tightness of the syntactic linkage 
directly reflects the semantic integration of the units in the linkage. This is expressed in 
the Interclausal Relations Hierarchy in Figure 2. 
Strongest 
Nuclear Cosubordination 
Nuclear Subordination 
Nuclear Coordination 
Core Cosubonlination 
Core Subordination 
Core Coordination 
Causal Cosubordination 
Causal Subordination 
Causal Coordination 
Weakest 
Syntactic Relations 
3.3 Focus structure 
Oosest 
Causative 
Aspectual 
Psych-Action 
Purposive 
Jussive 
Direct Perception 
Propositional Attitude 
Cognition 
Indirect Discourse 
Temporal Adverbial 
Conditionals 
Simultaneous Actions 
Sr.quential Actions: Overlapping 
St.quential Actions: Non-overlapping 
Action-Action: Unspecified 
Loosest 
Semantic Relations 
FigtR2 
The issue of the distribution of information in clauses and sentences was not 
addressed in Foley & Van Valin (1984), and Van Valin (1993a) integrates Lambrecht's 
(1986, 1987, in press) theory ofFOCUS STRUCTURE into RRG. Focus structure is the 
grammatical system which serves to indicate the scope of the assertion in an utterance in 
contrast to the pragmatic presupposition, and it is vital to the RRG analysis of many 
grammatical phenomena. The focus structure of an utterance is represented in a 
projection of the clause which is distinct from the operator and constituent projections~ 
this is exemplified in Figure 3. 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
Role and Reference Grammar 
Operator Projection 
Constituent Projection 
~~~ 
SBNf.iNCB 
~:--~~~ 
-
CI::jl/S.i 
"-~~~~~~ 
y 
a?HE<---A7WBHY 
........ 
~ 
•• .. :·.... 
ARONl/~O 
· 
.... ·.... 
~ ;aio; 
•• .. :· .... N.P 
"\ 
/ 
ADV 
·-.. x 
NA.VN.P; 
r...... 
I 
V 
/ 
What did John zive Mary yesterday? 
I 
I 
T 
I 
I 
ARG ARG NUC ARG ADV 
··\J· 
.. ···· 
·· .. l 
.. ··· 
• 
•• 
• 
• • 
.. '\.1 
•• 
·~ . 
·- .. 
~ . 
*~·· 
IF 
Focus Structure Projection 
Figure3 
3.4 Grammatical relations and linking 
page 71 
In the earliest work on RRG it was argued that grammatical relations like subject 
and direct object are not universal and cannot be taken as the basis for adequate 
grammatical theories. In place of these notions, RRG employs the notion of syntactic 
pivot, which is a construction-specific relation and is defined as a restricted neutralization 
of semantic roles and pragmatic functions for syntactic purposes. The other arguments in 
a clause are characterized as direct or oblique core arguments; there is nothing in RRG 
corresponding to direct or indirect object. 
The linking system relating semantic and syntactic representations is summarized in 
Figure 4. Syntactic functions like pivot and direct core argument (which are structurally 
instantiated in the LSC) represent the syntactic pole of the system, while LSs represent the 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
page 72 
Van Valin 
semantic pole. The linking between LSs and macroroles is universal, and cross-linguistic 
variation, e.g. accusative vs. ergative syntactic systems, is located in the mapping between 
macroroles and syntactic functions. 
SYNTACTIC FUNCTIONS: Pivot 
Direct Core Arguments 
Oblique Core Arguments 
! 
Pivotliierarchy:[Language-Specific] 
Actor> Undergoer (e.g. English) 
Undergoer > Actor (e.g. Dyirbal) 
SEMANTIC MACROROLES: 
Actor 
Undergoer 
Transitivity = No. of Macroroles 
Transitive 
= 2 
Intransitive = 1 ([ +MR]) 
Atransitive = 0 ([-MR]) 
A-U liierarchy [Universal] 
Actor 
Undergoer 
----------------------> 
<: --------------------------
Ag Eff 
Exp 
Loe 
Th Pat 
THEMATIC RELATIONS: Agent Effector Experiencer Locative Theme Patient 
I. State Verbs 
A. Locational 
B. Non-locational 
x = loc, y = theme 
x =patient 
1. State or condition 
2.Perception 
x = exp, y = theme 
x = exp, y = theme 
x = loc, y = theme 
3. Cognition 
4 .. Possession 
n. Activity verbs 
A. Uncontrolled 
x = eff, (y = loc) 
x =agent 
B. Controlled 
Argument Positions in f 
GICAL STRUCTURE 
VERB Q.ASs 
STATE 
ACHIEVEMENT 
ACTIVITY (±Agentive) 
ACCOMPLISHMENT 
LOGICAL STRUCTIJRE 
predicate' (x) or (x,y) 
BECOME predicate' (x) or {x,y) 
(DO (x,)) do' (x, [predicate' (x) or (x,y)]) 
• CAUSE 'I', where• is normally an activity 
predicaie and 'I' an achievement predicate 
Figure 4 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
Role and Reference Grammar 
page 73 
One of the questions which RRG asks is, when there is an option as to which 
arguments can be linked to pivot, what factors can affect the choice? It turns out that the 
answer to this question has important typological ramifications, for some languages permit 
discourse-pragmatic factors to play a role, whereas others do not. This distinction is 
expressed in the RRG typology of"role-dominated" (no discourse-pragmatic influence on 
linking) vs. "reference-dominated" (possible discourse-pragmatic influence on linking) 
languages, and in the contrast between SEMANTlC PIVOTS vs. PRAGMATIC PIVOTS 
(which are found only in reference-dominated languages), two subtypes of syntactic pivot. 
4 Some implications of RRG 
RRG illustrates one possible answer to the questions stated at the beginning of 
section 2, and it shows that it is possible to have a rigorous, typologically-sensitive 
grammatical theory which takes semantics and pragmatics as central features. It has 
attempted to deal not only with the issues that have interested typologists and 
functionalists, e.g. universality of grammatical relations, but also with some of the leading 
questions raised by formal theories, e.g. extraction restrictions (subjacency). Recent work 
(Van Valin 1993a,b) has proposed a functional account of subjacency which relies 
crucially on interactions among the linking system, focus structure, and syntactic structure. 
In addition, RRG has been shown to provide a potentially explanatory framework for the 
study of language acquisition and child language (Van Valin 1991, in press, Rispoli 
1991a,b). 
NOTES 
* This paper will appear in the Jnstrumentarium volume of the Handbook of 
Pragmatics to be published by the International Pragmatics Association. The conditions 
of the contract stipulated 2,000 words for the length of the article, and the paucity of 
argumentation, explanation and documentation are a function of this limit. See Van Valin 
(1993a) for a full exposition of the theory. 
1 It is assumed that noun phrases and adpositional phrases have a comparable 
layered structure; see Van Valin (1993a), §1.7 
2 While it is alien to the typological, universalist character ofRRG to give 
examples only from English, the severe space constraints imposed on this article make this 
necessary as a space-saving strategy. 
3 The semantic relations will be discussed in section 3.2 below. 
4 For further development of this decompositional system, see Van Valin & 
Wilkins (1993), Wilkins & Van Valin (1993). 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
page 74 
Van Valin 
REFERENCES 
Dixon, R.M.W. 1972. The Dyirbal language of North Queensland Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Dowty, David. 1979. WordmeaningandMontague Grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Fillmore, Charles. 1968. The case for case. In E. Bach & R. Harms (eds.), Universals in 
linguistic theory, 1-88. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Foley, William & Robert Van Valin, Jr. 1977. On the viability of the notion of"subject" in 
universal grammar. Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 3: 293-320. 
__ . 1984. Functional syntax and universal grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Gruber, Jeffrey. 1965. Studies in lexical relations. Unpublished MIT Ph.D. dissertation. 
Jackendoff, Ray. 1976. Toward an explanatory semantic representation. Linguistic Inquiry 
7:89-150. 
Johnson, Mark. 1987. A new approach to clause structure in Role and Reference 
Grammar. Davis Working Papers in Linguistics 2:55-59. 
Lambrecht, Knud.' 1986. Topic, focus and the grammar of spoken French. Unpublished 
Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley. 
__ . 1987. Sentence focus, information structure, and the thetic-categorial distinction. 
Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 13:366-382. 
__ . in press. Information structure and sentence form. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Olson, Michael. 1981. Barai clause junctures: toward a functional theory of interclausal 
relations. Unpublished Ph.D dissertation, Australian National University. 
Rispoli, Matthew (1991a) The acquisition of verb subcategorization in a functionalist 
framework. First Language 11 :41-63. 
__ . 1991b. The mosaic acquisition of grammatical relations. Journal of Child 
Language 18:517-52. 
Schachter, Paul and Fe T. Otanes. 1972. Tagalog reference grammar. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Van Valin, Robert, Jr. 1977a. Ergativity and the universality of subjects. Papers from the 
Chicago Linguistics Society 13 :689-706. 
__ . 1977b. Aspects of Lakhota syntax. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
__ . 1980. On the distribution of passive and antipassive constructions in universal 
grammar. Lingua 50:303-27. 
__ . 1981. Grammatical relations in ergative languages. Studies in Language 5:361-94. 
__ . 1991. Functionalist linguistic theory and language acquisition. First Language 
11 :7-40. 
__ . 1993a. A synopsis of Role and Reference Grammar. In R. Van Valin (ed.), 
Advances in Role and Reference Grammar, 1-164. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
__ . 1993b. The interaction of pragmatics and syntax: A case study in restrictions on 

SIL-UND Workpapers 1993
Role and Reference Grammar 
page 75 
question formation, topicalization and relativization. Paper presented at the Fifth 
Biennial Symposium of the Department of Linguistics, Rice University. 
__ . in press. Extraction restrictions, competing theories and the argument from the 
poverty of the stimulus. To appear in The Reality of Linguistic Rules. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Van Valin, Robert, Jr. & William Foley. 1980. Role and Reference Grammar. In E. 
Moravcsik & J. Wirth (eds.), Cu"ent syntactic theories (Syntax & semantics 13), 
329-52. New York: Academic Press. 
Van Valin, Robert, Jr. & David Wilkins. 1993. Predicting syntactic structure from 
semantic representations: remember in English and its equivalents in Mpamtwe 
Arremte. In Van Valin (ed.), 499-534. 
Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Wilkins, David & Robert Van Valin, Jr. 1993. The case for a case reopened: agents and 
agency revisited. SUNY Buffalo Center for Cognitive Science Technical Report 
93-2. 

