•.. ~~ ,....,... ......-r-··~ ·" .,." .-..... ,..~ .,~- ..,~ . "
.~ ...... ;~t:-~ . 
,"1" 
.. .. 
r· " 
"', 
~ • 
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their 
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this 
book and Perseus Books was aware of a trademark claim, the deSignations have 
been printed in initial capital letters. 
Library of Congrus Cataloging-in.Publication Data 
Boundaries and barriers: on the limits to scientific knowledge I 
edited by lohn L. Casu and Anders KarlqvisL 
p. cm. 
"Advanced book program." 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0·201·55570-0 
I. Science-Philosophy. I. Casti, J. L. n. Karlqvist, Anders. 
Q175.B738 1996 
50i-dc20 
Copyright 0 1996 by John L Casti 
96-28594 
e lP 
All rights reserved. No pan ohms publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any fonn or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo-
copying. recording. or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Perseus Books is a member of the Perseus Books Group 
Cover design by Suzanne Heiser 
'TYpeset by the editors in Times Roman 
23456789-MA-0201009998 
Second printing. July 1998 
Find us on the Wurld Wide Web at 
http://www.aw.eomlgbl 
BOUNDARIES 
BARRlfRS 
A 
N 
D 
On the LI M ITS 
to Scientific 
KNOWLEDGE 
(diU' ~ , 
John L. Casli 
Santa Fe lnslitulr 
&lI1la I'e. New .llexico. U.S.A. 
aad 
AmicI'S Kal'lq\'isl 
HOYill Swedish Academy of Scicl1(-e8 
Sirek holm. Sweden 
.ft_ 
W 
PERSEUS BOOKS 
Rtading, Massochust W 

98 
COMPLEXITY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 
i. Perrin, J. Les Atames. Paris: Librarie Felix Alcan, 1913 (English trans-
ation: Atoms. Woodbridge, CT: Ox Bow Press, 1990.) 
, . McCloskey, D. N. "Once Upon a Time There Was a Theory." Scientific 
Imerican, February 1995. 
, 
I i 
Chapter 8 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF 
SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
ROBERT ROSEN 
There are no impregnable fortresses. There are only fortresses 
that are badly attacked - Les Liaisons Dangereuses 
I. Introduction 
I do not consider myself a philosopher. I am a biologist, attempting to 
grapple with the Schr6dinger question, "What is Life?" It turns out that 
this is not an empirical question, to be resolved through observation in 
a laboratory. Hence I am a theoretical biologist, not a "practical" one. 
Many of my experimentalist colleagues, who tacitly feel that science is 
consubstantial with laboratory practice, accordingly reject the question it-
self as unscientific, and it does not bother them that they cannot answer it. 
I believe, on the other hand, that the problem is not only perfectly 
scientific, but that it is centraL I also believe that it is in some sense 
solvable. Thus, I have developed a different view of what "science" 
is and what it is about than most of my colleagues. I have had to 
spend much time in exploring the capabilities and the limitations of 
many methods which have been proposed to give an answer to the 
question, but which do not in fact do so. These methods all proceed by 
replacing the "real world" by one or another artificially circumscribed 
one, and by regarding "scientific" knowledge as what happens in that 
surrogate universe. Invariably, that surrogate turns out to be "too small" 
to accommodate organisms. In particular, this is true of the naive and 
optimistic Reductionisms that have been asserted to answer the question, 
but which do not. In pursuing this process, I have acquired a great deal 
of "practical" experience about "limitations." 
199 

200 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
Th me, the limitations of a method, or its inapplicability to a 
particular problem constitute neither a limitation of science, nor of the 
human mind. Nor are they inherent restrictions on the nature of the 
world. They mostly arise from replacing the "real world" by a small 
surrogate universe, a replacement that is made indepe?dently of a 
particular problem's exigencies. As we shall argue below, It IS the essence 
of the subjective to do this. 
III particular, Reductionisms in biology (and elsewhere) are adopted 
not because they answer the question, "What is life?", but because they 
emulate a method that has (sometimes) worked in dealing with inanimate 
nature. Reductionisms give us a small surrogate universe, consisting 
roughly of systems whose properties can be exhausted entirely on the 
basis of those of special subsystems that can be "fractionated" away 
from it, and studied entirely in vitro. These isolated fractions themselves 
are held to constitute a surrogate for the original system - indeed, they 
are the only kind of surrogate that is scientifically admissible. There are 
many reasons for wishing to believe that organisms fall into this class. But 
these reasons are irrelevant; organisms are outside such classes. I have 
used the word complexity (cf. Rosen 1991) to describe this situation. But 
complexity does not put organisms outside the pale of science, nor is there 
anything "vitalistic" about it. It is, as I have noted, simply the failure of a 
small surrogate universe to exhaust the real one. As such, it is essentially 
a mistake; an equivocation. It creates artifacts, as do all equivocations. 
In short, a proposition like "all systems are simple (fractionable or 
reducible)" is not itself to be identified with "scientific knowledge." And, 
accordingly, failure of reductionism as a method, in the sense that there 
are problems to which that method does not apply, is not a limitation 
on science, or on scientific knowledge. Quite the contrary; we learn 
something basic and new about the world when it fails to be exhausted 
by a posited method. 
n. What is "Scientific"? 
Ib even address the question of whether or not there are "limitations 
)f scientific knowledge," we must have an assessment of that qualifying 
ldjective, scientific. It is already not so easy to characterize, or to reduce 
o others. 
The earliest attempt to do so, or at least which I know of, goes 
,ack to Aristotle. He claimed that it was the entire job of science to 
ccount for "the why of things." This, in turn, led him to his doctrine of 
,usality, in which he identified "scientific knowledge" about something 
ROBERT ROSEN 
201 
(call it X) with all the ways of answering the question "Why X?" If we 
can say "X because Y," or that "Y is at least a necessary condition for 
the effect X," then this is the kind of assertion that belongs to science 
(though of course such an assertion may still be true or false). 
Another way of saying this is that an effect X is entailed by its 
causes Y, i.e., by answers to question "Why X?" Aristotle further tacitly 
assumed that the totality of these answers constitute a sufficient condition 
for the effect X. Thus, for Aristotle, the natural world constituted a 
web of (at least) such causal entailments that it was the job of science 
to illuminate. According to this criterion, it is clear what constitutes 
"scientific knowledge." What it has nothing to do with is the means 
adopted to answer a question "Why X?", or with characteristics like 
"objectivity"; these came much later. 
Partly because this Aristotelian picture of science was independent 
of a stipulated method for obtaining answers to such "Why?" questions, 
and especially because it did not focus on empirical or observational 
procedures (which can rarely answer "Why'!" questions, in any case), 
that picture of science has been slowly abandoned over the past few 
hundred years. Indeed, the Aristotelian view, in which science is content-
determined in terms of the kinds of questions it must answer, has been 
replaced by method-based procedures. That is, something belongs to 
science according to how it was obtained, not by what it is about. This 
constitutes a truly massive shift in outlook. Indeed, as a result of it, the 
question as to what is "scientific knowledge" shifts from a semantic one to 
one of "scientific method." In particular, "limits to scientific knowledge" 
has shifted from something content-based to something quite different: 
the adequacy of an admissible methodology. 
In the sections below, we shall argue that most (if not all) questions 
surrounding "limits of scientific knowledge" pertain primarily to the in-
equivalences between the two ways we have sketched of characterizing 
science itself. As we have seen, the older Aristotelian view pertained to 
content rather than method; it consisted of answers to questions; to infor-
mation. The second, more modern view, pertains not to content so much 
as to method; to process. The two pictures of science do not coincide. 
Still worse, there has never been any real consensus as to what methods 
are to be allowed as unquestionably producing "scientific knowledge." 
III. About "Objectivity" 
Probably the first thing one would say if asked to characterize "scientific 
knowledge" as opposed to other kinds of knowledge, is that it is objective. 

202 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
By this is generally meant that the knowledge in question pertains to its 
object or referent alone, devoid of any information about how or when 
it was obtained. 
The concept of "objectivity" already appears in the Aristotelian 
vision of science; it means that none of the "why?" questions about an 
effect X are answered by the processes involved in answering them. In 
more modern terminology, this asserts that an observation process, or 
an observer, plays no causal role in entailing what is observed. 
However the situation in Aristotle is confused by the presence of 
a causal cate~ory that he allows, but which has come to be rejected by 
every subsequent method-based view of what science is. That category 
is finality. Indeed, final causation has for a long time been regarded as 
the quintessence of subjectivity, and thus incompatible from the outset 
with science itself. 
However, finality has no such connotation in the Aristotelian picture. 
In that picture, the concept of objectivity remains, even if final causation 
of an effect X is allowed; it is exactly as stated above: that X is simply 
not entailed by the process of answering "Why X?" That is, X may well 
have a final cause that entails it, but it is simply not the process of 
answering the question in that fashion. And the fact that X has a final 
cause can itself be perfectly objective, according to these criteria. 
Nevertheless, the perceived need to exclude finality completely, in 
the name of preserving "objectivity," has been carried to ludicrous lengths 
in biology. For one thing, many have felt it necessary to do away with 
the concept of "function" entirely, one of the central concepts about 
organization, in general, on the grounds that it is finalistic and hence 
not "objective." It is astounding to watch adult physiologists twisting 
themselves into bizarre shapes to avoid saying things like, "the function 
of the heart is to pump blood." Carried still further, it is considered 
illegitimate for science to seek to understand anything about a part or 
subsystem in terms of a larger system or an environment with which it 
is interacting; hence, the Reductionistic idea that one must only seek to 
understand larger wholes in terms of "objective," context-independent 
parts, never the reverse. 
In molecular biology, Jacques Monod is one of the few to actually 
commit to paper the frank conceptual processes at the root of it. In 
1972, he states quite explicitly: 
The cornerstone of the scientific method is the postulate that nature is 
objective. In other words, the systematic denial that "true" knowledge 
ROBERT ROSEN 
can be got at by interpreting phenomena in terms of final causes - that 
is to say, of "purpose" ... science as we understand it today could 
not have been developed ... (without) the unbending stricture implicit 
in the postulate of objectivity-ironclad, pure, forever indemonstrable 
. .. . The postulate of objectivity is consubstantial with science; it has 
guided the whole of its prodigious development for three centuries. 
There is no way to be rid of it, even tentatively or in a limited area, 
without departing from the domain of science itself. 
203 
In tbis passage, we see clearly the identification of "science" with 
a method, independent of any question, and the simultaneous (if sub-
liminal) elevation of that method itself to a restriction on the material 
world ("NATURE is objective"). One need only ask if Monod's "Postulate 
of Objectivity" itself constitutes "scientific knowledge," and if so, about 
what? Indeed, to me, it is the "Postulate of Objectivity" itself that is 
SUbjective; the embodiment of a frank and clear intentionality, elevated 
to the status of a Natural Law. We shall have more to say about this, in 
a variety of contexts, as we proceed. 
For the moment, let us retreat back to our original view of "objective 
knowledge," in the sense that acquiring it plays no role in its entailment. 
As we have seen, this has nothing to do with finality. But it does seem 
to imply a sharp dividing line between "objective knowledge" and other 
knowledge ("subjective knowledge"); a line based in entailment. As noted 
above, "subjective knowledge" cannot be entirely causally separated from 
the process by wbich it is acquired. Aristotle makes no value judgment 
on this division; he does not restrict or identify his view of "science" to 
just the "objective." This only came much later. But is there indeed such 
a line at all? Such a line would constitute, even for Aristotle, inherent 
limits to "objective knowledge." This is a deep question, which we shall 
discuss from a number of different angles in what follows. 
IV. The Bohr-Einstein Debates 
As I have argued elsewhere (e.g., Rosen 1993), physics strives, at least, 
to restrict itself to "objectivities." It thus presumes a rigid separation 
between what is objective, and thus falls directly within its precincts, 
and what is not. Its opinion about whatever is outside these precincts is 
divided. Some believe that whatever is outside is so because of removable 
and impermanent technical issues of formulation; i.e., whatever is outside 
can be "reduced" to what is already inside. Others believe the separation 
is absolute and irrevocable. 

204 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
In either case, physics chooses a surrogate universe, bounded by 
criteria of "objectivity," and substitutes it for the "real" one, I will repeat 
here a citation (Bergman 1973) on this matter, which I have already 
used in lac. cit.: 
[Max] Planck designated in an excellent way ... the goal of physics 
as the complete separation of the world from the individuality of the 
structuring mind; i.e., the emancipation of anthropomorphic elements. 
That means: it is the task of physics to build a world which is foreign 
to consciousness, and in which consciousness is obliterated. 
However interpreted, this is the "objective" wofId, which physics 
claims exclusively for itself, and which many physicists identify with 
"science." Anything outside can either be pulled inside ("reduction"), 
and hence becomes scientific as a special case of physics, or else cannot 
be regarded as belonging to science at all. But as we have already seen, it 
is already not clear whether "objectivity" is to be determined by content 
(the Aristotelian view) or by adherence to a method. In any case, we 
seem to have come a long way from science as "the why of things." 
The Bohr-Einstein debates about complementarity, which occurred 
in the shadow of the "new" quantum theory, were precisely about what 
"objectivity" meant, and hence what physics itself was about. It was thus 
about how small (or how large) a surrogate universe it provides. A good 
reference about the substance of these debates are the volumes produced 
by Abraham Pais (1982, 1991, 1994), although Pais himself offers the 
opinion that, "I do not think these discussions affected the progress of 
physics in any way." In some trivial sense Pais is no doubt right about 
this (e.g., in the sense that most physicists find such issues irrelevant to 
what they do every day). But so much the worse for most physicists. 
Both Bohr and Einstein were troubled (though in separate ways) 
by the wave-particle duality, revived by Einstein himself in 1905 via 
the photoelectric effect and his invocation of the photon. For over a 
century, it had seemed clear that light consisted of waves, on the basis of 
firm experimental evidence based on interference. However, beginning 
with the photoelectric effect, and growing ever greater as the 20th 
century progressed, an equally impressive body of experimental work 
could only be reconciled with a particulate (quantum) interpretation, and 
excluded waves. Indeed, some of Einstein's other work (special relativity) 
dispensed with the hypothetical medium (ether) in which waves of light 
had to propagate. The apparently irreconcilable wave-particle pictures, 
elevated to a universal status by de Broglie around 1925, paved the 
ROBERT ROSEN 
20S 
way for the wave mechanics of Schriidinger, and in a more roundabout 
way, for the matrix mechanics of Heisenberg, based on uncertainties and 
noncommutativities. 
Bohr, who became in a sense the spokesman for new quantum theory 
and its interpretation through the next decades, proceeded to develop 
his views on complementarity to cope with the apparent contradictions 
between waves and particles. His position was somewhat analogous to 
Brouwer's position ("intuitionism") in the foundations of mathematics 
(an issue we will explore further subsequently). Namely, that the logical 
problems apparently manifested by mutually incompatible pictures really 
arise from trying to extrapolate classical ideas to quantum-theoretic 
situations. Even the idea of "mutually incompatible" is a classical idea 
(Brouwer said basically the same thing, in connection with the logical Law 
of the Excluded Middle, which held in finite realms, but not generally 
in infinite ones). 
In particular, Bohrian complementarity argued that whether we 
see light as a particle or a wave was not inherent in light alone, but 
also depended on the way we measure or observe it. Classically, we 
could ignore the measurement procedure, and look at the outcome of a 
procedure as inherent in the light alone. But not in quantum theory. The 
"true" system to which the observation pertains, in a quantum realm, is 
the complex consisting partially of the light, but equally significant, of 
the apparatus or procedure that observes it. 
Einstein could not accept this. He argued that something "belongs to 
reality" (i.e., is objective) only if it is independent of such things as how 
it is measured or observed. In particular, for Einstein, complementarity 
violates the stricture that we must not explain or describe a "real" system 
in terms of a particular larger one to which it might belong. This, it 
will be noted, is essentially Monad's "Postulate of Objectivity," that one 
must always look downward toward subsystems, and never upwards and 
outwards to a larger context. 
For Bohr, then, the "objective situation" requires the specification 
of a means of interrogating a system, and not just the system being 
interrogated. The outcome of an "experiment" pertains to this larger 
composite system, and cannot be fractionated or separated into a part 
pertaining only to what is observed, and a remainder which pertains only 
to the means by which it is obtained. Indeed, the word "classical" pertains 
only to situations where such a fractionation can always be made. 
So we can see that the Einstein-Bohr debates over complemen-
tary were really about what science (specifically, physics) is ultimately 

206 
ON THE LIMITATIONS m' SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
about' how (or even whether) objective knowledge, independent of an 
"orga~izing mind," and in which "consciousness is obliterate~," can be 
obtained, Einstein believed that there was such knowledge, Immanent 
alone in a thing, and independent of how that knowledge was elic~ted. 
Bohr regarded that view as "classical," incompatible with quantum views 
of reality, which always required specification of a context, and always 
containing unfractionable information about t~at context. 
. 
. 
Actually, the debate over complementanty spreads f~r wider; . It 
has profound causal correlates. As we saw above, Aristoteban causabty 
involved dealing with questions or interrogatives of the .form "Why X?" 
Bohr is in effect proposing that the variable X here is an msepara~l~ pair, 
consisting of something being observed, and a. p.rocedure for descnbm~ or 
observing it. He is thus asserting that the ongmal Anstot~IIan questlo~, 
"Why X?", referring to X alone, apart from such a specific .context, .IS 
ultimately meaningless, or at best can be given such a meanmg only m 
limited "classical" realms. 
In terms of surrogacy, Bohrian complementarity asserts that the 
classical world is too small, in itself, to provide a single coherent picture 
of material reality. Complementarity was his suggestion about how that 
world may be enlarged to accommodate quantum processes. He do~s. so 
by, at root, changing the concept of "objectivity" itself from pertammg 
only to what is immanent entirely in a material system X to what IS 
immanent in a system-observer pair (F, X); i.e, a larger system than X. 
Thus we get a bigger surrogate, which clearly cannot be "reduced" to 
the original "classical" world. Biological phenomena, however, raise the 
question whether this larger world, which is still method-based, is. y~t 
big enough. As I have extensively argued elsewhere, I do not thmk It IS. 
But, as I have stated previously, this does not constitute a limitation on 
scientific knowledge; it is merely a failure or inapplicability of a method 
that has been substituted for science. 
V. Some Mathematical Analogies 
We have suggested above that the Aristotelian notion of causality, based 
on questions of the form "Why X?" establishes relations betw~en ~atenal 
events, which it is the business of science to answer. In this View, the 
material world consists (to us) of a web of entailments between events X 
and Y which take the form of such answers: "X because Y," 
I 'have long argued that mathematics also consists of a web of 
entailments between propositions; inferential entailments. Thus, althou~h 
the mathematical world is in a sense entirely subjective, in terms of ItS 
ROBERT ROSEN 
207 
subject matter (i.e., in terms of what it is about), it admits the property of 
objectivity, Indeed, ironically, it is often regarded as the most objective of 
realms - it has often been argued that mathematical truth is the highest 
truth, independent alike of the external world and of the mathematician. 
Even God could not make 2 + 2 = 3 
Systems of inferential entailments, i.e., mathematical systems, can 
be compared to systems of causal entailments in many ways. For one 
thing, such comparisons, through vehicles of encodings and decodings 
between them, provide the basis of modeling relations, which I have 
discussed at length elsewhere (cf. Rosen 1985, 1991). But at a deeper 
level, mathematics, as a specimen or embodiment of entailment, can tell 
us things about entailment itself, and hence throw a new light on the 
questions we have been considering. Indeed, there are exactly parallel 
questions, pertaining to "limitations of mathematical knowledge," which 
have been discussed for a long time. These constitute what is now called 
the "Foundations" of mathematics, and as in science (i.e., in causal 
entailments) are wrapped up in arguments over whether mathematics is 
content-based or method-based. 
Thus, mathematics has undergone periodic "foundation crises," in 
which discrepancies between these two views have become unbearable. 
We are in one today, as we shall presently discuss. For now, because of 
its relation to the Bohr-Einstein debates over complementarity, we shall 
focus on an earlier one. One of its roots was in the attempt to extend 
arithmetic from finite to infinite realms. 
The arithmetic operations, addition and multiplication, start as bi-
nary operations (between integers, say). That is, we can only give a 
meaning to expressions like (a + b) and (a xc); uniquely determined 
new integers. These operations are commutative, so we can add or mul-
tiply two integers in either order and get the same answer. Products 
distribute over sums, so a x (b + c) is meaningful, and is the same as 
(a x b) + (a xc). On the other hand, an expression like a + b + c has 
no immediate meaning. Or rather, it has two different ones, which can 
be expressed as (a + b) + c, and a + (b + c), each of which involve 
only binary operations. If we set these equal, i.e., impose the associa-
tive law, then we can unambiguously remove the parentheses in these 
expressions, and turn addition and multiplication into a single ternary 
operation a + b + c. 
It is then a theorem (cf., Chevalley 1956), proved by mathematical 
induction, that given any finite set of integers {ad, there is a unique sum 
L ai that is independent of the way it is parenthesized; likewise, there 

208 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
is a unique product, and products distribute over sums in the familiar 
way. In other words, these unique values are independent of how they 
are calculated; the values appear immanent in their summands or factors 
alone; they are objective. 
In the sixteenth century, mathematicians exuberantly began to ex-
plore what happens if this restriction of finiteness is removed, i.e., if we 
consider sums with an infinite number of summands, or products with 
an infinite number of factors. At first, in the hands of people like Euler 
and the Bernoullis, it seemed as if a whole new world of ineffable beauty 
was emerging, populated by relations like 
1 
I 
1 
,,2 
1 + 9 + 25 + ... + (2" - 1)2 + ... ; S' 
or 
At first, these results appeared just as "objective" as finite arithmetic. 
But then apparent absurdities began to creep in, slowly at first, then in 
a torrent. The worst of them was perhaps 
1-1+1-1+···;'1, 
which seemed to entail the ultimate absurdity, 1 ; O. 
So something was clearly wrong here, a Foundation Crisis. There 
seemed to be only three choices: (a) to restrict arithmetic to finite realms 
exclusively, where we were safe, (b) to venture into infinite realms, but 
to find a way to choose our factors and summands judiciously enough to 
retain "objectivity," or (c) to somehow enlarge the idea of "objectivity" 
itself. 
As everyone knows, that Crisis was (temporarily) resolved by Cauchy 
around 1805 on the basis of (b). He introduced the notion of conver-
gence, and a number of algorithmic criteria for deciding whether a given 
sequence or series converged. Convergence, in this sense, was a gener-
alization of the "objectivity" automatically enjoyed in finite realms; the 
value of the limit of a convergent sequence was independent of how it 
was obtained, and inhered in the sequence alone. This stopgap rescued 
mathematical analysis as a secure discipline, and even had profound 
ramifications in theoretical physics, through the notion of the derivative 
ROBERT ROSEN 
209 
(velocity) as a well-defined variable, independent of how it was evaluated 
or measured. Without this, there could be no notion of phase. 
A series like the last one displayed above is called divergent, and 
was regarded as meaningless; beyond the realm of mathematics itself. 
Such a sequence was thought of as having no limit. On the other hand, 
in a precise sense, "most" sequences thus diverge; only very special 
ones satisfy the Cauchy criteria. In fact, what happens with divergent 
sequences is that they have many distinct limiting values; values that 
depend precisely on how they are evaluated, and not just on the sequence 
alone. 
Thus, a "limiting value" of a divergent sequence a is a pair, which 
we may denote by (F, a), where F is a specific evaluation process. In a 
sense, this is a perfectly objective number, determined by that pair. For 
instance, in the example of divergence given above, in which 
a;I-I+1-1+ .. ., 
the. appa~ent absurdity 1 ; 0 arises from not specifying F; Or rather, by 
tacitly usmg two different Fs, and then equating the results, which we 
cannot do. 
I believe the reader can immediately see the parallels between 
this situation and that involved in the Bohr-Einstein debates. In effect 
~instein was arguing that only convergent situations, in which limits ar~ 
mdependent of how they are evaluated, are entitled to be called "real" 
or objective. It was Cauchy's position that only convergent sequences 
are allowable. Bohr's position was, rather, that the material world, in its 
quantum aspects, was like divergence; perfectly objective, but requiring 
furt~er "information," pertaining to how it is evaluated, to determine a 
specific one of many complementary limits the sequence may have. 
. 
Let us pause to recapitulate what we have just said, since it is 
Important. We were considering familiar operations of arithmetic like 
addition, on ordinary numbers. We observed: 
' 
a. If we restrict ourselves to finite numbers of summands, a sum 
is uniquely determined, and independent of the way in which it 
is computed or evaluated. If we identify this independence with 
"objectivity," then this objectivity is in fact entailed by finiteness. 
That is, if a denotes a finite set of summands, then it is a theorem 
that F(a) ; G(a), where F and G are distinct evaluation processes. 
b. If we go to infinite realms, there is nothing to entail this "objectivity." 
It is no longer generically true that F(a) ; G(a) when a is infinite. 

210 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
c. If we generalize the "objectivity" condition F(O') = G(O'), we obtain 
a world of convergent sequences. This is, however, no longer a 
theorem, as it was before; rather, it is something imposed, or 
presupposed, in order to demarcate a world of infinite sequences 
that still manifest a property familiar from finite sums. 
d. We then go on to identify the world so demarcated with "mathe-
maties." What is left out of that world (which is, in fact, "most" 
sequences) is regarded as "nonobjective," since a limiting value de-
pends on the choice of an evaluation procedure F, and not on a 
sequence (J alone. 
e. Thus, what we call "mathematics" in this procedure becomes in-
herently method-dependent, and not content-dependent. As such, it 
has (pardon the pun) inherent limits. 
f. Nevertheless, the only real SUbjectivity here is entirely in the decision 
to replace "arbitrary sequence" by "convergent sequence," and to 
replace a pair (F. 0') by 0' alone. This choice is not mandated or 
entailed by anything in the content of mathematics itself. Rather, 
it is motivated by an intention, to retain customary habits, familiar 
from the finite realm, as intact as possible in the infinite one. 
VI. A Word About Computability 
Another good example of the phenomenon we have just described comes 
from our current mathematical Foundation Crisis, rather than from a 
previous one. I have written much about it in the past, so I will cover it 
quickly. Although its immediate historical roots are somewhat different, 
it is in fact rather closely related conceptually to the issue of convergence. 
It has to do with computability, viewed again as a generalization of 
finiteness. 
It was long a hope, or expectation, that the entailment processes 
of mathematics could be equivalently replaced with word-processing 
algorithms. Mainly, the hope was that in such severely restricted, finitely-
generated contexts, consistency of arbitrary mathematical theories, like 
set theory, could be guaranteed; entailed. This was the world of Formalism. 
It turned out, of course, that "most" mathematieal systems were not 
formalizable; this was the upshot of the venerable Godel Theorem, which 
has (among many other things) precipitated these workshops on "limits 
to scientific knowledge." 
The theorem actually compares a method-based simulacrum of math-
ematics, based on formalizability (computability) with a content-based 
ROBERT ROSEN 
211 
concept, and shows that the former is inevitably much smaller than 
the latter. The problem here is in a way much more acute than simply 
replacing "sequence" by "convergent sequence," as Cauchy did; it, in 
effect, sharply limits the evaluation processes (what we called F before) 
which allows limits of sequences to be evaluated at all. So the formalist 
world is very impoverished from the outset. In fact, it is limited to what 
can be done entirely by the iteration of rote processes; a limitation which 
will not carry you from the finite to the infinite, nor back again. 
In this formalistic world, "objectivity" is interpreted yet again, as 
entailment arising from purely syntactic rules. Roughly, something is 
"objective" if and only if it could be carried out by a properly programmed 
machine; i.e., as a matter of software and hardware. This conception 
spills over into science, and especially into biology, by recasting Monod's 
dictum ("NATURE is objective") into the still more restrictive form 
"NATURE is computable." 
Indeed, it might be noticed that Bohrian complementarity would be 
a hard thing to convey to a finite-state machine. Part of the problem 
here is that such a machine is, in material terms, entirely a classical 
device, both in its hardware and in its software; all it could see of a 
non~classical, quantum realm is noise. 
VII. On Complexity 
As I remarked at the outset, my interest in the problems dealt with above 
is a consequence of my scientific concerns with biology, and particularly 
with the question, "What is life?", the central question of biology. It 
became clear to me that Reductionism was not the way to find an answer. 
Indeed, the Laplacian Geist, the Reductionistic ideal, would make an 
extremely poor biologist. So too would his quantum-mechanical analog. 
Since I did not regard myself as method-bound, I explored alterna-
tives, especially under the rubric of "relational biology" (cf. Rosen 1991). 
I ended up WIth a class of systems «M, R)-systems), which seemed to 
me to be (a) perfectly "objective," but (b) fell outside the category of 
"mechanisms," and could not be understood in terms of Reductionistic 
method alone. I cannot claim that these (M. R)-systems fully answer the 
question "What is life?", but I do claim that the answer must at least 
comprehend them. 
The (M, R)-systems manifest inherent semantic properties, expressed 
in closed causal loops within them. Such closed loops, in inferential 
contexts, are called impredicativities. It is such impredicativities that For-
malism rejects as "subjective," and which scientists like Monad (vide 

212 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
supra) claim are inconsistent with science itself, at least as they compre-
hend it 
At any rate, my little (M, R)-systems are inherently unformalizable as 
mathematical systems. That means: not only do they have noncomputable 
models, but any model of them that is computable is not itself an 
(M, R)-system, and hence misses all of its biology. 
You cannot "reduce" nonformalizability or noncomputability to for-
malizability. That is simply a fact; it is not a limitation. Likewise, you 
cannot, for example, "reduce" nonexact differential forms to single (po-
tential) functions; again, that is a fact, and not a limitation. Nor can 
you "reduce" divergent sequences to convergent ones. Indeed, such "re-
ducibility" is in itself a rare and noogeneTic phenomenon; that too is a 
fact; a fact as "objective" as anything. 
I originally called a (material) system complex if it had noncom· 
putable models; otherwise, simple. People like Monod simply postulate 
that every material system is simple; i.e., there are no complex systems 
in nature, and identify this postulation with science itself. As noted 
above, this makes science method-based, rather than content-based, and 
inevitably liniits its content only to what is consistent with the pos-
tulated method. This has always turned out to be a Procrustean bed, 
which inevitably creates limits to the science (or to the mathematics) so 
circumscribed. 
This is how I view the Godel theorem. It exhibits "mathematics" (or 
at least number theory) as a profound generalization of formalizability 
(or, alternatively, reveals formalizability to be a most severe specializa-
tion of mathematics). Mathematical rigor (i.e., "objectivity") does not 
reside in finitely-based syntactic rules alone. In my previous terminology, 
Godel's Theorem demonstrated the complexity of number theory - its 
irreducibility to simple formalizations. I believe that biology does the 
same thing for our contemporary views of physics. 
Indeed, one of the upshots of Monod's "Principle of Objectivity" 
is that one must never claim to learn anything new about physics (Le., 
about matter) from a study of organisms; or, stated another way, that 
an observer would see exactly the same universe, governed by the same 
laws, whether life existed in it or not; the difference between them is 
a conceptually trivial difference in state. A mathematical analog of this 
assertion is that, e.g., one must never claim to learn anything new about 
set theory from a study of, e.g., groups. I believe that, in mathematics 
at any rate, Gode!'s Theorem already refutes any such claim. 
Set theory is currently the mathematical version of the physicist's 
ROBERT ROSEN 
213 
search for a "theory of everything"; a theory from which everything is 
inferentially entailed. As noted above, in earlier centuries, the physicists' 
dream was embodied in the Laplacian Geist, who could know the motion 
of every particle and every force; who could formulate and solve every 
N -body problem. He might not be able to tell the difference between 
a universe with life in it and one without it; but then he could not 
conceive of a system which was not an N -body system. The limitations 
to what he could know are limitations in him, not in the universe he 
perceives; and he could never even know what they are. 
I suggest that we humans are more fortunate than the hypothetical 
Ultimate Reductionist, in our ability to perceive complexity. That is, to 
recognize the necessity to pull ourselves outside the limitations of self-
imposed methodOlogies, which create nonexistent "limits" to knowledge 
itself. 
. 
I believe, in short, that Aristotle was more correct in his view of 
science as a content-based thing, than the more currently orthodox views 
~~ s~ie~ce as .constricted by a ~ethod. If this is so, then the problem of 
hmlts to sCience evaporates mto mist. 
Appendix: On Emergence 
As a biologist, I have been engaged in various ways in a long-standing 
debate concerning the scientific status of the concept of "emergent 
novelty." .Th~ debate itself is of very broad currency, but it is perhaps 
sharpest m biological contexts. It touches directly on the issues we have 
been di~cussing; moreover, it is illuminated by the remarks made above. 
Hence I! appears worth discussing the issue separately, if briefly, in this 
AppendIX. 
In a rough intuitive sense, "emergence" pertains to situations in 
which a system is, in some sense, "more than the sum of its parts." 
:",nother w,ay of sa~ing this is that a study of "parts" does not, by 
Itself, entad properties of the whole from which the parts have been 
fractionated away. In the language we have used above, the "parts" do 
not suffice to answer all the "Why?" questions we can ask about the 
whole; those parts are not sufficient to entail the whole. 
One can immediately see why methods of Reductionism, based 
precisely on the isolation and study of such "parts," look upon concepts 
of emergent novelty with great hostility. They tend to denounce the 
concept itself as unscientific and metaphysical. 
. 
On the other hand, the whole idea of "complexity" has always been 
tied up With the concept of emergence. For instance, von Neumann early 

214 
ON THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
argued that there was a "threshold of complexity" (I would prefer to use 
the word "complication"), below which automata (e.g., neural networks) 
could only deteriorate, but above which entirely new capabilities (learn-
ing, development, growth, reproduction, evolution) emerge. These are, 
of course, biological capabilities; pushing a material system across this 
threshold of complexity amounts to creating life. Indeed, in this view, 
the emergent property of "complexity" itself becomes a causal entity, a 
way of answering "Why?" questions: "Why is this system alive?" Because 
it is "complex"; over that presumptive threshold. 
In the light of these considerations, let us reconsider the example 
of divergent sequences introduced in Section V above, and analogized 
with Bohrian complementarity. Clearly, from the standpoint of finite 
arithmetic, divergence is itself an emergent property. The dependence 
of a limit of an infinite sum on the way its summands are ordered and 
parenthesized is something without a counterpart in finite sums, and is 
unpredictable from them alone. Or, stated another way, finite arithmetic 
does not provide enough entailment to answer "Why?" questions about 
limits of divergent sequences. 
This ki.nd of situation is characteristic of emergence itself; a paucity 
of entailment in a world of "parts," and hence an inability to answer 
"Why?"-questions about systems from which the "parts" have been iso-
lated. 
As we have already seen above, if you make no concession to the 
additional modes of entailment on which the emergence itself depends, 
you get 1 = O. 
References 
[I] Chevalley, C. 1956. Fundamental Concepts of Algebra. Columbia Uni-
versity Press, New York. 
[2] Monod, J. 1971. Chance and Necessity. Knopf, New York. 
[3] Pais, A. 1982. Subtle is the Lord. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
[4] Pais, A. 1991. Niels Bohr's Times. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
[5] Pais, A. 1994. Einstein Lived Here. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
[6] Rosen, R. 1991. Life Itself Columbia University Press, New York. 
[7] Rosen, R. 1993. Theoretical Medicine, 14, 89-100. 
Chapter 9 
UNDECIDABILITY EVERYWHERE? 
KARL SVOZIL 
I. Physics Mter the Incompleteness Theorems 
There is incompleteness in mathematics [1-7]. That means that there 
does not exist any reasonable (consistent) finite formal system from which 
all mathematical truth is derivable; and there exists a "huge" number 
[8] of mathematical assertions that are independent of any particular 
formal system. That is, these statements-as well as their negations-are 
compatible with the standard formal systems of mathematics. Take, for 
example, the Continuum Hypothesis or the Axiom of Choice. Both are 
independent of the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. 
Can such formal incompleteness be translated into physics or the 
natural sciences, in general? Is there some question about the nature of 
things that can be proved to be unknowable for rational thought'! Is it 
conceivable that the natural phenomena, even if they occur determinis-
tically, do not allow their complete description? 
Of course it is! Suppose there exists free will. Suppose further that 
an observer could predict the future. Then this observer could freely 
decide to act in such a way as to invalidate that prediction. Hence, in 
order to avoid paradoxes, one has either to abandon free will or accept 
that perfect and complete prediction is impossible. 
The above argument may appear suspiciously informal. Yet, it makes 
use of the diagonalization technique, which is one of the royal roads 
to a constructive, rational understanding of undecidability in the formal 
sciences. What Godel and others did was to encode the argument in a 
language suitable to their area of research. To translate and bring similar 
issues into mainstream natural science is, at least in the author's opinion, 
the agenda of present concern on rational limits to scientific knowledge. 
Before discussing these questions further, we should first clarify our 
215 

