HAL Id: hal-01083205
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01083205
Submitted on 16 Nov 2014
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Effective Reproducible Research with Org-Mode and Git
Luka Stanisic, Arnaud Legrand
To cite this version:
Luka Stanisic, Arnaud Legrand. Effective Reproducible Research with Org-Mode and Git. 1st Interna-
tional Workshop on Reproducibility in Parallel Computing, Aug 2014, Porto, Portugal. ￿hal-01083205￿

Eective Reproducible Research with Org-Mode and Git
Luka Stanisic and Arnaud Legrand
ﬁrstname.lastname@imag.fr
CNRS/Inria/Univ. of Grenoble, Grenoble, France
Abstract. In this article we address the question of developing a
lightweight and eective workow for conducting experimental research
on modern parallel computer systems in a reproducible way. Our work-
ow simply builds on two well-known tools (Org-mode and Git) and en-
ables to address issues such as provenance tracking, experimental setup
reconstruction, replicable analysis. Although this workow is perfectible
and cannot be seen as a nal solution, we have been using it for two
years now and we have recently published a fully reproducible article [3],
which demonstrates the eectiveness of our proposal.
1
Introduction
In the last decades, both hardware and software of modern computers became
so complex that even experts have troubles fully understanding their behavior.
Therefore, it could be argued that these machines are no longer determinis-
tic, especially when measuring execution times of programs running on a large
distributed computer systems or hybrid platforms. Controlling every relevant
sophisticated component during such measurements is almost impossible, mak-
ing the full reproduction of the experiments extremely diﬃcult. Consequently,
studying computers has become very similar to studying a natural phenomena
and it should thus use the same principles as other scientiﬁc ﬁelds that had them
deﬁned centuries ago. Although many conclusions are based on experimental re-
sults in this domain of computer science, surprisingly articles generally poorly
detail the experimental protocol. Left with insuﬃcient information, readers have
generally trouble to reproduce the study and possibly build upon it. Yet, as re-
minded by Drummond [1], reproducibility of experimental results is the hallmark
of science and there is no reason why this should not be applied to computer
science as well.
Hence, a new movement promoting the development of reproducible research
tools and practices has emerged, especially for computational sciences. Such tools
generally focus on replicability of data analysis [5]. Although high performance
computing or distributed computing experiments involve running complex codes,
they do not focus on execution results but rather on the time taken to run a
program and on how the machine resources were used. These requirements call
for diﬀerent workﬂows and tools, since such experiments are not replicable by
essence. Nevertheless in such cases, researchers should still at least aim at full
reproducibility of their work.

There are many existing solutions partially addressing these issues, but none
of them was completely satisfying our needs and therefore we developed an
alternative approach that is based on two well-known and widely-used tools:
Org-mode and Git. We present our contributions in Section 3, where we ﬁrst de-
scribe a speciﬁc use of Org-mode for doing the provenance tracking of the entire
projects. Then, we propose a unique way to use Git for keeping synchronized ex-
periment results and code that generated them. Finally, it will be demonstrated
in Section 4 how the proposed methodology helped us conducting two very dif-
ferent studies in the High Performance Computing (HPC) domain. We will also
state limits of our approach, together with some open questions.
2
Related Work
In the past few years, the ﬁeld of reproducibility research tools has been very
active, various alternatives emerging to address diverse problematic. However,
in the HPC domain most of them are concentrated on platform accessibility,
setting up environments and running the experiments on large clusters. Even
though such tools are very useful in general, we could not beneﬁt from them
due to the speciﬁc nature of our research projects. The machines we needed
to study are recent prototypes, with ever-changing libraries, set up by expert
administrators and we do not have neither the permission nor the interest to do
any modiﬁcations to the environment.
However, when conducting experiments and analysis, there are more aspects
that need to be considered. We detail the ones related to software, methodol-
ogy and provenance tracking, which are often neglected by researchers in our
community.
Accessibility It is widely accepted that tools like Git or svn are indispensable in
everyday work on software development. Additionally, they help at sharing
the code and letting other people contribute. Making data accessible, ﬁle
hosting services, such as Dropbox, Google Drive and many others, became
very popular among all scientists that want to collaborate. There is another
group of services that is more oriented on making data publicly available
and easily understandable to everyone, e.g., ﬁgshare1.
Provenance tracking Knowing how data was obtained is a complex problem.
The ﬁrst part involves collecting meta-data, such as system information, ex-
perimental conditions, etc., and it is often managed by experimental engines.
The second, frequently forgotten in our domain, part is to track any applied
transformation to the data, i.e., moving the objects from one state to another.
Moreover, there is a question of storing both data and meta-data. Classical
approach to solve these issues involves using a database. However, this solu-
tion has its limits, as managing source codes or comments in a database is
not convenient and is handled in much better way by using version control
systems and literate programming.
1 http://gshare.com

Documenting While provenance tracking is focused on how data was obtained,
it is not concerned with why the experiments were run and what the obser-
vations on the results are. These things have to be thoroughly documented,
since even the experimenters tend to quickly forget all the details. One way
is to encourage users to keep notes when running experiment (e.g., in Suma-
tra [5, chap. 3]), while the other one consists in writing a laboratory notebook
(e.g., with IPython2).
Extendability It is hard to deﬁne good formats for all project components in
the starting phase of the research. Some of the initial decisions are likely to
change during the study, so system has to be ﬂexible. In such a volatile con-
text, integrated tools with databases, such as Sumatra, are too cumbersome
for everyday extentions and modiﬁcations.
Replicable analysis Researchers should only trust ﬁgures and tables that can
be regenerated from raw data. Therefore, ensuring replicable analysis is es-
sential to any study. Popular solution nowadays for this problem is to rely
on open-source statistical software like R and knitr that simplify ﬁgure gen-
eration and embedding in ﬁnal documents [5, chap. 1].
To address the previous problems, we propose to rely on a minimalist set
of simple, lightweight, and well-known tools. We use Org-mode [2], initially an
Emacs mode for editing and organizing notes, that is based on highly hierarchical
plain text ﬁles which are easy to explore and exploit. Org-mode has also been
extended to allow combining plain text with small chunks of executable code
(Org-babel snippets). Such features follow the literate programming principles
introduced by Donald Knuth three decades ago, and for which there is a renewed
interest in the last years. In addition, for version control system we decided to
rely on Git, a distributed revision control tool that has an incredibly powerful
branch management system.
3
Tips and Tricks for Reproducible Research
In this section, we provide guidelines on best practices and hints on pragmatic
ways to implement them. First, we illustrate how to handle provenance tracking
issues with literate programming, in particular with Org-mode. The approach
we propose is lightweight, to make sure the experiments are performed in a
clean, coherent and hopefully reproducible manner without being slowed down
by a rigid framework. However, it is tempting to sometimes break one of these
rules, which hinders reproducibility in the end. This is why we harden these
guidelines with a particular usage of Git that forces the user to keep data and
code synchronized.
3.1
Provenance Tracking Through Literate Programming
As described in Section 2, there are many tools that can help to automatically
capture environment parameters, to keep track of experimentation process, to
2 http://ipython.org

organize code and data, etc. However, it is not easy to understand how they work
exactly, and additionally each of them creates new dependencies on speciﬁc li-
braries and technologies. Instead, we propose a solution based on plain text ﬁles,
written in the spirit of literate programming, that are self-explanatory, compre-
hensive and portable. We do not rely on a huge cumbersome framework, but
rather on a set of simple, ﬂexible scripts, that address the following challenges.
Environment Capture Environment capture consists in getting all the details
about the code, used libraries and system conﬁguration. It is necessary to gather
as much useful meta-data as possible, to allow to compare experiment results
with the previous ones and inspect if there were any changes to the experimental
environment. This process should not be burdensome, but automatic and trans-
parent to the researcher. Additionally, it should be easy to extend or modify,
since it is generally diﬃcult to anticipate relevant parameters before performing
numerous initial experiments.
Once meta-data is captured, it can be stored either individually or accom-
panying results data. Some prefer keeping these two separated, making their
primary results unpolluted and easier to exploit, but they soon run into diﬃ-
culties when they need to retrieve information from meta-data. Therefore, we
strongly believe that the experiment results should stay together with the in-
formation about the system they were obtained on. Moreover, keeping them in
the same ﬁle makes the access straightforward and simpliﬁes the project orga-
nization, as there are less objects to handle. Consequently, even if data sustains
numerous movements and reorganizations, one would never doubt which envi-
ronment setup corresponds to which results.
In order to permit users to easily examine any of their information, these
ﬁles have to be well structured. The Org-mode format is a perfect match for
such requirements as its hierarchical organization is simple and can be easily
explored. A good alternative might be to use the yaml format, which is typed
and easy to parse but we decided to stay with Org-mode (which served all our
needs) to keep our framework minimalist.
A potential issue of this approach is raised by large ﬁles, typically containing
several hundreds of MB and more. Opening such ﬁles can temporary freeze a text
editor and ﬁnding a particular information can then be tedious. We haven’t yet
met with such kind of scenario, but obviously it would require some adaptations
to the approach.
Note that all the data and meta-data are gathered automatically using
scripts, ﬁnally producing a read-only Org-mode document. Why the experiments
were performed and what are the observations on its results is stored elsewhere,
more precisely in a laboratory notebook of the project.
Laboratory Notebook A paramount asset of our methodology is the labo-
ratory notebook (labbook), similar to the ones biologist, chemists and scientist
from other ﬁelds use on a daily basis to document the progress of their work. For
us, this notebook is a single ﬁle inside the project repository, shared between all

collaborators. The main motivation for keeping a labbook is that anyone, from
original researchers to external reviewers, can later use it to understand all the
steps of the study and potentially reproduce and improve it. This self-contained
unique ﬁle has multiple purposes. Indeed, the labbook should not only serve as
journal but also play the following software development roles to ensure that it
can be exploited by others:
1. README: The labbook should explain ideas behind the whole project pur-
pose and methodology, i.e., what the workﬂow for doing experiments is and
how the code and data are organized in folders. It should state the conven-
tions on how the labbook should be used. This part serves as a starting point
for newcomers and is also a good reminder for experienced users.
2. Documentation: The labbook should detail what are the diﬀerent programs
and scripts, and what is their purpose. This documentation concerns source
code for the experimentation as well as tools for manipulating data and
analysis code for producing plots and reports. Additionally, there should be
explanations on the revision control usage and conventions.
3. Examples: The labbook should contain example usages of how to run scripts,
displaying the most common arguments and format. Although such informa-
tion might seem redundant with the previous documentation part, in practice
such examples are indispensable even for everyday users, since some scripts
require lots of environment variables, arguments and options.
4. Log: It is important to keep track of big changes to the source code and
the project in general inside a log section. Since all modiﬁcations are already
captured and commented in Git commits, the log section should oﬀer a much
more coarse grain view of the code development history. There should also be
a list with descriptions of every Git tag in the repository as it helps ﬁnding
the latest stable, or any other speciﬁc, version of the code.
5. Experiment results: Every set of experiment should be carefully noted here,
together with the key input parameters, the motivation for running such
experiment and ﬁnally observations on the results. Inside the descriptive
conclusions, Org-mode allows to use both links and git-links connecting the
text to the actual ﬁles in the Git repository. These hyperlinks point to the
crucial data and the analysis reports that illustrate a newly discovered phe-
nomena.
Managing eﬃciently all these diﬀerent information in a single ﬁle requires a
solid hierarchical structure, which once again motivated our use of Org-mode. We
also took advantage of the Org-mode tagging mechanism, which allows to easily
extract information, improving labbook’s structure even further. Org tags can
be used to distinguish which collaborator conducted a given set of experiments
or to list expertise requests. Although many of these information may already
be present in the experiment ﬁles, having it at the journal level revealed very
convenient. Experiments can also be tagged to indicate on which machine they
were performed and whether the results were important or not. Again, although
such tagging is not required it is very handy in practice and make the labbook
much easier to understand and exploit.

Several alternatives exist for taking care of experiment results and progress on
a daily basis. We think that a major advantage of Org-mode compared to many
other tools is that it is just a plain text ﬁle that can thus be read and modiﬁed
on any remote machine without requiring to install any particular library. Using
a plain text ﬁle is also the most portable format across diﬀerent architectures
and operating systems.
Data File Organization Having a clear, coherent and hierarchical organization
of all the ﬁles is a good practice for a proper scientiﬁc work, especially when
external collaborators are involved. Once again, the approach we propose is
lightweight and ﬂexible but is motivated by the three following important points:
1. There should never be any critical information in ﬁle organization. Impor-
tant information should be in the ﬁles themselves. Indeed, we could as well
have blobs rather than ﬁles but managing data and extracting important
information would probably not be very convenient. Thus, we do not recom-
mend to impose much on ﬁle organization so that users can organize their
data in a way that is natural to them. We think this lack of rules is not an
issue as long as this organization is explained in the labbook.
2. The ﬁle organization should be ﬂexible enough to be changed and adapted
as the experimental data set grows. Such reorganization could seemingly
break the labbook hyperlinks. However, as we brieﬂy mentioned, we recom-
mend to use git-links in the labbook, which are Org-mode hyperlinks that
store links to speciﬁc revisions of ﬁles (typically when they were created).
So reorganizing the data ﬁles will not break the labbook information.
3. The naming convention should not impede the activity of the researcher, so
here we used almost no convention at all. According to our experience, all ex-
periment results could simply be saved in folders, each of them representing
one set of measurements and having a unique characteristic name, e.g., the
name of the machine on which it was performed. Inside a folder, ﬁle names
could be preﬁxed by additional key characteristics of the experiment set, fol-
lowed by an ordinal number indicating in which order experiments were run.
This idea seemed the most natural one to adopt, but we are reconsidering
alternatives for the future projects.
Conclusion The approach we described implicates a partial redundancy of
some data and meta-data, typically saved in both experiment result ﬁles and
in the laboratory notebook. However, such information are never entered twice
manually. Most data should always be automatically tracked, although when
some data convey key information, they should be manually added to other
places as well, since it provides a better overview of the whole project.
We think that following the proposed guidelines is suﬃcient to conduct a
clean, comprehensible and reproducible research while having a very ﬂuid work-
ﬂow. However, not all scientists are rigorous enough to always follow such con-
ventions and even those who are, occasionally have the need to bend the rules

in order to quickly get some results in a dirty way. This sometimes pollutes the
whole project organization, often breaking the chains of the workﬂow processes
and making some parts incoherent.
In order to force researchers to be more disciplined and help them doing their
work in a reproducible manner, we propose to combine the previous approach
with a particular usage of Git.
3.2
Using Git for Improving Reproducible Research
Even when the project is well organized, meta-data tracked, all the collabora-
tors follow the conventions and take notes in the laboratory notebook, several
practical issues may still arise:
1. Although a svn revision or a Git sha1 of the source code is captured, this
does not guarantee that the experiment was run correctly and that the results
can easily be reproduced. There could exist some uncommitted diﬀerences
between the tracked and the current version of the code or the compilation
could be out-of-date, i.e., code was compiled with an old revision.
A solution proposed for example by Davison [5, chap. 3] and which we applied
as well, is to force recompilation and systematically verify that everything is
fully committed before running any experiment. The only exception to this
rule are the tests performed to validate the workﬂow.
2. Even with the complete and correct meta-data and code revisions, it is not
always easy to reconstruct the experimental setup, especially if it consists
of the code from numerous external repositories. Multiplying repositories
hinders provenance tracking, coherency and experimental reproduction. The
solution we propose is to increase the reproducibility conﬁdence level by us-
ing only revision control and a collection of simple scripts that automatically
track information. Additionally, we suggest to store both code and experi-
mental data in the same Git repository, so that they are always perfectly
synchronized, which eases the obtainment of the code that produced a par-
ticular data set. Nevertheless, this introduced the following new challenges.
3. Unlike source code, data ﬁles can be large, thus keeping them together in
the same repository can rapidly increase its size. Moreover, doing code mod-
iﬁcations, analysis and experiments in the same Git branch complicates its
history and makes experimental setup reproduction slightly ambiguous.
4. Another diﬃculty comes from managing several external beta source codes
that should now coexist in the same repository. Since these codes are also
under development, they are regularly upgraded by their developers and
these changes need to be propagated to local project as well. Additionally,
these codes typically have their own revision control, which rises many issues
with potential local code modiﬁcations and commits that concern now both
local and external projects.
Proposal To solve aforementioned problems we propose an approach that uses
Git with two parallel interconnected branches, displayed in Figure 1. The ﬁrst

src
data
exp1
(a) Development
src
data
exp1
Adding data
Analysis
(b) Experimentation
src
data
exp2
exp1
(c) Merging results
Fig. 1. Dierent phases in git workow
branch, named src, includes only the source code, i.e., code and scripts for run-
ning the experiments and the analysis. The second, data, branch consists of all
the source code as well as all the data and analysis reports (statistical analysis
results, ﬁgures, etc.). These two branches live in parallel and are interconnected
through a third type of branches, the exp# branches, where the experimentation
is performed. All these together form a "ladder like" Git repository, depicted in
Figure 1(c).
We now explain the typical workﬂow usage of such branching scheme:
1. Development phase: Researchers work on a code development inside the
src branch, committing the changes, as shown on Figure 1(a). These mod-
iﬁcations can impact local or external code, analysis or even the scripts for
running the experiments. Later, such modiﬁcations should be tested and the
correctness of the whole workﬂow should be validated. Only then can one
start doing real useful experiments.
2. Experimentation phase: Researcher creates a new branch from the src
branch containing and a new folder to store the results. We used the conven-
tion that these two (branch and directory) should always have equal names,
which eases the usage of both Git and labbook. In the example of Fig-
ure 1(a), this new branch for doing the measurements is called exp1. Next,
new experiments are executed running the scripts and generate results. The
resulting data, together with the captured environment meta-data, are then
committed to the Git. After that, one might want to do some basic analysis
of the data, investigating the results, which may later trigger another round
of experimentation and so on, as it is showed on the Figure 1(b). Finally,
only when all desired measurements are ﬁnished, exp1 will be merged with
the data branch.
3. Merging and reports phase: All experimental exp# branches are in the
end merged with data, as it can be seen on Figure 1(c). In addition, result
observations for each exp# branch are written to the labbook. Afterwards,
comparison of diﬀerent experiments can be performed by generating ﬁgures,
tables and clear explanations, to describe the newly discovered phenomena.
Since the changes to the source code from src branch are also propagated
through exp#, the head of the data branch will always contain the latest code
together with all the data. Nevertheless, the older version of code responsible

for producing a particular data or analysis can always be found in the Git
history.
A peculiar situation occurs when there are source modiﬁcations inside the
experimental branches. They have to be committed (as measurements are never
done with an uncommitted code), even though in most cases they represent an ad
hoc change, speciﬁc to an individual machine and its installation. These minor,
local hacks would pollute the data branch and thus it has to be ensured that they
are not propagated. It is done by using a special script for merging the branches
instead of classical Git merge command. At the end of the exp# branch, all source
code changes (not the data) have to be invalidated by using git revert, i.e., the
"anti-commit" of all the previously committed modiﬁcations inside that branch.
This way modiﬁcations remain local for that exp# branch and the experimental
setup can still be reproduced by pulling the revision before the revert operation,
i.e., the one used to generate the data.
If the researcher eventually realizes that some of the source code modiﬁcations
done inside exp# branch could be useful for the whole project, there are two
ways to inserted them in the src branch. The ﬁrst one involves rewriting Git
history and it is not advised as it leads to incoherences between Git repositories.
The second option is to cherry-pick the desired commits. Although this approach
produces some redundancy, it is very easy and safe and keeps the Git history
clear and coherent.
External software One more challenge arises when there are external software
repositories imported inside a local project. For example, one could have external
source code B that is a part of a bigger local project A. Since B is also under
development, one occasionally needs to pull the updates from its server, which
can cause conﬂicts with local modiﬁcations to the code. Resolving these conﬂicts
manually can sometimes be very tedious.
Even bigger problem occurs if one wants to push such local changes, as they
can be committed to either our project A, or external project B, or even to both
of them together. We decided to propagate, by default, these modiﬁcations only
to the project A, keeping the Git sha1 of A always valid and up-to-date. Later if
necessary, they can be pushed to B as well, but this has to be done by explicitly
calling the necessary commands.
Dealing with described challenges is error-prone, thus we started using
git-subrepo tool for cleaner and semi-automated management of external Git
projects inside our local one. However, we still have to do everything manually
when working with codes that are using other version control systems, notably
svn.
Analysis We now analyze the proposed solution and investigate how it ad-
dresses the stated problematic.
First, a complete synchronisation of code, data and analysis is ensured. The
convention to use the same name for Git experiment branches and folders con-
taining experiment results, additionally carefully noting it in the labbook, makes

exploration of project history very smooth. This way one can easily ﬁnd when
a particular data or a ﬁgure was created, pull the revision used to generate it,
inspect the code, reconstruct the environment and ﬁnally reproduce the object.
Using experimental branches also allows some local source modiﬁcations, that
are speciﬁc for the remote machine or some other part of the experimentation
setup. These changes stay local for that exp# branch avoiding to pollute main
src and data branches, elegantly making the project easier to read while still
keeping it coherent. Additionally, Git permits to put tags on certain commits,
which can be used to annotate an important revision, such as the ones with the
stable source code or the ones with some speciﬁc adjustments. With the evolu-
tion of the study, Git history becomes large and harder to explore, thus these
tags can help to quickly ﬁnd a desired state of the project.
By using Git as proposed, it is extremely easy to set up an experimental
platform on a remote machine by pulling only the head of the src branch. This
solves the problem of long and memory consuming retrieving of the entire data
and Git history, as the src branch is typically very small.
On the other hand, one might want to gather all the experimental data at
once, which can be easily done by pulling only the data branch. This is the case
for the researchers that are not interested in the experimentation process, but
only at the analysis of the whole set of results. For them, src and exp# branches
are completely transparent, as they will retrieve only the latest version of the
source code (including needed analysis scripts) and the entire data.
Another use case is when someone wants to write an article or a report based
on the experiment results. A completely new branch can be created from data,
selecting from the repository only the data and analysis code needed for the
publication and deleting the rest. This way complete history of the study behind
the article is preserved for the reviewers.
Holding external projects inside a local one allows to do git pull or svn
checkout in sub-directories, keeping them up-to-date. Small problems arise when
some modiﬁcations to the external code are done. These changes de facto inﬂu-
ence both external and local repository but our solution ensures that they are
committed only to the local revision control. Therefore in the meta-data part
of the experiment ﬁles, tracked revision of the external code corresponds to the
version pulled before any of the local changes, which is not strictly legitimate.
Nevertheless, this small issue is not critical, since the revision in local project is
stored in meta-data as well, and this value is always perfectly correct. Pulling
this version will bring the right code, keeping the research reproducible.
4
Evaluation
We used the described methodology in two very diﬀerent use cases. The ﬁrst
one is a part of the study of CPU cache performance on various Intel and ARM
micro-architectures [4]. The developed source code was very simple, containing
only a few ﬁles, but there were numerous input parameters to be taken into
account. Probably the critical part of this study is about the environment setup,
which proved to be unstable, and thus, responsible for many unexpected phe-
nomena. Therefore, it was essential to capture, understand and easily compare

as much meta-data as possible. Although it did not lead to a reproducible arti-
cle as we were only discovering such tools, we used this workﬂow and can still
track the whole history of these experiments. The second use case [3] aims at
providing accurate performance predictions for dense linear algebra kernels, us-
ing the StarPU runtime on top of the SimGrid simulator. By contrast, input
parameters and environment here are ﬁxed, but the source code is very complex
and in constant evolution. Moreover, we had to manage code from two external
repositories as well many of our own scripts.
The proposed solution proved generally successful in both use cases. We have
determined several good and bad sides, while for some aspects still remain rather
uncertain.
Pros Our approach is fast and eﬃcient for a daily usage. It provides reasonable
boundaries without taking away too much ﬂexibility from the users. It oﬀers
good code modiﬁcation isolation, which is important for ad hoc changes. Perfect
provenance tracking, which was painless to extend and explore, was crucial for
the cache measurement study. Although these two use cases are very diﬀerent,
most of the captured environment meta-data is the same for both projects:
date and time, hostname, Linux and gcc version, users logged on the machine,
environment variables, used external libraries, code revisions, memory hierarchy
of the machine, CPU governor and frequency, compilation outputs, etc. Since
all the source code and data is in Git repository, reconstructing experimentation
setup is straightforward. One could argue that not all elements are completely
captured, since operating system and external libraries can only be reviewed
but not reconstructed. To handle this, researchers would have to use virtual
machines to run the experiments, which would introduce many new performance
issues. Finally, after applying such a methodology throughout the whole research
process, it was extremely easy to write an article [3] in Org-mode that was
completely reproducible as well. Along with the text, this Org-mode document
contains all the analysis scripts and the raw data is provided as the article
companion [6] and can be inspected by reviewers.
Cons The biggest disadvantage of our approach is that it has many not so
common conventions along with a steep learning curve workﬂow, hence it is
diﬃcult for new users. Moreover, it requires an expertise in Org-mode, preferably
using Emacs text editor, together with a good understanding of Git. However,
we believe that these tools provide beneﬁts that are worth investing time.
Additionally, we ﬁnd current way of managing external source repositories
slightly cumbersome, and we are searching for a better solution. One path could
be to use recipes or experiment engines, that would do the checkout of external
sources for us and would only apply the right modiﬁcations before compiling.
The problem of storing large data ﬁles in repositories is well-known to the
community. It has been already solved for the Mercurial revision control tool,
but even after an thorough research we could not ﬁnd a satisfactory solution for
Git. Git repositories can quickly reach a few Gigabytes, which does not hinder

daily committing but signiﬁcantly slows down rebase operations to move back
to previous experimental conditions of a speciﬁc dataset.
Open questions It is still unclear how this approach would scale for multiple
users working simultaneously, doing code modiﬁcations and experiments in par-
allel. In theory it should work if everyone has suﬃcient experience of the tools
and workﬂow, but we have never tried it with more than two persons.
Another interesting feature that we haven’t yet experienced is collaboration
with external users. These researchers could clone our project, work on it on
their own, try to reproduce the results and build upon our work, potentially
improving the code and contribute data sets back. Even though such utilization
should work smoothly, there could be some pitfalls that we haven’t anticipated.
These are only few of the unknown, and as there are certainly many more,
we are hoping for the audience suggestions and remarks.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we did not intend to propose new tools for reproducible research,
but rather investigate whether a minimal combination of existing ones can prove
useful. The approach we described is a good example of using well-known,
lightweight, open-source technologies to properly perform a very complex process
like computer science experimentation. Although our methodology is undoubt-
edly improvable and similar results could be obtained with other frameworks,
we nonetheless ﬁnd it very smooth for a daily usage and extremely beneﬁcial
to our work. We can only encourage people to build on such simple workﬂows
to conduct their own studies, as it is clearly a very eﬀective way to produce a
reproducible research.
References
1. Drummond, C.: Replicability is not reproducibility: Nor is it good science. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Evaluation Methods for Machine Learning Workshop at the 26th
ICML (2009)
2. Schulte, E., Davison, D., Dye, T., Dominik, C.: A multi-language computing envi-
ronment for literate programming and reproducible research. Journal of Statistical
Software 46(3), 124 (1 2012), http://www.jstatsoft.org/v46/i03
3. Stanisic, L., Thibault, S., Legrand, A., Videau, B., Méhaut, J.F.: Modeling and
Simulation of a Dynamic Task-Based Runtime System for Heterogeneous Multi-Core
Architectures. In: Proceedings of the 20th Euro-Par Conference. Springer-Verlag
(Aug 2014)
4. Stanisic, L., Videau, B., Cronsioe, J., Degomme, A., Marangozova-Martin, V.,
Legrand, A., Méhaut, J.F.: Performance analysis of hpc applications on low-
power embedded platforms. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Au-
tomation and Test in Europe. pp. 475480. DATE '13, EDA Consortium (2013),
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2485288.2485403
5. Stodden, V., Leisch, F., Peng, R.D. (eds.): Implementing Reproducible Research.
The R Series, Chapman and Hall/CRC (Apr 2014), https://osf.io/s9tya/wiki/home/
6. Companion of the StarPU+SimGrid article. Hosted on Figshare. (2014), http://dx.
doi.org/10.6084/m9.gshare.928338, online version of this article with access to the
experimental data and scripts (in the org source).

