DIVIDED BRAIN, DIVIDED WORLD
WHY THE BEST PART OF US STRUGGLES TO BE HEARD

JONATHAN ROWSON AND IAIN MCGILCHRIST 
FEBRUARY 2013
www.thersa.org

Lotto, Lorenzo (1480–1556), Madonna and Child, the Infant Saint John and 
Saint Peter Martyr. Museo di Capodimonte, Naples. 
Credits: © 2013 Photo Scala, Florence – courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att. Culturali
About the authors 
Jonathan Rowson is Director of The Social Brain Centre at the RSA. 
A chess Grandmaster, Jonathan was British Champion for three 
consecutive years 2004–  6. He was educated at Oxford, Harvard and 
Bristol universities and currently writes a weekly column for The Herald, 
Scotland’s national newspaper.
For inquiries relating to this document or the work of the RSA Social 
Brain centre more generally, please email jonathan.rowson@rsa.org.uk 
Iain McGilchrist is the author of The Master and his Emissary: The 
Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World. He is a former 
Fellow of All Souls’ College, Oxford, where he taught literature, before 
training in medicine and becoming a Fellow of the Royal College 
of Psychiatrists. 

Contents
Preface: RSA’s Social Brain project becomes a Centre	

3
Introduction 	 
4
Part one: Inquiry into the strength and significance 	

7
of the argument
What is the argument, and why does it matter?	
8
Probing the argument	

23
Exploring practical and policy implications	

31
Part two: Reflections	
50
Reflections	

51
Afterword 	

77
Appendicies	 
80
Appendix 1: Questions for discussion	

81
at the RSA Workshop
Appendix 2: RSA Workshop
	
83
Endnotes	

93

‘If I am right, that the story of the Western 
world is one of increasing left hemisphere 
domination, we would not expect insight to 
be the key note. Instead, we would expect a 
sort of insouciant optimism, the sleepwalker 
whistling a happy tune as he ambles towards 
the abyss.’
Iain McGilchrist, The Master and his Emissary 1

3
Preface: RSA’s Social Brain Project becomes a centre
Preface: RSA’s Social Brain 
project becomes a Centre
The notion that we are rational individuals who respond to information 
by making decisions consciously, consistently and independently is, at best, 
a very partial account of who we are. A wide body of scientific knowledge 
is now telling us what many have long intuitively sensed – humans are a 
fundamentally social species, formed through and for social interaction, 
and most of our behaviour is habitual. 
Since its inception in early 2009, RSA’s Social Brain project has sought 
to make theories of human nature more accurate through research, more 
explicit through public dissemination, and more empowering through practi­
cal engagement. Over the last four years, our work has gradually grown from 
being a stand-alone awareness-raising project to a much wider programme 
of research, consultancy and thought leadership. We have illustrated the 
practical and policy relevance of our ideas through deliberative research 
on social and cultural norms in the police service, worked with taxi drivers 
to improve the fuel efficiency of their driving, and proposed a thorough 
rethinking of the Government’s Big Society initiative, based on a critique 
of its psychological foundations. 
More recently we contributed to an evidence review for the Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation on the role of perceptions of risk and trust in care-
based relationships in the context of an ageing society. We are currently 
helping a major retail bank on how to get people to spend less and save more, 
and advising NSPCC on a national behaviour change campaign to reduce 
aggression. We are also rethinking the role of behaviour change in the context 
of climate change by squarely focusing interventions on ‘climate ignorers’ – 
those who accept their complicity in climate change but don’t live as though 
they do. More fundamentally, we are about to begin a two year programme 
of research and events on how new conceptions of human nature may help to 
reconceive the nature and significance of the spiritual dimension of our lives. 
All of this work is connected by a deep conviction that we need to 
become more reflexive about human nature to address the major adaptive 
challenges of our time. Our work strives to link theory to practice 
in ways that make a distinctive and enduring contribution to social 
innovation. Our main practical aims are to support personal development 
and wellbeing, inform educational practice and improve financial and 
environmental behaviour. We work with a variety of partners and funders 
in public, private and third sectors and our staff are supported by a large 
advisory group, including several RSA Fellows. 
The RSA Social Brain Centre has emerged from these developments, 
with the shift of title reflecting the RSA’s continuing commitment to work 
in this area. The Centre was launched formally in November 2012, and 
was marked by the workshop exploring the practical relevance of Iain 
McGilchrist’s ideas, which is unpacked in the remainder of this document.
Dr Jonathan Rowson
Director, RSA Social Brain Centre

Divided brain, divided world
4 
Introduction 
The discussion and reflections that follow feature an inquiry into a 
singularly profound, complex and fascinating thesis about the relation­
ship between our brains and the world. Through this inquiry, I attempt to 
illustrate what a mature discussion about the social and political relevance 
of neuroscience might look like. While there are no explicit and crude 
injunctions of the form ‘because the brain is like X we should therefore do 
Y’ in what follows, I do attempt to carefully understand how a particular 
perspective on the brain might inform our attempts to act more effectively 
in the world. 
In light of the public prestige of neuroscience, it is important and 
timely to move beyond what Raymond Tallis calls ‘neuromania’.2 The 
belief that we can explain all our behaviour with reference to our brains 
is clearly misplaced, and brings with it what Nik Rose has chillingly called 
‘the neuromolecular gaze’, creating justifiable fears of alienating forms 
of neural reductionism and unwarranted pharmaceutical control.3 
But it would be a mistake to throw out the neural baby with the 
manic bathwater. In recent years we have also witnessed widespread 
neurophobia, a misplaced overreaction to neuromania that suggests we 
cannot infer anything important about our behaviour from our brains.4 
However you define and conceive the relationships between, for instance, 
brain and mind, mind and individual behaviour, and individual behaviour 
and social and cultural phenomena, the nature of our brains must be 
implicated in some way, and possibly in quite important ways. 
My hope is that the discussion that follows introduces a construc­
tive middle way to talk about the social and cultural relevance of our 
understanding of the brain.5 Rather than thinking about the link between 
brain and behaviour as if it always has to be direct and reductive, and then 
proceeding to argue about the significance of the link, the discussion that 
follows takes a different route. Iain McGilchrist’s work provides a fresh 
and powerful perspective because the route from brain to behaviour is 
mediated by phenomenology and values. 
If you have ever had the feeling that the world is deeply out of kilter 
in a way that you can’t quite articulate, suspect that the growing neglect 
of arts and humanities is even more tragic than most people believe, or 
are hoping for some insight into why we might be blinkered enough to 
destroy our own planet, the following discussion will hopefully offer some 
valuable intellectual resources. The Master and his Emissary,6 the book 
that informs the following discussion, is about the profound significance 
of the fact that the left and right hemispheres of our brains have radi­
cally different ‘world views’. The hidden story of Western culture, as 
told by the author, is about how the abstract, instrumental, articulate 
and assured left hemisphere has gradually usurped the more contextual, 
Iain McGilchrist’s 
work provides a 
fresh and powerful 
perspective because 
the route from 
brain to behaviour 
is mediated by 
phenomenology 
and values

5
Introduction
humane, systemic, holistic but relatively tentative and inarticulate 
right hemisphere. 
The book has enjoyed considerable commercial success and 
enormous critical acclaim,7 but McGilchrist’s book is not particularly 
accessible, even to an intelligent lay audience. The RSA has already 
hosted an event, which I was honoured to chair, and we produced 
a podcast, video, and RSAnimate, which has been viewed by over a 
million people at the time of writing.8 However, I personally found 
the argument powerful and timely enough to want to go beyond simple 
dissemination in three main ways: 
The first opportunity is literally prosaic – the book and references 
together comprise about 350,000 words. Most thoughtful and influential 
people who are intrigued by the argument, and would like to read the 
book, are never likely to have the time. Iain himself has said that if he 
hadn’t written the book, he would never have got round to reading it. 
In the discussion, we have tried to distil the argument without compro­
mising its integrity, and while this proved harder than initially hoped, 
it can now be read at one (long) sitting. 
Secondly, although lucid, the book details a very complex and subtle 
interdisciplinary argument of a broadly philosophical nature that is 
easy both to positively affirm without understanding, and to dismiss too 
casually. I wanted to guard against the association of this work with the 
eager misuse of ‘left brain thinking’ and ‘right brain thinking’ in popular 
psychology and management literature, but I also wanted to raise some 
of the main over-arching objections that question the legitimacy of 
brain-based explanations of the world in general. The discussion format 
hopefully helps to highlight the critical turns in the argument, and invites 
further challenges from readers.
Thirdly, although McGilchrist recognises that his thesis lends itself 
to practical questions, he chooses to focus on ‘diagnosis’ and leaves the 
reader with no tangible injunctions on what to do with the material they 
have read. 
The hidden story 
of Western culture, 
as told by the 
author, is about 
how the abstract, 
instrumental, 
articulate and 
assured left 
hemisphere has 
gradually usurped 
the more contextual, 
humane, systemic, 
holistic but 
relatively tentative 
and inarticulate 
right hemisphere

Divided brain, divided world
6 
The final section was by far the hardest to work through, because it is 
so difficult, particularly for anybody frustrated by intractable social prob­
lems, not to want to reach for tangible practical and policy implications in 
areas that seem to urgently need fresh insight, including education, mental 
health, climate change and finance. I hope we have made some headway 
here, at least enough to provoke constructive feedback. 
The Social Brain Centre chose to focus on this piece of work to 
mark the launch of The Centre for a variety of reasons: First, deep 
problems need deep insight. In the context of regretfully not being able 
to attend the workshop, Oxfam’s Kate Raworth mentioned, appositely, 
that ‘these are rich times to be rethinking the world’.9 If we are going 
to make ‘behaviour change’ about more than the technocratic application 
of behavioural insights to mostly minor problems, we need to work hard 
to think about the influence of deep structures and root causes, including 
planetary boundaries, political systems, social networks, inequality, the 
structure of the macroeconomy, and, in this case, the structure of the 
brain. If we don’t link up behaviour change to deep and systemic influ­
ences, we will be stuck with superficial tinkering rather than meaningful 
social innovation. 
The second reason or focusing on The Master and his Emissary is 
that we value reflexivity, and Iain’s work helps to promote it. Without 
an appreciation for the recursive nature of self-awareness and behaviour, 
we will not be able to achieve the forms of agency and autonomy that are 
implicitly or explicitly demanded of us to adapt to modern challenges. 
Neurological reflexivity is fundamentally about the interdependence of 
mind and world, which is central to Iain’s work. Simply state, knowing 
more about hemispheric division has an impact on the relevance of 
that division.10
Finally, the RSA Social Brain Centre works on three thematic areas: 
decisions, habits, and attention. Our focus on attention is part of what 
makes our work distinctive within the field of behaviour change. Iain’s 
work is fundamentally about patterns of attention, and by giving this 
work prominence here, we are trying to highlight the central relevance 
of attention to cultural challenges and social change. While the behaviour 
change agenda has rightly focussed on automatic behaviour, we should 
not forget the power of our controlled systems to adapt and adjust in the 
light of important new perspectives. Indeed, understanding and appreciat­
ing such perspectives may require particular kinds of attention that, if Iain 
McGilchrist is to be believed, are under valued, and under threat. 
Dr Jonathan Rowson
Director, RSA Social Brain Centre
Iain himself has 
said that if he 
hadn’t written the 
book, he would 
never have got 
round to reading it

7
Part one 
Inquiry into the strength and 
significance of the argument

Divided brain, divided world
8 
What is the argument, 
and why does it 
matter?
JR: Iain, let me begin by stating the argument as I have come to understand 
it, and you can tell me how you might express it differently or more fully. 
You seem to be saying that the left hemisphere of the brain is 
gradually colonising our experience. While the brain hemispheres are 
connected by the corpus callosum, and both are involved in everything 
we do, if we cease to ask what the hemispheres do eg language, 
reasoning, creativity, forecasting, and instead ask how they do it, we 
find very significant differences in the two hemispheres. For instance 
the left hemisphere tends to decontextualise issues while the right 
contextualises, the left tends to abstract while the right makes vivid 
and concrete, the left seeks instrumental feedback while the right 
prefers affectively nuanced responses, and the right hemisphere appears 
to be much more receptive to evidence that challenges its own position. 
Both of these ‘hows’ are important and necessary, and the evidence for 
these differences is meticulously unpacked in your book in a cautious 
but extensive inductive argument.
You are clear that there is insufficient evolutionary time in Western 
cultural history for left or right hemisphere dominance to manifest at 
the structural level of the brain.
So you are not saying the left hemisphere is getting bigger or denser 
or better connected than the right. The point is that the left hemisphere’s 
‘way of being’ is more culturally contagious than the ‘way of being’ of 
the right hemisphere.
The suggestion is that, slowly but surely, the left hemisphere’s perspec­
tive shapes our culture in such a way that the culture begins to respond 
to it as the dominant one.
Your thesis matters because there is a very real danger that we may 
reach what you call ‘a hall of mirrors’ in which the explicit, instrumental, 
defined, confident, abstract voice (not unlike the current voice of the 
materialistic orthodoxy in neuroscience or the neoliberal voice placing 
unqualified faith in markets) becomes the only one we appreciate, while 
the relatively implicit, intrinsic, fluid, visceral perspective of the right 
hemisphere begins to sound diminished and irrelevant.
Is that about right? If so, can you give some practical examples to 
illustrate the nature of this change?
IM: The suggestion 
is that, slowly 
but surely, the 
left hemisphere’s 
perspective shapes 
our culture in such 
a way that the 
culture begins to 
respond to it as 
the dominant one

9
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
IM: I think that is a good initial formulation. As you say, it is not about 
what each hemisphere does, as we used to think, because it is clear that 
each is involved with literally everything. It is about how it is done – an 
approach, a stance, a disposition towards things. Above all, this is not 
about ‘thinking versus feeling’. It is – as Mary Midgley perceived in her 
review in The Guardian – about two kinds of thinking.11 And, contrary 
to popular belief, it is the right hemisphere’s, not the left hemisphere’s, 
thinking that is more accurate, more down to earth – in a word, ‘truer’ 
to what is.
Practical examples
IM: But you ask if there are practical examples of what I see as us 
drifting ever more into the left hemisphere’s version of the world. 
That’s not hard. Let’s begin with the financial crash. It was fuelled 
by a belief that human behaviour can be confidently predicted by 
algorithms, whereas in fact we not only don’t know – but in principle 
can never know – enough for this sort of prediction to be valid. 
This false belief also allowed people to feel that their wise intuitions 
about the differences between individual borrowers, or individual 
economies, should be over-ridden, because such context-dependent 
uniqueness was nowhere to be found in the model. The situation 
was compounded by an absorption in the virtual – complex self-
referring systems of numbers – to the extent that we lost track of 
what these figures represented in the real world. Financial institutions 
disregarded the importance of trust, and instead traded in a war 
of all-against-all, inducing an atmosphere of paranoia, deception 
and chicanery. All these are features of the way the left hemisphere 
conceives the world, not the way the whole brain would have seen it. 
Equally I could point to the mass of petty legislation, and the 
obsession with accountability and audit in all walks of life, designed 
to fill the vacuum left by trustworthiness and merely serving further 
to erode trust; a litigious culture, which imposes a heavy burden on 
the economy and saps morale; the bureaucracy and micromanage­
ment that stifles originality in research and ensures mediocrity; the 
narrow-minded obsession with economic gain here and now that 
attacks educational institutions and the world of scholarship; the 
managerial culture that is destroying professionalism in medicine, 
and substituting machine-like ‘decision trees’ for skill and judgment; 
the neglect of practical hands-on, embodied experience and common 
sense, that turns nurses and policemen into office-based paper-pushers 
with degrees; the exploitation of the natural world as if it were just so 
much resource to ‘go get’; and so on.
Sometimes people seem to think that when I talk about the 
hemispheres this is ‘just’ metaphorical. But it is not. There is evidence 
that autistic spectrum disorders and anorexia nervosa, both of which 
mimic, and almost certainly involve, right hemisphere deficit states, 
are on the increase. But it goes much further than that. It affects us all. 
After a talk I gave recently in Toronto, a member of the audience came 
up to the microphone. What she said struck me forcibly. ‘I am a teacher 
of 7–11 year-olds’, she began. ‘My colleagues and I have noticed in the 
IM: Let’s begin with 
the financial crash. 
It was fuelled by a 
belief that human 
behaviour can be 
confidently predicted 
by algorithms … 
Financial institutions 
disregarded the 
importance of trust, 
and instead traded 
in a war of all-
against-all, inducing 
an atmosphere of 
paranoia, deception 
and chicanery. All 
these are features 
of the way the 
left hemisphere 
conceives the world

Divided brain, divided world
10 
last three or four years that we have started having to teach children 
how to read the human face.’
Of course, in itself it’s alarming that a proportion of our children 
are no longer able to understand implicit communication, not even 
so much as to respond appropriately to the face of their fellow human 
beings. In the past such problems would have been confined to children 
on the autistic spectrum. But more than that – it fell into place with 
other messages I had been getting from teachers since the publication 
of the book. These teachers reported that in just the last few years their 
children had become unable to carry out tasks involving sustained 
attention, tasks that ten years ago almost every child would have been 
able to do easily. When you put that together with research suggesting 
that children are now less empathic than they used to be, you get a 
startling picture. Because each of these faculties – the ability to read 
faces, to sustain attention and to empathise – as well as being essential 
to the human world, is particularly reliant on the right hemisphere of 
the brain. So their relative demise is precisely what you would expect 
if my hypothesis is correct.
JR: That’s a striking example. But it is curious that you mention just 
‘the last few years’ rather than the longer time frames that are unpacked 
in your book. What might be going on there?
IM: Well, these particular faculties are also likely to be impaired by 
over-reliance on TV and computers, the ‘virtual’ reality that comes 
through a screen, and which is expanding exponentially. Instead 
of spending much of his early years engaged with his mother’s face 
(which is how children crucially develop the sense of a secure self, 
distinct from, but not entirely separate from, others), a child now 
is likely to spend more time interacting with a piece of equipment. 
There he will expect to be constantly distracted and over-stimulated, 
and in due course to watch scenes of violence with calm detachment. 
All that is true. But then this virtuality and emphasis on technology is 
also in itself a reflection of a world dominated by the left hemisphere.
JR: The impact of technology on our capacity to pay attention, sustain 
concentration, appreciate implicit communication and so forth is certainly 
an important issue, not least because some (Nick Carr, Susan Greenfield, 
Kenneth Gergen) feel this is an acute and growing problem that we need to 
address, while others dismiss such fears as reflex technophobia without any 
evidence to back it up, and are quick to point out that many, though not 
all (eg Jaron Lanier) of those expressing such fears have relatively limited 
experience of the technologies in question, which are often intensely social 
and creative in nature, with exacting intellectual content. I think there is an 
important discussion to be had here, but I would prefer to focus for now on 
making sure the core argument is as clear as possible. 
Is the brain ‘foundational’?
JR: Your thesis seems to entail an implicit theory of consciousness, in 
particular how different aspects of the brain relate to mind, and mind 
JR: The main 
thing I want to 
clarify is that you 
are not ‘reducing’ 
everything to the 
brain, but at the 
same time you do 
seem to be saying 
the brain is a kind 
of touchstone, 
and it serves to 
give the argument 
a foundational feel: 
can you help clarify?

11
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
to world. You don’t wade into the major debates in the philosophy 
of mind, perhaps wisely, but you do seem to have views on these fun­
damental ontological matters that underpin your argument. The main 
thing I want to clarify is that you are not ‘reducing’ everything to the 
brain, but at the same time you do seem to be saying the brain is a kind 
of touchstone, and it serves to give the argument a foundational feel: 
can you help clarify?
IM: I am not one of those people, of whom there appear to be all too 
many these days, who think that they have said something profound 
– even perhaps revealed the real, the ultimate truth – about a human 
experience simply by re-describing it at the neuronal level. That is just 
naivety. People got terribly excited when they found what was referred 
to as the ‘neural circuitry’ involved in falling in love – but what exactly 
did they expect? A blank? Something lights up in my brain when I eat 
a cheese sandwich – it just doesn’t taste of cheddar.
The brain: divided and asymmetrical 
IM: But it is odd that in recent times science has largely ignored two 
absolutely fundamental and incontrovertible findings about the brain. 
First, that it is, literally, profoundly divided. And second, its obvious 
asymmetry: there are clear observable differences at every level.
JR: And in the book you spend some time detailing those differences. 
IM: The two hemispheres are different sizes, shapes, and weights 
(the right hemisphere is bigger and heavier in all social mammals); 
have expansions in different areas, different gyral conformations on 
the surface, and in places different architecture of the underlying cells; 
have different proportions of grey matter to white, different sensitivity 
to neuroendocrine influences, and rely on different preponderances 
of neurotransmitters. And in psychometric testing they consistently 
yield different results, which is in keeping with something any clinician 
could tell you: when there is damage to one hemisphere or the other, 
through injury, tumour or stroke, there are consistent differences in 
what happens to the subject and his world depending on which hemi­
sphere suffers the lesion. 
JR: So I guess you are saying something like this: if people are getting so 
excited about the brain in general – as they clearly are – why are they not 
saying more about perhaps the most obvious feature of it, namely that 
it is so fundamentally divided in so many different ways, and not just 
divided, but also profoundly asymmetrical?
IM: Exactly. And the first of these facts is particularly odd, because 
the power of the brain consists precisely in the number and complexity 
of its connections. Having it divided, on the face of things, is a massive 
waste of ‘computing power’. Add to this that the main band of fibres 
connecting the two hemispheres, the corpus callosum, has got smaller 
over evolution, rather than larger, and in any case spends much of 
IM: I am not one 
of those people, of 
whom there appear 
to be all too many 
these days, who 
think that they have 
said something 
profound – even 
perhaps revealed 
the real, the 
ultimate truth – 
about a human 
experience simply 
by re-describing it 
at the neuronal level

Divided brain, divided world
12 
its time facilitating the blocking or inhibition of action in the other 
hemisphere, and it looks like quite some investment has gone into 
keeping the two hemispheres apart. Why?
JR: Why indeed? What is it about the nature of the difference between the 
hemispheres that, despite their ongoing interaction and interdependence, 
a considerable degree of separation and neural inhibition is nonetheless 
somehow ‘adaptive’? You try to answer this at length in the book, and 
make the point above that it is not what each hemisphere does that is 
significant, but rather how they are – their way of being. But I think for 
lay people, and perhaps even for many scientists, that’s really hard! What 
things do just seems to be the default way that we think about how one 
thing compares with another, and we reserve the ‘how’, the ‘way of being’ 
that you mention for people. 
Hemispheres: It’s not what they do, it’s the way that they do it
IM: Well, that is indeed a crucial point, and it’s the only conceivable 
explanation of how we came to neglect these obvious hemisphere 
differences. Dogma came to obscure facts. Because we thought of the 
brain as a machine, we were asking ‘what does it do?’ and getting the 
answer ‘they both do everything’. If instead we had thought of the 
brain as part of a person, rather than a machine, we might have asked 
a different question: ‘what’s he or she like?’ How, in other words – with 
what values, goals, interests, in what manner and in what way – did 
this part of a person do what he or she did? And we would have got 
quite another answer. For each hemisphere has a quite consistent, but 
radically different, ‘take’ on the world. This means that, at the core 
of our thinking about ourselves, the world and our relationship with 
it, there are two incompatible but necessary views that we need to try 
to combine. And things go badly wrong when we do not.
So when people say, what does looking at the brain tell us about 
the human world that we couldn’t have found out some other way, 
I say – nothing. But that’s also true of a map. There’s nothing on it you 
couldn’t have found out by wandering aimlessly around in the rain for 
quite some time. But would you throw away the map for that reason? 
JR: Interesting. So you are not giving the brain extra explanatory power 
because it is the brain as such, but because it is something we now have 
a fairly large amount of information about, and it would be foolish 
not to at least try to apply some of that knowledge to making sense 
of the world?
IM: It’s like this. Suppose it could be shown – because it can – that 
our brains are so constructed as to enable us to bring into being and 
conceive the experiential world in two quite distinct, complementary, 
but ultimately incompatible, ways. Suppose each has its uses, and that 
– here’s why the brain view helps – these versions of the world, which 
have importantly different qualities, are generally so well combined 
or alternated from moment to moment in everyday experience that 
individuals are not aware of this being the case. 
JR: You make 
the point that it 
is not what each 
hemisphere does 
that is significant, 
but rather how they 
are, their way of 
being. But I think 
for lay people, and 
perhaps even for 
many scientists, 
that’s really hard!

13
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
Now suppose also that it could be shown – because indeed it 
can – that these ‘takes’ on the world are not equally well grounded: 
the part of the brain that makes one of these views possible (the right 
hemisphere) takes into account more and better integrated informa­
tion, over a broader range, than the other (the left hemisphere). One 
sees more, in the broadest sense of the word.
Now further suppose – because this is in fact demonstrably the 
case – that persons who, by experimental contrivance or through 
injury or disease, have to rely only on the part of the brain which 
sees less (the left hemisphere) tend to be unreasonably certain, more 
rigid and exclusive than those who are, for similar reasons, obliged 
to rely on the part that sees more (the right hemisphere), who are 
more tentative and more able to see other points of view. And suppose 
it could be shown – because, again, it can – that while most people, 
most of the time, draw on each hemisphere, individuals often show 
a bias towards drawing on one more than the other, with predictable 
results for that person’s understanding of the world. 
I think it would be a bold person who claimed that this did not 
add anything to our understanding of what it means to be a human 
being – didn’t tell us something we would have found hard to deduce 
from mere observation, without study of the brain. And, as you know, 
my thesis is that, much as a bias of this kind can become characteristic 
of an individual’s thinking, it can become characteristic of the thinking 
of the group of individuals who shape a culture.
JR: I was with you completely until that last leap, which I suspect not 
everybody will take as self-evident. That’s useful, because in a moment 
there are three distinct philosophical challenges about the argument as 
a whole that I would like you to help allay in the second section of the 
discussion. But first you mentioned that we don’t need neural ‘expla­
nations’ to make sense of everything, and I imagine you would say 
something similar about evolutionary psychology, but still, many will 
want to make sense of why it might be that we have these two modes 
of being. Is there an important evolutionary drive here? 
The evolution of two types of consciousness 
IM: Survival requires the application of two incompatible kinds 
of attention to the world at once. A bird, for example, needs to 
pay narrow-beam sharply focussed attention to what it has already 
prioritised as of significance – a seed against a background of grit or 
pebbles, or a twig to build a nest. At the same time, it must be able to 
bring to bear on the world a broad, open, sustained and uncommitted 
attention, on the look-out for whatever else may exist. Without this 
capacity it would soon become someone else’s lunch while getting its 
own. Birds and animals all have divided brains, and regularly use one 
hemisphere for vigilant attention to the world at large, so as to make 
sense of it, including to bond with their mates, and the other for the 
narrow attention that enables them to lock onto whatever it is they 
need to get. Humans are no different in this respect: we use our left 
hemisphere to grasp and manipulate, and the right to understand the 
IM: We use our left 
hemisphere to grasp 
and manipulate, 
and the right to 
understand the 
world at large and 
how things within 
it relate to one 
another, as well 
as our relationship 
with it as a whole

Divided brain, divided world
14 
world at large and how things within it relate to one another, as well 
as our relationship with it as a whole. 
It is the left hemisphere that controls the right hand which for most 
of us is the one that does the grasping, and provides that aspect of 
language (not all of language) that enable us to say we have ‘grasped’ 
something. But it is the right hemisphere that is the basis of our nature 
as the ‘social animal’, which Aristotle saw as our defining feature.
It is easy to think of attention as just another ‘cognitive function’. 
But it isn’t. It is an aspect of consciousness: a machine can process data 
but it cannot attend. The nature of the attention we choose to pay alters 
the nature of the world we experience, and governs what it is we will 
find. This in turn governs the type of attention we deem it appropriate 
to pay. Before long we are locked into a certain vision of the world, 
as we become more and more sure of what it is we see. To a man with 
a hammer everything begins to look like a nail. And some beautiful 
research demonstrates that what we do not expect, we just do not see.
JR: So it’s as if we live simultaneously in two different worlds, but we 
don’t realise how radically different they are, and nor do we sense that 
they are competing?
IM: Exactly. We are, as Kant put it, ‘citizens of two worlds’. But as 
we live headlong we can lose sight of that – in fact our consciousness 
appears (and no doubt has to give the illusion of being) seamless. 
Which is where looking at the brain comes in. It gives us something 
concrete, external to our minds, to look at. If our minds are generated 
by the brain, or at least mediated by it, the structure of the brain will 
undoubtedly tell us something about the structure of mind. 
What are these two worlds like? Even a summary of all the differences 
in the kind of world that each hemisphere brings about would be very 
extensive, since each hemisphere plays a part in everything we experi­
ence. We would need to cover differences in the ways of conceiving and 
construing knowledge itself, what we mean by newness, by wholeness, 
by types and aspects of reason and emotion, and aspects of language, 
music, space, depth and time, as well as the body, morality and the 
self. So here I am going to do no more than point to some of the global 
ways in which they differ.
One way of looking at the difference would be to say that while the 
left hemisphere’s raison d’être is to narrow things down to a certainty, 
the right hemisphere’s is to open them up into possibility. In life we 
need both. In fact for practical purposes, narrowing things down to 
a certainty, so that we can grasp them, is more helpful. But it is also 
illusory, since certainty itself is an illusion – albeit, as I say, a useful 
one. Similarly the right hemisphere appreciates that all things change 
and flow, and are never fixed and static as the left hemisphere sees 
them. Nor are they isolated and atomistic (left hemisphere), but 
reciprocally interconnected (right hemisphere).
There is no certainty, fixity or isolation in nature. Things we make 
give the illusion of being so. Machines give us the idea that the world 
is made from bits put together. At least in the so-called ‘life’ sciences, 
we still imagine that things are mechanical, in just this way, while in 
JR: So it’s as if we 
live simultaneously 
in two different 
worlds, but we 
don’t realise how 
radically different 
they are, and nor do 
we sense that they 
are competing. 
IM: Exactly

15
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
physics the idea was discarded around a hundred years ago. We talk 
of the brain having wiring, circuitry and switches, of its ‘functioning’, 
‘processing’ information, etc From this you might deduce that we knew 
exactly what sort of thing a brain was, or at least what sort of thing 
a neurone was, but in reality we don’t have the slightest idea. In fact 
every individual cell is a quite extraordinarily complex self-regulating 
and self-repairing system entirely unlike any wire that ever existed. 
It forms tens of thousands of connections. As there are billions of 
neurones involved, the number of connections is virtually infinite. 
And everything in such a system is reciprocal rather than linear. 
This is not like anything we can know. 
Implicit theory of consciousness?
JR: So relationships of one sort or another are primary, rather than parts. 
Again it feels like there is an implicit theory of consciousness here. I 
don’t want to get needlessly sidetracked on a question that many think 
will confound people indefinitely, but what is your ontological ‘take’ 
here?  Is the world ultimately comprised of mind or matter, or both, 
and how should we go about approaching that question?
IM: Well, we think we can make consciousness explicable by ‘reducing’ it 
to matter. In the first place, nothing can ever be ‘reduced’ to anything else. 
JR: Briefly explain, please. 
IM: Because things are unique, whole and indivisible, as the right 
hemisphere realises, not just instances of a type, substitutable by 
something else, and mechanically put together from bits, as the left 
hemisphere believes. Each thing is precisely itself and not another 
thing, as Wittgenstein was fond of observing. 
But even if we choose to ‘reduce’ consciousness to a property 
of matter, it does not make it any easier to account for. We then have 
to sophisticate our idea of matter (no bad thing), since it becomes 
something so extraordinary that it can give rise to consciousness. 
JR: A practically-minded colleague who read a draft of this discussion 
said they felt a bit lost by this claim – what would it mean to sophisticate 
our idea of matter?
IM: It is often thought that we cannot know the whole until we under­
stand the ‘parts’. But it is just as true that we cannot understand what 
sort of thing these ‘parts’ we identify are, without knowing what sort 
of a whole they go to make up – they don’t exist separately from the 
wholes in which they inhere. The argument is bi-directional or, rather, 
forms a hermeneutic circle; there isn’t a privileged direction which 
enables us to establish one thing and then the next, because each thing 
is constantly being altered by the context of the whole. If conscious­
ness is ‘just’ matter, then matter immediately becomes something 
extraordinary – there’s nothing ‘just’ about it, if this thing that looks 
so unlike consciousness has the potential for consciousness to come 
IM: The amazing 
thing is consciousness 
itself, and it doesn’t 
get more explicable 
by saying ‘it’s matter’. 
You have just kicked 
the can further down 
the road

Divided brain, divided world
16 
about. The amazing thing is consciousness itself, and it doesn’t get 
more explicable by saying ‘it’s matter’. You have just kicked the can 
further down the road. 
Though people talk of the problem of consciousness, I would be 
inclined to turn things on their head and say, ‘What problem? The real 
problem is matter.’ Consciousness we know inside and out; but matter, 
that is closed to us. In fact it is its closed quality, its way of offering 
resistance to consciousness, that defines it. The existence and nature 
of matter is at least as hard to explain as the existence and nature 
of consciousness – I would say harder: it is just the familiarity with 
which we treat it every day that makes matter seem simple.
Presentation and re-presentation
JR: This distinction between what is familiar to perception and what 
is fresh seems to have broad application in your argument. Is this 
why you make so much of the distinction between presentation and 
re-presentation?
IM: Familiarity and everydayness, at least in the sense that they make 
something more like a cliché, more like an icon (in the computer 
sense), a ‘re-presentation’ rather than a real thing that is fully present, 
are also features of the left hemisphere’s world. Things as they are, 
fresh, embodied and unrepeatable – truly ‘present’ – are preferentially 
dealt with by the right hemisphere; as they become familiar, abstracted 
and generalised – no longer present, but ‘re-presented’ – they are 
transferred to the left. It is like comparing a world in all its richness 
with a useful map of that world, which leaves almost everything out, 
except the strategic essentials. We have become like people who have 
mistaken the map for the thing itself.
Many time-honoured problems in philosophy seem to hinge on 
which of these versions of the world one prioritises. But this is not 
just interesting from a philosophical point of view: it has massively 
important consequences for the sort of world we are busy creating 
now. If I describe what the left hemisphere sees, by contrast with 
what the right hemisphere sees, you will understand what I mean.
JR: I would like you to do that, and also clarify what exactly you mean 
when you say ‘the left hemisphere sees’– why the visual reference?
IM: In almost every language, seeing is a metaphor both for perception 
and for understanding. What I mean by it is that the two hemispheres 
differ in their awareness, therefore both in what they literally perceive, 
and, more broadly, in what they then make of it – the world they 
construct from their perceptions. 
Not what but how: The ‘worlds’ of the left and 
right hemispheres
IM: Because of its narrow focus and emphasis on getting certainty, 
the left hemisphere sees only bits and pieces, fragments which it 
IM: Things as they 
are, fresh, embodied 
and unrepeatable 
– truly ‘present’ – 
are preferentially 
dealt with by the 
right hemisphere; 
as they become 
familiar, abstracted 
and generalised – no 
longer present, but 
‘re-presented’ – they 
are transferred to 
the left

17
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
attempts to put together to form a whole. The left hemisphere alone 
encodes tools and machines. In the living world, context is everything, 
but this is neglected by the left hemisphere. Thus the left hemisphere 
prefers the explicit, without understanding that rendering things 
explicit, and isolating them under the spotlight of attention, dena­
tures and ultimately kills them, just as explaining a joke or a poetic 
metaphor robs it of its meaning and power. The view through the 
lab window distorts the meaning of everything most precious to 
us – the natural world, sexual love, art and spirituality all fare badly 
when treated in this detached and decontextualised way. 
The left hemisphere focuses on detail at the expense of the bigger 
picture, and on procedures at the expense of their meaning. This loss 
of proportion and preference for the forms of things over any real 
world content, lend themselves to a ‘tick box’ mentality, which is also 
an aspect of its risk-averse nature. Since its purpose is control in the 
service of grasp or manipulation, rather than understanding of the 
world, it is anxious and even paranoid if it senses loss of control. 
This makes it prone to bureaucracy, and indeed one could see the 
bureaucratic mind as an epitome of the left hemisphere’s take on 
the world, prioritising not just control but procedures that are explicit 
and that favour abstraction, anonymity, organisability and predict­
ability over what is individual, unique, embodied and flexible. In the 
process justice gets re-interpreted simply as equality. 
JR: It’s just worth adding here that by highlighting these limitations you 
are not just cheerleading for the right hemisphere – both hemispheres 
have important limitations?
IM: I spend a lot of time these days going round the place speaking up 
for the left hemisphere. Woody Allen said that the brain was his second 
favourite organ: one might say that the left hemisphere is my second 
favourite hemisphere. We desperately need both in order to reason 
properly and to use our imagination creatively. If I seem to have a lot 
to say in favour of the right hemisphere in the book, it is because there 
was a balance here that needed to be redressed – and still does. A com­
pletely false view prevailed that the right hemisphere was somehow 
airy-fairy and unreliable and simply added some emotional colour to 
the perceptions of the ‘intelligent’ left hemisphere. But it is in reality 
the right hemisphere that sees more, that is more in touch with reality, 
and is more intellectually sophisticated (incidentally, there is evidence 
that those of highest intelligence, whatever their discipline, may rely 
more on the right hemisphere).12 
The left hemisphere does not understand things, so much as process 
them: it is the right hemisphere that is the basis of understanding. 
This has an impact on the way we live now: because the left hemisphere 
is better than the right hemisphere at manipulating both figures and 
words, but less good than it at understanding their meaning (or in 
fact meaning in any sense), information becomes more important 
for it than knowledge, and knowledge than wisdom, which is implicit, 
paradoxical, and discoverable only by experience. Similarly, skills 
and judgment, embodied, implicit and born of experience, seem 
IM: We have 
become like people 
who have mistaken 
the map for the 
thing itself

Divided brain, divided world
18 
merely unreliable versions of a procedure, and have to be ‘operation­
alised’ by algorithms that a machine could follow. This produces a 
standard product that is guaranteed to rule out any form of excellence. 
Systems become designed to maximise utility, that is to say the 
efficiency that one would require of a machine: quantity, speed, and 
reliability of production. The problem here is that while this may apply 
to making plastic spoons, it does not apply to any human relationship, 
such as that with a teacher, a doctor, a policeman, a clergyman, a 
judge, or a social worker, all of whom will do a worse job by doing 
more, more quickly and to a standard template. Reasonableness, a 
highly sophisticated quality that used to be thought a goal of educa­
tion, as well as a hallmark of civilisation, becomes replaced by mere 
rationality, and there is a resounding failure of common sense. 
Reason and rationality
JR: Perhaps you could say something more about this distinction that 
you highlight in your book, because at first blush it sounds like a minor 
semantic quibble, but the distinction has real practical import, and 
relevance, for instance, for our adherence to what has been called ‘zombie 
economics’13 in which we continue to use ‘rational’ economic models that 
we know do not make sense of ‘reasonable’ economic behaviour in the 
real world.
IM: The difference I am seeking to point up here is one that is rec­
ognised in other languages – certainly in Greek, Latin and German 
– by having two quite distinct terms. Rationality is the mechanical 
following of the rules of logic. Reason is the sort of judgment that 
comes from combining this with the fruits of experience, and leads 
to wisdom. People who are rational, but not reasonable, are impossible 
to live with: they can’t see, for example, that what might be appropri­
ate in a court of law is not appropriate in the bedroom. And it leads us 
to imagine that human minds are like computer programmes designed 
to maximise return on investment: it is amazed to learn that people 
often forgo their own good for the pleasures of community, or actually 
become demotivated by some kinds of reward. 
Rationality does not understand how the uniqueness of things, 
especially of contexts, means that general rules can only ever be highly 
approximate, and are often plain wrong. Uniqueness, the quality of 
a thing, is not understood by the left hemisphere, and so quantity, 
what it can measure, alone counts in its world. Because of its need 
to collapse things to a certainty, false distinctions and dichotomies 
thrive, with an emphasis on ‘either/or’ rather than ‘both/and’.14 Matter 
becomes mere resource to be exploited, and human mental processes 
are divorced from the body which shapes them, with the consequence 
that things become both more abstract, and more reified, more merely 
material, at the same time.
The left hemisphere must conceive of society as an aggregate of 
individuals, seen as equal, but inert, units. The right hemisphere alone 
can understand that individuals are unique and reciprocally bound in 
a network, based on a host of things that could never be rationalised, 
IM: People who 
are rational, but 
not reasonable, are 
impossible to live 
with: they can’t 
see, for example, 
that what might 
be appropriate in 
a court of law is 
not appropriate 
in the bedroom

19
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
creating something much greater than the sum of its parts, a society; 
and that that society has no meaning apart from them, but neither 
do they apart from it. The left hemisphere’s ‘mis-take’ on this tends 
towards a mechanistic idea of society that does not take into account 
emergent properties of a system, or complex reciprocal and fundamen­
tally unpredictable interactions. It leads to a loss of social cohesion, 
and an emphasis on a mass of rules, regulations, and mechanisms of 
accountability which are supposed to substitute for trust. This has 
huge financial and social costs, as well as costs in terms of the further 
erosion of trust and morale. 
The left hemisphere is not, as is sometimes thought, unemotional 
and down to earth. Anger is one of the most clearly lateralised emo­
tions and it lateralises to the left hemisphere. The left hemispheres is 
manifestly not in touch with reality, and when it does not understand 
something it simply makes up a story that makes sense in its own 
terms and tells it with conviction. It prioritises as ‘truth’ the internal 
consistency of a system rather than its correspondence with the world 
outside the window. It tends to deny problems, abjure responsibility 
and take an unreasonably positive view of itself and its capacities. 
All of this can be demonstrated by ingenious experiments, detailed in 
The Master and his Emissary. As a result, according to it we are passive 
victims of the wrongdoing of others, more spectators than actors in 
the world, yet unwarrantedly optimistic about where we are going. In 
relation to that last – and very important – point, when individuals are 
asked to complete self-rating scores with one hemisphere isolated at a 
time, and these are compared with scores completed by their acquaint­
ances, the left hemisphere reveals itself to have an unwarrantedly high 
opinion of itself compared with the right hemisphere. People with 
right hemisphere injuries, thus relying to a greater extent on their left 
hemisphere, have completely unrealistic ideas about their limitations, 
and are harder to help. They will even completely deny an obviously 
paralysed limb, and if ultimately forced to confront it, they will claim 
it belongs to someone else – say, the person in the next bed. 
In a world in which the right hemisphere plays little part you 
would expect art in general to become conceptual, visual art to lack 
depth or perspective (both of which are provided largely by the right 
hemisphere), and music to be reduced to little more than rhythm, since 
in the normal course of things this is all the left hemisphere provides, 
melody and harmony being heavily dependent on the right hemisphere 
in most people. Language would become diffuse, excessive and lacking 
in concrete referents. There would be a deliberate undercutting of 
the sense of awe or wonder, which suggest the existence of something 
beyond what the left hemisphere can conceive: and the left hemisphere 
would be unreasonable and intemperate in rejecting the idea of a 
transcendent or spiritual realm. 
JR: This seems to be the crux of the argument, and I think it’s where 
many people struggle to grasp the urgency of your claim. Your argument 
is about the brain, but your concern is with fairly rapid cultural change, 
and if the brain doesn’t change as such, what, then, drives the change?
IM: The left 
hemisphere 
is not, as is 
sometimes thought, 
unemotional and 
down to earth. 
Anger is one of 
the most clearly 
lateralised emotions 
and it lateralises to 
the left hemisphere

Divided brain, divided world
20 
IM: No, it is not that the brain has changed significantly in terms 
of its structure in the last 500 years or so. It’s more about function: the 
bihemispheric structure constrains our choices, and we tend nowadays 
to construe the world, ourselves and experience using only one part 
of it, and rely on that part more and more. It is like a form of blind­
ness. At other eras of human history and in other cultures people were 
aware of much that it seems we have forgotten (not, as we fondly think, 
‘outgrown’ because of our intelligence or sophistication). We may 
be the least perceptive, most dangerous people that have ever lived, 
and at the same time we have more power, for good or ill. 
The questionable ‘success’ of the left hemisphere
JR: I know you have particular perspectives on danger and perception 
here, but not everybody will agree with the strength of that claim. Stephen 
Pinker’s recent book on the world becoming less violent15 comes to mind, 
as does Matt Ridley’s passionate if somewhat zealous faith in human 
innovation.16 However, while it might be difficult to agree on the nature 
and degree of the problems we face, and the extent to which they are 
caused by the ‘blindness’ you highlight, I am curious to know more about 
your case for how that ‘blindness’ itself comes about.
IM: If I am right that we are living in the West in a culture dominated 
by the take on the world of the left hemisphere, how did this come 
about? Surely, you may say, it’s because it has proved itself more 
successful than any of the alternatives. Well, that all depends on what 
you mean by success. It is, I repeat, a culture that is very good at using 
the world, as if it were just a heap of resource to further our plans. 
But are our plans necessarily wise? 
I think its success can be attributed to several things. First, it makes 
you powerful, and power is very seductive. Second, it offers very simple 
explanations, that are in their own terms convincing, because what 
doesn’t fit the plan is simply declared to be meaningless. For example, 
to declare talk of ‘consciousness’ a delusion or a linguistic error has 
the virtue of simplicity. It may not, however, satisfy the more sceptical 
among us, those who are not in thrall to our left hemisphere’s way of 
thinking. If what does not fit the model is just discarded we will never 
learn, never sophisticate our model of reality, and our understanding 
will come to a standstill where it is. Third, the left hemisphere is 
also, as I suggest in the book, the Berlusconi of the brain – a political 
heavyweight that controls the media. It does the speaking, constructs 
the arguments in its own favour. And finally, since the Industrial 
Revolution, we have constructed a world around us externally that 
is the image of the world the left hemisphere has made internally. 
Appeals to the natural world, to the history of a culture, to art, to 
the body, and to spirituality, routes that used to lead out of the hall 
of mirrors, have been cut off, undercut and ironised out of existence, 
and when we look out of the window – we see more of the world 
we had created in our minds extended in concrete all around us. 
IM: The left 
hemisphere is 
also, as I suggest 
in the book, the 
Berlusconi of the 
brain – a political 
heavyweight 
that controls the 
media. It does the 
speaking, constructs 
the arguments in 
its own favour

21
What is the argument, and why does it matter?
JR: That’s a pretty 
important claim 
for anybody trying 
to act constructively 
in the world. Why 
exactly do things 
that are most 
valuable evade 
measurement?
JR: When you say that, part of me nods along, but I am conscious that 
many others believe the Industrial Revolution, for instance, was a huge 
step forward for mankind, improving the material conditions of life 
by several orders of magnitude for millions.17 I understand that some 
of that depended on colonial exploitation, and couldn’t have happened 
without the abundant use of non-renewable fossil fuels, but still, is there 
not a danger that people will become resistant to your broader argument 
if you call into question human achievements that most assume to be 
steps forward?
IM: I am not doubting what you say about material benefits – although 
the evidence is that people are not in fact happier because of material 
improvements in their standard of living. 
It seems hard for many people to believe this, but once you have the 
basics of food and shelter, the rest does not correlate with an increase 
in happiness. And we should not neglect the fact that there are huge 
costs to industrialisation – for example, the break-up of stable com­
munities, the loss of practical skills, and the disruption of ancient 
ways of life that are closer to the earth, things that we know do give 
life meaning and contribute to happiness and fulfilment. 
The left hemisphere’s purpose is to use the world. It sees everything 
– education, art, morality, the natural world – in terms of a utilitarian 
calculus only. If decisions are to be made about the value of a university 
faculty, of teaching the humanities in schools, or of what research pro­
ject to fund, arguments are mounted, often with considerable ingenuity, 
but in the only permissible language, that of a financial balance sheet. 
If a quarry is planned that will destroy a wilderness, pollute a landscape 
and violate the holy place of a native people, the arguments will be only 
about how much ‘value’ (money) can be extracted, and what the value of 
tourism or the ‘leisure industry’ might otherwise have been to the local 
economy. If it can’t be measured it apparently doesn’t exist. Yet every­
thing most valuable defies measurement in this way. 
JR: That’s a pretty important claim for anybody trying to act construc­
tively in the world. Why exactly do things that are most valuable evade 
measurement?
IM: There’s a famous saying attributed to Einstein: ‘Not everything 
that counts can be counted, and not everything that can be counted 
counts’. But why is this? One obvious factor is that the most valuable 
things are not tangible and are therefore not entities to be numbered. 
But they could be measured in other ways – subjective scoring based 
on self-report, for example, or asking what money or tangible goods 
one would be prepared to give up in exchange. These methods have 
their uses but also have inherent limitations; and they miss the point 
that the worth of truly valuable things changes with context, and may 
not increase as we have more of them. 
Just as we don’t live to eat, but eat to live (however much we may 
enjoy the business of eating), we don’t live to make money but make 
money in order to live better lives. The culture of a people does not 
serve as a decorative addition to life, there to help one relax after one 

Divided brain, divided world
22 
is tired from the real business of amassing wealth, but is what gives 
meaning to life, and wealth is only good in so much as it enables a 
richer culture to flourish. This is not done by immersing ourselves 
more and more in technological gadgetry that removes us from the 
business of embodied existence. 
JR: ‘The business of embodied existence’ is an arresting way of putting 
it. Is alienation from the body part of what left-hemisphere dominance 
brings about?
IM: Yes, and it is more important than it sounds. 
At the literal level, the right hemisphere is more in touch with 
the body: for instance it is the right hemisphere that has the ‘body 
image’, which is much more than just a visual image. It’s more of 
a ‘multimodal’ image, a sense of the body as a coherent, living 
(and lived) whole, that is part of us, not a container in which we 
happen to live. By contrast the left hemisphere sees the body as an 
assemblage of parts, more like a machine. And the right hemisphere 
has richer connections with the body via the limbic system, an ancient 
part of the brain that we share with animals and which integrates 
thought with feelings and information from the body, as well as 
via the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which regulates 
autonomic responses.
But that is not all. In a much more general way it is the right hemi­
sphere that enables us to feel ourselves to be part of the living web of 
experience, not detached observers seeing the world pass on a screen. 
Embodied beings in a concrete, incarnate world. It is the one, as I 
say, for which life is present, not represented – literally ‘re-presented’, 
after the fact.
JR: ‘The business of 
embodied existence’ 
is an arresting way 
of putting it. Is 
alienation from the 
body part of what 
left-hemisphere 
dominance brings 
about?

23
Probing the argument
Probing the argument
JR: By now the reader should have a fair sense of your argument as a 
whole, and it seems a good moment to raise some of the major challenges 
that might be waged against it.
The mereological fallacy: from parts to wholes
JR: The first, beloved by certain philosophers, most famously Bennett 
and Hacker,18 is the so-called ‘mereological fallacy’ which as you know is 
about ascribing the properties of wholes to parts, which would mean that 
the left or right hemisphere doesn’t have any kind of agency in itself, so it 
makes no sense, literally has no meaning, to say: ‘The left hemisphere is or 
does X, Y or Z’. 
IM: Let me just respond to that first. I am the last person to believe that 
wholes can be reduced to their parts – as you know, one of the persis­
tent themes of my book is precisely that this is a fallacy. People like 
Bennett and Hacker are obviously right, in a literalistic sense, that the 
left hemisphere doesn’t ‘believe’, ‘intend’, ‘decide’, ‘like’ or anything 
else of the kind, since these are all predicates of the mind of a person, 
not the brain – of course I agree.   
But I think the point is relatively trivial, and easily resolved, in 
relation to the hemispheres. For example, when I say that ‘the left 
hemisphere likes things that are man-made’, this could be paraphrased 
as ‘a human being relying on his left hemisphere alone likes things that 
are man-made’.  All that happens is that every time you say ‘the left 
hemisphere’ you substitute it with ‘a human-being-reliant-solely-on-
his-left-hemisphere’.  But this is tedious.  Everyone understands the 
point, which is why all neuroscientists invariably commit this fallacy 
(and, yes, it is a fallacy, I agree) to some degree. But we enter the 
realms of unsatisfying pedantry here, in my view. I don’t think there 
is a devastating philosophical issue here waiting to explode in my face. 
I had either to talk about the hemispheres as machines, as scientists 
usually do, which is also to commit a fallacy, or as having concerns, 
interests and values, which suggests they are at least part of a person. 
I prefer the latter, and am unrepentant.
JR: Just to be clear, you are not speaking only of cases where people 
have one hemisphere effectively ‘switched off’, it is rather that even 
when both hemispheres are ‘on’, ie in normal consciousness, that left 
and right hemispheres can still be described as if they were operating 
by themselves?
JR: Just to be clear, 
you are not speaking 
only of cases 
where people have 
one hemisphere 
effectively ‘switched 
off’, it is rather that 
even when both 
hemispheres are 
‘on’, ie in normal 
consciousness, 
that left and right 
hemispheres can still 
be described as if 
they were operating 
by themselves?
IM: Exactly

Divided brain, divided world
24 
IM: Exactly. Of course I am not suggesting that one hemisphere ever 
actually goes blank! If you were to scan anyone’s brain at any time you 
would find activity going on in almost all of it, and certainly in both 
hemispheres. Brain imaging can give the impression that only some tiny 
parts of the brain are active, the bits that ‘light up’ on a scan. But this 
is an artefact of the process, dependent on the threshold the researcher 
chooses. If you set the threshold low enough, you would see activity 
everywhere. No, my point is that we can choose to attend to a problem, 
or a person, or the world at large, according to either of the broad ‘takes’ 
each hemisphere provides, but in practice nowadays in the West we seem 
to use increasingly only one.
Methodological individualism?
JR: The second major challenge concerns the problems involved in deriving 
explanations of social and cultural phenomena from explanations of proper­
ties of individuals. It is not to say that you can’t do this at all, but just that it’s 
not straightforward. There are various ways of giving such explanations well 
or badly, and a huge related literature in the philosophy of social science. The 
social world has emergent properties and perhaps even what Durkheim called 
‘social facts’, that some think have no aetiological relationship to properties 
of individuals, never mind individual brains. I have noticed, especially with 
sociologists, anthropologists and some philosophers, there is a huge reluc­
tance to make precisely those kind of leaps, for instance from individual brain 
to individual mind, to social and cultural phenomenon. I imagine you have 
faced objections of this kind already – are they equally easy to deal with? 
IM: I agree that a culture is not the same as a person, but we undoubt­
edly say of a culture that it has certain values, and a certain outlook 
on the world. That’s not just a coincidence, or just a manner of speak­
ing: I can’t imagine how one could talk of such things without in fact 
making the comparison with a person’s values or outlook on the world. 
We would probably agree that, for example, the Enlightenment was an 
optimistic movement in the history of ideas, which placed a high value 
on individual self-determination and the ultimate ability of man to tame 
and subjugate nature to his will. We could not possibly mean that in any 
radically different sense from the way we would mean it of an individual, 
and more likely than not we would be thinking of actual Enlightenment 
thinkers, of their outlook and pronouncements. 
Moreover we can measure the characteristic ways of thinking, and 
even perceiving, of a culture, just as we can of individuals. This has been 
done repeatedly in the last 20 years, comparing Western subjects with 
Far Eastern subjects. The evidence is that the two populations differ in 
what they see – literally in how they register a visual image, for example 
– and in how they think, how they would set about solving a problem. 
That is a fascinating story in itself and I go into it in more detail in the 
book. But essentially what transpires is that while Far Easterners attend 
to the world in ways typical of both the left and right hemispheres, and 
draw on strategies of either hemisphere more or less equally, we in the 
West are heavily skewed towards the attentive viewpoint and strategies 
of the left hemisphere alone. This is nice confirmatory evidence.
JR: I have noticed, 
especially with 
sociologists, 
anthropologists and 
some philosophers, 
there is a huge 
reluctance to make 
precisely those 
kind of leaps, for 
instance from 
individual brain to 
individual mind, to 
social and cultural 
phenomenon

25
Probing the argument
I might add that social historians and anthropologists of the 
eminence of Robin Briggs, Howard Kushner, Andrew Scull and Ellen 
Dissanayake have found my application of the thesis to cultural history 
illuminating and convincing. 
JR: That makes sense to me, though I imagine there is scope to challenge 
this relationship between individuals and cultures more generally. The 
third overarching objection I have noticed is the one stated by Anthony 
Grayling in his review, namely that we don’t know nearly enough about 
the brain yet to make credible links between the brain and the world. In 
his words: ‘far too much is made to turn on the suppositious and slender 
state of knowledge in brain science.’19
IM: I had not realised till I read those words that Grayling was an expert 
on the state of knowledge in brain science. Be that as it may, one needs 
to distinguish two quite different undertakings. One, which I believe 
to be futile, and this may be what Grayling is getting at, is the attempt 
to reduce human behaviour to brain science: we not only do not have 
enough knowledge for that now, we never will have, because the whole 
project is founded on a philosophical error, a basic category mistake. 
The other is the link between phenomenology and the brain, 
something of which we do have intimate and extensive knowledge. 
The link between the brain and the world does not have to be argued 
for: when bits of the brain go missing so do parts of the experiential 
world. We have known that for thousands of years, and we just happen 
to know a hell of a lot more about it in the last 100 years. Specifically 
we have a huge body of data concerning hemisphere difference: it 
starts on the hospital ward where one sees, as a matter of everyday 
experience, what a difference laterality makes to the effects of a stroke 
on a person’s temperament, personality, attentional skills, ability to 
empathise, verbalise, reason and so on; and it has been expanded by a 
huge volume of painstaking research. In the book I refer to about 2,500 
sources. Perhaps Grayling would like to check them out for himself. 
But I suspect that for the likes of Grayling – to whom, by the way, 
I am indebted for some very generous comments on my work – there 
never could be enough data. He rather disarmingly confesses to being 
‘quite considerably a left-hemispheric creature’. The left hemisphere 
puts together one thing it considers certain with another and another, 
as if one were putting together stones to build a wall. But there are 
some things one can see only by grasping the whole. This is like the 
famous picture of the Dalmatian dog that I include in my book: it 
contains hundreds of splodges of black, but there is no way one can 
say of one, out of context, ‘this is part of the shade of a tree’, and of 
another ‘this is part of a dog’. You have to see everything together to 
make an intelligent assessment of what is going on, and for that par 
excellence you need the right hemisphere to be functioning.
JR: Taking those three answers together, I feel persuaded, but I want 
to put in one last word for the sceptic. Are you saying that the evidence 
points towards these two fundamentally different and sometimes 
antithetical ways of being, or is it truer to say that by making a kind 
IM: As for the 
attempt to reduce 
human behaviour 
to brain science: we 
not only do not have 
enough knowledge 
for that now, we 
never will have, 
because the whole 
project is founded 
on a philosophical 
error, a basic 
category mistake

Divided brain, divided world
26 
of philosophical gestalt shift from ‘the what’ of hemispheric function 
to ‘the how’ that the evidence floods in to place to support it? To the 
extent that it’s the latter, what would falsification look like? 
Could there be a kind of critical test in the Popperian sense, or is your 
point precisely that your thesis is not so much a scientific hypothesis to be 
falsified but more like a philosophical outlook to be challenged at the level 
of its overall coherence and explanatory power? 
Forgive me, that’s several questions, but they are related, and perhaps 
you could help to disentangle them? I am trying to make sense of what 
it would mean to test your profound thesis to destruction. 
Evidence
IM: The first thing to say is that I am acutely aware that I haven’t 
the space here to lay out the detail of what is a complex and many-
stranded argument and to give clear scientific evidence. As a result 
the reader is being asked to take a lot on trust. If I were that reader 
I wouldn’t stop there – I’d want chapter and verse. For that one 
would need to go to the book itself. It took 20 years to write, argues 
its case in detail, and, as I say, cites a mass of evidence. The complete 
bibliography is available in the hardback edition and on line, so it’s 
clear what I am relying on. I have tried to be true to the balance of 
evidence, and never relied on evidence where I knew that the balance 
was against it. For clarity’s sake my editor insisted, rightly I believe, 
that discussions on the assessment of conflicting evidence should go 
into footnotes, so the footnotes are extensive and important, but my 
reasoning has been transparent. Also my practice has been as much as 
possible to cite numerous different strands of evidence, from different 
methodologies, for any point I am making – eg, from brain lesion 
studies, commissurotomy (‘split-brain’) patients, hemisphere isolation 
experiments and so on, not just from, say, neuroimaging. 
As to how the evidence works, it could be made to follow either 
pattern you suggest. After all, if you think about it, I could have laid 
it out like this:
Premise
We know that birds and animals attend to the world in 
different ways with either hemisphere.
Testable hypothesis
‘Humans do so too’.
Evidence
Overwhelmingly that they do.
Premise
Such differences in attention must have certain 
predictable consequences for the nature of the world 
perceived by that hemisphere.
Testable hypothesis
‘The left hemisphere will see the world as fragmented, 
isolated entities, the right hemisphere as interconnected 
and whole’.
Evidence
Overwhelmingly that this is the case.
And so on, from which an entirely coherent and consistent pattern 
emerges. 
IM: The link 
between the brain 
and the world does 
not have to be 
argued for: when 
bits of the brain go 
missing so do parts 
of the experiential 
world

27
Probing the argument
JR: I have done what I can for now to raise doubts about your argument, 
and to balance that, could you please tell me just a bit about the reaction 
from scientific colleagues and philosophers, including the events where 
your ideas have been tested? If your answers to the questions above did not 
fully satisfy, are there testimonies of trusted experts that may help readers 
to give you the benefit of the doubt?
IM: Well, you will see from my website20 that many of those best 
placed to assess the validity of the hypothesis – world-leading 
neuroscientists such as VS Ramachandran, Jaak Panksepp, and 
Colwyn Trevarthen, just to name a few who actually know the brain 
lateralisation literature in detail (Trevarthen even worked with Roger 
Sperry at CalTech on the first split-brain patients) – are convinced 
of its importance, as are a host of neurologists, neuropsychologists 
and psychiatrists. As I hoped, philosophers such as Mary Midgley, 
Rupert Read, Timothy Chappell, Arran Gare and the Cartesian 
scholar John Cottingham, among others, have engaged positively 
with my ideas, and I gave a paper a few weeks ago at a philosophy 
conference in Oxford organised by Roger Scruton and Ray Tallis 
where I was able to debate some of the points you have raised here. 
I addressed a conference of ordained scientists at Lambeth organised 
by Archbishop Rowan Williams that explored my ideas, and they 
have been well received by physicists in particular. 
Political challenges
JR: In addition to what might best be called philosophical challenges 
above, another challenge is that your argument could be seen not so much 
as an argument about the brain hemispheres, or even about two ways of 
being, but about competing sets of values, with the corollary that your 
personal view is that one set is to be preferred. How would you respond 
to the two parts of that claim?
IM: It obviously is about two competing sets of values – those 
enshrined in two different perspectives on the world subtended by 
the two brain hemispheres. That doesn’t seem to me to undermine the 
argument that they happen to be embodied in the cerebral hemispheres 
– that’s not my choice, it’s what the evidence suggests.
As to the second point, I can’t deny that I prefer the values of the 
right hemisphere (though needing to pay due respect to those of the 
left hemisphere). But it’s not just a matter of my opinion. What the 
brain shows – what it adds to the argument – is that, indisputably, 
one view of the world sees more, and is truer to what is. That can 
be demonstrated, proved to be the case. That it also happens to be 
the view of the hemisphere which is more capable of empathy, more in 
favour of consensuality and co-operation, just happens to be a bonus. 
 The fact that it is not just neuroscientists, neurologists, 
psychiatrists and psychologists, but philosophers, theologians, 
cultural historians and critics, artists and composers who have been 
struck by the hypothesis suggests to me that it has intuitive validity. 
Many of the distinctions that emerge – between rationalism and 
IM: It obviously 
is about two 
competing sets 
of values – those 
enshrined in 
two different 
perspectives on the 
world subtended 
by the two brain 
hemispheres

Divided brain, divided world
28 
reasonableness, between denotative and connotative language, 
between the explicit and the implicit, between information and 
wisdom, between the abstract and the embodied, the general and 
the unique, the parts and the whole – strike people immediately as 
having importance. 
JR: I agree, but if you’ll bear with me, how confident are you that you 
are right at every level of your argument? For instance I saw a review in 
The Economist 21 where they pounced on your admission near the end of 
the book that your argument from neuroscience was perhaps not essential 
to the broader argument about cultural change. 
IM: At the end of the book I say words to the effect that, though it 
would surprise me if the hemispheres were not literally related to 
these two ways of looking at the world, that would not ultimately 
matter, because they would still constitute a powerful metaphor.This 
has caused confusion amongst those who don’t value the tentative and 
uncertain, don’t see that the world is not black and white, ‘either/or’, 
and think of metaphor as a kind of untruth. So this was taken as an 
admission that I didn’t believe my own argument. But that’s not it 
at all. All I meant to suggest was that ultimately the identification 
of the brain correlates of this dichotomy are not the point – in other 
words, I am not a reductionist, so it is the human experience that 
ultimately counts.
However it would be quite extraordinary if the differences I refer 
to, the same distinctions that artists and philosophers have for cen­
turies pointed to as irresoluble conflicts in the human mind or spirit, 
were not associated with the division between the hemispheres, given 
that the evidence from brain science, that that is precisely what they 
are, is so extensive, coherent and compelling. 
JR: I take the point, but I know so many neurophobes that I wonder if 
people feel that you might be using the brain to smuggle in a politically 
loaded worldview. In my experience people resist any kind of neural 
explanation, no matter how sophisticated, because they think it is an 
attempt to give epistemic warrant for political and ethical views, even 
if they are normally more about endorsing simplistic accounts of ‘the 
survival of the fittest’ or our lack of free will. In this case you are not 
presenting that kind of world view, but is there still a sense in which your 
argument is political?
IM: I have sympathy with the general point you are making, and I 
do think that the brain can sometimes be used as a clincher for an 
argument where it has no warrant to clinch anything. Brain science, 
and science in general, has been used as a way of forcing a view of 
ourselves on us which is absolutely unsustainable, as malignant 
pieces of machinery enslaved by our genes. But the point is that that 
is just bad science. There is simply nowhere in the brain that could 
possibly tell us we are machines, or malignant, or lacking in free will. 
That is not the kind of thing that study of the brain could ever do. 
And that is the difference. Because it is in principle a verifiable matter 
IM: There is simply 
nowhere in the 
brain that could 
possibly tell us we 
are machines … And 
that is the difference. 
Because it is in 
principle a verifiable 
matter whether the 
brain hemispheres 
do or do not have 
the characteristics 
I describe

29
Probing the argument
whether the brain hemispheres do or do not have the characteristics 
I describe. Either the attentional differences between the hemispheres 
are what we find, or they are not. That the attentional differences 
result in different views of the world and difference priorities is both 
inevitable a priori, and demonstrably the case. It is not a matter of 
interpretation, as it would be to say that knowledge of our brains 
shows we are Machiavellian machines. 
What you do with that politically is up to you. By inclination, 
I am not much interested in politics. But if my hypothesis is right, 
it will have relevance to politics, as to everything human, since 
it touches the core of what it is to be a human being, neither 
Machiavellian nor Erasmian, but both; neither selfish nor selfless, 
but both; neither entirely free nor entirely ensnared by genes. Capable 
of at least two essentially incompatible world views at once.
JR: Granted, but if we strip away the content and just feel for a moment 
the form of the argument, I imagine there are some who think it is 
just too neat somehow – that there are these two ways of looking at 
things, these two fundamentally different ways of being. I can imagine 
people thinking it doesn’t sound right, if only because surely there are 
more than two fundamental ways of being. Is that why you need the 
hemispheres as the reference point, to ground the argument and show 
the fundamental divide?
IM: It has been said that the world is divided into two types of people, 
those who divide the world into two types of people, and those who 
don’t. I’m with the second group. But while there are some dichotomies 
that have no basis (like ‘good’ and ‘bad’ drivers, where there is only a 
continuum), there are some that it would be irrational to pretend don’t 
exist (as between Hinduism and Islam, or processes of analysis and 
synthesis).  It’s not to say they can’t complement each other and work 
together in all manner of ways and degrees: but they just are different. 
By combining the zeros and ones of a binary code one can produce 
almost anything, but the code still has that binary structure.
The division of the cerebral hemispheres falls into this last category, 
a ‘dichotomy’ which it would be profoundly irrational to ignore just 
because we don’t like dichotomies. Evolution has taken care to preserve, 
and even to intensify, the division of the brain, this organ whose whole 
purpose is to connect.  So let’s not say we are doing the dichotomising 
when we take a look at why that should be. Every intelligent person 
should want to know why this is the case.  As I have often said, the 
distinction is not absolute, there is overlap, and, above all, we need 
both hemispheres, not just one.  At the end of the day, though, there 
are undoubtedly differences, and in my view they desperately need 
to be understood.  The last thing we should do is ignore them simply 
because this dichotomy doesn’t fit the view of the world we already 
happen to have.
JR: Right, so in a sense you seem to be saying: let’s not allow the fear of being 
seen to be ‘divisive’ blind us to perhaps the most important division of all?
IM: It has been said 
that the world is 
divided into two 
types of people, 
those who divide the 
world into two types 
of people, and those 
who don’t. I’m with 
the second group

Divided brain, divided world
30 
IM: Precisely.
JR: In any case, it’s not as if people don’t like such divisions at all. 
To begin to open up to practical applications, I wonder if you could say 
how your work connects with some recent work that is also scientifically 
grounded, but has a more obvious practical edge. For instance, how do 
the hemispheric divisions connect with Daniel Kahneman’s distinction 
between automatic and controlled processes, or Thinking Fast and Slow? 
I also know you liked Jonathan Haidt’s book, The Righteous Mind, where 
he discusses the evolutionary foundations of moral psychology, but also 
highlights how we use reason (rationality?) to justify our moral intuitions, 
and are often blind to the moral intuitions of others? 
IM: Kahneman’s book goes over familiar ground – some of it familiar, 
to be fair, because of some nice research of his own over the years. 
But it doesn’t really impinge on my thesis at all. If you like, he is 
cutting the cake horizontally, and I am cutting it vertically. He is 
contrasting instinctive, ‘quick and dirty’ reactions, with higher, slower 
and more deliberative cogitation. This is not a distinction between 
right and left: both hemispheres have both. It certainly isn’t the case, 
above all, that the right hemisphere tends to be the ‘quick and dirty’ 
one – precisely the opposite. 
As I say in The Divided Brain and the Search for Meaning: Why 
Are We So Unhappy? 22 a short essay published as an e-book, it turns 
out that it is the left hemisphere that tends to jump to conclusions, 
while the right hemisphere is, as Ramachandran says, the devil’s 
advocate, asking the awkward questions. Equally the left hemisphere’s 
view is the one that is more rough and ready, despite its obsession with 
precision. Through that very obsession, it is obliged to represent the 
world as static and made up of fixed and distinct pieces – which we 
know it isn’t. It is less truthful, but provides a quick and dirty approxi­
mation of the world that is useful. 
What is important to understand here is that, contrary to the 
received view, the intuitive and holistic has its representation, not just 
as instincts at the lowest level of the brain, but in complex thinking 
at the highest, in the right frontal cortex.
I very much admire Haidt’s book. What I find exciting about it is 
that he demonstrates precisely how loaded so much of the thinking 
we take to be objective is, and how narrow we can be when we think 
we are being open-minded – how restricted the basis of our moral 
judgments has become. And in fact what he shows, though he had not 
read my book when he wrote it, and therefore does not use the terms, 
is exactly the slide into the left hemisphere’s way of thinking that I 
suggest has taken place.
JR: Right, so in a 
sense you seem to 
be saying: let’s not 
allow the fear of 
being seen to be 
‘divisive’ blind us 
to perhaps the most 
important division 
of all?
IM: Precisely

31
Exploring practical and policy implications
Exploring practical and 
policy implications
JR: Many people who grasp the essence of your argument, and who have 
contented themselves with your answers to the challenges above, will no 
doubt be eager to understand what follows in terms of actions, in terms 
of the ‘So what?’, or ‘That’s fascinating and inspiring, but what do we do 
now?’ However, thus far you have been fairly reticent about being explicit 
or prescriptive on this matter. Why is that?
IM: It probably sounds like a cop out, but I do believe that prescrip­
tions are one of the reasons we are so messed up nowadays. We always 
have to have a plan, an algorithm, a set of bullet points, and that 
immediately narrows things down, so we imagine that we just need to 
put this plan into action. It discounts the creative, the spontaneous, the 
improvised, the unexpected, the fruits of the imagination of those who 
take the ‘plan’ forward. What I can see now is limited; what others may 
see is limitless. Our plans are always at too local, too detailed a level. 
For example, if you want to educate people, you don’t give them a lot 
of procedures to carry out or just information to spew. You inculcate 
habits of mind: curiosity, a habit of sceptical questioning, enthusiasm, 
creativity, patience, self-discipline – the rest comes naturally. Equally 
you can’t go into a country and set up the structures of democracy. 
That is back to front, and they will inevitably fail. What is needed is 
a habit of mind that sees the value in democratic institutions; in time 
they will then emerge naturally, and flourish. 
JR: Tony Blair often says that democracy is a way of thinking not just 
a way of voting …
IM: I am more interested in indicating the right questions than 
giving the right answers. For me to give a list of bullet points – ‘Eight 
Things You Should Do to Save the Planet’ – would be to enact the 
left hemisphere’s agenda. I am a physician and a psychiatrist, and 
in my experience getting the diagnosis as accurate as possible is 
primary. I also know that raising consciousness of what we are doing 
wrong is the first step on the path to recovery, and that it is often a 
matter of what not to do, rather than what to do, that opens up the 
field of possibility for change. There is much we should stop doing, 
in other words, and allow things that are currently crushed almost 
out of existence – so much so that we no longer even know what they 
are – to flourish.
IM: Raising 
consciousness of 
what we are doing 
wrong is the first 
step on the path to 
recovery, and that 
it is often a matter 
of what not to do, 
rather than what to 
do, that opens up the 
field of possibility 
for change

Divided brain, divided world
32 
The answer is in the hearing and the understanding 
of the answer …
JR: I am sure many would sympathise with this approach, and also 
appreciate the difficult position you are in. Those who are impressed 
by your intellectual authority and persuaded by the argument in the 
book will understand that you are not a policymaker or a legislator, 
and I can feel the strain in pushing too far for practical or policy 
recommendations. Nonetheless, when you say prescriptions are part 
of the problem, I would add that ‘waiting for the real experts’ might 
be another. We are never going to have an uncontested epistemic war­
rant for any course of action, and to some extent I feel we will always 
have to make our best guess and get on with it. In this respect, while 
you have opened people’s eyes to a way of looking at the world’s prob­
lems, I suspect you nonetheless see the resulting vision more clearly 
than most others. Can you not at least advise us on how we should 
start looking for practical applications? 
IM: I can, but the problem is that if my response is not actually 
couched in terms of the brain, it’s bound to look exactly like an 
answer that anyone else could have given.  The difference is not in 
the answer itself, but in the hearing or understanding of the answer, 
which can only come from reading the book and seeing why it 
is important to look at the world this way.  Which is why I keep 
emphasising that it is a complete change of heart or mind in the 
hearer, not a policy of bullet-point type, that is needed.  In other 
words, the focus is wrong if people expect me to come up with 
‘solutions’ that look quite different from anything they have ever 
heard before (‘everyone should live on unripe pears and stand on 
their heads for half an hour before bed’ – well, I imagine some guru 
somewhere has in fact recommended it already, since truth is stranger 
than fiction).  They’re not going to be.  It’s just that, if you read my 
book, you’d see why certain responses are so much more compelling 
than others.
The conundrum is this. To my delight, but nonetheless to my 
astonishment, people from all over the world and all walks of life 
write to me saying that this book has changed their lives.  If that is 
right, it must have practical consequences.  But the consequences 
won’t be of the kind that have never been thought of before!  It’s just 
that the compelling reason for adopting them wasn’t there before, in 
the same way, or to the same degree.
JR: You seem to be saying that the hemispheric perspective serves not 
so much as an axiom in a deductive argument about how we should live, 
but more like a major resource in a broader inductive argument how we 
should act, given the fullest possible understanding of ourselves? 
IM: That is true, though it is a slightly separate point from the one I 
am making about the nature of the consequences. I certainly believe 
we will never solve the major global problems we face by tinkering 
with the current model. My hope is that a better understanding of 
JR: When you say 
prescriptions are 
part of the problem, 
I would add that 
‘waiting for the 
real experts’ might 
be another. We are 
never going to have 
an uncontested 
epistemic warrant 
for any course of 
action, and to some 
extent I feel we will 
always have to make 
our best guess and 
get on with it

33
Exploring practical and policy implications
the limitations of the mechanistic model offered to us by our left 
hemispheres will lead us to think differently about our situation in 
ways that I cannot now envisage, but which are available to all of us 
if we look for them.
JR: By ‘the current model’ do you mean ‘capitalism’, or is it more nuanced 
or perhaps more fundamental than that? 
IM: Capitalism is an aspect of it, and, to paraphrase Churchill, I sup­
pose one might think of capitalism as the worst possible system – apart 
from all the others. 
JR: Ed Miliband just said something similar,23 and more generally it feels 
like we are in a time where it we are generally accepting that we are stuck 
with capitalism and trying to make the best of it … 
IM: Certainly a socialist state is not what I am advocating, and there 
are different types of capitalism. Of these the most malignant is where 
money breeds money, a triumph of virtuality, in which what is actually 
happening is that society is rewarding people extravagantly for indulging 
in their tendency to gamble, and what gets lost in the virtual calculus is 
that ultimately others must pay for this. As in pyramid selling, there is 
an illusion that ‘all will win prizes’: when the music stops, as it eventu­
ally must, some have lost and some have gained. Wealth is not really ever 
created, except by non-virtual labour in the real world. It has just been 
redistributed towards those who are busy working the system. 
But I mean something much broader than this, a complete shift 
of perspective. 
Economy and government are not ends in themselves
IM: The point about the reference to the story of the Master and his 
emissary is that the emissary, however expert at what he does, serves 
the Master, and cannot himself become the Master. We first need to 
think why we have a society, with a government and a market, at all. 
We have a society not to serve the government and the market; govern­
ment and the market are no more than highly necessary evils. They 
enable the true business of a society to continue without its foundering 
for lack of life’s essentials: enough to eat and drink, adequate shelter 
from the elements, and as little antisocial behaviour as possible. Free-
marketeers agree that government is an evil, true, but only because 
they have an inflated idea of what the market can and should achieve: 
socialists think the market an evil because they have an inflated idea 
of what government can and should achieve. But neither can provide 
a better future. What we need to see with 20/20 clarity is that neither 
of these is any use in itself. Our society is worthless unless it serves 
something higher than itself, higher than the government and the 
market – therefore the answer can never be better government or a less 
trammelled economy in themselves. These are only means to an end.
IM: Freemarketeers 
agree that government 
is an evil, true, but 
only because they 
have an inflated 
idea of what the 
market can and 
should achieve: 
socialists think 
the market an evil 
because they have 
an inflated idea of 
what government can 
and should achieve

Divided brain, divided world
34 
The meaning of life comes from what can’t be argued for 
JR: In that case, at the risk of asking the perennial question, what is it 
that you think actually gives meaning to our existence? 
IM: First let me say that there are some things that can be understood 
only by experience, not by logical persuasion – and if you do not 
have the experience you will never understand. Take something as 
fundamental as sex. If you had to explain to a Martian what this 
involved, there is no way he would be encouraged to try. The same is 
true of meditation: ‘sit still in a rather unnatural position and let your 
mind go blank for as long as you can manage’. Or going for a walk 
in the mountains: ‘get up and go out into the cold, expect to get wet, 
expend energy that you do not need to expend, take a chance on falling 
and breaking something, or ending up dead’ – no-one would go. And 
the same could be done for music, art, and rituals and ceremonies of 
all kinds (whether social, religious, academic or state) – all of them 
ridiculous and impenetrable unless you go to meet them on their own 
terms. If that is what you do, however, then they may begin to disclose 
a little of what it is they have to offer. The same could be said for 
working with others, working to help others – and all forms of work, 
in fact, that are not directed solely at significant monetary reward. And 
just think what having children looks like, when objectively described. 
Yet for many people their family is what gives life most of its mean­
ing. It is these sort of things – the experience of love, of the spiritual 
realm, of a sense of closeness to nature, of music, art and the rituals 
and ceremonies that form an essential part of our sense of ourselves 
individually and as a society, that bring meaning in their wake. And 
there is barely one of these that is not under attack in some form as 
a result of the way we live now. 
JR: I quite often feel that we are, as you suggest we would be if your thesis 
is right, ‘ambling towards the abyss’, but I also know that many think 
such a view as needlessly pessimistic. Leaving existential concerns to one 
side, at a very practical level, we are clearly living in a period with lots 
of what are sometimes called ‘wicked problems’ – multifaceted and not 
lending themselves to simple solutions – for instance: adult social care, 
terrorism, deep global recession, nuclear proliferation, climate change.24 
For now, I want to focus on a few that we can discuss together because 
they may be related: climate change, mental health and education, and see 
if other important issues arise along the way. 
Climate change
JR: Firstly, on climate change. I imagine your thesis has things to say not 
merely about environmental degradation, but also about denial?
IM: About denial and short-sightedness. Again it is to do with a habit 
of mind. I mentioned above that the left hemisphere is overconfi­
dent – tends to underestimate its limitations and dismiss its errors. 
Hence the climate change deniers, and those who serenely forecast 
IM: The left 
hemisphere is 
overconfident 
– tends to 
underestimate its 
limitations and 
dismiss its errors. 
Hence the climate 
change deniers, and 
those who serenely 
forecast that 
technology will find 
a way of repairing 
what it has undone

35
Exploring practical and policy implications
that technology will find a way of repairing what it has undone. 
It might, but since we have no idea now what form that will take, it 
looks like blind faith. Remember that the left hemisphere’s agenda is 
grasping, manipulating and getting hold of resources: grain for food, 
twigs for shelter, prey. It has a narrow focus, because that is what is 
required to grasp and manipulate effectively. It also does not see what 
else is there: it comes already with its preconceived idea of what it 
wants and simply focuses on that. This is not to denigrate its useful­
ness; we would not have a civilisation without it. But it is not nearly 
enough on its own, and without the bigger picture, the guiding 
vigilance for the unexpected, which the right hemisphere provides, 
it could also lose us a civilisation. 
Climate change is the consequence of rapacity and greed for 
‘resources’ (as an aside, it is revealing that what used to be called 
‘Personnel’ – something to do with persons – is now called ‘Human 
Resources’ – a bunch of stuff to be exploited). It betokens a disregard 
for the natural world as a living organism, with beauty and vitality of 
its own – instead it has become a mechanical heap of potential ‘goods’ 
(it’s also revealing that ‘goods’ are not actually ‘good’ except in respect 
of their being consumable). It is bound up with our ‘busy-ness’ – being 
forever on the move, go-getting, rather than tending, and working with 
the grain of, nature where we are. We are moving too fast, without a 
clear idea of where we are headed. And climate change comes of not 
seeing the consequences of individual actions, both as they spread 
outwards into the surrounding world, and spread forward in time: the 
context is stripped away, we think of individual acts, here and now, not 
of the bigger picture. This leads to thinking of the kind: ‘What I do is 
no worse than what x or y do – so it is all right’. Or the argument that 
developing countries should be allowed, out of a misplaced sense of 
equality, to pollute as heavily as we did in the bad old days. Madness!
JR: Funny to see that cast as madness, because in this light it certainly 
looks mad, but for an economist or political negotiator that sort of argu­
ment feels more like a fair compromise!
IM: Let me back-track historically a little. With the Enlightenment 
came a hardening up of the left-hemisphere point of view. Many of 
the aims of the Enlightenment were, of course, laudable, and much 
of what it brought we have to be thankful for. After all, the left hemi­
sphere, the emissary of the story from which my book takes its title, 
is,  at its best, the right hemisphere’s – the Master’s – faithful servant. 
But its problems are those of hubris: believing itself to be the Master, 
believing that it understands and can control everything, whereas 
in fact it is ignorant of what the right hemisphere knows. Thus the 
problem of the Enlightenment was its faith that, as long as we continue 
to think purely rationally, and prioritise utility, we can understand, 
and thereby come to control, everything.
With the rise of capitalism and the coming of the Industrial 
Revolution (both children of the Enlightenment), one sees a further 
cementing – literally – of the left hemisphere’s vision. The thinking 
they both involved is instrumental and competitive and they promote 
IM: Climate 
change is the 
consequence of 
rapacity and greed 
for ‘resources’ … It 
betokens a disregard 
for the natural 
world as a living 
organism, with 
beauty and vitality 
of its own – instead 
it has become 
a mechanical 
heap of potential 
‘goods’ …  It is 
bound up with 
our ‘busy-ness’ 

Divided brain, divided world
36 
a more atomistic and competitive model of society, a more detached 
and manipulative stance in relation to one another and the world at 
large, which comes to be seen as just a heap of resources.25 
Common cause?
JR: The ‘Common Cause’ Report,26 which you may be familiar with, 
was endorsed by various major NGOs, and makes a similar claim, that 
we may win a few battles – for instance by improving energy efficiency 
as part of ‘green growth’- but lose sight of the wider ‘war’, in this instance 
reinforcing extrinsic and materialist values. When you mention that 
tinkering with the current model is not enough, is your point that reform 
is the enemy of revolution’ in the sense that minor adjustments and 
improvement just strengthen the root of the problem? 
IM: We must step back to see the bigger picture. Living headlong we 
skim over the surface of the world rather than allowing ourselves to 
enter into its depth. At the same time, as it might seem paradoxically, 
our view is too ‘close up’: always in a hurry, we are narrowly focussed 
on a few salient things and miss the broader picture. We need to find 
a more natural, a slower, more meditative, tempo. That way too we 
see more. 
So although we can think of temporary fixes, the problem is not 
the sort that can be cured by a tweaking of what we are already up to. 
It demands a change of mind, a change of heart. We need to think at 
a much bigger and broader level, and ask the difficult questions. 
JR: No doubt these big-picture shifts are fundamentally important, but 
for every injunction you indicate above – ‘step back to see the big picture’; 
‘find a more meditative tempo’, ‘ask the difficult questions’ – part of me 
agrees completely, but part of me wants to say: ‘How? What would that 
look like? Who would do it? Who would try to stop it? What would we 
do then?’ 
It feels almost churlish to feel this way, but I suspect I am not alone in 
thinking that the overall shift of perspective you argue for will only look 
feasible if such questions are taken into account. Perhaps that is asking 
too much of both the argument, and you as its main proponent, but if 
we stick to the question of ‘what to do’ about climate change, can you 
see how we might adapt to the challenge of making this overall shift? 
How could it begin to transpire, and might it even already be happening? 
IM: The questions you ask are the right ones, though whether one 
person could or should ever attempt to answer them all, I am not sure. 
I can give some idea of what it might look like, and I will try to do so 
in what follows. As to who must do it, we must all, from the ground up 
be involved with and committed to resolving these problems – not just 
a government on its own, and not just isolated groups of individuals 
without government support. The vested interests that will be against 
it are commercial, and we cannot do much against them as long as we 
carry on being brainwashed by the rhetoric of consumerism. Once 
again, the solution involves not just a few measures of the kind that 
JR: The ‘Common 
Cause’ Report  was 
endorsed by various 
major NGOs and 
makes a similar 
claim, that we may 
win a few battles 
– for instance by 
improving energy 
efficiency as part of 
‘green growth’- but 
lose sight of the 
wider ‘war’, in this 
instance reinforcing 
extrinsic and 
materialist values

37
Exploring practical and policy implications
we are already taking, only stronger: it involves a complete re-think 
of what our lives are about. 
For example, one of the worst aspects of modern life is the divorce 
between work and the community where one lives, the image of which 
is the packed commuter train. This way of living destroys communi­
ties, takes a huge toll on individual health and happiness, wastes 
energy on a massive scale and pollutes the environment. One might 
be tempted to think that one part of the solution to that would be the 
internet, which allows people to work from home. And that is surely 
an advantage we could build on – but only if there is a change of heart 
about what work itself is. Because if it carries on being, as it is for so 
many people, virtual and mechanical, you end up with a lot of people 
even more isolated than they were when they had to go into an office, 
and no real community reviving around them. Work needs to be more 
actual, hands-on, involving the learning and exercise of real skill, and 
involved with the lives of those with whom one lives. For professionals, 
such as doctors, teachers and solicitors, it always has been to a large 
extent, and for too many others it used to be, but no longer is.
JR: A similar claim is made by Matthew Crawford in ‘The Case for 
Working with your Hands’.27 I suspect we are becoming increasingly 
alienated from the world around us. But again I wonder whether the 
hemispheric perspective really adds to your argument?
IM: The alienation you speak of is ultimately not because of some­
thing we have done, such as build large cities, but because of an 
attitude of mind that lies even deeper. It is the one that makes virtual 
work more important – better paid and of higher status – than the 
practical job that is done with one’s hands in the real world. That is the 
left hemisphere’s point of view. 
Working too hard
JR: And it’s not just the kind of work we do, but the amount of it too? 
(And by ‘we’ here I mean people in post-industrial, developed societies.) 
IM: We work too hard. We are hooked by the greedy machines of 
capitalism. I have seen the toll this takes among my patients. Many 
of us lack employment altogether, but those who are lucky enough 
to be employed have to work ever harder, faster and longer – for what? 
The logic of the left hemisphere is that if something is good, more 
of it must be better. It is also concerned with amassing goods for use, 
and expert at seeing us as disconnected from the world we are engaged 
in exploiting. 
Now we find that the retirement age is being put back. The working 
day is extended. Though the average labourer’s hours have decreased, 
most of the rest of us work longer than people in similar jobs used 
to do forty or fifty years ago. Moreover, at that time a single person’s 
wages were enough for a family to live on: now two people often strug­
gle to meet their needs working longer hours. The machinery of the 
market used the legitimate arguments for women’s equality to its own 
IM: The alienation 
you speak of 
is ultimately 
not because of 
something we 
have done, such as 
build large cities, 
but because of an 
attitude of mind 
that lies even deeper

Divided brain, divided world
38 
ends. It was a way to get twice as many people into the workforce. 
But now we are no better off, just both parents in a family now have 
to work, whether they want to or not. It is a case of what I call the 
football match paradox. One person stands up to get a better view, 
the person behind stands up to see beyond his neighbour, and soon 
everyone is standing – but the view is no better than when everyone 
was able to sit down. It’s just that, like it or not, no-one can now sit 
down any more. 
Resolving it is like dealing with the Prisoner’s Dilemma – we 
can only achieve our goals by thinking consensually rather than 
atomistically. Actually I know of an amusing small example where 
such thinking seems to have worked. At an open air concert in Hyde 
Park, attended by the Royal Family, it poured with rain. Everyone put 
up umbrellas, and no–one could see anything. The Prince of Wales 
was sitting at the front, and he and his party, I am told, put down 
their umbrellas so that those behind could see better. One by one the 
umbrellas went down, and once more all could see what they had 
come to see. Such connected, altruistic thinking is foreign to the left 
hemisphere’s calculus of benefit. 
JR: The New Economics Foundation has been arguing for some time for 
a shorter working week, even as little as 21 hours per person.28 The claim 
is that this will be good for wellbeing, balance out employment oppor­
tunities and rapidly reduce carbon emissions, without diminishing living 
standards. I am guessing that this kind of perspective – though the devil is 
of course in the detail of the macroeconomic models – is the sort of thing 
you might mean by a more fundamental shift in our attitude?
IM: Well, it’s an example of a step in the right direction. I was very 
struck by the experience of going to stay with a former teacher of mine 
who went to live on a self-sufficient small holding in Wales in the 1970s. 
He and his family bred or grew all their own food. I expected to find the 
days packed with labour, and was astonished at how much leisure time 
there was. He explained that there were a couple of times in the year 
when they were very busy – lambing and harvest – but even those were 
fun because the local farmers all mucked in and helped one another. 
Otherwise there was a great deal of leisure time. A Langland scholar, he 
pointed out that Langland twitted the peasants of his day for their habits 
of lying around drinking and refusing all but bread made with the finest 
flour. He helped me see that it was only when, in the eighteenth century 
(the age of ‘Enlightenment’ and the rise of capitalism), people started 
to realise that they could grow far more than they needed, sell it and get 
rich, that the farm labourers’ lives became intolerably hard. Once more 
the problem of the narrow left hemisphere ‘logic’ that seeks power but 
impoverishes a community. Also – a vital point – the left hemisphere 
view is narrow not only in space, but in time. It is effectively the short 
term view – what’s good for me here and now, not what’s good for us 
all in the longer run. Now we have no leisure to enjoy what we earn. 
A civilisation depends on leisure. But that is not just absence of work. 
It involves something so hard that many people would rather fill their 
lives with ‘busy-ness’: learning to be still. In the absence of this, leisure is 
JR: The New 
Economics 
Foundation has 
been arguing for 
some time for 
a shorter working 
week, even as little 
as 21 hours … this 
will be good for 
wellbeing, balance 
out employment 
opportunities and 
rapidly reduce 
carbon emissions, 
without diminishing 
living standards. 
I am guessing 
that this kind of 
perspective – though 
the devil is of course 
in the detail of the 
macroeconomic 
models – is the sort 
of thing you might 
mean by a more 
fundamental shift 
in our attitude?

39
Exploring practical and policy implications
just an unwanted space where boredom must be driven out by constant 
stimulation of one kind or another. Leisure is pointless without knowing 
what to do with it – otherwise it just gets filled up with ‘noise’. In any 
system that is full of noise the true message will be lost. As Josef Pieper 
observed over half a century ago in Leisure, the Basis of Culture, true 
idleness is being unnecessarily busy, not opening oneself to that stillness 
out of which all spiritual and artistic, as well as scholarly, achievements, 
as well as the sense of oneness with nature, must come. 
JR: When you say ‘learn to be still’, I think of the famous Pascal quota­
tion – that all our miseries stem from not being able to sit quietly alone 
in a room – but you seem to mean something else here – that we should 
– what – buy less, be less ‘driven to distraction’, meditate more? 
IM: Obviously stillness is particularly hard to achieve if we are con­
stantly uneasy, craving something more, something new, as advertising 
and the media constantly exhort us to do, at the beck and call of our 
phones, our computers, busy getting money and getting goods – never 
getting to know ourselves, who we really are. This was the ultimate 
goal of human life that was carved over the entrance to the Oracle 
at Delphi: ‘Know thyself’. In terms of the hemispheres, it is the left 
hemisphere that is acquisitive, competitive, distractible, and ultimately 
unable to perceive the meaning of life, or of ourselves. We are over-
busy, busy a lot of the time doing – ultimately – nothing that counts 
‘all day long’. 
JR: That makes good sense to me, and is a tangible example of why the 
hemispheric perspective might be relevant, in this case for our arguably 
perverse attitude to work. From the left-hemispheric perspective – the 
one you believe is increasingly dominant – work becomes something 
we use to acquire things and to gain various forms of power. While these 
goals might be legitimate ones for working people they should be in the 
service of something other than the goals themselves. The balancing per­
spective that asks: ‘Are the things that I am gaining important? What does 
my contribution mean? How does it link to wider sources of value?’ These 
questions that you suggest are posed by the right hemisphere – are not 
heard as they once were, and will increasingly go unbidden if we continue 
on our current course. 
IM: I believe so. And I am not saying that work is not often intrinsically 
valuable – it gives worth and purpose. But in that case, precisely, it is 
being valued for something other than its utility in amassing wealth. 
It is hugely important that we break out of the purely utilitarian 
calculus according to which financial considerations are the only ones 
that count. So many important issues these days are argued on the 
wrong grounds – those of immediate benefit (or not) to the economy. 
One has only to listen to the Today programme – time and again 
one hears opposing factions in any debate root around for economic 
grounds on which to argue a case that has far deeper and broader 
foundations, and often misrepresent their own cause in doing so, 
because it is assumed that no other criterion will cut any ice these days. 
IM: It is a case 
of what I call the 
football match 
paradox. One 
person stands up 
to get a better 
view, the person 
behind stands up 
to see beyond his 
neighbour, and soon 
everyone is standing 
– but the view is no 
better than when 
everyone was able 
to sit down. It’s just 
that, like it or not, 
no-one can now sit 
down any more

Divided brain, divided world
40 
In the past a foundation of spiritual values (whether or not individuals 
succeeded in living up to them is quite another matter), a sense of how 
what we do here might look sub specie aeternitatis, framed human 
intention, and an education in the humanities underwrote that at the 
secular level. Now each of these lodestars has been jettisoned, and the 
intuition of another realm of value – other than the material one – has 
been largely lost. I know that other concerns, those for the long-term 
health of the environment, for example, have to some extent filled the 
vacuum, but their nature is more limited. 
Mental health
JR: On mental health – there seems to be some equivocation about how 
levels of wellbeing have changed, and how best to characterise the rela­
tionship between income and wellbeing. My impression is that your view, 
broadly, is that if nothing else we are much less happy than we might be. 
Why do you think that, and what might we begin to do about it?
IM: In as much as happiness can be measured, the evidence is clear. 
We are certainly no happier, and almost certainly less happy, than 
when we were materially enormously much less well off. 
JR: Are you sure? My impression is that the evidence is a bit more 
equivocal?
IM: It is clear, and applies to Britain, the rest of Europe, the US, 
Japan … everywhere it is the same story. Which should make us stop 
in our tracks and ask what we are trying to achieve in despoiling the 
planet, making ourselves ill, and degrading social trust in the effort 
simply to amass wealth.
JR: Assuming that’s right, bizarrely it doesn’t seem to make us stop in our 
tracks. Again it looks like a kind of denial?
IM: That’s true, but it is also a failure to be able to take on board 
something so contrary to the beliefs that the left hemisphere holds 
– getting more goods in the material realm must equate with greater 
well-being. One distinguished elderly colleague of mine could 
not accept that people were less happy, because, as he pointed out, 
‘they have washing machines now – they must be happier’. At some 
level material well-being was, for him, well-being, so the information 
‘did not compute’. 
What’s less certain is whether depression is actually on the 
increase. The figures suggest that 25 percent, even up to as much as 
50 percent of us, will experience a diagnosable mental illness during 
our lives. There are many possible confounding factors, including 
raised awareness (both in the public and the medical profession), 
reduced stigma (leading to more readiness to seek help), the need to 
establish illness in the context of personal injury claims, or in order 
to get hold of scarce resources for a child, diagnostic fashions, and 
the readiness of Big Pharma to capitalise on the fuzziness of diagnosis. 
IM: The alienation 
you speak of 
is ultimately 
not because of 
something we 
have done, such 
as build large 
cities, but because 
of an attitude 
of mind that lies 
even deeper

41
Exploring practical and policy implications
Having said all of that, there is evidence that our way of life does 
make us sick, and it seems fairly certain that depression is on the in­
crease. One way to look at this is to study the trends across immigrant 
generations at a moment in time: Mexican immigrants to the USA 
start with a low level of mental illness, but increase in proportion to 
the time spent in the US. The lifetime prevalence of any mental disor­
der in one large study was 18 percent for Mexican immigrants with less 
than 13 years in the US, 32 percent for those with more than 13 years, 
but only for those born in the US did it approximate, at 49 percent, 
the national rate for the whole US.29 
When one considers that we have got better and better at manipu­
lating the world, yet less and less able to discern any meaning in our 
lives – the topic of an e-book I released earlier this year – this is per­
haps not surprising. The stability of social networks outside work, 
a sense of being trusted by, and able to trust, one’s work colleagues, 
a sense of belonging, a sense of mastery of a skill, are all important 
to human happiness and are less common now than they were before. 
The secret to happiness, known to every CBT therapist, never mind 
to generations of the spiritually wise, is to appreciate and be grateful 
for what one has, not constantly comparing oneself and what one has 
with other people, or some imagined ideal. Yet our society is founded 
precisely on propagating this unhealthily comparative attitude 
of mind. 
JR: Which is at least partly about advertising, but also the political 
emphasis on consumption-filled economic growth, and I imagine you can 
link this to the left hemisphere’s tendencies in certain ways. Tim Jackson 
even speaks of ‘the social logic of consumption’ in that we increasingly 
use what we buy to project status and identity, which we then compare 
with others who are doing the same thing. But I just want to tease the 
implications out a bit. Does it follow from your argument that advertis­
ing should be curbed and economic growth should be less of a priority? 
It feels slightly absurd to have ended up here, after starting with hemi­
spheric differences, but is there a sense in which it follows?
IM: Yes. Chasing the phantom of endless economic growth is destruc­
tive of the world and of our happiness, and the ever-presence of 
advertising is a terrible blight on modern cities. But far worse, in such 
places, it requires a constant effort to block it out: it’s a sort of awful 
mental pollution that drifts into one’s consciousness whatever one may 
be doing, like the plastic bottles that till the end of time will drift onto 
the remotest and most beautiful beaches of the world. 
But we were talking about health and happiness, so let’s leave 
that to look again at the bigger picture. Let’s return to first principles 
– not the left hemisphere considerations of what we can have and 
control, but the right hemisphere ones of who we are and how we 
relate to others that live alongside us and that came before and will 
come after us. If we do so we can see right away that there are a couple 
of things we must address. 
We are too isolated, most of us don’t have a sense of connected­
ness with a community in the way we used to – and we need to do 
JR: Does it follow 
from your argument 
that advertising 
should be curbed 
and economic 
growth should be 
less of a priority? It 
feels slightly absurd 
to have ended up 
here, after starting 
with hemispheric 
differences, but is 
there a sense in 
which it follows?
IM: Yes

Divided brain, divided world
42 
something about that. We need to have a broader context in which 
to see ourselves and our lives – and we need to do something about 
that. Some of that comes through education, and I am sure we will 
discuss that, but some comes from access to what we would have 
to call a realm of spiritual value. That doesn’t mean signing up to a 
religion. In a way, spirituality is simply a question of having an open 
enough mind to see that that there are things in the world at large that 
transcend what we can know and fully comprehend, that are not fully 
accounted for in a reductionist, materialist account. Rationally this 
is extremely likely: it would be extraordinary if we just happened to 
have arrived at such a summit of evolution that our brains allow us to 
understand and be aware of all that exists. The fact that it may look 
that way to us now does not prove anything, except the impossibility 
of conceiving what it is that one cannot conceive. If a squirrel could re­
flect, it would imagine that it understood everything, too – it couldn’t 
conceive of the kind of understanding it didn’t have.
Children should not grow up ignorant of the fact that other peoples 
in all parts of the world at all times and in all places have had religions. 
It should not be implied that this is just a sign of foolishness and 
ignorance. It might well be our own lack of insight. After all, what we 
don’t expect we simply won’t find. It’s in any case a good discipline 
to keep an open mind, not to think one knows it all, and to respect 
and to some extent feel in awe of what is greater than ourselves. By 
the same token, it’s a disastrous belief that we understand everything 
and have it all under control.
The value of the spiritual 
JR: I am glad to hear you say that we need to broaden our notion of the 
spiritual, and link it to a wider sense of epistemic humility.30 Curiously, 
that is both very similar to the harsher forms of scepticism – in the sense 
of questioning what we can legitimately know – but also radically differ­
ent in the sense that it doesn’t limit itself to what is already known by only 
one sanctioned method. If I have read you correctly, you seem to be saying 
that this kind of spiritual openness is completely ‘reasonable’ because, 
rather than in spite of the fact, that it is not ‘rational’. 
IM: It is irrational, and in the end unscientific, to imagine that we 
understand everything because we have a way of analysing it into 
ever smaller parts. We are seduced by the simplistic take on the 
world offered to us by our left hemisphere, the part of us that we 
know actually sees less, and certainly understands less. The worst 
and most damaging aspect of this is the arrogance of those scientific 
materialists who believe they know it all – the internet is full of the 
evidence of their rage and intolerance towards anyone who does not 
buy their philosophy. Their minds are as firmly closed as those of any 
religious fundamentalist – and let me make clear that I find religious 
fundamentalism every bit as mindless and as damaging. 
The arts, I believe, have a pivotal role in putting us in touch with 
the transcendent, with whatever it is that is beyond us. They are core 
to a civilisation, measures of its health, and should be treated as such 
IM: Spirituality is 
simply a question 
of having an open 
enough mind to 
see that that there 
are things in the 
world at large that 
transcend what 
we can know and 
fully comprehend, 
that are not fully 
accounted for in 
a reductionist, 
materialist account

43
Exploring practical and policy implications
by government. They are not an optional extra. But they also matter 
too urgently to become purely intellectual games. They need to have 
viscera, and affect us viscerally. Which is not at all the same as saying 
‘gutsy’, in the sense of constantly ‘shocking’ and ‘daring’ – in fact 
rather the opposite. They need to stop being just ‘clever-clever’, ironic, 
disaffected, ‘above’ it all in a place from which one can see that ‘really’ 
there is no meaning to anything. Seeing no meaning may say more 
about you than about the world you are looking at.
How to bring these things about? Well, first of all we need smaller 
communities. We are not equipped to deal with social groups on the 
scale of a modern city. When Johnson said that ‘when a man is tired of 
London, he is tired of life’, he was talking of a city less than a tenth the 
size it is now, and very much more like a collection of villages. In smaller 
communities we recognise one another, learn about one another, feel we 
know whom we can trust, and are able to form bonds. We also need to 
live closer to our ultimate context, the natural world. We are part of it, 
not as we see ourselves, standing over against it, taming or subduing it to 
serve our deracinated urban existence. We can bring this about without 
losing the sense of overall connectedness. In the past, often small com­
munities were inward-looking, developed antipathies through ignorance, 
and became too certain of what they believed. One of the advantages that 
has come with technology is that we can remain far more in touch with 
one another and with what others are thinking than we could before. 
JR: That’s true, and the shift you allude to sounds desirable, but also 
painfully at odds with where we are heading. Current estimates suggest 
that by 2050 there will be 9 billion people on the planet, three-quarters 
of whom will live in cities.31 So how might that kind of change come about? 
The growth of cities is closely related to the drive to increase productiv­
ity through economies of scale, so you have partly addressed that kind 
of limited perspective already, but the numerical challenge is still stark. 
Speaking at the RSA, David Attenborough said we need to talk about 
limiting population growth, but that, for example, requires considerable 
courage and conviction.32 
IM: I would agree with Attenborough about that. Smaller communities 
with closer bonds, less commuting and less pressure for high incomes 
would enable mothers to spend more time with their children. Much of 
the development of a child’s sense of its identity as separate and distinct 
from, but still warmly connected to, others comes from the intercourse 
between the baby’s face and the mother’s face in the first two and half 
years of life. Fathers are quite capable of looking after children, playing 
with them, and do need to be involved with children – it’s good for 
the fathers as well as for the children – but no-one can substitute for a 
mother. There are important differences between the sexes which have 
simply and unrealistically been ignored for too long, because they are 
awkward. 
Working less hard would mean we would have to reassess what 
our true needs are. At present they are unrealistic, and rely on a 
consumption of resources that can’t be sustained and the willingness 
of people to be exploited in countries that are not industrialised to the 
IM: The arts, 
I believe, have 
a pivotal role 
in putting us in 
touch with the 
transcendent, with 
whatever it is that is 
beyond us. They are 
core to a civilisation, 
measures of its 
health, and should 
be treated as such 
by government

Divided brain, divided world
44 
same degree – yet. This can’t go on. This would mean contemplating 
something that looks from the present standpoint simply like a drop in 
the standard of living. 
Vicious circles
IM: But we are caught in vicious circles. Many things seem crucial 
for a good life only because of the very mess we have got into. We have 
less and less time, so we need to rely more and more on gadgets and 
machines to shore up our lives – an aspect of the pressure under which 
we live, the lack of leisure. We need expensive foreign holidays when 
we want to relax, because we have made the places we live in so alien, 
so limiting and so sad. As a result, we need to experience vicariously 
the vitality of relatively undeveloped communities, in the process 
eroding the very thing we see as valuable. We need costly cars and train 
tickets because we are not really embedded in the place where we live: 
our lives are scattered abroad precisely because of the availability of 
transport. We also need them for the pointless, destructive process of 
commuting because we work far from where we live. We need money 
for expensive distractions such as computer games, because we can’t 
find any adequate satisfaction in the impoverished ‘real life’ environ­
ment we have created around us. 
Although it might look like a reduction in the standard of living it 
could be the foundation of greater happiness and stability for a society. 
There would be many compensations in terms of reduced anxiety and 
worry, re-established connections with one another, and the satisfac­
tions of hands-on work in the place where we live. People would grow 
more of their own food and rely less on costly imports that are good 
neither for us, nor for the environment. We would at once use fewer 
resources, create stronger social bonds, and, with them, the possibility 
of generating trust. 
JR: That seems coherent, but we have reached – as I imagined we might 
– the kind of position advocated by those who think that the pursuit of 
economic growth in the developed world is now doing more harm than 
good. My impression is that the vicious circles you mention are fuelled 
by – and can ultimately be traced back to – the social logic of consump­
tion and the perceived need to increase GDP by a certain percentage year 
on year. Many view that emphasis on growth as a necessary objective in 
order to deal with our existing debt problem, and to create jobs, espe­
cially for the young, but I think you have highlighted that there might be 
another way. Michael Sandel,33 for instance, recently highlighted a need 
to reverse this subtle but pernicious shift from being countries that have 
market economies to becoming countries that are market economies.
Trust
IM: No government worth the name should be thinking only about 
enlarging the economy. But more leisure is not necessarily worse for the 
economy, in any case. In Europe it is the Germans that work the short­
est hours and the Greeks the longest.34 This no doubt has something 
IM: But we are 
caught in vicious 
circles. Many things 
seem crucial for a 
good life only because 
of the very mess 
we have got into 

45
Exploring practical and policy implications
to do with the respective levels of corruption in the two societies. 
Untrustworthiness is costly: a few do excellently well by doing very little, 
while the rest must slave to make up. It has often been pointed out that 
groups with a high level of mutual trust, such as Orthodox Jews, can 
out-compete others in certain areas of trade because they know they 
can rely 100 percent on one another’s word. The City of London used 
to trade on that, too, to an extent: a gentleman’s word was his bond. 
Foolishly such attitudes came to be seen as old-fashioned, and we were 
exhorted to ‘get real’: Machiavellian, in other words. The costs have 
been colossal. So have the costs of the mutual suspicion with which the 
sexes have learnt to view one another, and the suspicion that attaches 
to all adults’ relations with children. Victims are everywhere. (Lack 
of trust, paranoia, the sense of being the victim of others’ misdoing, 
unwillingness to accept responsibility – all these are characteristic of 
right-hemisphere deficit states. This is a literal fact, demonstrable by 
brain lesion studies, not just a manner of speaking.) But those are huge 
topics that would take us far longer than we have to explore. 
JR: Indeed! It might just be worth mentioning though that, in so far as the 
loss of trust is a symptom of left-hemispheric dominance, British Social 
Attitudes surveys suggest not only that we have relatively low levels of 
trust compared to other countries, but that we are becoming less trusting 
over time.35
Education 
JR: When you spoke at the RSA36 you said that education was a big 
part of the answer, and I recently read a review that said your book was 
the best defence of the arts and humanities ever written in the English 
language37 … What would an education for health and wellbeing entail 
that it doesn’t currently?
IM: Education is the perfect example of how we get things wrong 
by not taking a broad enough, or long enough, view. The emphasis 
now being called for on technical training – business, admin, com­
puting, science – is precisely the opposite of what we need. So is the 
emphasis on ‘relevance’, on the here and now and the contemporary 
– that’s the very last thing we need. It seems to me that one of the 
main purposes of an education is to broaden minds, not narrow 
them further. That means not learning more and more about what 
we are already familiar with, and hardening up the sort of thinking 
we have anyway, but understanding other points of view, the ways 
people would have thought about the problems we confront in other 
times and other places. It cannot be strongly enough emphasised 
that scholarly learning is in and of itself valuable, regardless of any 
functional application of immediate interest to the economy. We will 
perish if we do not explore avenues we have no way of knowing now 
will be fruitful. Once we want to see only more of what we already 
know about, we have fossilised. However it is a characteristic of the 
left hemisphere ‘take’ on life that it sees only what it predicts it will 
see, focuses narrowly on the issue in front of it, is over-confident in 
IM: Education is 
the perfect example 
of how we get 
things  wrong by 
not taking a broad 
enough, or long 
enough, view. 
The emphasis 
now being called 
for on technical 
training – business, 
admin, computing, 
science – is precisely 
the opposite of 
what we need

Divided brain, divided world
46 
its assessment of what it understands and knows, and has one driving 
value – utility. 
At the same time we need to understand the values and mores of 
those who forged the foundations of our own culture and civilisation. 
Too often when these things are brought into the curriculum it is with 
a sense of ironic, knowing, superiority to the ways of other times. 
It has become politically incorrect to laugh at the ways and manners 
of other cultures, but not at those of past ages. So the chance of 
learning from them is lost. Even the great works of literature of the 
past are not met on their own terms, but judged by our own narrow 
ones, and found to be examples of colonialism, racism, sexism, class 
struggle, or whatever. But we must meet art on its own terms, if we are 
to appreciate it, understand it and grow from the experience – not with 
our agenda already set.
JR: Which I imagine means we also need to value and praise different 
kinds of traits?
IM: The highest praise of a wise person in the past was that he or she 
possessed ‘reason’ and ‘judgment’. These skills – for such they are (not 
just forms of knowledge) – depended on what Aristotle called phro­
nesis, a complex of rationality tempered with experience, intuition, 
a sense of proportion, of what is appropriate, and much else besides. 
Those who have been technically trained only, and think according 
to sets of rules, guidelines or procedures, but have no background 
in the humanities generally – history, literature, art, philosophy and 
so on – can have no way of understanding what it is they are dealing 
with, no context in which to set it, no sense of proportion to apply to 
it, no sense of what would be appropriate here, and have impoverished 
intuitions. The humanities help us see the broader context, how people 
in other times and other places thought and lived – vital if we are not 
to become terminally narrow-minded, congratulating ourselves on 
being progressive, while in fact being complacent, conservative in the 
most negative sense. Then we become so certain we are right that we 
think we have the duty to ‘educate’ the rest of the world into our way 
of thinking. There is a fascinating conflict here between the lip service 
paid to respect for other cultures, often very far in their points of 
view from our own, and the dogma that only modern Western liberal 
thinking is ‘enlightened’.
Even science, important as it is, is not an education in itself; while 
it is a vital part of what we should learn at school it is never enough to 
focus narrowly within it. It provides no context in which to understand 
what it teaches. It depends on questioning facts, but never gets round 
to doubting its own dogmas. That would be to enter the territory of 
philosophy. Until 50 years ago, you could not have become a scientist 
or an administrator without having studied and absorbed a good deal 
of the classics and humanities. Our system now for the first time makes 
this possible. One
of the gravest problems with the current state of medicine is that 
doctors too often no longer have a background in the humanities, and 
see themselves as, in effect, high-grade technicians. They misconceive 
IM: One of the 
gravest problems 
with the current 
state of medicine 
is that doctors too 
often no longer have 
a background in 
the humanities, and 
see themselves as, 
in effect, high-grade 
technicians. They 
misconceive the 
nature of what 
they are about

47
Exploring practical and policy implications
the nature  of what they are about. Add to that a managerial culture 
that is imposing itself on our doctors, teachers and even, little by 
little, on judges, and the effect is complete. One can’t help thinking 
that the more broadly educated professionals of the past would have 
simply refused to be bamboozled by the impoverished pseudo-culture 
of managerialism: they would have recognised it for what it is – an 
attempt to replace a broad, humane culture, and its values, with the 
desiccated language and bankrupt procedures of bureaucratic control.
You can’t instil ‘citizenship’ by classes. This is once again a solution 
at too superficial a level. It doesn’t consider the roots. Equally I don’t 
want a doctor who is, disconcertingly, the product of a course in social 
skills. I want a doctor with humanity, and part of that will come from 
him or her having a richer inner world. Too many doctors and neu­
roscientists adopt unreflectingly the model of the body as a machine, 
because they have no background in the humanities and philosophy 
that would alert them to the problems with such a view, and it there­
fore seems obvious to them that  this must be right.
Quite apart from conveying information – knowledge, at any rate, 
is important – schools should be places where children are taught to 
use their imagination, ask difficult questions, think flexibly, concen­
trate effectively, sustain attention and learn self-discipline. If we are 
honest, they are all too rarely any of these. Children need to be encour­
aged to question the accepted views of our own age, not just the things 
their teacher doesn’t like. No person should leave school so ignorant as 
to believe that he or she really knows much at all. 
Good teachers should be trusted, not micromanaged and over 
controlled. There is too much constraint of the syllabus and too much 
monitoring of staff and pupils alike.
If you were Secretary of State for Education …
JR: It may not be entirely fair to ask you this, but in light of the above, 
if you were Michael Gove or the equivalent, considering the constraints 
of democratic accountability and the need to educate millions of varying 
abilities and backgrounds, would your overall approach just be to trust 
teachers more. If so, on what basis would you have that trust? 
IM: Well, the quid pro quo for this position is that it should be easier 
for a head to get rid of an ineffectual teacher. We should be more 
honest with them. But we should also be more honest with pupils. 
What does this mean in practice? 
There should be no pretence that learning is always easy or in the 
most obvious sense, fun, but it should be clear that patience, skill and 
hard work will be rewarded in time, and that real rewards need to be 
earned. To pretend otherwise is a hopeless basis for achievement of 
any kind and a poor preparation for life. The habit of being quiet and 
not requiring stimulation should be encouraged by de-emphasising 
the constant stimulation provided by technology, though technology 
has a place in education, too. Self-discipline and respect for one’s 
fellows, one’s teachers and one’s self go hand in hand and should never 
be undermined. 
IM: The alternative 
to experience is 
theory, and I do 
not know of a 
theory sufficiently 
convincing that 
it would lead me 
to discard what 
seems to me evident 
through experience 
– not just in the 
narrow sense of 
what I myself might 
have learnt through 
schooling, but what 
seems to me to be 
the ground of all 
civilised endeavour

Divided brain, divided world
48 
For the more intellectual, it means re-embedding things in the 
humanities. There should be a strong encouragement of history, clas­
sics, philosophy, literature, music, drama and art. All children should 
learn practical embodied skills in the crafts and arts, working not just 
with machines and ideas, but with actual materials, such as wood, 
metal and fabric, to make things that are both useful and beautiful. 
All children should be taught mindfulness and some form of spiritual 
exercise. They should learn some sort of practical life-skills, such 
as how to recognise cognitive distortions in oneself and others, and 
how to mediate in disputes. These are quite practical things that can 
easily be taught, and transform lives. Getting rid of many of the ‘soft’ 
subjects that have crept in over the last few years should make room for 
these. It’s also an unkind and destructive policy that imposes an expec­
tation that most people should go to a university: this has simply led to 
a further expansion of such ‘soft’ subjects, the devaluation of degrees, 
a waste of time for the unwary students, and false expectations which 
inevitably lead to disappointment, bitterness and accusations that 
failure is due to some form of discrimination.
JR: This is all fascinating, but at this point I can imagine readers might 
feel the discussion has lost sight of its moorings in the brain hemispheres. 
To put it combatively, is your warrant for the above claims that you 
yourself know the benefits of such an education, and want more people 
to see the world as you do, or do the suggestions above flow from more 
objective premises? 
IM: With respect, you asked me what I would do if I were Michael 
Gove, and I told you. As to experience, the alternative to experience 
is theory, and I do not know of a theory sufficiently convincing that 
it would lead me to discard what seems to me evident through experi­
ence – not just in the narrow sense of what I myself might have learnt 
through schooling, but what seems to me to be the ground of all 
civilised endeavour. And, as far as the hemisphere hypothesis goes, 
to me what I have said follows, as night follows day: embodied skills, 
a proper humane context for the understanding of what we learn, an 
emphasis on the implicit as much as the explicit, on quiet, sustained 
attention rather than constant stimulation that fragments attention, 
a belief in the broader picture, and in the values of more than just 
pleasure and utility – the terms on which everything in the left hemi­
sphere’s world has to be validated. 
If we do not think in this broader and more long-term way, we will 
try just to patch up the current morally bankrupt system of competi­
tive capitalism by training narrower and narrower technicians so that 
we can out-compete other economies. An economy exists to support 
a civilisation, not to become the purpose of it. If we forget that, we 
become barbarians, and betray the very values we believe so important 
that we even feel justified in imposing them on others. 
JR: Although I agree with much of what you say, I expect some people 
would say that your vision was unrealistic, even ‘Romantic’? How would 
you respond to that?
IM: An economy 
exists to support a 
civilisation, not to 
become the purpose 
of it. If we forget 
that, we become 
barbarians, and 
betray the very 
values we believe 
so important that 
we even feel justified 
in imposing them 
on others

Exploring practical and policy implications
49
IM: Watch an animal explore its environment. It tries something 
and then recoils, it tries something else and recoils again, but then 
goes forward and onward until it recoils again – and so it finds the 
right path to what it is seeking. This is an intelligent way to succeed 
and to survive. An animal that ploughs on regardless of evidence that 
it is in danger will not survive. Many great steps forward in the history 
of ideas have come when we stopped doing something that had come 
to seem natural, and opened ourselves to something new. Of course 
there is actually nothing new under the sun, and that something ‘new’ 
came about because people were not afraid to revisit knowledge and 
ways of thinking and being that had become lost. The Renaissance is 
a prime example, of course, of a society that leapt forward by looking 
to the past, but there are many others. Civilisations wax and wane. 
They all fail ultimately. There is no such thing as eternal progress. That 
is just a belief, a dogma, that flies in the face of history and experience. 
There is no reason to believe ourselves to be immune – in fact there are 
a number of good reasons (climate change being one) – that suggest 
our civilisation has not long to go. Blame our blind optimism for that. 
A lot of what I have to say will sound like a step back. It will be 
called ‘Romanticism’. Rationally, a step forward is as likely to be a 
mistake as a success. There is at most a 50-50 chance that a departure 
from the long history of human experience will be positive. To believe 
otherwise is itself a sort of Romanticism – but one that is not paying 
attention to experience or evidence. The fact is that we are not getting 
happier. We are not getting wiser. We are not living in harmony with 
the planet on which our existence, never mind our happiness, and our 
sense of fulfilment, depends. But we should never worry about saving 
the planet: the planet will survive well when it has got rid of us. It is 
we who need saving from ourselves.
In closing
JR: Thank you for your generosity in enduring my questions and 
giving such thoughtful answers. How should we close this discussion? 
Gramsci famously said that we should have ‘pessimism of the intellect, 
but optimism of the will’. Is that where we are now?
IM: I call myself a hopeful pessimist. In respect of where we are cur­
rently headed, yes, I am a pessimist. In respect of our potential to adapt 
and change quickly, I am hopeful. I sense that people are sick of the 
current worldview in the West (alas, all too quickly being espoused 
by the East that used to know better). In response to my book, people 
of all walks of life all over the world have written to me. They are 
looking for a change in direction, and I think all I have done is to give 
them courage to believe in what they already really know at some level 
– something which has not been articulated in quite the same terms 
before. In many ways my message is a very positive one. We have been 
sold a sadly limiting version of who we as human beings are, and how 
we relate to the world. Inside each one of us there is an intelligence, 
in fact a superior intelligence, that sees things differently from the way 
we have been sold – if we would only listen to it. Let’s hope that we can. 
IM: I call myself 
a hopeful pessimist. 
In respect of where 
we are currently 
headed, yes, I am 
a pessimist. In 
respect of our 
potential to adapt 
and change quickly, 
I am hopeful

Divided brain, divided world
50 
Part two
Reflections

51
Reflections
The RSA hosted a workshop on 5th November 2012 and invited par­
ticipants at the workshop to write short follow-up pieces.38 A few of the 
people who were invited but unable to attend also took this opportunity 
to share their perspective. In the 13 pieces that follow, there is a range of 
critique, clarification and illustrations of relevance in particular domains, 
including economics, behavioural economics, climate change, NGO 
campaigning, patent law, ethics and art.
Ray Tallis
Gigantic generalisations overlook the teaming ocean of particulars.
The research brilliantly summarised in I.M.’s mighty work of scholarship 
focusses largely on the deficits that are seen in different kinds of brain 
damage. The alterations in perception, memory, emotion, drive, personal­
ity etc that follow from brain damage do not, however, demonstrate the 
bits of brain that are affected are the locus for these things. 
Firstly, even the most elementary experience or memory involves large 
areas of the brain, and the brain is engaged bilaterally in every aspect of the 
ordinary experience of everyday life – as I.M. himself admits at one point. 
Secondly, the stand-alone brain, never mind a stand-alone hemisphere, 
is not a sufficient basis for any aspect of consciousness, even less those 
complex manifestations of individual and collective behaviour that I.M. 
is concerned with. The brain is a necessary basis for all of these things 
but, beyond the brain, the body and the surrounding world are also neces­
sary for ordinary consciousness and everyday individual and collective 
behaviour and it is here, not inside the brain, where the trends that I.M. 
worries over unfold. 
At the very least, persons are embodied-brains-in-worlds that have 
their own extracranial history. (See below). Being-there is essentially 
relational and we cannot find the nature of being-there if we confine 
ourselves to, or give priority to, one of the relata, namely the individual 
brain or parts of it. There is considerable ambivalence, what is more, 
in I.M’s view of the relationship between the mind and the brain: he says 
the former may be ‘generated’ by the latter or ‘mediated’ by it – rather 
fundamental equivocation. And it is not clear what ‘mediated’ means 
here. This failure to address the metaphysical and ontological problems 
of the relationship between brain and consciousness means that his theory 
lacks a ground floor.
Notwithstanding these problems with his thesis, I.M. personifies 
the brain and bits of the brain – claiming that they are ‘at least part of a 
person’. For example, he contrasts the ‘abstract, instrumental and assured 
Reflections
This failure 
to address the 
metaphysical 
and ontological 
problems of 
the relationship 
between brain and 
consciousness means 
that his theory lacks 
a ground floor
Ray Tallis

Divided brain, divided world
52 
left hemisphere’ with the ‘contextual, humane, systemic, but relatively 
tentative and inarticulate right hemisphere’. The right hemisphere, it seems, 
is the kind of character you would like to have a beer with while the left 
hemisphere is a geek. (Although I.M. says that he spends a lot of time 
defending the left hemisphere, he is doing so largely against his own attacks. 
With such friends, the left hemisphere doesn’t need enemies!) 
The left hemisphere, we are to believe, is rather more than somewhat 
bureaucratic while the right hemisphere is ‘more in touch with reality’. 
What does ‘reality’ mean in this context? He may argue that he is talking 
only metaphorically but the metaphors are often presented as literal truth 
and they are necessary to carry his argument. 
The thesis – itself highly systematising, linguistic, explicit etc – 
looks rather left hemisphere according to his own characterisation of that 
pushy item. The laboratory findings (massive quantities of painstakingly 
acquired, precise data, 2,500 sources) which seem left hemisphere prod­
ucts of ‘the narrowly focussed attention to that which has already been 
prioritised as significant’ underpinning his arguments seem themselves 
to have been gathered by what he would regard as left hemisphere activity. 
Does he repudiate his own work – given that he says that the left hemi­
sphere ‘doesn’t understand things but only processes them’? Or indeed, 
the great monuments of natural science upon which our survival, 
health, comfort and safety in daily life depend? (He is critical of the ‘life 
sciences’ – which would presumably include the neurosciences he draws 
upon throughout his book – as in thrall to the left hemisphere, seeing 
the living world as machine-like.) The suspicion that I.M.’s thesis may be 
self-undermining is reinforced by his claim that the left hemisphere is out 
of touch with reality. Doesn’t this make it rather odd that he relies on the 
neurological data presumably gathered by that hemisphere to support his 
extraordinarily ambitious account of ‘reality’, a reality that encompasses 
the history of mankind?
The indicative, as opposed to the subjunctive, mood in which The 
Master is written suggests that I.M. feels that he is dealing with certain 
facts (left hemisphere according to his own thesis) rather than uncertain 
possibilities (right hemisphere according to his thesis); for example, his 
assertion that ‘the left hemisphere’s purpose is to use the world. It sees 
everything – education, art, morality, the natural world – in terms of a 
utilitarian calculus only’ sounds pretty certain to me. 
It may be that my own left hemisphere has atrophied but I would 
hesitate to make such sweeping generalisations. And I wouldn’t be at all 
certain of the truth of such massive claims as that ‘Far Easterners attend 
to the world in ways typical of both the left and right hemispheres, and 
draw on strategies of either hemisphere more or less equally, while we in 
the West are heavily skewed towards the attentive viewpoint and strategies 
of the left hemisphere alone’. 
And consider the assertion that ‘since the Industrial revolution we have 
constructed an image of the world externally that is an image of the left 
hemisphere internally’. Who are ‘we’? What ‘image’ of the world (as if 
there were only one image and one world) are we talking about? And what 
would an ‘image of the left hemisphere’ be? I suspect that we are dealing 
with a somewhat simplistic circularity here: the left hemisphere is seen as 
The left hemisphere, 
we are to believe, 
is rather more 
than somewhat 
bureaucratic while 
the right hemisphere 
is ‘more in touch 
with reality’. What 
does ‘reality’ mean 
in this context? 
He may argue that 
he is talking only 
metaphorically but 
the metaphors are 
often presented as 
literal truth and they 
are necessary to 
carry his argument
Ray Tallis

53
Reflections
(say) the locus of rationality and the image of the world post Industrial 
Revolution is rational (or rationalistic) and therefore the latter is a passive 
reflection of the former. At any rate, such gigantic generalisations over­
look the teaming ocean of particulars that make up our shared world, and 
overfly the infinite variety of the lives of billions of people and the count­
less cultures and micro-cultures in which they live.
It is tempting to ask: From what hemisphere is he able to observe 
the two hemispheres, pass judgement on them, and see their rivalry 
as the motor of the unfolding of human cultures? Does he have a third 
hemisphere? Or does he have something that is not a hemisphere at all? 
In short, is he talking from a standpoint that transcends his hemispheres? 
I suspect he is; it is the standpoint from which we all speak when 
we speak about pretty well everything: namely the shared, extracranial 
human world woven over the millennia out of a zillion human (whole 
person) interactions. And it is this that he seems to by-pass when he 
argues that the outcome of the rivalry or balance between the two 
hemispheres plays a major role in determining the predominant charac­
teristics of cultures, civilisations or epochs. And I would argue that this 
extracranial viewpoint is the one we adopt when we comment on our 
own and others’ brains and cultures. This is more relevant than neural 
circuitry. It is the community of human minds, the human world, which 
has gradually built up at least over the hundreds and thousands of years, 
since hominids emerged. 
It is here, and not in the intracranial darkness, that we should look for 
the motors of history, of cultural change and the evolution of civiliza­
tions. Histories, cultures, societies, institutions, have their own internal 
dynamic. To take a single example, the Council of Trent was the mighty 
effect of mighty causes and the mighty cause of mighty effects that cannot 
be usefully captured in neural terms. 
Ray Tallis is a philosopher, humanist, retired medical doctor, neuroscientist and 
author of Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis And The Misrepresentation 
Of Humanity.
Rita Carter
We should stop for a moment to see why the left hemisphere 
perspective is so resilient …
As I understand it, McGilchrist’s argument is this:
1.	 The bihemispherical nature of the brain affords each individual 
two distinct ‘takes’ on the world: 
i.	 Left: reductive, abstract, deluded, grasping, certain, confi­
dent, narrow and articulate. 
ii.	 Right: tentative, aware, insightful, inarticulate, etc. 
2.	 An individual’s ‘take’ at any moment depends on which 
hemisphere is functionally ascendant.
3.	 When people en masse tend toward a certain ‘take’ it creates 
a culture which reflects that perspective, and that in turn 
It is here, and not 
in the intracranial 
darkness, that we 
should look for the 
motors of history, 
of cultural change 
and the evolution 
of civilizations. 
Histories, cultures, 
societies, institutions, 
have their own 
internal dynamic
Ray Tallis

Divided brain, divided world
54 
(recursively) determines the typical ‘take’ of individuals 
within the culture.
4.	 The cultural and individual ‘take’ on the world has varied 
from time to time.
5.	 Currently it is leaning towards the left.
6.	 A shift towards a right hemisphere perspective would return 
us to a more humane and ‘better’ culture.
I agree entirely with Iain on (1) and (2) and I find (3), (4) and (5) 
perfectly plausible. I do not, however think that (6) follows seamlessly. 
Iain, thanks to his immense scholarship and rigorous analysis, has 
put the case for (6) more convincingly and credibly than anyone else. 
It is not, however, a unique, or even unusual call. That we need to alter 
our ‘atomist’ or ‘selfish’ view is a familiar cry (eg the call for the ‘Big 
Society’). You don’t have to be overly cynical, however, to observe that 
these calls do not translate into real change; just sentimentality and 
hot air. Rather than trying to construct another initiative for change, 
therefore, perhaps we should stop for a moment and try to see why 
the left hemisphere perspective is so resilient.
I offer this:
While I agree that a shift to a right hemisphere perspective would 
make for a ‘better’ world as measured by criteria such as ‘kind’, non- 
punitive, generous and so on, it doesn’t necessarily follow that this 
‘better’ world makes those within it happier. 
Of course, there is a huge sociological literature on this which may 
give the lie to the statement above (I don’t know). However, I think there 
is some use in looking at it at the neurological level:
Iain points out that anger (a feature of today’s world which he 
understandably identifies as a negative) is lateralised to the left. 
Conversely, anxiety, shame and fear are lateralised to the right. 
While a world peopled by anxious, shameful, fearful people may be 
‘better’ than a world peopled by those who are shameless, fearless 
and aware of their limitations it would not necessarily be a happier 
place. Indeed, by definition, I would argue that a shameless, fearless 
and deluded population is happier than a fearful, shameful, insight­
ful one. (Many might say that ‘happiness’ borne of self-delusion is 
‘false’ happiness, but I believe there is no such thing as false happi­
ness, any more than there is false hope. Hope is hope, and happiness 
is happiness.)
The ‘take’ problem arises, I think, when you have a mix of the 
confident, self-deluded etc, and the self-aware. A solution can only 
be wrought by those with power, and power accrues to those with 
certainty, delusion and fearlessness. But the only ones who see, or 
indeed, have, the problem, are the self-aware. So the ones with the 
problem cannot solve it and the ones with the solution do not see 
the problem. 
Conventionally we assume that we should force the powerful ones 
to see the problem and bring about a solution. 
There is another way though: instead of calling for a shift to the 
right, what about encouraging a universal shift to the left. Let us all be 
certain, blinkered, deluded … 
A solution can 
only be wrought 
by those with power, 
and power accrues 
to those with 
certainty, delusion 
and fearlessness. 
But the only ones 
who see, or indeed, 
have, the problem, 
are the self-aware. 
So the ones with 
the problem cannot 
solve it and the ones 
with the solution do 
not see the problem
 Rita Carter

55
Reflections
I offer this is a slightly mischievous way. But there is a degree of 
seriousness about it … after all, a real sense of perspective is always 
uncomfortable …
Rita Carter is a science writer, lecturer and broadcaster specialising in the 
human brainscience.
Theresa Marteau
The provenance of a problem does not necessarily imply its solution.
The Master and his Emissary is an extra-ordinary book that re-presents our 
experiences of ourselves in a compelling narrative, starring two brain hemi­
spheres and the cultural history of the Western World.  Crudely, the central 
thesis is that a shift in balance between the two hemispheres, resulting in a 
dominance of the left hemisphere, can explain the imbalances many of us 
recognise in the lives we lead and the world we have created. There are of 
course many other ways of explaining such imbalances using a range of 
disciplines and theoretical perspectives. This book is in a deserved class of its 
own for the breathtaking range and erudition of his account. But to seek a 
guide to action from this magnum opus is misguided. The provenance of 
a problem does not necessarily imply its solution. Indeed, the sting in the tail 
of the book’s thesis is that looking for such a guide is to fall into the grasp 
of the author’s least favoured (but sometimes second favourite) hemisphere. 
For those optimistic (or foolhardy) enough to seek ideas on effective interven­
tions to change behaviour across populations to, for example, achieve more 
sustainable lifestyles in the face of climate change and the growing burden 
of chronic non-communicable diseases, there is little of immediate applica­
tion in this book. More is to be found in the behavioural sciences literatures 
and recent critiques of neoclassical economics. This is not a criticism of the 
book – which is hugely rewarding to those who take the time to read it – but 
rather a footnote on what the book did not set out to do and indeed does not. 
As the last of us sleepwalks into the abyss whistling a happy tune, this book 
may well provide one of the most lucid explanations to future inhabitants of 
our planet. 
Professor Theresa Marteau is the director of the behaviour and health research 
unit at the University of Cambridge. Her current research focus is upon developing 
ways of changing behaviour at population levels, drawing on neuroscience, 
behavioural economics as well as psychology.
Mark Vernon
A way of attending that does not come naturally in the modern world …
The book brings three thoughts sharply to my mind. The first is about how 
we do ethics. Two approaches have dominated in the modern world – utili­
tarian ethics, which focuses on the attempt to measure and maximise things 
like happiness; and deontological ethics, which focuses on the attempt to 
This book is in a 
deserved class of 
its own for the 
breathtaking range 
and erudition of his 
account. But to seek 
a guide to action 
from this magnum 
opus is misguided
Theresa Marteau

Divided brain, divided world
56 
reason out what we should and shouldn’t do. These might be the preferred 
approaches one would expect in a world that trusts the human capacities 
McGilchrist associates with the left hemisphere. But there are all sorts 
of reasons for believing that they are now not serving us well – and they 
also sideline and misunderstand a third tradition that it seems possible 
to associate more with the capacities associated with right hemisphere 
functioning. This is virtue ethics. Virtue ethics takes the ups and downs 
of life as the basic stuff of ethics and cultivates the ability to reflect upon 
experience so as to learn from mistakes, tolerate the uncertainties of 
living, nurture the habits that enable one to flourish, and over time gain a 
feel for how to live well – that lived sense of understanding we might call 
practical wisdom.
The second thought is not unrelated and has to do with McGilchrist’s 
central thesis that the way the hemispheres function constrains how 
we perceive the world. If it is right that we have broadly two ways of 
attending to life, one focused and directive, the other open and connect­
ing – and this seems right to me as it is something that has been repeatedly 
observed by adepts in spiritual traditions – then it will presumably also 
be the case that we can nurture our attention so as to develop different 
perceptions of and approaches to life. It will no doubt be a difficult, 
even painful, task to cultivate a way of attending that does not come 
naturally in the modern world, that is to cultivate the open and connect­
ing in a milieu that prefers the focused and directive. But it seems pretty 
clear that having access to both kinds of attention is crucial.
The third thought is related again, and concerns having a capacity 
for uncertainty – an ability to stay with the anxieties of doubt and 
not reach out after faux-certainties; as well as an ability to resist 
the temptation to need to be doing something, anything, and/or 
unconsciously seeking escape in distractions. The psychotherapist 
Donald Winnicott called it ‘going on being’, arguing that trusting life 
itself rather than the nervy isolated self, is fundamental if creative and 
unexpected insights are to unfold. Again, this would seem to be a far 
more difficult state to sustain when the capacities associated with the 
right hemisphere are lost or denigrated. 
Dr Mark Vernon is a former anglican priest, a journalist and author of several 
books including God: All That Matters (Hodder Education, 2012).
Tom Crompton
It is the circularity that is key …
I attended the workshop as an erstwhile NGO campaigner. I spent 
many years believing in the persuasive power of presenting the facts of 
environmental challenges like climate change. I assumed that if only we 
all understood the scale of such challenges, then we would be galvanised 
into demanding proportional government action. But I am now persuaded 
by the psychologists who point out that this is wrong. Actually, though 
the facts are important, if they don’t fit with our values it seems likely 
that  we’ll simply reject them. 
It will no doubt 
be a difficult, even 
painful, task to 
cultivate a way of 
attending that does 
not come naturally 
in the modern 
world, that is to 
cultivate the open 
and connecting in 
a milieu that prefers 
the focused and 
directive. But it 
seems pretty clear 
that having access 
to both kinds of 
attention is crucial
Mark Vernon

57
Reflections
Social and environmental concern – and motivation to take action 
in line with such concern – is shaped importantly by our values. And our 
values, in turn, are shaped by many aspects of our experience – includ­
ing our education, the social institutions with which we interact, and 
the public policy environment in which we live. Gifted politicians grasp 
this intuitively. Margaret Thatcher, for example, was clear on this point: 
‘Economics are the method’, she said in 1981: ‘the object is to change the 
heart and soul.’ 
Those values associated with greater social and environmental 
concern are called ‘self-transcendence’ values. They are held in opposi­
tion with ‘self-enhancement’ values. Momentarily and subtly engaging 
self-enhancement values (briefly showing people pictures of desirable 
consumer goods, for example) suppresses self-transcendence values, 
and thereby reduces pro-social and pro-environmental concern. 
Repeatedly engaging these values (through inundating citizens with 
commercial advertising, for example) seems to serve to strengthen 
these values in a ‘dispositional’ way, more permanently eroding social 
and environmental concern. So – almost irrespective of the social or envi­
ronmental issue about which an organisation or individual is concerned 
– common cause can be established in working to help strengthen self-
transcendence values in society, and to reduce the importance that we 
attach, collectively, to self-enhancement values. 
In recent years I have worked with many social psychologists and have 
become convinced of the powerful evidence for these conclusions. But until 
I read Iain’s book, I knew nothing about brain laterality. In reading it, I was 
struck by how closely the insights that Iain draws from his understanding 
of the brain corroborate the conclusions of social psychologists working on 
values. This is all the more striking given that the conceptual and empirical 
traditions upon which these two bodies of work draw are so very different.
The left hemisphere, as Iain describes this, privileges values of control, 
use and pleasure; mirroring the ‘self-enhancement’ values of power, 
achievement and hedonism described by social psychologists. The right 
hemisphere, on the other hand, privileges values of care and connection 
with something beyond the self; mirroring the ‘self-transcendence’ values 
of benevolence and universalism. Iain describes the competitive nature 
of the relationship between hemispheres – echoing social psycholo­
gists’ description of the dynamic tension between self-enhancement 
and self-transcendence values. He also perceives (as psychologists have 
argued) that instrumental appeals to the left-hemisphere (or the use of 
‘self-enhancement’ values) in order to encourage the uptake of a social 
or environmental behaviour may be counter-productive if this serves 
to shift the balance in favour of the left-hemisphere (or strengthen self-
enhancement values) in the longer term.
Crucially, Iain describes, too, how we configure our societies in ways 
that can serve to shift the balance, such that the ‘left hemisphere’s values 
simply become further entrenched’ (p.244). ‘Our experience of the world’, 
he writes, ‘helps to mould our brains, and our brains help to mould our 
experience of the world’ (p.245).
It is this circularity that is key from the perspective of those seeking a 
more sustainable and compassionate world. Collectively, we decide how 
to organise our societies, and this organisation serves to further entrench 
The left hemisphere, 
as Iain describes 
this, privileges 
values of control, 
use and pleasure; 
mirroring the 
‘self-enhancement’ 
values of power, 
achievement 
and hedonism 
described by social 
psychologists. 
The right 
hemisphere, 
on the other 
hand, privileges 
values of care 
and connection 
with something 
beyond the self; 
mirroring the ‘self-
transcendence’ 
values of 
benevolence 
and universalism
Tom Crompton

Divided brain, divided world
58 
particular values: values that may undermine – or otherwise build – our 
motivation to respond to problems like climate change.
Tom Crompton, Ph.D., works for WWF. For more information on Common 
Cause – a project which applies social psychologists’ understandings of 
values in order to support social and environmental change – please visit 
www.valuesandframes.org. 
Jeremy Holmes
Inequality is what drives left hemisphere dominance. 
From a sociological/political point of view, the really interesting 
aspect of McGilchrist is the way different societies ‘pull out’ different 
potentials from the neurome; of course it works the other way round as 
well, since our biological potential determines to an extent what can be 
‘pulled out’. 
I think McGilchrist’s model is essentially a rather hierarchical model, 
although he might argue that he is merely trying to rehabilitate the 
neglected and underpowered right hemispheric perspective. His title-
story is about a Master and an honest servant who has ideas above his 
station.  I’d argue that what’s needed is a democratic balance between 
the hemispheres and their social manifestations. McGilchrist appears 
to have little concept of power and how it operates in society.  Here I find 
Pickett and Wilkinson hugely convincing:  inequality is what drives left 
hemisphere dominance.39 Democracy is the coming together of the weak 
against the strong, and we need both, and both hemispheres. I know 
McGilchrist would say he agrees and he’s just trying to redress the 
balance, but actually I don’t really think he’s worked out how they can 
work together harmoniously and democratically – not that anyone else 
has either!
Recently, while sitting in a plane at thirty thousand feet, eating a black­
berry (the edible variety), my left brain concentrated on spearing it on the 
end of a fork while my right contextualised the absurdity and planet-
destroyingness of it all. The really good thing about McGilchrist is that he 
takes the ‘personal is the political’ (70s feminist slogan) a stage further, and 
shows how context shapes not just our selves but our brains, and vice versa.
Professor Jeremy Holmes is a psychiatrist affiliated to the University of Exeter. 
His extended review of The Master and his Emissary was recently published 
in Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, Vol. 26, No. 2, June 2012, 160–170.
Siva Thambisetty
The gradual slippage from reasonableness towards ‘rationality’ 
has profound implications for the private ownership of information.
Iain McGilchrist’s suggestion that left-hemisphere dominance gradually 
creates a ‘hall of mirrors’ full of self-referential logics resonated very 
The really good 
thing about 
McGilchrist is 
that he takes the 
‘personal is the 
political’ (70s 
feminist slogan) 
a stage further, 
and shows how 
context shapes 
not just our selves 
but our brains, 
and vice versa 
Jeremy Holmes

59
Reflections
strongly with my understanding of legal and institutional processes 
in the patent system.
The patent system is multi-institutional and decisions often combine 
rich contextual and historical reasoning with technical and scientific 
facts. This diffusion of reference points between judicial and administra­
tive institutions has led to an over-use of certain heuristics that seems 
to mirror the directional view of ‘reason’ being trumped by ‘rationality’ 
so dramatically described by Iain McGilchrist and highlighted in section 
1.9 of the discussion document.
Over the last 20–30 years, patent law seems to have closed off 
spaces for normative, contextual and policy based reasoning in favour 
of highly technical, operationalised legal tests. Such legal tests are 
often detached from public policy concerns, but nonetheless enjoy a 
self-perpetuating and objective status. This shift is in evidence in the 
following developments:
Withholding the extension of property rights over certain kinds 
of inventions is a profoundly normative question that is tied to the 
nature of information as a public good that is both non-rivalrous and 
non-excludable without such property rights. However, interpreta­
tion of exclusions from patentability have largely been reduced to 
linguistic silos that can be side-stepped by avoiding or specifying certain 
terms in patent applications. At least three instances come to mind:
The European Patent Convention excludes animal varieties 
from patentability but the narrow interpretation of the term by the 
European Patent Office means that genetically modified animals may 
be patented. Applicants have only to ensure that the term ‘animal variety’ 
is not used in the application. Similarly, computer programs are explicitly 
excluded but may be patented so long as the patent description incorpo­
rates ‘technical’ components as banal as servers or other general-purpose 
equipment. Thirdly, most ‘diagnostic methods’ are now patentable 
provided at least one step in the process of diagnosis is practised away 
from the human or animal body which can be easily incorporated into 
the description of the diagnostic method invention.
Only technical inventions are patentable. The European Patent 
Office adopts a very low threshold for ‘technical’ such that both the 
banal (like servers); and the ephemeral (improved internal functioning 
of a computer) can amount to technical. Once this low threshold is 
crossed, the evaluation shifts to whether the invention is ‘inventive’ 
enough to be patentable. This shifts the burden of justification from 
why property rights should be granted to explanations of why a particu­
lar subject matter should be denied patent protection (on grounds of 
not being ‘inventive’, or being inadequately disclosed for instance). 
In my view this represents the gradual slippage from reasonableness 
towards rationality that McGilchrist alludes to and it has profound 
implications for the increasing privatisation of information and techni­
cal advances.
The second aspect that comes to mind is a question of institutional 
design in the patent system. Keeping open multiple outcomes of reason­
ing through a rich understanding of the context of patentability can 
be resource intensive and impractical. However, maintaining an insti­
tutional memory of the point at which resources are committed to a 
We can expect 
confirming 
information to 
be incorporated 
and disconfirming 
information to be 
filtered out. This 
appears consistent 
with McGilchrist’s 
view of the left 
hemisphere growing 
in dominance
Siva Thambisetty

Divided brain, divided world
60 
particular outcome would be a very useful way of building in sources of 
negative feedback.
A related aspect comes from ideas that grew out of the social acceptance 
of technology. It takes time and resources to learn new things, and we often 
learn by trial and error. People are more likely to do something that many 
others are also doing and may adapt their own behaviour based on what 
they expect other people to do. Learning effects (where knowledge gained 
in the operation of a complex system leads to higher returns from continu­
ing use); coordination effects (when the benefits received from choosing a 
particular standard increase as others adopt the same option); and adaptive 
expectation (derived from the self-fulfilling character of certain kinds of 
expectations) may all arise. These learning needs and behaviours can be 
demonstrated in the way legal standards are first formulated and evolve 
through the domestic and institutional cluster of the patent system. 
It has also been argued that actors who operate in complex and opaque 
contexts such as in the patent system are heavily biased in the way they 
filter information into existing ‘mental maps’. We can expect confirming 
information to be incorporated and disconfirming information to be 
filtered out. This appears consistent with McGilchrist’s view of the left 
hemisphere growing in dominance.
The above brief institutional description of learning resonates 
well with the patent system where a self-perpetuating dynamic squeezes 
out contextual reasoning in favour of seemingly superior and sterile 
‘objectivity’. However the main question that underpins patent law 
– the propertisation of non-rivalrous and non-excludable information  – 
remains a nuanced jurisprudential question, that risks being caricatured 
in the form of decision making algorithms used by patent offices. In this 
respect, Iain McGilchrist’s work is again highly pertinent.
Siva Thambisetty is a lecturer in law and regional champion for India at The 
London School of Economics. The ideas above have been widely developed in 
her scholarship, details of which can be found via: www.lse.ac.uk/collections/
law/staff/sivaramjani-thambisetty.htm.
David Archer
People’s thinking has been in thrall to a particular limited focus 
of attention.
My personal take on what I heard in the discussion was that in recent 
times across many areas of life, work and politics, people’s thinking 
has been in thrall to a particular limited focus of attention. A narrow, 
deconstructed, linear view of the world which seeks to optimise indi­
vidual components, usually those that a person or organisation can 
directly control.
Reading the arguments in Iain’s book prompted me to re-assess how 
to help people to:
a.	 Recognise that this is not the only way to see the world and that 
other perspectives exist. Perspectives that take a broader view, 
My personal take on 
what I heard in the 
discussion was that 
in recent times across 
many areas of life, 
work and politics, 
people’s thinking 
has been in thrall 
to a particular 
limited focus of 
attention. A narrow, 
deconstructed, 
linear view of the 
world which seeks to 
optimise individual 
components, usually 
those that a person 
or organisation can 
directly control
David Archer

61
Reflections
see the world as more connected but also more uncertain and to 
explore ways of improving the functioning of the whole system 
even if the steps to that improvement appear clumsy and cannot 
promise specific outcomes.
b.	 Consider the constraints that may narrow their own perspectives 
on an issue – whether these constraints come from the working 
of their brain, the culture they are embedded in or the technol­
ogy they have access to.
In our discussions I used my own experience of playing trumpet 
(badly) in a number of different contexts. In an orchestra my narrow 
focus is on reading the notes on the score in front of me and playing my 
part in time, but in a jazz band all my attention is on listening to what 
my fellow band members are playing and trying to respond to it with an 
occasional glance at the chords if I feel I might be getting lost. I might be 
a better musician if I could combine these two approaches but in fact I 
find this very difficult. I am able to perform in different musical contexts 
by closing down one form of attention in order to focus on another 
without distractions. And I see people doing something similar in all sorts 
of organisational contexts too.
Whether the origin of these different forms of attention lies in the 
two hemispheres of the brain I leave to others to decide but I did find 
the concepts and some of the language in Iain’s work useful. And I can 
see how I might use them to help groups appreciate the value of difference 
and so come to better informed decisions around a Board table.
David Archer is an RSA trustee, director of socia and co-author of the book 
Collaborative Leadership: How to Succeed in an Interconnected World.
Adam Cooper
That description matched my experience of the use of economics 
within Government …
How much can The Master and his Emissary inform national policy? 
The first question this raises for me is whether the book identifies a 
problem that government is best placed to fix. And of course, whether 
one sees a problem really depends on what your idea of ‘right’ or 
‘good’ is. During the session I was struck by Iain’s description of the 
left hemisphere as being highly analytic, abstract, perhaps overly confi­
dent in its abilities, and so often over-reaching into areas which are not its 
forte. What struck me was how that description matched my experience 
of the use of economics within government. As such, I could build an ar­
gument that says, government policy-making is too left-brain oriented, or 
more specifically, government use of economics is too left-brain oriented? 
But to what extent does that simply recast the problem in different terms? 
And to what extent is it a problem? If I was a government economist, 
I might conclude that there is no problem to be  solved or described.
Even if we accept the problem, to what extent does the neuropsy­
chological description of it help? Does it matter that there might be a 
The first question 
is whether the book 
identifies a problem 
that government 
is best placed to 
fix. And of course, 
whether one sees 
a problem really 
depends on what 
your idea of ‘right’ 
or ‘good’ is
Adam Cooper

Divided brain, divided world
62 
neuropsychological underpinning to this effect, or is it sufficient for us 
to observe the outcome and identify strategies to rebalance our thinking 
so as to bring about a better (ie more left an right brained) outcome? It 
may matter in identifying possible solutions, if we grant it problem status: 
maybe there are properties of the brain, left or right hemisphere, that 
we can exploit to provoke more balanced thinking? And even if that is 
so, aren’t  we almost certain to derive policy options for tackling it which 
interface not with the hemisphere directly (eg via transcranial magnetic 
stimulation), but rather with the person which the hemispheres ‘support’. 
Hence the hemispheric property of any effect may simply serve as a gate­
way to knowledge which may then generate policies which seek to exploit 
some property of the brain. Ultimately though, it doesn’t really matter 
that it is left vs right, or frontal vs parietal, or medial vs lateral, it’s the 
constellation of effects, and knowledge that falls out of synthesising the 
understanding of that constellation that are likely to be useful for policy.
But of course, it may be entirely unfair to subject The Master and 
his Emissary to such an analysis – I’m sure Iain didn’t write it with the 
Research Excellence Framework impact agenda in mind … but neverthe­
less I’m hoping this exercise is instructive in thinking how some of the 
farther reaches of cognitive neuropsychology and philosophy might 
inform something as here and now as public policy.
Adam Cooper holds a doctorate in neuropsychology and is head of social science 
engagement at the department for energy and climate change.
Nathalie Spencer
Many cognitive biases seem to be directly reflected in McGilchrist’s 
description of the left hemisphere.
Exploring Iain McGilchrist’s left hemisphere versus right hemisphere 
framework from a behavioural economics stance, many of the descriptions 
McGilchrist makes of the different hemispheres feel familiar. While I myself 
have not yet worked out the intricacies of the connection, it seems very 
probable to me that the two models are linked in important ways. 
A point which resonated deeply with me, and which was discussed 
to a degree in the workshop, is that it can be incredibly uncomfortable to 
view the world around us in the way of the right hemisphere. In economic 
experiments, many people are found to be ambiguity averse;40 that is, 
many of us have a preference for certainty (over uncertainty). So it is 
not surprising to me that we would display the tendency to sink into the 
comfort of the left hemisphere way of thinking.
Next, it strikes me that many cognitive biases seem to be directly 
reflected in McGilchrist’s description of the left hemisphere. For example, 
the confirmation bias (the tendency to seek out or interpret informa­
tion in such a way as to confirm or support pre-existing beliefs) and 
narrow bracketing (evaluating a situation within only a narrow context) 
have obvious links to McGilchrist’s description of the left hemisphere. 
A subtler connection can be found to other cognitive biases such as 
anchoring in that when we anchor to an irrelevant figure we are failing 
It doesn’t really 
matter that it is 
left vs right, or 
frontal vs parietal, 
or medial vs lateral, 
it’s the constellation 
of effects, and 
knowledge that falls 
out of synthesising 
the understanding 
of that constellation 
that are likely to be 
useful for policy
Adam Cooper

63
Reflections
to contextualise and recognise that every situation is unique, and instead 
we inadvertently just grab a hold of a given number nearby. 
Along the same lines as cognitive biases is the use of heuristics. 
McGilchrist says that the left hemisphere ‘is obliged to represent the 
world as static and made up of fixed and distinct pieces – which we 
know it isn’t. It is less truthful, but provides a quick and dirty approxi­
mation of the world that is useful.’ The use of heuristics or rules of 
thumb defies the deliberate ‘rational’ thought assumed in standard 
economics. But their use can also be thought of as rather efficient, as 
they often lead to results that are ‘good enough’ or even better than 
those achieved by slower, more measured thought, without using up 
as much precious cognitive resource.41 Reference to Daniel Kahneman’s 
dual-system framework42 of thinking was not made in the workshop, 
but was made briefly in the paper and seems to me to be an area ripe 
for further discussion. It is not yet clear to me how we can best relate 
the hemispheric division to Kahneman’s System 1 automatic reactions 
and System 2 deliberative thought. A section in the paper begins with 
stating that the two theses are distinct, but then suggests similarities 
between the left hemisphere’s and System 1’s way of thinking. I think 
there may be more to be said about this connection, and perhaps in a 
future workshop or publication the extent of the link between the two 
frameworks could be explored in more depth. 
If, as was discussed in the workshop, McGilchrist’s framework is more 
about attention specifically than about general cognition as a whole, does 
this suggest that we could reframe cognitive biases, preferences such as 
ambiguity aversion, and tools such as heuristics as issues specifically of 
attention as well, and review them from this angle? I would be interested 
to explore this, and also the relationship between left hemisphere way 
of thinking and these aforementioned features of human decision making 
prevalent in behavioural economic thought, more closely. 
Nathalie Spencer is a behavioural economist and senior researcher at the RSA 
Social Brain Centre. 
Emma Lindley
The experience of reading a book can be as profound and transforming 
as any rite of passage.
I have at least one thing in common with Iain McGilchrist, in that the 
subject of both our undergraduate degrees was English literature. It is 
perhaps partly because of this that I have a particularly deep appreciation 
of and respect for ‘the book’. The experience of reading a book can be 
as profound and transforming as any rite of passage. A book can turn our 
familiar impression of the world and the people in it upside down. A book 
can change our attitudes, take us through uncharted territory, and make 
us feel and even act differently.
It is absolutely clear to me that Iain McGilchrist’s major work, 
The Master and his Emissary, has made a profound impression on 
those around me who have read it. I understand from having listened 
Many cognitive 
biases seem to be 
directly reflected 
in McGilchrist’s 
description of the 
left hemisphere
Nathalie Spencer 

Divided brain, divided world
64 
to discussions between its readers, and from reading a range of critical 
and discursive writing about the book that it is tremendously broad in 
scope, extraordinarily convincing, and navigates smoothly between vastly 
contrasting epistemologies. However, apart from a few extracts, I have not 
actually read it. Nevertheless, it isn’t always necessary to have read a book 
first hand and in full in order to appreciate its message and understand 
its significance.
I do know that McGilchrist’s book is the product of many years of 
research, and it refers to many hundreds of scholarly articles and books, 
significantly from neuroscience, but also from psychiatry, psychology, 
philosophy, and social science. Without a background in neuroscience 
it would be foolish and presumptuous for me to comment on the 
neuroscientific findings set out and discussed by McGilchrist. However, 
as a social scientist with a particular interest in English literature, I find 
McGilchrist’s account of ‘left hemisphere’ and ‘right hemisphere’ ways 
of making sense of the world engaging as metaphor. It is deeply significant 
that in Western society, for all sorts of reasons, there has been too much 
emphasis on analytic, virtual, certain, tick box, accountancy-audit 
thinking (‘left hemisphere’), at the expense of the less certain, grounded-
in-reality, empathic, living (‘right hemisphere’) way of engaging with 
the world.
But, when it comes to how we might apply McGilchrist’s theory to 
make positive changes to the things I really care about, I still need to be 
convinced. I think I may understand the broad message about the different 
ways of engaging with the world, how each has a vital role to play, and 
how if ‘the left hemisphere’ dominates and suppresses ‘the right hemi­
sphere’, the result can be disastrous. On an intellectual level, I can see why 
this is important. But as yet I simply don’t have an affective sense of how 
his thesis might make it easier to narrow the gap between the world we 
have and the world we’d like.
Part of the reason for this might be because I have a general scepticism 
about and suspicion of Grand Theories. While they can be seductive, and 
tend to be very satisfying, I also think there’s a danger they end up missing 
a great deal, excluding not just anomalies but everyday multiplicity.
Although the workshop we had at the RSA went some way towards 
creating a platform to promote the development of practical strategies 
of application, it isn’t one on which I yet have a firm foothold.
Perhaps the only way I’m really going to feel the intensity and profun­
dity of McGilchrist’s argument is to read the book. I’m not opposed or 
averse to doing so, but this does underscore another problem, which is 
that if it is not possible to simplify McGilchrist’s thesis to allow those who 
have not read his very lengthy book to assimilate its key messages, it will 
be extremely difficult for his ideas to become widely disseminated and to 
have the influence which they deserve, and the world needs. 
The excellent RSAnimate presentation was a creative attempt to get 
his ideas across ‘in a nutshell’. I hope that the present document goes some 
way towards framing and applying McGilchrist’s work, which allows his 
ideas to be more widely accessible and inclusive. I also hope that its readers 
and others will engage with us in the challenge of continuing to broaden 
the reach of McGilchrist’s work. Were this to happen, it could truly be at 
the forefront of a movement for enlightened social change.
If it is not possible 
to simplify 
McGilchrist’s thesis 
to allow those who 
have not read his 
very lengthy book 
to assimilate its 
key messages, it 
will be extremely 
difficult for his ideas 
to become widely 
disseminated and to 
have the influence 
which they deserve, 
and the world needs
Emma Lindley

65
Reflections
Emma lindley is a social scientist with a particular interest in education about 
mental illness and senior researcher in the Social Brain Centre.
Michael Gibson
Our view of the world is a peculiar, paradoxical synthesis which fails 
to surprise us.
Why was I so utterly enthralled by Iain McGilchrist’s Master and his 
Emissary when I first began to read it a year ago? The answer is simple 
enough: it was because he quite obviously had found the answer to a 
crucial question that I myself had raised some forty years ago and had 
been unable to answer.
But first, something about myself:
I spent over three decades working as an art critic in Paris and, if I am 
to believe what a Parisian art dealer told me one day, I had the reputation 
of ‘actually looking at the paintings I wrote about’. This certainly raises 
some questions about what the other critics were up to. What is certain is 
that I gradually learned to read paintings (to the extent at least that it had 
anything to say) the way others read novels, and one of my recent books 
(The Mill and the Cross) subjects Bruegel’s Way to Calvary to this sort 
of treatment.
In those years, like so many others, I clearly felt that all was not 
well with the world and, in 1975, I summed up my perception of our 
industrial society in these words:
Polyphemus, with a single eye in the middle of his forehead, has made 
his home in the dark socket of a cave which he seals up with a heavy stone. 
Bottled up in there with his companions, Ulysses (who claims his name 
is Nobody), is destined to die. Polyphemus, according to his promise, 
is saving him for the last, but he will devour him in the end.
Ulysses imprisoned is a figure of our present situation. Only we 
know that Ulysses will manage to escape, whereas in our own case 
nothing is assured.
After which I went on to provide a more detailed assessment of 
our predicament:
The mark of the Cyclops is that single round eye. He only has half 
of the vision that humans enjoy. The depth which our eyes perceive, and 
which allows us to move with ease about the world, is a product of those 
two distinct and apparently irreconcilable angles from which we approach 
all things: the lucid glance which seeks out the given and perceives all 
causes, and the prophetic glance, which senses the possible and defines 
our purpose.  This double vision catches all things under two different 
aspects.  Yet we do not sense this difference in everyday life, and our view 
of the world is a peculiar, paradoxical synthesis which fails to surprise 
us, until we stop to think.
Although I knew nothing about hemisphere functions at the time, 
I can’t help feeling that the eye stands in quite nicely for the hemisphere 
to which it is attached. Yet this was not exactly what I had in mind then, 
since I was explicitly referring to cause and purpose. But it was only 
upon reading Iain’s book that I came to realise how close I had been to 
Iain McGilchrist 
found a suitable 
way of addressing 
our left hemisphere 
Cyclops and of 
forcing him to 
‘acknowledge that 
a portion of the 
world lay beyond 
his grasp’
Michael Gibson

Divided brain, divided world
66 
the mark when I declared that ‘our view of the world is a peculiar, para­
doxical synthesis which fails to surprise us.’
It was no doubt our ‘failure to be surprised’ that led us into the trap 
in the first place.
Still, something had to be undertaken to get us out of this predicament 
and so I concluded with what might be viewed as a cry for help. ‘Is there 
anyone out there who knows how to reason this monster and get us out of 
this trap?’
Suppose a beyond that might be foreign to the world that Polyphemus 
is capable of recognising, but which would nonetheless be found­
ed within it. Such a beyond, if it exists, would constitute the specific 
realm of the philosophy of culture, just as the realm of the philosophy 
of science is embodied in the propositions of the sciences of nature.  
Some sort of ‘outside the world’ must be found if a meaning is to exist, 
an answer to the questions that solicit us. But if we are to escape from 
the sealed cave in which we have been trapped, this ‘outside’ must also 
be made to appear legitimate to the hungry keeper blocking the exit. 
Polyphemus must be made to acknowledge that a portion of the world 
lies beyond his grasp, and that the propositions of the natural sciences 
do not account for every aspect of reality. As things now stand, however, 
Polyphemus is determined to take no other proposition into account.
And while those familiar with Iain’s thesis may find my appeal rather 
to the point, I certainly hadn’t an inkling of how we were to go about 
‘converting the Cyclops’. 
This being the case, you can imagine my extreme delight when I 
realised that this was precisely what Iain McGilchrist had set out to do 
in the interval – and had indeed successfully accomplished: he had found 
a suitable way of addressing our left hemisphere Cyclops and of forcing 
him to ‘acknowledge that a portion of the world lay beyond his grasp’.  
I should perhaps make it quite clear that my Cyclops stands, not for the 
industrial society (though it is indeed his society) but for the half-brained 
cultural outlook which has momentarily engulfed the industrial world 
and has reached its brilliant but totally misguided zenith in such bodies 
as the Rand Corporation (‹rational choice›) and Goldman Sachs (‹greed is 
good›). The Cyclops is part of our own mind, and it is his triumph in our 
own minds that has given us the world we now live in.
So the good news today is that the devouring monster can indeed be 
made to understand the scientific discourse thanks to Iain McGilchrist’s 
sweeping scientific, philosophical and literary vision, which provides us 
with precisely the language we needed to ‘reason the monster’.  
To this I would like to add, and this will have to be my modest contri­
bution to this scintillating event, that just as the Cyclops needs to be fed 
the (to him) totally ungraspable half of the truth when it is set before 
him in scientifically persuasive terms, so too, the other half of our mind 
(let’s call it Titania for the occasion), needs to be provided with the sort 
of translation that recasts the purely factual and causal findings of the 
sciences into the sort of metaphorical and purpose-laden idiom that 
our imagination understands so well. 
In this task, works of the imagination should obviously prove helpful.
Not that one should expect mere intuition to rush to the defence 
of solid science. The opposite is usually the case. But under certain 
So the good news 
today is that the 
devouring monster 
can indeed be made 
to understand the 
scientific discourse 
thanks to Iain 
McGilchrist’s 
sweeping scientific, 
philosophical and 
literary vision, 
which provides 
us with precisely 
the language we 
needed to ‘reason 
the monster’ 
Michael Gibson 

67
Reflections
circumstances perhaps, and with the fond blessing of the sciences, intui­
tion may prove helpful in preparing the ground which will then have to be 
dug up in order to lay the enduring foundations of knowledge.
I actually set out on precisely such an intuitive venture at the turn of 
the millennium by writing an elaborate fictional defence of the imagina­
tion. Four years later, I had on my hands a thousand-page, three-volume 
manuscript entitled Chronicles of the Greater Dream. Published under 
the pseudonym of Miguel Errazu (the third volume this year), this trilogy 
turned out to be quite as long as Iain’s Master, which is indeed so very 
long that its author engagingly admits that if he hadn’t written the book 
he most likely would never have had the time to read it. 
The Chronicles do seem to reflect an intuitive view of the matter that 
Iain McGilchrist develops in a proper scientific form. And I suspect that 
both forms are necessary, to provide the same information that both hemi­
spheres need, in an analytical and a metaphorical form.
Michael Francis Gibson is an art critic, art historian, independent scholar and 
writer, published regularly in the International Herald Tribune, who lives in Paris.
Simon Christmas
We should not ask how Iain’s argument could have practical implications: 
it is already having them.
From what Iain says, I understand that many people have already ex­
pressed their gratitude to him for writing The Master and his Emissary. 
I am one of them; and while I can only speculate why others have been 
grateful, I do have an idea what difference the book has made to me. 
First, it has given me a better way of grasping many things I had 
already thought or felt. By doing so, it has made those thoughts and 
feelings clearer and more meaningful. Iain himself notes that there is little 
in the book that one might not arrive at by some other route. I think that 
is key to its impact: it speaks to an audience who have already fumbled 
their way to an intellectual discontent for which Iain’s argument provides 
a shape, a story, a narrative. 
Secondly, by doing so, the argument does not just give me an individu­
al, intellectual benefit. It delivers something much more basic: a sense that 
I am not alone. Opportunities to talk to others – such as that provided by 
the Social Brain Centre – amplify this. 
Thirdly, and by no means least, the book brilliantly characterises the 
predicament I and those others find ourselves in. The ‘hall of mirrors’ 
is perhaps the most powerful metaphor in the book, a modern answer 
to Plato’s cave, a vivid expression of not only the cultural trap we have 
sprung, but also the challenge we face – all of us face, including those 
sympathetic to Iain’s argument – breaking free.
None of the above count as behavioural outcomes of the kind a high-
ranking policy-maker might be interested in; but they are of immense 
personal importance, and are still working their slow subtle effects on the 
actions I take – such as giving up half a day of my life to attend a seminar 
at the RSA, or making the time to write this. 
I think that is 
key to its impact: 
it speaks to an 
audience who 
have already 
fumbled their way 
to an intellectual 
discontent for which 
Iain’s argument 
provides a shape, 
a story, a narrative
Simon Christmas

Divided brain, divided world
68 
In light of which, we should not ask how Iain’s argument could have 
practical implications: it is already having them. A more fruitful question 
may to be ask how and why the book’s impact has so far been limited. 
For my part, I suspect the source of the limitation lies in the book’s main 
strength: the very things that make it so powerful for an audience of the 
already-discontent also confine it to that audience.
I’m not talking here about the length of the book. Nudge, while a 
short book, is probably about twenty times longer than it needed to be, 
yet people seem to have waded through it in their thousands. Nor am I 
recommending a bullet-points and toolkits approach. I am talking about 
rhetoric and story-telling.
In particular, the characterisation of the two hemispheres in the book 
worries me. I can’t quite shake the image of a moustachioed and top-
hatted left hemisphere tying a quaking and pathetic (both senses) right 
hemisphere to the train tracks. Put simply, the left hemisphere is the villain 
of the piece, and I am not sure this helps. Even if true, it doesn’t help: 
one doesn’t win arguments by being right.
It would help even less if people started making the all too easy leap 
(without Iain’s blessing, I know) from a villainous left hemisphere to 
villainous ‘left brain people’.
To recast the argument and retell the story in ways that will draw in 
different audiences, we – by which I mean those of us who have already 
bought the story as it stands and think it worthy of a wider hearing – 
will need to use both our hemispheres. Yes, we will need to master the 
facts and logic that will appeal to others’ overweening left hemispheres: 
but we will also need to empathise and feel our way into the perspec­
tives of fellow human beings who do still have a right hemisphere, 
but rely more on the perspective offered by the left – by habit, by choice, 
or because they feel they have to. One can sometimes win arguments by 
first listening and understanding.
If I have a criticism of Iain, it is not that he has written a book 
that appeals only to one audience. How could he have done otherwise? 
And what a necessary book! It is that, when asked questions about 
that book, his answers all too often seem to amount to little more than 
‘Yes, I said that on page x’. Because the book is so compendious, this 
is normally true. But the rhetorical effect is a strange one – as if the only 
way of escaping the ‘hall of mirrors’ is to enter a web of footnotes. The 
challenge, it seems to me, is not to defend the argument but to extend it; 
and this will require not the left hemisphere’s habit of fitting everything 
into what it already knows, but the right brain’s openness to newness 
and surprise in whatever it encounters.
Simon Christmas is an independent social researcher with extensive 
experience across the public and private sector. He is a visiting senior research 
fellow in the Centre for Public Policy Research at King’s College London.
The challenge, 
it seems to me, 
is not to defend 
the argument but 
to extend it; and 
this will require not 
the left hemisphere’s 
habit of fitting 
everything into 
what it already 
knows, but the 
right brain’s 
openness to 
newness and 
surprise in whatever 
it encounters
Simon Christmas

69
Reflections
John Wakefield
It provides a new sort of understanding of a problem already perceived 
but seemingly without solution.
For the purposes of the Social Brain Centre, purposes described by 
Jonathan as being (at least in part) ‘wanting to reach for tangible practi­
cal and policy implications’ in The Master and his Emissary, its author’s 
claims regarding the practical utility of his thesis could hardly be more 
unpromising. Iain comes close to denying that there are any. 
Specifically, he insists that his book provides no ‘causal explanation’ 
of what may be going on in the world. He says that when asked what the 
book tells us about the world that could not be discovered by other forms 
of human inquiry his answer is: ‘Nothing’. He then goes on: ‘But that’s 
also true of a map’ – adding that whilst we could find out everything 
that’s on a map by trudging around the landscape in the rain, it seems 
more sensible not to throw the map away.
Two things may be noted here, though. Iain’s ‘But’ implies that he 
acknowledges that there may be a utility of some sort; and his analogy 
with the map seems to define that utility as being descriptive rather 
than explanatory.
Descriptions of things do, of course, have their uses but I rather 
imagine that the Social Brain Centre is looking to Iain’s book for some­
thing more than a description to get its teeth into. Yet it needn’t give up 
in disappointment because Iain does not eschew explanation altogether. 
During the discussion he said: ‘The structure of the brain constrains 
what we know’. Turn this around and we have a claim to an explanation: 
what we know is (in part) the effect of (caused by) the structure of the 
brain. Of course this is no more than an expression of the uncontroversial 
claim that because the phenomenological world is the world as it exists 
in consciousness and as consciousness is mediated by the brain, what the 
phenomenological world can be is constrained by the structure of the 
brain. Nonetheless, this takes us beyond description into explanation: the 
phenomenological world we inhabit takes the form it takes because it is 
constrained by the structure of the brain.
This takes us straight to the question: ‘How (in what way) does the 
structure of the brain constrain what we know?’ and thence into the meat 
of Iain’s book.
In this respect it is perhaps misleading of Iain to deny that his thesis 
tells us anything about the world that we could not discover through 
other forms of human inquiry. On the contrary, it not only tells us that 
what we know is constrained by the structure of our brains (an uncon­
troversial claim), but also purports to tell us how (in what way) it does 
so – namely, by the dynamic interaction within our unified consciousness 
of the two hemispheres each with its own discernible ‘take’ on the world. 
Furthermore, he claims that the nature of that interaction means that, 
currently, the effect of the constraint is manifest in our understanding the 
world increasingly according to the dominant left hemisphere’s ‘take’ on 
it. Put more colloquially, he is telling us that in inhabiting the world we 
It is perhaps 
misleading of 
Iain to deny that 
his thesis tells us 
anything about 
the world that we 
could not discover 
through other forms 
of human inquiry. 
On the contrary, 
it not only tells 
us that what we 
know is constrained 
by the structure 
of our brains (an 
uncontroversial 
claim), but also 
purports to tell 
us how (in what 
way) it does so
John Wakefield

Divided brain, divided world
70 
inhabit we are increasingly in thrall to the left hemisphere’s ‘take’ and that 
this is radically affecting our behaviour and, as a consequence, the very 
substance of the actual world we are living in. And it is sending us to hell 
in a handcart.
This is surely explanation in spades. No wonder that the Social Brain 
Centre, with its concern to see how, more generally, what we are learning 
about the brain might have ‘tangible practical and policy implications’, 
pricks up its ears.
But no wonder too that a reading of Iain’s book as explanatory raises 
objections. It seems to me that Ray Tallis’s objections (I hope he will 
forgive me if I have misunderstood him) are rooted in a perfectly under­
standable reading of Iain’s book as offering a causal explanation of our 
predicament. From memory, he seemed to give (at least) four reasons why 
he thinks it doesn’t.
First, he objects that Iain’s thesis explains nothing that cannot better 
be explained by treating the phenomenon to be explained closer to its 
own terms (ie not at brain level). Secondly, he argues that it is misleading 
to look at brain functioning solely in terms of the different ‘takes’ of 
the two hemispheres because both hemispheres are always in play in any 
activity and in any case there is far more to the functioning of the brain 
than can be understood simply by looking at any differences between 
the hemispheres. Thirdly, he claims Iain’s argument is circular: that the 
structure of the brain is used to explain the phenomenological world, but 
what is seen in the phenomenological world is used to explain how the 
brain functions. And fourthly, he argues that the book is full of unsup­
ported and tendentious generalisations; he believes this to be especially 
so in the historical account given in Part Two and in the final ‘The Master 
Betrayed’ section, a thinly disguised account of the contemporary world 
presented as an imaginary world in which the left hemisphere has finally 
been victorious in overcoming the right hemisphere. (Again, my apologies 
if I have misremembered and therefore misrepresented Ray’s objections.)
What exasperates Iain is that Ray is saying nothing (Iain claims) that 
he has not himself said in the book. So how can what Ray says constitute 
a substantive critique? Iain points out that he himself endlessly bangs 
on making the point that he does not think that phenomena should be 
explained reductively at brain level and that explanations should be 
sought at levels appropriate to those phenomena. He constantly repeats 
the point that any adequate account of the relationship between brain 
activity and its perceived effects must acknowledge that both hemispheres 
are almost always in play and that hemisphere difference is far from being 
the only relevant factor. He makes no bones about the fact that he sees 
the world reflected in the structure of the brain and vice versa. And he 
protests that it is impossible to write history without generalising, impos­
sible to generalise without simplifying and that exceptions can always be 
found to challenge any generalised historical account. Furthermore, he 
draws our attention to the fact that he prefaces Part Two by warning read­
ers that the historical account they are about to read will be no different 
in this respect. (Apologies once more if I have not done justice to Iain’s 
response to Ray.)
But Iain’s exasperation is not only with the detail of Ray’s critique 
of his book, detail derived from reading it as offering an explanatory 
So is Iain trying to 
eat his cake and 
have it here – by 
constructing what 
appears to be an 
explanatory theory 
only to deny it is 
explanatory; and by 
attempting to defuse 
specific objections 
to the perceived 
explanatory 
theory by himself 
embracing those 
objections as though 
they were part of 
his argument?
John Wakefield 

71
Reflections
account of our world. Iain categorically denies that he is offering any 
causal explanations in the first place.
Explanation, description or something else?
So is Iain trying to eat his cake and have it here – by constructing what 
appears to be an explanatory theory only to deny it is explanatory; and 
by attempting to defuse specific objections to the perceived explanatory 
theory by himself embracing those objections as though they were part 
of his argument?
Perhaps (though I happen to think not). It seems to me the riddle may 
be unravelled by seeing Iain’s argument not in terms of the dichotomy 
between description and explanation but in an entirely different way. 
So how might we otherwise regard it?
One way to do so would be through the lens of Iain’s own thesis. 
(Palpably, this begs the question it is supposed to answer, but bear with me.)
Iain’s thesis (in crude form) is that it is through the right hemisphere 
that we have access to the raw material that makes up the phenomeno­
logical world and that the left hemisphere then processes that material 
(‘re-presents’ it) to create a form that is more precise, certain and usable. 
It then persuades itself (and tries to persuade ‘us’) that its re-presentation 
is the true and certain reality. This misleads us. Iain’s view is that the 
optimal procedure has the left hemisphere deliver its re-presentation back 
to the right hemisphere for re-interpretation (so to speak) in order that we 
should not be misled.
One of the beneficial aspects of this optimal procedure – perhaps the 
most beneficial and why it is optimal – is that the right hemisphere sheds 
the certainty with which the left hemisphere regards its re-presentation 
and instead sees it as more provisional, as being not the be-all-and-end-all 
explanation or even description of things, no matter how convincing such 
descriptions and explanations may seem.
One way, therefore, to see the argument about whether Iain is offer­
ing us explanation or description of how the phenomenological world 
comes about is to see it as an argument still being conducted solely in the 
left hemisphere. If only the left hemisphere would transfer its argument 
back to the right hemisphere, then it could be resolved by allowing the 
thesis to be seen in a different light – as neither an explanation of how the 
phenomenological world comes about (in the sense of a causal explana­
tion, still less a reductive one) nor a mere description. Rather, his thesis 
might then be seen as providing ‘an understanding’ of how it comes about 
(in which, in the phrase ‘an understanding’, the indefinite article is quite 
as important as the noun).
That understanding depends fully on both the descriptive and explana­
tory work done by the left hemisphere but is imbued by the sense of the 
provisional, of the unembarrassed tentativeness about the precise status 
of what it conceives, characteristic of the right hemisphere. In ourselves 
being privy to this understanding we are persuaded we have learned 
something without being cocksure that we have fully solved our problems.
How might this point be made without begging the question (ie 
without having recourse to Iain’s own thesis)? Perhaps by reflecting on 
what it is we would be demanding if we required his thesis to satisfy us 
in providing a watertight causal explanation of how the brain brings the 
His insistent 
and surely 
incontrovertible 
point is that we 
should not think 
of the metaphoric 
as being opposed 
to the literal but 
rather as a stage in 
the evolution of our 
understanding of a 
phenomenon that 
may (or may not) 
lead to a later stage 
we refer to as literal 
understanding
John Wakefield

Divided brain, divided world
72 
phenomenological world into being. Such a causal explanation would 
surely have to include a watertight causal explanation of the relationship 
between the brain and consciousness. But we know that (as of now) such 
an explanation is simply unavailable. Equally, though, we believe that 
no explanation of consciousness (and thus of how the phenomenologi­
cal world comes into being) would pass muster if it ignored the role of 
the brain.
In such circumstances, would we be sensible to dismiss a provisional 
account of how the brain, its structure and its functioning bring the 
phenomenological world into being simply because it failed to satisfy 
criteria for judging hypotheses concerning causal explanations of more 
amenable phenomena? And if such a provisional account strikes us 
as providing ‘an understanding’ that seems plausible and persuasive, 
would we not do better to give it attention while remaining mindful of its 
provisional status?
This is what it seems to me Iain is inviting us to do by discussing his 
own thesis in relation to metaphor. His insistent and surely incontrovert­
ible point is that we should not think of the metaphoric as being opposed 
to the literal but rather as a stage in the evolution of our understanding 
of a phenomenon that may (or may not) lead to a later stage we refer to 
as literal understanding. It seems to me that Iain’s thesis provides us with 
‘an understanding’ that is metaphoric and that may (or may not) one day 
come to be regarded as literal. 
On such a view, the issue of whether Iain’s thesis is explanatory or 
‘merely’ descriptive can perhaps be parked. Rather, the more appropriate 
questions to ask are whether the thesis, as offering ‘an understanding’ 
(or, as contemporary parlance would rather drearily put it, ‘a narrative’), 
resonates with what our other experience tells us about the world; and 
whether it offers anything new.
The answer to the first must surely be ‘Yes’. Iain himself has been 
inundated by unsolicited communications from people unknown to 
him testifying to the fact. Many of us, having read his book, now find 
ourselves inhabiting a world that seems continuously to echo it.
On the second, the answer seems also to be ‘Yes’. What he has brought 
together concerning what human beings now know about how the two 
hemispheres view the world differently surely suggests, at the very least, 
that there is something going on here that most of us were entirely 
unaware of before Iain wrote his book.
What about truth?
But resonance and novelty are not the only criteria by which such a 
proferred understanding should be judged. There is also the tricky issue 
of truth. The concept is always tricky, of course, and is perhaps the more 
so with regard to so loose a notion as ‘an understanding’, for which the 
criteria of truth may be different from the ones with which we are familiar 
when dealing with description or explanation.
Both in the document that Iain and Jonathan put together and in 
the subsequent discussion, the matter of falsifiability came up. The 
point was made that maybe this was not the sort of thesis for which 
there could be evidence that would falsify it. To many, this itself (if true) 
would make the thesis anathema; to others it would mean that we needed 
In ourselves being 
privy to this 
understanding 
we are persuaded 
we have learned 
something without 
being cocksure that 
we have fully solved 
our problems
John Wakefield

73
Reflections
to refine our concept of truth so that it retained meaning even when the 
falsifiability criterion seemed inappropriate.
For what it’s worth (which may not be very much), I am not persuaded 
that the falsifiability criterion is wholly inappropriate here. I think (again, 
please correct me if I am wrong) that in our table discussion during the 
non-plenary session, Ray said in reply to a question from me, that while 
he accepted that ‘at the extremes’ (ie when each hemisphere is functioning 
wholly alone) the account Iain provides of how (in what way) each does 
so (ie what ‘take’ each has on the world) is accurate, he (Ray) was far from 
persuaded that this had much bearing on how the brain normally works 
(ie with both hemispheres operative). So I suppose if it could be demon­
strated beyond doubt that the way the hemispheres function when ‘alone’ 
had no bearing whatsoever on the way they function in tandem, then I 
guess the thesis would be falsified. Iain, of course, goes into our current 
state of knowledge on this in his book; but my point is not whether or not 
our current state of knowledge disproves his thesis but whether, in theory, 
evidence could come along that would disprove it. I would suggest that, 
in theory, it could. But it could do so only if, in the first place, Iain’s theory 
of brain functioning were presented as offering a sufficient causal expla­
nation and he himself denies that that is what he is doing. Nonetheless, 
such evidence would clearly dent the plausibility of his account presented 
provisionally as offering ‘an understanding’.
So with regard to truth, when we are dealing with an account, an 
understanding, in which explanations provide part of the content but 
do not presume to be comprehensive and sufficient, we are left with 
much less stringent criteria for deciding its truth or otherwise. The 
pertinent criterion may be as seemingly limp as something like whether 
the account is convincingly suggestive. This might seem to some 
wholly inadequate; hardly better than asking, for example, whether 
Tolstoy’s fictional world ‘rings true’. But if our demands on truth are 
no greater than this, then the convincingly suggestive may be good 
enough. Notwithstanding the extraordinary polymathic erudition of 
his book (or perhaps because of it), Iain seems to be saying that maybe 
we shouldn’t be expecting much more, and certainly not something 
conclusively explanatory.
How to read the book (and how not to)
That may be all very well for minds subtle enough to recognise that there 
are many ways for the world to be understood and that they can’t all be 
judged by the same criteria. But readers read books as they wish to read 
them and the risk is that, for all Iain’s disclaimers, his book will be read 
as offering a causally explanatory account of our predicament, even a 
reductively explanatory one, because that is what our culture leads us to 
expect. Indeed if Iain’s own thesis is to be believed, this is not so much a 
risk as a dead certainty. 
It would not be unreasonable to suppose that Iain would see the left 
hemisphere as the culprit here, deliberately devaluing all other ways of 
understanding the world in order to create a monopoly for its own ‘take’. 
Others might riposte that if Iain were indeed to blame the left hemisphere 
for this state of affairs, it might be because he himself was in thrall to 
his own left hemisphere-constructed theory about why we may have 
The danger here 
is obvious: that 
the theory of 
left hemisphere-
dominance 
becomes used as 
an explanation 
for everything
John Wakefield

Divided brain, divided world
74 
narrowed down the range of ways of understanding the world. But we 
don’t need to get into an argument about whether our culture’s predilec­
tion for reductive explanation over all other ways of accounting for the 
world is a function of left hemisphere-domination or not. We can surely 
agree as a matter of simple observation that that is, increasingly, the 
predilection. It would seem to follow, then, that no author could construct 
an account of, an understanding of, our world with the imaginative force 
and scientific rigour of Iain’s book without making statements that 
would inevitably be read as explanatory, even reductively so.
The danger here is obvious: that the theory of left hemisphere-
dominance becomes used as an explanation for everything. Eagerly 
misused (to quote Jonathan’s fine phrase), Iain’s thesis about the left 
hemisphere turns his ‘second-favourite hemisphere’ into the latest in a 
long line of evil agents thought to be responsible for our woes (yellow 
bile and the uncontrollable Id are two predecessors that come to mind).
It is hard to think how Iain himself could have warned against this 
danger more vigorously than he has already done. But he is perhaps the 
last person to be able to do so effectively. However anxious he has been 
to print his own health warning in bold type and capital letters it is likely 
to be disregarded by those swept along by the rhetorical power of his 
account and who have become habituated to converting such accounts 
into reductive explanation. In their different ways, Darwin and Keynes 
suffered similar problems.
It perhaps requires someone else to utter the health warnings, which 
is why Ray may be a necessary party-pooper. Even if he is saying only 
what Iain has already said (and he may dispute that), to say it from 
outside, as it were, may give it more force. The danger with such party-
pooping, however, is that it might close down the party, something Ray 
insists he does not wish to do – there is much at the party he really enjoys, 
he says. The two disclaimers mirror each other – Iain’s vehemently deny­
ing that his account is reductive and Ray’s protesting that there is much 
that he finds of value and interest in Iain’s account. Neither, perhaps, 
would be necessary if our culture were less predisposed to seek reductive 
explanation in all accounts of the world. Iain and Ray would not then 
seem so much at odds with each other.
Such are the inevitable consequences, I would suggest, of constructing 
an account of the world daring enough to transcend the categories of 
description versus causal explanation by being couched in the terms of 
what I have called ‘an understanding’ and then presenting it to a reader­
ship with a predilection for reducing all accounts to the form ‘A causes B’.
How should the Social Brain Centre ‘use’ Iain’s thesis?
Where does this leave the Social Brain Centre? Needing to tread with 
very great care, I would suggest. Palpably, Jonathan does not need to be 
told this. His own talk of the ‘eager misuse of ‘left brain thinking’ and 
‘right brain thinking’ in popular psychology and management litera­
ture’, and his evident recognition of the risks he runs in succumbing to 
temptation (‘it is so difficult, for me at least, not to want to reach for 
tangible practical and policy implications … ’) make this clear enough. 
Equally, though, he does not want to run away just because he might 
be about to enter a minefield: ‘it would be a mistake to throw out the 
neural baby with the manic bathwater’. Put in terms of my reading of 
How could an 
account that 
purports to offer 
no more than 
‘an understanding’ 
be helpful here? 
I would suggest 
that it  is through 
the force of 
the realisation 
(achieved by 
reading such 
an account), on 
the part of an agent 
already perceiving 
a problem in his 
own localised 
province, that 
that problem is 
reflective of a much 
bigger problem
John Wakefield

75
Reflections
Iain’s book as offering ‘an understanding’, one could say, simply: ‘there 
is something very important going on here and it most certainly should 
not be ignored’.
My own view is that ‘needing to tread carefully’ means, perhaps, 
two things. The first is to be careful how one uses the terms. It was strik­
ing how quickly, in our discussion, the phrases ‘left hemisphere’ and ‘right 
hemisphere’ were being bandied about as though they were uncontentious 
agents in an explanatory theory. It is hard to see how this could have been 
avoided. Even if those using the phrases were using them as metaphors 
deployed in a way consistent with the provisional nature of Iain’s account, 
the phrases would inevitably have been heard as something more solid 
and explanatory.
The second is for the Social Brain Centre to be extremely selective 
when considering which areas of practical and policy work might benefit 
from a reading of Iain’s book. 
I was perhaps a little extreme and unkind during the discussion when I 
said that the attempt (in the document) to relate Iain’s thesis to the issue of 
climate change ‘approached the outer margins of the barking’. On re-reading 
it I realised that the exchange between Jonathan and Iain on the subject was 
more measured than I had remembered it. Nonetheless, I think the underlying 
point stands. It is not that there is no relationship between Iain’s thesis and 
climate change – what, after all, is immune to being seen through the lens 
of Iain’s thesis? It is rather that the distance between the phenomenon to be 
explained (climate change) and the thing to explain it (left hemisphere domi­
nance) is so vast as to make the explanation not only inutile but ludicrous. 
Iain, denying that his theory is explanatory, would be the first to say so.
But it is worth exploring why this is so. The problem of climate 
change, I would argue, is not that we lack adequate explanations for it, 
nor even ideas about how to solve it; it is that we lack an agent capable 
of implementing those solutions. Except in the most indirect sense, Iain’s 
thesis provides no help in bringing into being an effective agent.
This itself is suggestive of the circumstances in which Iain’s thesis 
might be helpful and thus of those cases of practical and policy work 
where the Social Brain Centre might fruitfully seek help from it: namely, 
in circumstances where a problem has not only already been identified but 
where there is an agent who wants to do something about it and is capable 
(in theory at least) of doing so. 
How could an account that purports to offer no more than ‘an under­
standing’ be helpful here? I would suggest that it is through the force of 
the realisation (achieved by reading such an account), on the part of an 
agent already perceiving a problem in his own localised province, that that 
problem is reflective of a much bigger problem; that the potential conse­
quences of that bigger problem persisting are graver than he had imagined 
to be the case when he saw only its local manifestation; and that to see the 
local problem in this bigger context throws up possibilities for overcom­
ing the problem that might not have occurred to him unless he had seen it 
in this broader context. Such is the power of any account that helps us to 
see the familiar anew. Such, I believe, is the power of Iain’s book and its 
capacity to be of use.
This is what I meant when I said that the value of the book to those of a 
practical and policy-making bent is perhaps best thought of as therapeutic. 
In most cases 
the reaction has 
been that this 
perspective is a 
singularly profound 
contribution 
that reveals, in a 
way that is both 
compelling and 
credible, the form 
of the pattern 
underlying the most 
challenging issues 
of our time
John Wakefield

Divided brain, divided world
76 
It provides a new sort of understanding of a problem already perceived but 
seemingly without solution. Seen in this way, the practical value of Iain’s 
book conforms with the old joke. ‘How many psychotherapists does it take 
to change a light bulb? Only one, but the light bulb needs to want to be 
changed.’ The agent needs to see a problem and to want to do something 
about it for Iain’s broader thesis to be of potential use. This criterion, I 
would suggest, might steer the Social Brain Centre into selecting those 
cases of practical work and policy-making that might be susceptible to the 
beneficial influence of Iain’s account of our predicament.
To give an example: governments (or at least quite a few politicians on 
all sides) seem aware of the deleterious effect on education of increasing 
government interference in what goes on in schools. But their solutions 
tend only to increase the bureaucratic interference, making the problem 
worse. (If anyone thinks the new Free School policy is an exception, they 
should talk to people trying to set up free schools.) Seeing the danger­
ously self-compounding nature of this approach in the larger context 
expounded in Iain’s book might help politicians to realise they need a 
radically different approach. I am not asking anyone to hold their breath; 
I’m simply trying to indicate the sort of area of policy it might be produc­
tive for the Social Brain Centre to make use of Iain’s book.
In the simplest terms, Iain’s book provides a new, bigger picture and 
(in my view) an immensely suggestive one within which to understand our 
narrowly disaggregated problems. Understanding a problem is the first 
necessary stage in trying to deal with it; and for those already perceiving the 
need to do something about our problems, Iain’s book seems to me to have 
the potential to be of great use. Even if what he says is still ‘only a meta­
phor’ – even, perhaps, if it only ever remains one – it is a metaphor with 
great power to stir the imagination. And without imagination we are sunk. 
John Wakefield is an economist, writer, and former political journalist 
and campaigner who has worked with John Humphreys and David Owen 
and was previously the editor of Walden, the sunday lunchtime political 
interview programme. 
In the simplest 
terms, Iain’s book 
provides a new, 
bigger picture and 
… an immensely 
suggestive one 
within which 
to understand 
our narrowly 
disaggregated 
problems
John Wakefield

77
Afterword
Afterword 
I have a friend with a background in espionage who tells me that the most 
important distinction for spies to keep in mind while looking for intel­
ligence, and one that often keeps them alive, is the distinction between 
interesting and important. Nobody who has read this far will doubt that 
Iain’s ideas are interesting, but the question we have been wrestling with 
remains more difficult: in what ways are they important?
During the course of reading Iain’s work, the process of preparing 
and conducting the dialogue, organising the workshop, and compiling 
and writing this document, I have often felt somewhat overwhelmed 
by the effort, but never underwhelmed by the goal. The theory is big, 
difficult and audacious and most people don’t quite know what to do 
with it. So, there have been times where it has felt like the drive to extract 
importance out of the interest has been in vain, but when I reflect on the 
initial motivation, and the potential prize, it feels more like we just have to 
try differently, or better. 
Iain’s work has struck a deep chord in a huge number of people from 
a wide variety of backgrounds all over the world. The nature of that 
appreciation has not simply been: ‘that’s a particularly good book, but 
one of many’. No, in most cases the reaction has been that this perspec­
tive is a singularly profound contribution that reveals, in a way that is 
both compelling and credible, the form of the pattern underlying the most 
challenging issues of our time. 
The difficulty, however – and I think there is no good way of saying this 
in less academic language – is the ontological, conceptual, epistemologi­
cal and methodological gaps between the depth and generality of the 
explanatory apparatus, and the personal, social and cultural phenomena 
that it potentially applies to. Those gaps are daunting and difficult, and 
do require a certain intellectual range and versatility, but can we not try 
harder to rise to the challenge? Part of me feels we are needlessly shy 
about trying to generate the necessary intellectual bandwidth that would 
allow us to place more trust in those connections, even though, granted, 
we have to hold so many perspectives in mind at one time to do so. 
In this respect I am reminded of Bill Clinton’s passing remark at the 
Davos Economic Forum in 2006, in which he argued that the challenge 
of integrating all our best ideas to solve planetary problems was that we 
needed a ‘higher level of consciousness’ to make sense of how they inter-
relate. At the time he made reference to the American Integral Philosopher 
Ken Wilber, but I feel a similar point could be made about the relevance 
of Iain’s contribution.43 I can’t be sure that the work is ‘true’ in every detail 
and every sense, but for those who feel it speaks powerfully to the nature of 
the main challenges we are wrestling with, as I do, it is incumbent on us to 
do what we can to make the ideas as salient and relevant as possible.
We wait for evidence 
of the problem at 
the same time that 
the problem actually 
gets progressively 
harder to deal with. 
We are loading 
the dice against 
ourselves and don’t 
even realise it

Divided brain, divided world
78 
There are two main ways that I feel we need to push harder. The first is 
to make more effort to think about the hemispheres working together but 
competing in certain ways, rather than one being ‘on’ or ‘off’ at a given 
time. Part of the communication challenge is that even though the argu­
ment is about both hemispheres being different phenomenologically ie 
having different ‘worldviews’, they are experienced together. And despite 
constant statements that both are valuable and necessary functionally, 
when it comes to the normative point about the relatively problematic 
left hemisphere ‘take’ becoming increasingly dominant, and the further 
point that this dominance may be self-perpetuating and self-reinforcing, 
even highly intelligent thinkers tend not to accommodate that point in the 
requisite way. For instance in the workshop, among people who had read 
the book or the discussion document, we still, for communicative conveni­
ence, ended up talking about ‘switching’ from ‘right brain thinking’ to 
‘left brain thinking’, which is the kind of intuitive but misleading language 
that Iain’s work was trying to move beyond.
I sense that the subtlety of this part of the argument, which is in 
many ways the normative heart of the matter, and the place where the 
answer to the ‘so-what?’ question resides, is rarely attended to with due 
care. I feel most of us struggle not to think in terms of binary features 
(left vs right) even when what Iain is saying is something much more chill­
ing and significant. In most cases it is always left and right hemispheres 
that are operating and need to operate, but Iain’s argument is that the 
predominant proclivity for most people is gradually veering towards the 
left – and here is the important political point – therefore influencing the 
future probability that we will continue to veer in that direction, with 
potentially disastrous consequences. 
It occurs to me that this part of the theory may be best expressed 
through Bayesian logic, in which assumed probabilities, in this case of 
hemispheric balance, are adjusted in light of the evidence (in this case 
Iain’s arguments for cultural change, including medical evidence on the 
growth in certain psychiatric conditions). In this sense, curiously, I think 
we struggle to ‘get it’ in much the same way that we also struggle to ‘get’ 
the urgency for action on climate change, which is related to the fact that 
we wait for evidence of the problem at the same time that the problem 
actually gets progressively harder to deal with. We are loading the dice 
against ourselves and don’t even realise it.
But that’s all still rather abstract. The second, more concrete point is 
about our inability, despite – I hope – a fairly significant effort, to show 
the direct relevance of Iain’s work to major policy issues of our time. 
I find this frustrating because however many maps you have, they are 
all a part of the same world, and again there is part of me that feels we 
are just not trying hard enough to hold the complexity of the relationships 
in mind. In his book, while reflecting on a similar point, Iain quotes the 
American Pragmatist, John Dewey, who managed to foresee the  growing 
relevance of neuroscientific explanations over a hundred years ago, with­
out assuming they would have to be of a reductive or threatening nature:
I feel most of 
us struggle not 
to think in terms 
of binary features 
(left vs right) even 
when what Iain is 
saying is something 
much more chilling 
and significant

79
Afterword
‘To see the organism in nature, the nervous system in the organism, the 
brain in the nervous system, the cortex in the brain is the answer to the 
problems which haunt philosophy. And when thus seen they will be seen 
to be in, not as marbles are in a box but as events are in history, growing, 
never finished process.’44 (p.142)
We need to work harder to bring that kind of holistic and balanced 
perspective to bear. Here I think a stronger case needs to be made for – 
and I don’t even think we have good terms for such things – Narrative 
touchstones? Indirect relevance? Persuasive metaphors? In his feedback 
reflection John Wakefield calls it ‘an understanding’ and that might be 
enough. Whatever we call it, we need to find a way to give greater epis­
temic warrant to forms of evidence that are indirect, which brain-related 
evidence usually is, even though it tends to be misused to be evidence of 
a causal or reductive nature. Brain hemispheres constrain attention and 
action in certain ways, which are in turn manifest in cultural forms that 
serve to reinforce those forms of attention and action. We cannot say: 
Do X on climate change because the Brain is like Y, but we can and should 
say: when you are thinking deeply and systemically about what to do 
about climate change, don’t forget about the constraints of the brain.
The Social Brain Centre’s core focus will remain relatively practical, 
and our main contribution is to attempt to apply insight into human 
nature to the major challenges of our time. In this context, we now have 
a better sense of how to conceive of the role and relevance of Iain’s work, 
and perhaps more importantly, we have learned a great deal about the 
challenge of conveying the social relevance of the brain along the way.
Dr Jonathan Rowson
Director, RSA Social Brain Centre
We cannot say: 
Do X on climate 
change because the 
Brain is like Y, but 
we can and should 
say: when you are 
thinking deeply and 
systemically about 
what to do about 
climate change, 
don’t forget about 
the constraints of 
the brain

Appendicies

81
Appendix 1
Appendix 1
Some suggested questions for discussion at the RSA Workshop:
General
1.	 What kind of impression does the argument as a whole make on 
you? ie is your response broadly one of eg qualified intellectual 
agreement, general emotional revulsion, or renewed political 
commitment? 
2.	 Does the thesis change how you view the challenges the 
world faces and how we might act on them? If so, why? If not, 
why not?
Scientific
3.	 Does the Science stack up? If you are not qualified to say, how 
much does the Scientific warrant matter to you? In what ways 
does the argument as a whole need ‘the brain’ to give it intel­
lectual warrant and traction?
Philosophical
4.	 The shift from asking what the respective hemispheres do 
(functional) to asking what they are like (phenomenological) 
seems to be of fundamental importance to why the hemispheric 
perspective has social and cultural relevance. Given how much 
seems to follow from this shift of emphasis, how might we work 
to make it more intuitive? 
5.	 How persuaded are you by the nature and strength of the links 
from hemispheres to individual phenomenology, to societal and 
cultural trends?
Behaviour change and value change
6.	 The link between brain and behaviour looks very different when 
you unpack this link through competing forms of phenomenal 
experience and the values inherent in them. Does this perspective 
support the claim that enduring behaviour change strategies 
depend upon promoting certain kinds of values, as argued, 
for instance, in the Common Cause Report. Does the hemi­
spheric perspective add anything important here?
Practical implications 
7.	 Meditation has been mentioned by Iain as one of the ways 
to ensure a greater balance between the hemispheres. In light 
of the argument, why doesn’t it follow that more space, time 

Divided brain, divided world
82 
and resources should be invested in normalising meditation? 
If it does, how, and to whom, might that case be made most 
effectively?
8.	 If Climate Change is a problem of short-termism, denial and 
viewing nature as a resource to be used for profit, and these 
attributes fall out of tendencies of the left-hemisphere, does it 
follow that climate change is directly related to an imbalance of 
the hemispheres? If not, why not? If so, what follows?
9.	 From a hemispheric perspective, achieving and maintain mental 
health begins to look like a challenge of achieving a certain kind 
of balance in forms of attention. In addition to the so-called 
‘work-life balance’, what does the hemispheric perspective tell 
us about the kinds of things we need to try to balance?
Education
10.	It has been said that no matter what we learn about the brain, 
deciding what children should learn will always be a value 
judgment. If value judgments are at least partly a function of 
how the hemispheres interact, and deciding what children might 
benefit from learning relates to hemispheric imbalances that 
play out culturally, does this claim still stand up? Does it matter?

83
Appendix 2
Appendix 2: RSA Workshop, 
5th November 2012
45 
We invited a range of interested parties from a variety of backgrounds 
to read the discussion document and further explore the strength and 
relevance of the thesis in a four and a half hour workshop, hosted on 
the afternoon of 5th November 2012. 
In the first session, our main aim was to examine what participants 
thought and felt about the strength and significance of the thesis in 
general terms. We tried to focus on central assumptions and critical 
turns in the argument, and reflect on, for instance, how well they hold 
up, what has been left unsaid, and why. We also sought general reflec­
tions on the role of ‘root causes’ and ‘grand theory’ in the context of 
addressing contemporary challenges. And in so far as generalisations 
are made we wanted some sense of the ways in which they are helpful 
or unhelpful. 
This session was opened by a short speech by Ray Tallis (reproduced 
as the first feedback piece in the previous section) who was largely very 
sceptical of the whole endeavour.46 Iain McGilchrist responded to the 
points directly before the general discussion began. We broke into three 
groups after about 90 minutes for a more informal discussion that was 
captured by note-takers at each table.
In the second session, we tried to tease out what participants thought 
and felt about the nature and extent of the practical relevance of the 
thesis. We sought imaginative responses to the ‘so what?’ question that 
are to some degree tractable. This objective, of course, is ambitious, 
and not obviously wise, but it was clear to the group that the gap between 
the nature of the hemispheres and whatever social, economic, ecological 
or political issue was at hand would always have to be mediated in some 
way, for instance through phenomenology, values, bodies, relationships 
or institutions. We also sought reflections on the degree of practical 
‘warrant’ afforded by the thesis, and whether this warrant, in so far as it 
exists, applies to specific issues, or is of a more general nature. 
This session was opened by Matthew Taylor who was broadly 
impressed by Iain’s argument, but questioned how the work could be 
applied in practice without being operationalised and therefore instru­
mentalised in a way that didn’t reinforce the left hemispheric tendencies 
that the thesis suggests we should try to guard against.
Rather than give a blow-by-blow set of minutes, I have focussed below 
on what felt to me to be the critical questions and central outcomes of 
the discussion. I have tried to exclude material that was already addressed 
directly in the discussion between myself and Iain, and tried to minimise 
duplication of material that was addressed in the feedback pieces.47

Divided brain, divided world
84 
From ‘The Book’ to ‘The Argument’
‘Where is the edge of this knowledge? What are the known unknowns?’ 
There was some instructive equivocation about the most appropriate 
reference point for the discussion. The book is the most tangible and 
fully developed expression of the ideas as a whole, but the purpose of 
the discussion document and workshop was to go beyond reviewing the 
book, towards considering the strength and significance of the thesis or 
argument. If Iain’s work is going to have enduring ‘impact’, it will be 
because the ideas live and breathe without depending on the book or its 
author.The aim was to move beyond the appreciation of a creative intel­
lectual and literary contribution towards the assessment of the relevance 
and versatility of the author’s major ideas, which have to become accessi­
ble outside of their textual moorings if they are going be helpful to those 
who cannot refer to the intricacies of the book in perpetuity. 
This emphasis on the ideas rather than the text creates two challenges. 
The first is that it leaves it open to Iain and those who value the depth 
and richness of the book to argue that the only fully adequate answer 
to a given question is always the book as a whole, and its references, 
which did happen a few times in the workshop. The other challenge 
is that, as psychiatrist Jeremy Holmes wrote in an extended review of 
Iain’s work, it brings into sharper focus the question: ‘What exactly is 
McGilchrist saying?’48 In his opening remarks, Ray Tallis highlights: 
‘The indicative, as opposed to the subjunctive, mood in which The Master 
is written suggests that I.M. feels that he is dealing with certain facts (left 
hemisphere according to his own thesis) rather than uncertain possibilities 
(right hemisphere according to his thesis); for example, his assertion that 
‘the left hemisphere’s purpose is to use the world. It sees everything – edu­
cation, art, morality, the natural world – in terms of a utilitarian calculus 
only’ sounds pretty certain to me.’
As part of a fuller response, Iain referred to his book, where his 
extensive references make the range and degree of his epistemic caution 
and confidence much clearer. He also expressed the bind he often finds 
himself in when presenting his work in public forums, in which he typi­
cally only has up to about 45 minutes to explain his framework, so he 
has to generalise and simplify the claims, but then he gets criticised for it 
being too generalised and simplified! 
In this respect Ray Tallis’s reference to ‘gigantic generalisations (that) 
overlook the teaming ocean of particulars’ is a striking expression, but 
Iain responded by simply stating that for almost any generalisation, one 
can find evidence that supports or contradicts the claim. In this respect, 
the question seems to be whether the balance of evidence supports the 
way the generalisation is used rhetorically, and on that point, the book 
as a whole is the appropriate reference point.
Iain added that one way of summing up what he was trying to do in 
a more general sense is ‘to raise awareness that we are constructed to see 
things that we currently do not see’. He also referred to the gradual erosion 
of ‘sources of intuitive life’, an evocative expression that has stayed with me. 

85
Appendix 2
Iain also expressed sympathy for Guy Claxton’s reaction to his work, 
which was a more qualified mixture of admiration and ambivalence. Guy 
said that he found the work beautiful and admirable, but it also left him 
a little uneasy. He likened the discussion document to ‘a rabbit warren’, 
and felt that through Iain’s knowledge of the topic and fluency in so 
many areas, that he could often duck down into a different rabbit hole 
to get out of really answering some of the direct questions that were posed 
there. Guy also made an instructive comparison with Stephen Batchelor’s 
description of his experience of ‘escaping’ from Tibetan Buddhism, 
which was related to the experience of being inside ‘a highly elaborate 
and fully internally consistent bubble that, from the inside, offers vast 
explanation and comfort, but from the outside looks increasingly ad hoc 
and dubious.’49, 50
In a later workshop discussion Guy added that the ambivalence was 
grounded in the feeling that the work explains too much in general, and 
therefore too little in particular. In this context he posed the pertinent 
question: ‘Where is the edge of this knowledge? What are the known-
unknowns?’ In the breakout discussion he also highlighted the lack of 
empiricism and rigour applied to some of the anecdotal evidence eg 
examples about children not being able to read faces, which may not 
stand up in face of empirical educational research.
In a similar vein, Theresa Marteau referred to McGilchrist’s work as 
‘a grand theory with a small g’, highlighting its enormous scope, but she 
also felt the challenge in engaging with the work is that Iain is ‘fluent in 
so many epistemologies’ that it is hard to experience traction on the main 
points of contention. In another breakout session the whole group was 
unclear whether Iain’s work was best approached as an argument with a 
conclusion, or a fleshed-out description of what many already implicitly 
feel. I don’t see any way to resolve this tension between the book and the 
argument other than becoming clearer about what the most salient and 
relevant expression of the argument is.
Metaphors or facts (or both?)
‘He may argue that he is talking only metaphorically but the metaphors 
are often presented as literal truth and they are necessary to carry 
his argument.’ 
In our discussion document, Iain was crystal clear (beginning of part one) 
that his argument is not merely a metaphor and yet many still feel that this 
is one of the best ways to characterise it. For instance, Simon Christmas 
suggested that it doesn’t matter if it is ‘all a metaphor’ because it was an 
exciting journey Iain took through the book to get to that metaphor, and 
how Iain conducts the journey is liberating. Ray Tallis remarked that Iain 
‘ … may argue that he is talking only metaphorically but the metaphors 
are often presented as literal truth and they are necessary to carry his 
argument.’ In this respect Simon Christmas’s is right to point out that 
while a good metaphor is great for the people who already reach out for 
this type of explanation, for others, the ‘truth’ of the matter matters a lot. 
I suspect Iain himself is one of those people! He is no different from 
anybody else in having to use metaphors while talking about mind, brain 

Divided brain, divided world
86 
and consciousness, and is suitably scientific in choosing to be tentative 
on matters where the evidence is equivocal. That said, to my mind he 
has always been clear that he intends his argument to be understood as 
a statement of probable fact rather than as a suggestive metaphor. The 
highly complex relationship between the brain hemispheres and the 
even more complex account of how this relationship plays out in cultural 
terms often has to be described in metaphorical language, most notably 
as ‘The Master and his Emissary’. However, the necessity to communicate 
through metaphors doesn’t mean that the relevant phenomena underpin­
ning these metaphors are themselves merely metaphorical! 
For instance near the end of section 2.4 Iain reiterates that he is 
stopping short of certainty because he feels that is appropriate but adds: 
‘It would be quite extraordinary if the differences I refer to, the same 
distinctions that artists and philosophers have for centuries pointed to 
as irresoluble conflicts in the human mind or spirit, were not associated 
with the division between the hemispheres, given that the evidence from 
brain science, that that is precisely what they are, is so extensive, coherent 
and compelling.’ So while the argument contains metaphors, it doesn’t 
mean that it is a metaphor, which still begs the question of how best to 
characterise ‘it’.
Description or explanation? 
‘So does the explanation lie in the constraints?’ 
Part of the challenge with establishing agreement on the argument 
is that it’s difficult to know what we are referring to when we ask: 
‘Is it true?’ In this respect John Wakefield’s contribution was invaluable: 
Before thinking about ‘practical implications’ he said it would be help­
ful to agree ‘Where between description and explanation does this 
argument stand?’ On the one hand Iain said in the workshop that he is 
not saying the brain offers ‘an explanation, never mind the explanation’ 
but for his argument more broadly he does try to use the framework 
to try to explain various phenomena in what Ray Tallis calls ‘the 
extracranial world’. 
We began to speak of the brain as a ‘constraint’ on how we perceive 
and act, with Iain’s hemispheric perspective offering a particular account 
of the nature of those constraints in terms of competing patterns of 
attention and values. John Wakefield observed that perhaps it was these 
constraints that were the basis of the explanation for various phenomena. 
I took this to mean that while much of the argument is about describing 
hemispheric differences, the aspect of those differences that is used to 
explain worldly phenomena is the sense in which they constrain (rather 
than cause) our perception and action.
Iain responded by giving the example of air going through an oboe; 
the oboe doesn’t make the sound as such, but rather constrains the air 
in such a way that a particular sound is expressed. Similarly, it is not 
that the brain directly causes particular forms of attention or values, 
but neural constraints can still in a manner of speaking cause things to 
happen. This nuanced perspective gives us a firmer basis on which to try 
to ground practical suggestions and recommendations. 

87
Appendix 2
In the context of these scholastic qualifications, it was good to hear 
Rita Carter say that Iain ‘doesn’t go far enough’. She went further and 
suggested that it felt like Iain doesn’t like what he’s saying enough, and 
needed to toughen up the argument and become less tentative about the 
practical relevance of his work. 
In a similar vein, Nicholas Spice highlighted that he felt conversations 
about the ideas were more often about trying to ‘catch out’ Iain rather 
than appreciating the radiation of the theory. 
Attention
‘The message of the book is really about attention, intention, and coping 
with uncertainty.’ 
Mark Vernon seemed to appreciate this wider radiation of the theory 
and stated that, for him, ‘the message of the book is really about 
attention, intention, and coping with uncertainty.’ He also felt that some 
of the concern about causation above was not necessarily pivotal. The 
book has an Anglo-American slant, but the ideas themselves move into 
a more continental view which is less about pinning down causation and 
more about accepting the fact that causation is mysterious. 
This contribution tallied with my own claim that it was often more 
helpful to speak about two patterns of attention than two hemispheres, 
because patterns of attention were relatively tangible and experiential in a 
way that neural anatomy is not. There seemed to be broad agreement with 
this claim, but much of it felt pragmatic in nature, related to the relatively 
controversial nature of brain-based explanations. For instance, John 
Wakefield advised us not to underestimate the enormous rhetorical power 
of reductionist explanations, and the equally vehement reactions to such 
arguments. Speaking at the level of attention rather than hemispheres is 
one way around that, but you do then lose whatever prestige is attached to 
brain-based explanations, which feels appropriate to some and regrettable 
to others. Again it seems to come back to what you want to do with the 
ideas, and why.
Values 
‘What are values if not neurally instantiated dispositions?’
Tom Crompton’s contribution was useful in respect of this question. 
He highlighted parallels to the WWF/Common Cause report, where they 
explore the importance of social values and the dynamic tension between 
self-enhancement values and self-transcendent values. Similarly, the left 
hemisphere dominance is in a perpetual cycle: market forces come into 
more areas of public life, which strengthen self-enhancing values, which 
then fuels market forces.
Iain seemed to broadly agree with the form of the parallel, even if 
it relied on different forms of evidence. He referred again to the ‘hall 
of mirrors’ expression, in which we are increasingly surrounded by 
things that reflect back on us the ‘take’ of the left hemisphere.

Divided brain, divided world
88 
While it may be relatively straightforward to translate competing 
and complimentary hemispheric perspectives to patterns of attention, 
linking these patterns of attention to particular sets of values is some­
what more complex and contentious, because it is less directly related 
to the evidence or informed by our experience. However, again there 
may be some danger in becoming too tentative. Indeed, Guy Claxton 
raised the pertinent question: ‘What are values if not neutrally 
instantiated dispositions?’ 
Uncertainty
‘Whitehall is dominated by not being able or prepared to deal 
with uncertainty.’ 
One of the more tangible differences between hemispheres is the attitude 
to certainty, and the perception that there is a growing lack of toler­
ance for, and appreciation of, uncertainty was highlighted by several 
participants. Many felt the dislike of uncertainty was related to a mis­
understanding of the nature of risk, which is often framed as something 
bad to be avoided, rather than something endemic and probabilistic that 
has to be intelligently understood and negotiated. 
Simon Christmas, who has experience working as a researcher 
for government suggested that Whitehall is dominated by not being 
prepared to deal with uncertainty, adding that he spends a great deal of 
time trying to get civil servants to think more holistically about policy 
challenges, rather than focussing exclusively on measurable outcomes.
Theresa Marteau also highlighted that people often wrongly equat­
ed science with certainty, when in fact in most cases ‘evidence’ is deeply 
uncertain, so science is not in itself about being reductionist. There 
is a dominant narrative that we cannot be open to uncertainty, which 
perhaps  means we need a change in narrative. However, Rita Carter 
and Nathalie Spencer both emphasised that for many, uncertainty is 
deeply uncomfortable and strategies to minimise or avoid it are always 
likely to be attractive.
Applications
‘Instrumental questions always lead to bureaucratic answers.’ 
This tension in using the hemispheric perspective to try to promote a 
more holistic view is that to make Iain’s ideas relevant, one may have to 
compromise in certain ways. Matthew Taylor mentioned that to give the 
ideas traction in the world of policy, it would be necessary to operation­
alise and therefore instrumentalise them, which, in this case, would run 
the risk of corrupting them.
To illustrate, Iain’s (not verbatim) response to Matthew’s question: 
‘How do we actually change culture?’ was broadly that we don’t have 
to change it through effort, but rather through opening people’s eyes 
without pushing or driving change physically. Both acknowledged the 
relevance of their respective backgrounds in policy and psychiatry as 
relevant to this difference of emphasis. One key point of agreement was 

89
Appendix 2
that, as Matthew put it, while Iain is wary of the language of cause and 
effect, he does very much want to achieve effect, which begs the question 
of how, and where to start?
Matthew felt that it was a mistake to focus on policy, where there may 
be intractable institutional inertia, but that it might have relevance to 
politics more broadly conceived, where people were crying out for fresh 
forms of insight and inspiration about the nature of the political process. 
He argued that while politics should be about inspiration and connection, 
it has become merely adversarial and technocratic. All political neoliberal­
ism works within the political process rather than challenging the nature 
of it. In this context the question becomes what Iain’s ideas might mean 
for renewing democracy and motivating political activism, but it might 
have broader application to our understanding of what makes for inspiring 
political leadership, for instance in terms of the role of narrative in contex­
tualising policy proposals.
Tom Crompton seemed to strongly disagree with this general emphasis 
on policy and politics. He suggested it would be peculiar if the best place 
to start was the policy field where there are vested interests and entrenched 
patterns of behaviour. He felt it was more promising to begin with several 
spheres where left hemisphere domination is less intensely felt and more 
easily resisted, for instance in the realms of nature, art and community. In 
his experience many charities are increasingly dominated by left hemisphere 
thinking, because they have to constantly justify their economic efficiency 
and effectiveness. In a further email communication, he developed this point: 
‘I’m tired of the hackneyed argument, often trotted out unreflectively within 
NGOs, that simply because we position ourselves closer to people in power 
(CEOs, MPs, etc) then our change strategies must be more effective.
I don‘t believe this is necessarily the case. There is a countervailing 
argument that people in power will be highly constrained in what they 
can ask for – for both institutional and personal reasons. The personal 
reasons arise both because positions of power are likely to attract people 

Divided brain, divided world
90 
with particular values (or, perhaps, relatively greater left hemisphere 
dominance) and because these people then go to work every day in 
contexts that re-affirm these values (or this dominance).
It seems to me that the profound challenges which Iain puts out 
require an engagement further removed from entrenched power: with 
social movements, for example.’
Iain said the key was always to work for a balance between right and 
left, not to eliminate one or the other. Good policies will result from not 
trying to control every possible outcome in society, but we will need to 
have some technocrats and some management. The key is not to lose sight 
of what such things are for, what they ultimately serve.
Matthew Taylor suggested that part of the challenge with thinking of 
how to ‘use’ the hemispheric perspective is that ‘Instrumental questions 
always lead to bureaucratic answers’. He contrasted this way of trying to 
use a particular set of ideas to achieve a particular objective with compa­
nies that genuinely care for what they do, stating that the latter are more 
successful, and emphasised the need to create a shared mission and goal 
to contextualise people’s efforts. 
Adam Cooper remarked that Iain’s work resonated strongly with his 
lived experience of working in government, where a left-hemispheric 
technocratic tendency tends to dominate. To illustrate he mentioned a 
presentation on the investment in renewable energy that totally missed 
out all contextual/ moral/ emotional factors that might inform the issue, 
focussing purely on economic costs and benefits. He added that there was 
a more general risk of units of analysis being driven into boxes and that 
social sciences other than the relatively hegemonic discipline of econom­
ics needed to respond to this challenge.

91
Appendix 2
Dangers
‘Why do we want to say something about the brain in order to make 
these points?’ 
Many participants argued that there was a need to prevent people taking 
Iain’s ideas, a very difficult nuanced framework, and simplifying it in a way 
that undermined its wider relevance and value. Theresa Marteau added 
that the simplification of the argument can lead to misguided authority, and 
potentially basing policy on profound misconceptions, including the general 
danger of thinking everything can be explained through biological science.
Joe Hallgarten was not convinced of the argument for the growth in 
left hemispheric domination, felt that ‘some generalisations strike you as 
more valid than others’ and said there was a danger that we reflexively 
attribute something we don’t like (ie consumerism) to left brain domina­
tion. More generally there is a danger of applying left brain problematic 
to everything we don’t like.
Ray Tallis posed the more fundamental question of why we want to 
say something about the brain in order to make any of these points. In 
most cases, there is a danger of thinking that the extra references to the 
brain appear to give extra warrant for a particular position, without 
actually doing so. 
Balance
‘Does this thesis give us the confidence and liberation to start describing 
things honestly?’ 
Siva Thambisetty questioned the nature of the ‘balance’ between hemi­
spheres that was presented as optimal, suggesting that this might require 
forms of spiritual or psychological progress that may not be available to 
the population at large. This comment arose in the context of a more 
general discussion about whether ‘balance’ meant integration of hemi­
spheric perspectives or regular alternation between them. For instance 
David Archer commented: ‘Using either hemisphere is rather situational, 
so could we choose to bring both together? And how easy can we choose 
to switch the dominance of each on our work?’ Or as Nicholas Spice put 
it: ‘Is it AB or A+B?’
In this context, Mark Williamson remarked that in the boardroom, 
many actually make decisions based on broadly right-hemispheric 
perspectives, but they typically justify them with left-hemispheric ration­
alisations. ‘So does this thesis give us the confidence and liberation to start 
describing things honestly?’ A further example on the same point was the 
absurdity of scoring applicants at job interviews when it is almost an open 
secret that we typically choose the candidates that we ‘like’ and retrofit the 
scoring process to accommodate that preference.

Divided brain, divided world
92 
Constraints
‘The last few centuries were about freedom from external constraints. 
Now, we are still seeking freedom, but from internal constraints. We need 
to understand these constraints before we can change them. So this may 
be uncomfortable, but necessary work.’ 
Matthew Taylor’s quote above was a fitting close to an RSA Workshop 
because it fits directly with RSA’s 21st Century Enlightenment mission,51 
and echoed a previous publication on conceptions of liberty by RSA 
Director of Programme, Adam Lent.52 Most participants seemed to 
share the desire to become more aware of our own biases, in ways that 
will helps us be more reflective and effective. It is not controversial to 
say that the brain constrains what we can know and how we can know, 
which in turn influences what we are capable of thinking and doing. 
Becoming aware of these types of constraint is at least therapeutic and 
deeply attuned to RSA Social Brain’s emphasis on the importance of 
reflexivity, but it may also be simply necessary if we are going to face up 
to the complexity of the major challenges of our time.

93
Endnotes
Endnotes
1.	
McGilchrist, I. (2009). The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the 
Making of the Western World. New Haven: Yale University Press. Page 237.
2.	
Tallis, R. (2011). Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis and the 
Misrepresentation of Humanity. Durham: Acumen Publishing. See also Taylor, 
M. and Tallis, R. (2011). Neuromania: The Possibilities and Pitfalls of our 
Fascination with Brains [RSA event, online], available at: www.thersa.org/events/
video/vision-videos/neuromania-the-possibilities-and-pitfalls-of-our-fascination-
with-brains See also Rowson, J. (2011) Are we Neuromaniacs?, RSA blogs: 
www.rsablogs.org.uk/2011/socialbrain/neuromaniacs/ 
3.	
Abi-Rached, JM. and Rose, N. (2010). The Birth of the Neuromolecular Gaze. 
History of Human Science. 23 (1): 11–36.  
4.	
See, for example, Poole, S. (2012). Your brain on pseudoscience: The rise 
of popular neurobollocks. New Statesman [online]. Available at: www.
newstatesman.com/culture/books/2012/09/ your-brain-pseudoscience-rise-
popular-neurobollocks?quicktabs_most_read=1 To be fair to the author, 
Poole acknowledges the value of genuine neuroscientific research, and is 
concerned about its misuse rather than the science as such. However, the term 
‘neurobollocks’, like its predecessor, ‘psychobabble’, gives rhetorical ammunition 
to those who reject the relevance of the whole body of evidence on principle, 
rather than through an understanding of the details on a case by case basis. 
5.	
For further details, see Rowson, J. (2011). Transforming behaviour change: Beyond 
nudge and neuromania. RSA publication available at: www.thersa.org/__data/
assets/ pdf_file/0006/553542/RSA-Transforming-Behaviour-Change.pdf 
6.	
McGilchrist, I. (2009). The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the 
Making of the Western World. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
7.	
An extensive set of feedback responses are available on Iain McGilchrist’s website 
at: www.iainmcgilchrist.com/comments.asp 
8.	
For video and audio of the event see: www.thersa.org/events/audio-and-past-
events/2010/the-divided-brain-and-the-making-of-the-western-world. For 
RSAnimate see: www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFs9WO2B8uI. For my Blog 
response shortly after the talk see: www.rsablogs.org.uk/2010/socialbrain/ 
master-emissary 
9.	
Personal communication. Kate Raworth recently spoke at the RSA about social 
and planetary limits in ‘Doughnut Economics’; available at: www.thersa.org/
events/audio-and-past-events/2012/ doughnut-economics-creating-a-safe-and-
just-space-for-humanity 
10.	 For a fuller discussion of the relevance of reflexivity to the Social Brain’s work, 
please see: Rowson, J. (2011). Transforming behaviour change: Beyond nudge 
and neuromania, RSA publication. (Section 2.1) 
11.	 Midgley, M. (2010). Mary Midgley enjoys an exploration of the left-brain/ right-
brain divide [Review of the book The Master and his Emissary: The Divided 
Brain and the Making of the Western World by Iain McGilchrist]. The Guardian 
[online]. Available at: www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jan/02/1 91 McGilchrist, 
I. (2009). The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of 
the Western World. New Haven: Yale University Press. Page 96. 
12.	 McGilchrist, I. (2009). The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the 
Making of the Western World. New Haven: Yale University Press. Page 96. 

Divided brain, divided world
94 
13.	 Quiggin, J. (2010). Zombie Economics: How dead ideas still walk among us. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
14.	 (From Iain McGilchrist) Interestingly this also reflects the relationship between 
these two kinds of thinking, that of the left hemisphere and of the right: the left 
hemisphere cannot understand the value of what the right contributes, whereas 
the right does understand the value of what the left contributes. This is the 
basis of the story behind the title The Master and his Emissary. The story is as 
follows: There was once a wise spiritual master, who was the ruler of a small but 
prosperous domain, and who was known for his selfless devotion to his people. 
As his people flourished and grew in number, the bounds of this small domain 
spread; and with it the need to trust implicitly the emissaries he sent to ensure the 
safety of its ever more distant parts. It was not just that it was impossible for him 
personally to order all that needed to be dealt with: as he wisely saw, he needed 
to keep his distance from, and remain ignorant of, such concerns. And so he 
nurtured and trained carefully his emissaries, in order that they could be trusted. 
Eventually, however, his cleverest and most ambitious vizier, the one he most 
trusted to do his work, began to see himself as the master, and used his position 
to advance his own wealth and influence. He saw his master’s temperance and 
forbearance as weakness, not wisdom, and on his missions on the master’s 
behalf, adopted his mantle as his own – the emissary became contemptuous of 
his master. And so it came about that the master was usurped, the people were 
duped, the domain became a tyranny; and eventually it collapsed in ruins. 
15.	 Pinker, S. (2011). The Better Angels of our Nature [RSA event, online]. 
Available at: www.thersa.org/events/audio-and-past-events/2011/ 
the-better-angels-of-our-nature 
16.	 Ridley, M., Taylor, M. (2011). Angus Millar Lecture 2011- Scientific Heresy [RSA 
event, online]. Available at: www.thersa.org/events/audio-and-past-events/2011/ 
angus-millar-lecture-2011-scientific-heresy 
17.	 Lent, A. (2012). Generation Enterprise: The Hope for a Brighter Economic 
Future. RSA publication available at: www.thersa.org/action-research-centre/ 
enterprise-and-design/enterprise/generation-enterprise 
18.	 Bennett, M, and Hacker, PMS. (2003). Philosophical Foundations of 
Neuroscience. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
19.	 Grayling, AC. (n.d.) In Two Minds. [Review of the book The Master and his 
Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World by Iain 
McGilchrist]. Literary Review [online]. Available at: www.literaryreview.co.uk/ 
grayling_12_09.html 
20.	 Available at: www.iainmcgilchrist.com/comments.asp 
21.	 See The Human Brain: Right and Left, Nov 26th 2009. Available at 
www.economist.com/node/14959719 
22.	 McGilchrist, I. (2012). The Divided Brain and the Search for Meaning: Why We 
Are So Unhappy. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
23.	 See www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/ed-miliband/9544522/Ed-Miliband-
interview- I-want-to-save-the-capitalism-my-father-hated.html 
24.	 See Taylor, M. (2012) ‘The Power to Act: A New Angle on our Toughest 
Problems’. Available at: www.thersa.org/events/audio-and-past-events/2012-the-
power-to-act-a-new-angle-on-our-toughest-problems 
25.	 It is worth mentioning here that in this discussion, for the sake of keeping this 
publication relatively short and focussed on practical implications we do not 
cover the historical analysis that forms the second part of The Master and 
his Emissary in any detail. The analysis of historical development from the 
Ancient World, to the Renaissance and Reformation, to the Enlightenment, 

95
Endnotes
to Romanticism and the Industrial Revolution, to the Modern and Post Modern 
Worlds, is both too sweeping and too intricate to further summarise in any 
satisfying way, so while the features of left-hemisphere dominance in the present 
are discussed at length, the case that the left hemisphere has gradually become 
more dominant at a cultural level over historical time is taken as a given on the 
basis of the evidence unpacked in Iain’s book. In the workshop Joe Hallgarten 
expressed doubt about this part of the argument, which was useful because it is 
entirely reasonable to have that doubt on the basis of the discussion document 
alone. In different parts of sections one and two, we do explore the theoretical 
case made for the nature of epigenetic evolution which is the subject of chapter 
seven of the book: Imitation and the Evolution of Culture. Moreover, although 
not evidence in itself, it is noteworthy that Iain’s book has received positive 
reviews from several eminent historians, as mentioned in section 2.2. On 
reflection, for this particular part of the argument, I feel that to develop an 
informed opinion on this historical perspective, there is no good substitute for 
critically engaging with the historical analysis in the second half of the book. 
26.	 Compton, T. (2010) Common Cause: The Case for Working with our Cultural 
Values. WWF publication. Available at: http://assets.wwf.org.uk/downloads/ 
common_cause_report.pdf 
27.	 Crawford, M. (2009). The Case for Working with Your Hands: Or Why Office 
Work is Bad for Us and Fixing Things Feels Good. London: Penguin. 
28.	 www.neweconomics.org/publications/21-hours 
29.	 Since the evidential basis of this point feels particularly important I asked Iain 
for a fuller set of references rather than just directing the reader to his book 
as a whole: “In relation to sees more, there are a huge number of possibilities, 
as this is one of the principal points of my book; but for the pure neurological 
breadth of attention point, see Mesulam, M.-M., ‘Behavioral neuroanatomy: 
large-scale net-works, association cortex, frontal syndromes, the limbic system 
and hemispheric specialization’, in Mesulam, M.-M. (ed.), Principles of 
Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000, 
pp. 1–120; and Deouell, L. Y., Ivry, R. B. & Knight, R. T., ‘Electrophysiologic 
methods and transcranial magnetic stimulation in behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology’, in Feinberg, T. E. & Farah, M. J. (eds.), Behavioral Neurology 
and Neuropsychology, 2nd edn., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003, pp. 105–34
  In relation to more in touch with reality, again this is one of the great themes of 
my book, and is evidenced in many ways, but see Deglin, V. L. & Kinsbourne, M., 
‘Divergent thinking styles of the hemispheres: how syllogisms are solved during 
transitory hemisphere suppression’, Brain and Cognition, 1996, 31(3), pp. 285–307.
  In relation specifically to higher intelligence: O’Boyle, M. W. & Benbow, C. 
P., ‘Enhanced right hemisphere involvement during cognitive processing may 
relate to intellectual precocity’, Neuropsychologia, 1990, 28(2), pp. 211–16; 
Gorynia, I. & Müller, J., ‘Hand skill and hand-eye preference in relation to 
verbal ability in healthy adult male and female right-handers’, Laterality, 2006, 
11(5), pp. 415–35.”
30.	 In 2013 The RSA Social Brain Centre will be working on a two year 
project provisionally titled: “Spirituality, Tools of the Mind and the Social 
Brain” designed to reconceive the idea of the spiritual on the basis of new 
understandings of human nature. 
31.	 For further details see www.thersa.org/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/563534/
Cabbies,- Costs-and-Climate-Change.pdf 
32.	 See Attenborough, D. (2011) RSA President’s Lecture: People and 
Planet. Available at: www.thersa.org/events/audio-and-past-events/2011/
rsa-presidents-lecture-2011

Divided brain, divided world
96 
33.	 Sandel, M. (2012). What Money Can’t Buy. London: Penguin. 
See also: Sandel, M. , (2010). Justice: What’s the Right Thing to Do? 
[RSA event, online]. Available at: www.thersa.org/events/video/archive/ 
michael-sandel---justice-whats-the-right-thing-to-do 
34.	 See for example: Are The Greeks the Hardest Workers in Europe? BBC website, 
26 February 2012 Available at www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-17155304
35.	 Levels of generalised social trust in the UK are low and getting lower. The 
proportion of people who say that they generally trust other people dropped 
from 60% in 1959 to 30% in 2005 and has declined further since then. Green, 
A., Janmaat, J.G. and Cheng, H. (2011). ‘Social Cohesion: Converging and 
Diverging Trends’, National Institute Economic Review, No 215, pp 6–22. While 
this pattern is reflected globally, the most severe declines in trust are to be found 
in the UK and the US.
36.	 McGilchrist, I. (2010). The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World 
[RSA event, online]. Available at: www.thersa.org/events/ audio-and-past-
events/2010/ the-divided-brain-and-the-making-of-the-western-world 
37.	 Read, R. (2012) The Master and his Emissary Book Review. Phenomenology and 
The Cognitive Sciences, Springer Science, DOI 10.1007/s11097-011-9235-x 
38.	 For details of the workshop, including a thematic analysis of the discussion, 
please see the appendices. 
39.	 Pickett, K., and Wilkinson, R. (2010) The Spirit Level: Why Equality is Better for 
Everyone, Penguin. Also see my blog response to an RSA debate on the subject: 
www.rsablogs.org.uk/2010/social-economy/statistical-cat-fight/
40.	 See, for example: Boghans, L., Golsteyn, B., Heckman, J., Meijers, H. (2009). 
Gender Differences in Risk Aversion and Ambiguity Aversion, National Bureau 
of Economic Research working paper 14713. Available at: www.nber.org/papers/ 
w14713.pdf?new_window=1 
41.	 See, for example: Gigerenzer, G., and Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic Decision 
Making. Annual Review of Psychology. 62: p 451–482. Available at: http:// 
citrixweb.mpib-berlin.mpg.de/montez/upload/PaperOfTheMonth/gigerenzer_ 
gaissmaier_2011-1-2.pdf 
42.	 Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. London: Allen Lane. 
43.	 Clinton, W., speaking at the 2006 Davos Global economic forum, available online 
at: www.youtube.com/watch?v=GEjKr2gA8Wk. For more information about 
Ken Wilber’s work see: Wilber, K. (2001). A Theory of Everything: An Integral 
Vision for Business, Politics, Science and Spirituality. Shambala publications. 
44.	 Quoted on page 142 of The Master and his Emissary, and sourced from review 
article by Arran Gare in Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social 
Philosophy, vol. 8, no. 1, 2012 Quote on p430. 
45.	 Attendees: 1. Iain McGilchrist, author & psychiatrist 2. Professor Guy Claxton, 
research director, Centre for Real World Learning 3. Professor Theresa Marteau: 
director, Behaviour and Health Research Unit, University of Cambridge 4. 
Raymond Tallis, author of ‘Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis and the 
Misrepresentation of Humanity’ 5. Tom Crompton, change strategist, WWF, 
and author of Common Cause: The case for working with our cultural values 6. 
Mark Wiliamson, Director, Action for Happiness 7. Mark Vernon, journalist, 
Author 8. Rita Carter: science writer, lecturer and broadcaster 9. Nicholas Spice, 
publisher, London Review of Books 10. Adam Cooper, neuropsychologist and 
head of social science engagement, Department of Energy and Climate Change 
11. David Archer, director of Socia, and RSA Trustee 12. John Wakefield, 
political journalist and broadcaster 13. Simon Christmas, independent social 
researcher 14. Siva Thambisetty, lecturer in intellectual property law, London 

97
Endnotes
School of Economics 15. Matthew Taylor, CEO RSA 16. Jonathan Rowson, 
director, RSA Social Brain Centre 17. Joe Hallgarten, director of education, 
RSA 18. Emma Lindley, senior researcher, RSA Social Brain Centre 19. Nathalie 
Spencer, senior researcher, RSA Social Brain Centre 20. Plamena Pehlivanova, 
RSA International. 
46.	 For the full reaction, see the first reflection in section two. For a wider discussion 
of related issues see: Tallis, R. (2011) Neuromania? The possibilities and pitfalls 
of our fascination with brains [RSA event, online]. Available at: www.thersa.org/
events/audio-and-past-events/2011/neuromania-the-possibilities-and-pitfalls-of-
our-fascination-with-brains See also a response to that RSA event: Rowson, J., 
(2011) Are we Neuromaniacs? [online blog post]. Available at: www.rsablogs.org.
uk/2011/socialbrain/neuromaniacs
47.	 A full audio recording of the plenary discussions has been stored by the RSA 
for reference. 
48.	 Holmes, J. (2012) Book Review [Review of the book The Master and his 
Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World by Iain 
McGilchrist]. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, Vol. 26, No. 2: 160–170 
49.	 This exact wording came through a personal email communication. 
50.	 Batchelor, S. (2010) Confessions of a Buddhist Atheist. New York: 
Random House. 
51.	 See Taylor, M. (2010) 21st Century Enlightenment, RSA, Available at: 
www.thersa.org/about-us/rsa-pamphlets/21st-century-enlightenment 
52.	 Lent, A. (2011) On Liberty. RSA Journal, Spring 2012. Available at: 
www.thersa.org/fellowship/journal/archive/spring-2012/features/on-liberty

The RSA: an enlightenment organisation committed 
to finding innovative practical solutions to today’s social 
challenges. Through its ideas, research and 27,000-strong 
Fellowship it seeks to understand and enhance human 
capability so we can close the gap between today’s reality 
and people’s hopes for a better world.
8 John Adam Street
London WC2N 6EZ
+44 (0) 20 7930 5115
Registered as a charity 
in England and Wales 
no. 212424 
Copyright © RSA 2013
www.thersa.org

