royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Review
Cite this article: Adamatzky A. 2019 A brief
history of liquid computers. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
B 374: 20180372.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0372
Accepted: 26 November 2018
One contribution of 15 to a theme issue ‘Liquid
brains, solid brains: How distributed cognitive
architectures process information’.
Subject Areas:
bioengineering
Keywords:
liquid, fluidics, sensing
Author for correspondence:
Andrew Adamatzky
e-mail: andrew.adamatzky@uwe.ac.uk
A brief history of liquid computers
Andrew Adamatzky
Unconventional Computing Lab, Department of Computer Science and Creative Technologies, University of the
West of England, Bristol, UK
AA, 0000-0003-1073-2662
A substrate does not have to be solid to compute. It is possible to make a
computer purely from a liquid. I demonstrate this using a variety of exper-
imental prototypes where a liquid carries signals, actuates mechanical
computing devices and hosts chemical reactions. We show hydraulic math-
ematical machines that compute functions based on mass transfer analogies.
I discuss several prototypes of computing devices that employ fluid flows
and jets. They are fluid mappers, where the fluid flow explores a geometri-
cally constrained space to find an optimal way around, e.g. the shortest path
in a maze, and fluid logic devices where fluid jet streams interact at the junc-
tions of inlets and results of the computation are represented by fluid jets at
selected outlets. Fluid mappers and fluidic logic devices compute continu-
ously valued functions albeit discretized. There is also an opportunity to
do discrete operation directly by representing information by droplets and
liquid marbles (droplets coated by hydrophobic powder). There, compu-
tation is implemented at the sites, in time and space, where droplets
collide one with another. The liquid computers mentioned above use
liquid as signal carrier or actuator: the exact nature of the liquid is not
that important. What is inside the liquid becomes crucial when reaction–
diffusion liquid-phase computing devices come into play: there, the liquid
hosts families of chemical species that interact with each other in a mas-
sive-parallel fashion. I shall illustrate a range of computational tasks,
including computational geometry, implementable by excitation wave
fronts in nonlinear active chemical medium. The overview will enable scien-
tists and engineers to understand how vast is the variety of liquid computers
and will inspire them to design their own experimental laboratory
prototypes.
This article is part of the theme issue ‘Liquid brains, solid brains: How
distributed cognitive architectures process information’.
1. Introduction
A substance offering no resistance to shear deformation is a fluid. A liquid is an
incompressible fluid. Following the overall theme of this special issue ‘Liquid
brains, solid brains’, co-edited by Ricard Sole´, Melanie Moses and Stephanie
Forrest, I focus on computing devices where a liquid plays a key role, either
as a material substance for signal representation and transmission or as a sub-
strate where computation takes place. A liquid plays a key role in the
functioning and behaviour of several creatures, discussed in this special issue.
Thus, for example, slime mould Physarum polycephalum is well known for coor-
dinated channelling of fluid through its networks of protoplasmic tubes [1–4].
There is evidence of signal propagation with cytoplasmic flow [5], including
morphological changes triggered by the cytoplasmic flow [6]. The networks of
biochemical oscillators governing the shuffling of cytoplasm in the slime
mould could be also responsible for the slime mould’s adaptive behaviour and
learning [7–10]. At the level of social insect behaviour, fire ants exhibit fluid-
like behaviour in their outbound traffic [11,12], and interactions between neigh-
bouring ants in moving traffic could be seen as analogous to interaction between
molecules in a fluid substrate [13].1 My personal interest in liquid-based compu-
ters started in the early 1990s when I proposed a paradigm and experimental
laboratory implementations of reaction–diffusion chemical computers [17,18],
& 2019 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

affective liquids [19] and liquid brains for robots [20,21]. In
reaction–diffusion computers, information is processed via
interaction of phase or diffusion wave fronts. Affective liquids
are mixtures of chemical species representing emotional states
[19], and stirred or thin-layer mixtures of doxastic and affec-
tive chemical-like species [22]. Liquid brains for robots
are onboard controllers for robot navigation that employ a
thin-layer excitable chemical reaction [23].
Echoing one of the threads of this special issue—‘a crea-
ture does not have to have a nervous system to cognize’—I
demonstrate that a substrate does not have to be solid to com-
pute. Liquid-based computing devices overlap with old
schools analogue computation, as it was in the 1950s–
1960s, and unconventional computation, as it fully flourishes
in the 2000s. The field of analogue computation has been
mainly populated by engineers and therefore most achieve-
ments
have
been
highly
practical.
Unconventional
computing, till recently, has been in the domain of computer
science and therefore is full of theoretical papers. I estimate
that for every thousand theoretical papers there is just one
experimental laboratory paper. This is why an experimental
laboratory
prototype
of
an
unconventional
computing
device is of utmost importance. Therefore in this paper I
focus not on why a liquid can compute but on what practical
computing devices can be made from liquid-phase substrates.
I overview a variety of liquid computers, from hydraulic alge-
braic machines invented in the late 1890s to liquid marble
logic designed just recently. The chronological order of
selected liquid-based computing devices is shown in table 1.
All the prototypes have only one thing in common: they
use liquid to encode and process information. The exact
implementations of the computing devices are very different
one from another. Hydraulic mathematical machines employ
mass transfer analogies; a fluid in such machines is mostly
stationary except when bodies are immersed. Streams and
jets of a fluid are employed in fluid mappers to explore geo-
metrically constrained spaces and in fluid logic devices to
realize logic gates via interaction of fluid jets. The streams
are continuous. The liquid can also be ‘discretized’ in dro-
plets and liquid marbles, and computation is implemented
via liquid marbles colliding with each other or actuating
mechanical devices. In hydraulic algebraic machines, integra-
tors and droplet-based computers, the nature of the liquid is
not critical because the liquid is used as an actuator or carrier
of signals. What is inside the liquid becomes important when
reaction–diffusion liquid-phase computing devices come into
play: there, the liquid hosts families of chemical species that
interact with each other in a massive-parallel fashion. Here
I shall illustrate a range of computational tasks, including a
computational geometry, implementable by oxidation wave
fronts in nonlinear active chemical medium.
The examples discussed demonstrate the versatility of the
liquid as a computing substrate. I believe the overview will
encourage researchers and engineers to be more proactive
in employing the liquid phase in their unconventional
computing devices.
2. Hydraulic algebraic machines
The first recorded liquid computers worked on the displace-
ment of water in response to immersion of a body in a
container. In 1901, Arnold Emch published a paper in The
American Mathematical Monthly where he proposed to calculate
the nth root of any number by immersing solid bodies in a
liquid
[24].
He
assumed
a
paraboloid-shaped
body
is
immersed in liquid as shown in figure 1a. When this body is
immersed,
the weight
of
the
displaced
water
will
be
W ¼ p  w 
Ð y
0 x2 dy ¼ p  w 
Ð y
0 x2 dy, where w is the weight
of one cubic foot of water. The function f(x) is selected such
that the weight W of the displaced water equals the nth
power of a given number y: p  w  Ð y
0 x2 dy ¼ yn.
x
h
Y
W
A
P
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
G
y
X
0
Figure 1. (a,b) Illustration of the hydraulic method for extracting the nth root of any number proposed by Arnold Emch in 1901. Adapted from [24]. (c,d) Pictures
from [26].
Table 1. A brief history of liquid computers.
year
device
publications
1900
hydraulic algebraic machines
[24–26]
1936
hydraulic integrators
[27,28]
1949
Monetary National Income Analogue
Computer
[29]
1949
ﬂuid mappers
[30]
19602
ﬂuidic logic
[32–36]
1985
Belousov–Zhabotinsky computers
[18,37–40]
1996
reaction–diffusion computers
[41–44]
2003
liquid brain for robots
[20,45]
2003
ﬂuid maze solver
[46]
2007
droplet logic (pressure/ﬂow-driven)
[47–50]
2010
chemotactic droplets solving mazes
[51,52]
2012
droplet logic
[53]
2017
liquid marbles logic
[54]
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
2
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

A device for the extraction of a square root of a given
number N is shown in figure 1b. G is a hook-gauge showing
the water level. The shape of the parabolic body immersed is
defined by the equation y ¼ x2 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(pw)=2
p
. Let W be the
weight of the water displaced, Q be the weight of the vessel,
and P be an added weight to make Q  P ¼ N ¼ y2. Thus,
y ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
N
p
. The value y is measured by gauge G as the difference
of the water levels before and after the immersion.
A method of solving trinomial equation x3 þ x ¼ c, where
c is a constant, was proposed by Demanet, cited by Gibb [26].
The device shown in figure 1c is an inverted cone joined to a
cylinder, base 1 cm2, with a tube. The height of the cone H
and the cone’s radius R are selected so that R=H ¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃp
p .
A volume c cm2 of water poured into the device will stay at
the height h in both vessels. The volume of the water in the
cylinder will be V ¼ h3 (because R ¼ h  (
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃp
p )). The
volume of the water in the cylinder used in the device is
1  h. Thus, we have h3 þ h ¼ c. The height h of the water is
the solution of the equation.
A hydrostatic balance, inspired by Emch [24], was proposed
by
Meslin,
cited
in
Gibb
[26]
to
solve
the
equation
p  xm þ q  xn þ ... ¼ A
(figure 1d [26]). Solid bodies are
immersed in a liquid. Parameters of the bodies are selected so
that when x units of length are immersed in the liquid the
volumes are proportional to xm, xn, .... Coefficients p, q, etc.,
are represented by distances of the bodies’ hanging points rela-
tive to the axis of rotation of the beam (left means negative and
right positive). After the bodies are immersed a weight jAj is
suspended at a unit distance from the axis of rotation. The
system becomes temporarily disturbed but the equilibrium is
restored by the water redistributing between the vessels. After
that the moments of the bodies relative to the axis of rotation
of the beam will be p  hm þ q  hn þ ..., and therefore h is the
solution found.3
3. Hydraulic integrators
Flows of a liquid through a network of pipes with different
diameters can
analogously imitate thermal
diffusion in
geometrical constraint spaces, electrical conductivity and
money flow in a country’s economy. In the early 1930s, two
hydraulic computing devices were invented simultaneously
in the USSR by Luk’yanov [27] and in the USA by Moore
[28]. Both were designed to imitate heat transfer not by solving
differential equations by hand or using existing calculators but
by analogue modelling of the heat propagation with water
(figure 2a). The devices relied on the following analogies
between the liquid and the thermal characteristics of thermo-
conductive building materials [27,28,55]. Levels of water in
vessels represent difference of temperatures between the build-
ing materials and the air. The cut area of the vessels represents
the thermal capacity of layers. Hydraulic resistance of the
tubes connecting the vessels is analogous to the thermal resist-
ance of the simulated material layers.
As stated by the Polytechnic Museum (Moscow, Russia)
[56], there were around 150 hydraulic integrators produced
in the USSR, some exported to Poland, the Czech Republic
and China. A portable version of the Luk’yanov integrator
was manufactured for schools.
Over a decade after the invention and relatively wide
usage of the hydraulic integrators, in the late 1940s,
William Phillips designed and prototyped his Monetary
National Income Analogue Computer (MONIAC), also
known as the Phillips Hydraulic Computer (figure 2b).
There, a flow of money was imitated by a redistribution
of water between the containers [29].
4. Fluid mappers and maze solvers
Acurrentinaliquidis strongestalongtheshortestpath(or paths)
from a source to a sink (or sinks). Fluid mappers visualize the
current streams, thus extracting shortest paths from the liquid
computers. In 1900, Hele-Shaw & Hay proposed an analogy
between stream lines of a fluid flow in a thin layer and the
lines of magnetic induction in a uniform magnetic field [57].
They applied their ideas to solve a ‘problem of the magnetic
flux distortion brought about by armature teeth’ [58]. In the
1940s Hele-Shaw and Hay analogies were advanced by Arthur
Dearth Moore, who developed fluid flow mapping devices [30].
The Moore’s fluid mappers were made of a cast slab,
covered by a glass plate, with input (source) and output
(sink) ports. Crystals of potassium permanganate or methyl-
ene blue were evenly distributed at the bottom of the slab.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Hydraulic equation solvers. (a) Luk’yanov’s hydraulic integrator (1936). This is a photo of Model no. 3 hydraulic integrator donated by the Ryazan Factory
of Analog Computers to the Moscow Polytechnic Institute in 1956. Photo copyright & 2005–2018 Polytechnic Museum (Moscow, Russia). (b) Phillips Hydraulic
Computer (1949). Science Museum Group Collection. Copyright & The Board of Trustees of the Science Museum. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
3
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

Fluid flow lines were visualized by traces from the dissol-
ving crystals. Moore shown that the fluid mappers can
simulate electrostatic and magnetic fields, electric current,
heat transfer and chemical diffusion [30]. The fluid mappers
became popular, for a decade, and have been used to solve
engineering problems of underground gas recovery and
canal
seepage
[58,59],
current
flow
modelling
in
the
human body [60] (figure 3b) and design of fume exhaust
hoods [61] (figure 3a).
The Moore’s fluid mappers could solve mazes; however,
Moore never reported this. The first published evidence of
an experimental laboratory fluid maze solver dates back to
2003. In the fluidic maze solver developed in [46], the maze
is a network of micro-channels. The network is sealed.
Only the source site (inlet) and the destination site (outlet)
are open. The maze is filled with a high-viscosity fluid. A
low-viscosity coloured fluid is pumped under pressure into
the maze, via the inlet. Owing to a pressure drop between
the inlet and the outlet, liquids start leaving the maze via
the outlet. The velocity of the fluid in a channel is inversely
proportional to the length of the channel. High-viscosity
fluid in the channels leading to dead ends prevents the
coloured low-viscosity fluid from entering the channels.
The shortest path—least hydrodynamic resistance path—
from the inlet to the outlet is represented by the channels
filled with coloured fluid (figure 3c). A similar approach
could be used to solve a maze at a macro scale, e.g. with
milk and water (figure 3d) or milk and coffee (figure 3e).
5. Droplet-tracing fluid mappers
Current and chemical gradients in liquid computers can be
traced with droplets of another liquid. We can think of this
as one liquid computer implementing a computation (devel-
oping current flow and/or chemical gradient) while another
liquid computer (a droplet) extracts the results of the compu-
tation. The motion of droplets of one liquid in another liquid
is determined by thermal and chemical gradients, and
directed by flows outside and inside the droplet [63–68]. If
the gradients represent the solution of a computational pro-
blem then droplets travelling along the gradients might be
seen as solving the problem. Such an experimental prototype
of a droplet traversing a pH gradient is presented in [52].
There, a polydimethylsiloxane maze is filled with a solution
of potassium hydroxide. An agarose block soaked in hydro-
chloric acid is placed at the destination site. A pH gradient
establishes in the maze. Then a droplet of a mixture of min-
eral oil or dichloromethane with 2-hexyldecanoic acid is
placed at the start site. The droplet travels along the steepest
gradient of the potassium hydroxide. The steepest gradient is
along the shortest path. Therefore, the droplet travels from its
start site to the destination site along the shortest path [52].
The exact mechanics of the droplet motion are explained
in [52] as follows. Potassium hydroxide, which fills the
maze, is a deprotonating agent. The gradient of the proto-
nated acid determines a gradient of the surface tension. The
surface tension decreases towards the destination site. A
35 s
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3. Fluid mappers and solvers. (a) A fluid mapper used in optimization of a canopy exhaust hood in 1954 [61]. (b) An imitation of the current flow in the
human body by a thin-layer fluid flow, with domains of low permeability corresponding to the lungs and liver; the fluid enters the model from the left leg and
leaves the model through the arms. The experiments were conducted in 1952. From [60]. (c) The fluid flow through a maze. The entrance is on the left; the exit is
on the right. The flow simulation is done in Flow Illustrator http://www.flowillustrator.com/ for visual flow control dt ¼ 0.01 and Reynolds number 500. The maze is
black, red coloured areas are parts of the fluid making clockwise rotation and green coloured areas—counter-clockwise. (d) Maze solving with milk and water;
snapshots from the video of experiments by Masakazu Matsumoto (https://youtu.be/nDyGEq_ugGo) with kind permission from Masakazu Matsumoto. (e) Labyrinth
solving with coffee and milk: the path is traced by the coffee [62]. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
4
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

flow of liquid—the Marangoni flow—is established from the
site of the low surface tension to the site of the high surface
tension. The droplet is moved by the flow [52].
Another prototype chemotactic droplet maze solver was
demonstrated in [51]. The maze is filled with a solution of
sodium decanoate in water. The sodium chloride diffuses
from its host nitrobenzene droplet at the destination site. A
gradient of the saline concentration is established. The gradi-
ent is steepest along the shortest path leading from any site in
the maze to the destination. A decanol droplet moves
along the steepest gradient till it reaches the droplet at the
destination site (figure 4).
The experimental prototypes of travelling droplets laid
the foundation of an emergent field of liquid robots [69,70].
There, droplets are studied as adaptive actuating and/or pro-
pulsive
devices
capable
of
navigation
in
dynamically
changing environments.
The droplets tracing gradients behave in a manner similar
to the slime mould Physarum polycephalum, though without
permanent marking of the path selected. A Physarum maze
solver, proposed in [71], is based on attraction of the slime
mould to volatiles emitted by bacteria colonizing a virgin
oat flake. Thus, to solve a maze, we place an oat flake in
the maze’s central chamber, and inoculate the slime mould
into a peripheral channel. Chemoattractants from the oat
flake diffuse along the maze’s channels (figure 5a). The Phy-
sarum explores its vicinity by branching out protoplasmic
tubes into openings of nearby channels (figure 5b–e). When
a wavefront of diffusing attractants reaches the Physarum,
the Physarum halts lateral exploration and develops an
active growing zone propagating along the gradient of the
attractants’ diffusion (figure 5f–h). The thickest tube rep-
resents the shortest path between the sources of nutrients.
Not only sources of nutrients can be placed at the destination
site but also non-nutritional yet aromatic substances, e.g.
roots of the medicinal plant Valeriana officinalis [72].
6. Fluidic logic
The first work on using fluids to implement logic gates can be
traced back to the late 1950s/early 1960s [73–75]. The truth
value of a variable was represented by high and low pressure
in inlets and outlets and a computation was realized via inter-
action of fluid jet streams at junctions of the inlets. The basic
principles of the fluidic devices are the laminar flow of a
fluid, a jet interaction, a wall attachment and a vortex effect.
The jet interaction is the phenomenon that occurs when
fluid
flows
are
arranged
so
that
small
opposing
jets
(b)
(a)
0 s
20 s
60 s
140 s
180 s
200 s
(c)
(e)
(f)
(d)
Figure 4. A decanol droplet (containing Oil Red O for colour) solves a maze. Adapted from [51] with kind permission of Jitka Cˇejkova´. (a) 0 s, (b) 20 s, (c) 60 s, (d)
140 s, (e) 180 s and (f) 200 s. (Online version in colour.)
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
( f)
(e)
(g)
(h)
Figure 5. (a–h) Simulation of maze solving by slime mould using diffusion equations for attractants and Oregonator wave propagation for the slime mould.
Concentration of diffusing attractants is shown by levels of grey. Active zone of slime mould is shown by red. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
5
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

experience changes of direction which can be used as output
signals. The wall attachment phenomenon is that the fluid
attaches to a surface within a device and continues to flow
over the surface until disturbed. The first devices, designed
and fabricated in the 1960s, included beam deflection, turbu-
lence, vortex and wall attachment amplifiers, AND, NOT, OR
and XOR logic elements, counters and shift registers. The flu-
idic devices have been used in jet sensing, programmable
sequence control, flameproof equipment, machine tool con-
trol, systems operating nuclear reactor coolant, servo-control
in marine applications, missile and aircraft control, artificial
heart-pumps, and lung ventilators [73–75].
The AND–NOT gate (figure 6a) is the most well-known
device in fluidics, on, a par with the bistable amplifier. Two
nozzles are placed at right angles to each other. When there
are jet flows in both nozzles they collide and merge into a
single jet entering the central outlet. If the jet flow is present
only in one of the input nozzles it goes into the vent opposite.
The horizontal output channel implements x AND y and later
channels x AND NOT y and NOT x AND y.
A monostable beam deflection device comprises a power
supply, controls/inputs and vents (figure 6b,c). When no
inputs are present the fluid jet from the power source exits
through the output (figure 6b). When one or both input jets
are present, the jet from the power source is deflected into
the vent and discharged (figure 6c) [74]. The fluid jet exits
the output only if no input jet is present. This defines a
NOR operation.
input
port 1
input
port 2
vent
power
supply
power
supply
vent
vent
vent
vent
vent
vent
output
output
C1
+
C2
S
O2
O1
no control
control
4
q
p
x
y
(a)
(c)
(e)
(g)
(h)
( f )
(j)
(k)
(l)
(i)
(d)
(b)
3
2
7
5
3
2
1
vent
output when
1 and 2
are present
S = supply
C1, C2 = inputs
O2 = C1 + C2 = output
Ol = C1 · C2 = output
CL of
undeflected
jet
CL of
undeflected
jet
Figure 6. (a) Fluidic AND–NOT gate [36,76]. (b,c) Fluidic deflection type NOR element. From [74]: (b) undeflected jet, (c) jet deflected by control stream; CL,
contour line. (d) A diagram of the monostable fluid NOR–OR amplifier [77]. (e) Tesla diode [31]. (f) Scroll diode [35,74]. (g) Basic delay. Adapted from
[33]. (h) Delay and diode. Adapted from [32]. (i–l ) Hobbs gate: a hook-type fluidic half-adder. (i) Structure of the gate. ( j,k,l) Dynamics of the fluid streams
for inputs ( j) x ¼ 1 and y ¼ 0, (k) x ¼ 0 and y ¼ 1, (l ) x ¼ 1 and y ¼ 1. Modified from [34].
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
6
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

The monostable beam deflection device (figure 6b,c) can
be transformed into a NOR–OR gate (figure 6d) by adding
an output outlet instead of the vent [77]. When no control
jets are present the jet from the power source exits via the
outlet O1. If one or both signal jets are present, the jet from
the power source is deflected into the outlet O2.
A fluidic diode is a two-terminal device that restricts, or
even cancels, flow in one direction (backward direction).
The Tesla diode [31] (figure 6e) and scroll diode [35,74]
(figure 6f) are the most-known fluidic diodes (as well as the
vortex diode, which is not discussed here).
The Tesla diode (figure 6e), called the ‘valvular conduit’
by its inventor [31], is composed of buckets and partitions
arranged in such a manner that the forward flow propagates
mainly along the axis (4–5 in figure 6e). In the backward
direction (5–4 in figure 6e), fluid enters the branches and
loops around to oppose the main flow.
In the fluidic scroll diode (figure 6f), the channel, or
nozzle, converges in the backward direction and enters an
annular cap. In the forward direction, the fluid flows
through the throat and into a diffuser section. In the back-
ward direction, the fluid enters the cap and is directed
back towards an incoming flow, causing turbulence. A
delay in the fluidic systems is implemented as a volumetric
tank (figure 6g) with input and output pipes [33]. A step
change in the input pressure appears as a similar change
in the output pressure after a delay. The delay is caused
by the turbulence. The amount of the delay is determined
by the volume of the tank [33]. Another version of a delay
element (figure 6h) combines orifices and volumes to have
a low impedance in one direction of the flow.
A fluidic one-bit half-adder can be implemented on the
basis of the gate proposed by Hobbs in 1963 [34] (figure 6i).
Logical values are encoded into the presence of streams in
the specified channels. When only input is TRUE, x ¼ 1, a
power jet stream enters the gate via channel x. The stream
is turned by the hook and follows the channel p (figure 6j).
When only input y ¼ 1 the power jet stream entering the
gate via channel y locks on (gets attached to) the left bound-
ary wall of its channel, and propagates along the channel p
(figure 6k). If both inputs are TRUE, streams entering x and y
merge and follow the channel q (figure 6l). Thus, the
stream exiting the channel p represents p ¼ x  y and the
stream exiting the channel q represents q ¼ xy. The fluidic
AND–NOT gate [36,76] had an unexpected ‘reincarnation’
in the logic gates implemented with swarms of soldier crabs
[78–80] and plant roots [81,82]. In the crab gate, Boolean
values TRUE and FALSE are encoded into the presence and
absence of a swarm of soldier crabs in input or output chan-
nels (figure 7a). If a swarm is installed only in one of the input
channels, it propagates along its original trajectory into the
corresponding output channel, with minor dissipation of
crabs into other channels. When both input channels have
swarms of crabs, the crabs from different swarms collide
at the junction. They change their velocity such that over
70–80% of crabs enter the central output channel (figure 7c).
Thus, statistically, the central output channel represents func-
tion xy and lateral channels functions xy and xy. The plant
roots gate (figure 7b) proposed in [82] was an attempt to
employ swarming behaviour of plant roots [84] in the
implementation of logical functions. That is, roots propagat-
ing in the channels follow their original trajectories unless
they encounter roots propagating in the other direction.
When two swarms of propagating roots ‘collide’ their
velocity changes towards a vector averaged over all swarm
elements. Thus, if plant roots are present in both input chan-
nels they propagate into a central output channel xy.
7. Digital microfluidic logic
In fluidic logic devices, fluid jets are programmed by the
geometry of channels and perform computation by interact-
ing with each other. Boolean values are represented by
pressure of the jets in the output channel. In digital microflui-
dics, signals are represented by droplets or bubbles travelling
in the channel [47,48,50,53]. The droplets/bubbles also con-
trol pressure in the channels, thus affecting trajectories of
other droplets/bubbles. An example of a fluidic gate,
designed in [47], with two inputs x and y and two outputs
is shown in figure 8a–d. An oil droplet is introduced
into
an aqueous phase. When the droplet enters the channel
with the larger flow rate, the pressure drop increases across
the channel containing two-phase emulsions, particularly at
a low capillary number.
Cheow et al. [47] designed a ratio of tubes and flows
(figure 8a) such that the following phenomena take place. If
the flow through A to C exceeds the flow through A; the
regime is laminar; therefore all flow from x goes via AC. An
oil droplet entering A travels into C (figure 8b). The flow
through the bridge between A and B exceeds half of the flow
through B. Thus, an oil droplet entering B also travels into C
(figure 8c). When a droplet from A enters channel C the
hydrodynamic resistance of A increases. The flow via the
bridge connecting A and B becomes less than half of the flow
through B. The droplet entering B travels into channel D
(figure 8d).
Using similar principles, Morgan et al. [85] implemented a
one-bit half-adder. When only one of the input channels rep-
resents ‘1’ the droplets from this channel go into channel S
(figure 8e,f). When both inputs are ‘1’ the droplets travel
into lateral channels (figure 8g).
Other variants of fluidic gates are realized in [50] using
surface tension-based passive pumping and fluidic resistance,
and in [49].
8. Billiard-ball computing with droplets and
marbles
In billiard-ball computing with droplets, the presence/absence
of a droplet in a given time or space symbolizes TRUE/FALSE.
The droplets compute when they collide with each other and
change their velocity vectors as a result of the collision.
Most logic gates implemented in fluidic devices (§6) use
the phenomenon of merging colliding jet streams (figure
6a) and excitation wave-fragments (figure 11g). Thus,
input jet streams or wave-fragments x and y propagating,
beyond the collision site, along their original trajectories
represent functions xy and xy. A stream or a wave-fragment
propagating along a new trajectory represents the function
xy. Discrete soft and liquid bodies do not always merge
when they collide but often are reflected. Thus, they can
implement collision-based gates.
Collision-based computation, emerging from Fredkin–
Toffoli conservative logic [86], employs mobile compact
finite
patterns,
which
implement
computation
while
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
7
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

interacting with each other [87]. Information values (e.g. truth
values of logic variables) are given either by the absence or
the presence of the localizations or by other parameters of
the localizations. These localizations travel in space and per-
form computation when they collide with each other. Thus,
the localizations undergo transformations: they change vel-
ocities, form bound states and annihilate or fuse when they
interact with other localizations. Information values of local-
izations are transformed as a result of collision and thus a
computation is implemented.
When two hard balls collide they are reflected in such a
manner that the trajectory of a reflected ball is at an angle
of less than 1808 to the trajectory of the same ball not involved
in the collision (figure 9a). If the presence of balls represents
TRUE values of Boolean variables x and y, then the trajectories
of the reflected balls represent xy and xy. This was the inspi-
ration for the Fredkin gate [86]. When balls are soft they are
compressed on impact and propagate for some period of
time as conjunct bodies. Then their shapes are restored and
they bounce back; thus their output trajectories are shifted
in time–space (figure 9b). When soft bodies impact each
other under particular regimes they might merge into a
single ball and lose their momentum (figure 9c); in this
case, we have only three output trajectories instead of four.
The gate shown in figure 9c is a fusion gate analogous to
figure 6a.
Outcomes of the collisions between liquid droplets
depend on the relationship between fluid inertia and tension
(b)
(a)
(c)
Figure 7. (a) A snapshot of the experimental set-up of AND–NOT gate implemented with soldier crabs. From [83] with kind permission of Yuta Nishiyama and
Yukio Gunji. The crabs are placed in one or two input channels, shown at the bottom of the photos, and persuaded to move towards three output channels, shown
at the top of the photos. (b) Experimental set-up of plant root gate. (c) Snapshots of operating crab gate for inputs 11: both input channels have swarms of crabs.
See video at https://vimeo.com/242345427. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
8
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

(Weber number) of the colliding droplets and their offset.
Binary collisions between droplets have been analysed
exhaustively by Ashgriz & Poo in 1990 [89] and 20 years
later by Rabe et al. [88]. Based on their results, we can
derive the following experimental droplet gates: stretching
separation (figure 9d) and reflexive separation (figure 9f ) of
colliding droplets represent a soft balls gate; coalescence of
droplets (figure 9e) represents a fusion gate (figures 9c and
6a). For certain parameters of the droplet collisions, one or
more stationary droplets are formed [89] (figure 9g); they
could represent results of the AND gate and even be used
as elementary memory units (the presence of a stationary
droplet is ‘1’ and the absence is ‘0’).
Mertaniemi et al. [53] explicitly interpreted collisions
between droplets on a hydrophobic surface in terms of
Boolean
logic
gates.
They
programmed
trajectories
of
droplets, and thus architectures of the logic gates, by the geo-
metry of grooves, on the hydrophobic surface, along which
the droplets travel. Examples of two gates are the NOT gate
(figure 9h–j) and the OR–AND gate (figure 9k–n). In the
NOT gate (figure 9h), there is a droplet travelling along
the channel labelled ‘1’. When this droplet ‘1’ collides with
the droplet travelling along the channel x, the droplet ‘1’ is
reflected into the south-west channel x (figure 9i). When
input x is FALSE and only the droplet in channel ‘1’ is present,
the droplet ‘1’ travels into the channel x. The OR–AND gate
(figure 9k) shows several channels leaving the collision site,
and thus that the droplets x or y are always routed to the chan-
nel x þ y when each of the droplets enters the gate alone
(figure 9l,m). When both droplets enter the gate, they collide.
Then one droplet enters the channel xy while the other droplet
still travels to the channel x þ y (figure 9n).
Instead of running droplets on a hydrophobic surface, we
can coat the droplets with a hydrophobic power. The droplets
then become liquid marbles. The liquid marbles, proposed by
Aussillous & Que´re´ in 2001 [90], are liquid droplets coated by
hydrophobic particles at the liquid/air interface (figure 10a–c).
In
2016,
I
proposed
to
make
experimental
laboratory
prototypes of computing devices allowing the liquid marbles
to explore additional degrees of freedom to travel in different
directions [92]. The first collision-based logic gate with liquid
marbles was prototyped by Draper et al. [54]. An example of
the liquid marble gate in action is shown in figure 10d.
Computing schemes involving ‘proper’ collision-based
gates require a synchronization of signals. Such synchroni-
zation
is
indeed
achievable
but
places
an
additional
burden on preparation of data for computation; thus, simul-
taneously with developments of synchronous circuits I
considered producing experimental prototypes of asynchro-
nous devices based on cantilever moving parts, actuated by
liquid marbles [92].
In 1965, J. T. Godfrey [93] proposed a mechanical binary
digital computer: the configuration of flip-flops arranged on
an inclined surface and operated by metal balls rolling
down the surface. The design inspired my group to prototype
an asynchronous binary counter actuated by liquid marbles
[90] (figure 10e). Droplet and liquid marble devices use the
force of gravity to operate. This can be avoided by using
self-propulsive liquid marbles, e.g. aqueous ethanol marbles
on a water surface [94,95] or polypyrrole and carbon black
marbles driven by light [96].
9. Reaction–diffusion computers
All living systems, from cells to brain cortex, display excitable
dynamics as part of their dynamical patterns [97–99].
Creatures without a nervous system, e.g. plants [100–108],
slime
moulds
[109–115]
and
fungi
[116,117],
employ
excitation dynamics, manifested in calcium waves and
action-potential-like spikes, in their decision-making pro-
cesses. The electrical activity in plants, slime mould and
fungi might be associated with calcium waves [111,118–
125]. Decision-making with calcium waves propagating in
living substrates strongly relates to the theory and practice
of reaction–diffusion computing.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
( f )
(g)
(h)
(e)
x
x+y
xy
y
x
c
s
c
c
c
s
s
s
drain
drain
drain
drain
y
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
B
D
A
C
Figure 8. (a–d) Microfluidic gate OR–AND, redrawn from [47]; oil droplets are coloured red and green for distinction only. Vertical channels are inputs, horizontal
channels are outputs. (e–h) Snapshots of experimental implementation of microfluidic half-adder by Morgan et al. [85]: (e) x ¼ 1, y ¼ 0, (f) x ¼ 0, y ¼ 1, (g)
x ¼ 1, y ¼ 1, (h) oil entering channel x is coloured to demonstrate a deflection of flow. Adapted from [85]. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
9
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
y
xy
x + y
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0 1
1
1
1
x
x
x
y
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy xy
y
y
y
y
y
x–y
x–y
x–
x–
x–
x–y
x–y
x–y
x–y
xy–
xy–
xy–
xy–
xy–
xy–
(a)
(g)
(h)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(i)
(k)
( j)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
( f )
Figure 9. Collision-based computing with droplets and liquid marbles. (a) Hard balls gate, Fredkin gate. (b) Soft balls gate, Margolus gate. (c) Fusion/
coalescence gate. (d–f) Gates derived from laboratory experiments [88] with droplets colliding with various offsets: (d) stretching separation, (e) coalesc-
ence and (f) reflexive separation. Illustrations of colliding droplets are redrawn from fig. 4 of [88]. (g) Outcome of binary droplet collision experimentally
found by Ashgriz & Poo [89]; Weber numbers, from top to bottom are We ¼ 23, We ¼ 40 and We ¼ 96. Collisions are redrawn from [89]. (h–n) Schemes
of gates implemented with droplets on a hydrophobic surface in [53]. (h–j) NOT gate, scheme (h), x ¼ 1 (i), x ¼ 0 ( j). (k–n) OR–AND gate, scheme (k),
x ¼ 1, y ¼ 0 (l ), x ¼ 0, y ¼ 1 (m), x ¼ 1, y ¼ 1 (n). In (h–n), the pathway of a droplet originated in channel x is coloured red, and in channel y green.
(Online version in colour.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 10. (a) Liquid marbles with Lycopodium coating and water cargo on the right and a mix of red Indian ink and water on the left; marbles are around 5 ml in
volume. (b) Fifty microlitre water marble coated by red fluorescent fingerprint powder. (c) Fifty microlitre water marble coated by copper particles. (c) Soft balls gate,
figure 9b, implemented with liquid marbles, filmed by a high-speed camera; the gate was prototyped by Draper et al. [54]. Adapted from [54]. (d) A fragment of
the liquid marble binary counter presented in [91]. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
10
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

A reaction–diffusion computer [18,126,127] is a spatially
extended chemical system that processes information by
transforming an input concentration profile to an output con-
centration profile in a deterministic and controlled manner. In
reaction–diffusion computers, the data are represented by
concentration profiles of reagents, information is transferred
by propagating diffusive and phase waves, computation is
implemented via the interaction of these travelling patterns
(diffusive and excitation waves), and results of the compu-
tation are recorded as a final concentration profile. Chemical
reaction–diffusion computing is among the leaders in provid-
ing experimental prototypes in the fields of unconventional
and nature-inspired computing.
The Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction—periodic oxi-
dation of malonic acid in solution [128–130], has been a
key substrate for implementing reaction–diffusion computers
for nearly the last 40 years. In these computing devices, infor-
mation is represented by travelling oxidation wave fronts
(figure 11a) and the computation is programmed by geo-
metrical constraining of the medium or configurations of
the excitation initiation sites.
Research on BZ-based information processing started in
the mid-1980s when Kuhnert, Agladze & Krinsky demon-
strated that a thin layer of light-sensitive BZ reaction can
implement contrast modification, detection of a contour and
smoothing of the half-tone images projected onto the
medium [39,132]. These results ignited an almost 40 year
epoch of information processing with BZ medium. Work on
image processing with BZ continued till the early 2000s
[133–137].
In the mid-1990s, the Showalter laboratory produced a
series of experimental prototypes of logic gates implemented
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
( f )
(g)
(h)
x–y
xy–
xy
y
x
Figure 11. (a) A thin-layer BZ reaction; travelling oxidation wavefronts are blue. (b,c) Computer model of Agladze diode. (b) Forward propagation. Excitation wavefront
propagates from the right to the left. (c) Backward propagation. Excitation wavefront propagates from the left to the right. (d,e) Exploration of London street networks
with fully excitable (d) and sub-excitable (e) media. Time lapse snapshots two-variable Oregonator model. (f) Routing of a wave-fragment in a sub-excitable medium.
The medium is sub-excitable but two rectangular shapes (white rectangles) are not excitable. Grid size is 500500 nodes. The pictures are not snapshots of many
wave fronts generated at the initial stimulation point, but time lapsed snapshots of a single wave-fragment recorded every 150th step of numerical integration. (g)
Collision-based gate. Case shown when both inputs have value TRUE; thus two wave-fragments collide. Time lapse overlays. One fragment is travelling from north-west
to south-east, another fragment from south-west to north-east. The wave-fragments collide and fuse into a new localized excitation travelling east. (h) Robotic hand
interacts with Belousov–Zhabotinsky medium. When the bending fingers touch the chemical medium, glass ‘nails’ fitted with capillary tubes release small quantities
of colloidal silver into the solution and this triggers additional circular waves. Adapted from [131]. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
11
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

via interaction of oxidation wavefronts in geometrically con-
strained BZ medium [40]. Following this, numerous devices
were modelled and/or implemented in the experimental labora-
tory, including signal switches [138], counters [38], a one-bit
adder [139], a many-bit binary adder [140] and decoder [141],
three-valued logic gates [142] and a device for square root
approximation [143].
Design of potential computing circuits was facilitated by
the discovery of a chemical diode [37]. The diode is made
of two plates covered with excitable solution. The corner of
one plate is close to the plane side of the other plate. An exci-
tation wavefront travelling in the forward direction reaches
the contact site between the plates as a planar wave, it propa-
gates through the contact site and then continues expanding
in the triangular part of the device (figure 11b). The wave-
fragment travelling in the backward direction slows down
while propagating towards the corner of the triangular
plate (figure 11c). At the contact point, the size of the wave-
fragment becomes so small, for the level of the medium’s
excitability, that it is annihilated without crossing the contact
site between the plates.
The above prototypes constrained BZ medium in tem-
plates,
that
is,
BZ
computers
were
programmed
by
architecture. There is another option to realize logic gates
using BZ. This is a collision-based, or dynamical, compu-
tation [86,87]; see §8. In 2001, Sendin˜a-Nadal et al. [144]
experimentally demonstrated the existence of localized exci-
tations—travelling wave-fragments that behave like quasi-
particles in the photosensitive sub-excitable BZ medium. In
the early 2000s, I proposed that the compact wave-fragments
can represent Boolean values and execute logic gates by col-
liding with each other [145]. The wave-fragments can be
routed in the medium by using non-excitable domains as
reflectors (figure 11f). I employed the localizations to
construct several logic gates and circuits [145–149].
BZ medium is also used for optimization tasks, e.g. to
assist in maze solving [150–152] and to calculate the shortest
collision-free path [87]. Recently, my group found that by
tuning the excitability of the medium we can select the critical
features of street networks [153,154]. In excitable BZ, oxi-
dation wavefronts traverse all streets of the network (figure
11d). A pruning strategy is adopted by the medium with
decreasing excitability when wider and ballistically appropri-
ate streets are selected (figure 11e).
In the early 2000s, the first-ever excitable chemical
controller mounted on-board a wheeled robot was con-
structed and tested under experimental laboratory conditions
[20,45,87], and also a robotic hand was interfaced and con-
trolled using BZ medium [128] (figure 11h). Litschel et al.
[155] showed that by linking micro-reactors with BZ and
establishing excitation and inhibitory connections between
the neighbouring reactors, it is possible to generate travelling
patterns of oscillatory activity resembling the neural locomo-
tive patterns.
Control of a robot with oxidation wavefronts can be
embedded directly in the actuating materials. This can be done
by impregnating a pH-sensitive gel with a catalyst and immer-
sing it in the catalyst-free BZ solution: a peristaltic motion will
be observed [156]. Such an approach can be advanced to other
types of smart materials and soft robots [157,158].
The collision-based gate shown in figure 11g can be
also implemented in a geometrically constrained medium,
where wave-fragments interact at the junctions of the
excitable channels (figure 12) [159]. In excitable mode, stimu-
lation of a single (figure 12b, input x) input leads to
wavefronts propagating to all channels. In sub-excitable
mode, a wave-fragment from the input channel propagates
ballistically to an output channel (figure 12c), but when
both input channels are excited the wave-fragments fuse
and propagate into the central vertical channel (figure 12e).
The fusion gates can be cascaded into a one-bit half-adder
(figure 12f–i), and further to a many-bit full adder [159]
and Fredkin and Toffoli logically reversible gates [161].
Fine-grained compartmentalization of BZ solutions can
be achieved by preparing emulsions or liquid droplets of
BZ solution in an oil and liposomes [162–168]. Then each
of the droplets can be seen as a computing element interact-
ing with its neighbours via reagents diffusing in oil.
Information transmission, as presented by excitation wave
fronts, between BZ droplets [164,165,169] has been demon-
strated in laboratory experiments. Experimental laboratory
computing devices made from arrays of BZ droplets or ves-
icles are the memory devices made from BZ–oil emulsion
[170] and the NOR gate made from BZ droplets with inhibi-
tory coupling [171]. Recently, my group demonstrated
prototypes of BZ liquid marbles, BZ solution coated with
a hydrophobic powder [172]. There is evidence of oxidation
wavefront transmission between BZ liquid marbles, poss-
ibly via the gaseous phase; however, more experimental
evidence is required to establish the design of potential com-
puting architectures.
As demonstrated in computer experiments, by arranging
a configuration of BZ droplets and by tuning sizes of pores
between BZ vesicles, it is possible to implement Boolean
gates, including collision-based polymorphic gates [173]
and binary arithmetic circuits [160,174–176]. In the example
shown in figure 12j, a one-bit half-adder is implemented in
a simulated ensemble of two-dimensional BZ vesicles. The
outputs from the XOR operation are recombined with an
OR operation with additional discs in the top right. The cir-
cuit
employs
three
methods
of
signal
modulation:
connection angle, disc size and aperture efficiency. Vesicles
sizes and diameters of pores between vesicles are selected
intentionally to perform the desired operations. The half-
adder implemented in uniformly sized vesicles having the
same diameters of pores is shown in figure 12k.
Recently, Gorecki et al. [177] demonstrated how to make a
frequency of oscillation-based OR gate and one-bit memory
in an array of coupled oscillatory BZ droplets and to evolve
a classifier of BZ droplets [178].
BZ reaction is not the only chemical medium for
unconventional computing. In the mid-1990s, Tolmachiov &
Adamatzky developed prototypes of reaction–diffusion com-
puting devices capable of approximation of the Voronoi
diagram of a planar point set [44] and calculation of a skeleton
of a planar shape [43]. Several experimental laboratory proto-
types
of
precipitating
processors
have
been
built
for
implementation of an XOR gate [179], and computation of a
skeleton of a planar shape [179] and Voronoi diagrams [180].
10. Discussion
Several contributions to this special issue have demonstrate
that a creature does not need a nervous system, in its classical
sense, to fuse sensorial inputs, process information and make
a decision. The most exciting examples include learning by
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
12
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

the slime mould, morphogenetic positional computing, dis-
tributed
information
processing
in
plant
organs,
and
neuronal-like activity of bacterial biofilms. In the present
paper, I show that a substrate does not need to be alive or
posses any particular electrical or biochemical properties to
compute: even a liquid, which you would be unable to
keep in your hands, can perform sophisticated computing
circuits.
Back in 2007, while at the ‘Unconventional Computation:
Quo Vadis?’ conference in Santa Fe I met Norman Margolus
(famous for his block cellular automata model of billiard-ball
computers, co-design of the Cellular Automata Machine, and
Margolus–Levitin theorem [181]). During our discussion
about the nature of computation, Norman stated that ‘any
object/substrate either does not compute or is a universal
computer’. Fully agreeing with this statement, I would like
to highlight that the time for theorizing that ‘natural systems’
compute is over. It is time to produce working laboratory pro-
totypes of actual computing devices based on unconventional
computing substrates. This is why in this paper I have
exhibited a kaleidoscope of the working prototypes of
liquid-based computing devices. I have shown that one can
implement logic gates using interacting stream jets, colliding
liquid droplets and marbles, and excitation wavefronts in non-
linear chemical medium. Most of the prototypes demonstrated
are not liquid-specific. For example, gradient tracing by liquid
droplets can be imitated by slime mould growing along a gra-
dient of chemoattractants, and logic gates implemented by jet
streams can be equally realized via collision between swarms
of soldier crabs or growing plant roots.
(a)
( f )
(g)
(h)
( j)
(k)
(i)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
x
y
y
b
e
f
h
g
a
d
c
i
j
x
xy
S = 1
C = 0
C = 0
C = 0
x = 1
x = 1
x = 0
y = 0
y = 1
y = 1
S = 1
S = 0
x ≈y
x–y
xy–
xy
C
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
y
S
x
x
Figure 12. (a–e) Fusion gate. (a) Scheme: inputs are x and y, outputs are xy, xy, xy. (b–e) Time lapse overlays of excitation waves. (b) Excitable mode, x ¼ 1,
y ¼ 0. (c) Sub-excitable mode, x ¼ 1, y ¼ 0. (d) Excitable mode, x ¼ 1, y ¼ 1. (e) Sub-excitable mode, x ¼ 1, y ¼ 1. (f) A scheme of a one-bit half-adder:
input channels are a and b, output channels are g and h, internal channels are d, e, f, and junctions are c, i and j. Input variables x and y are fed into channels a
and b, results x  y and xy are read from channels g and h. (g–i) Time lapse overlays of excitation waves propagating in the one-bit half-adder for inputs (g)
x ¼ 1, y ¼ 0, (h) x ¼ 1, y ¼ 0, (i) x ¼ 1, y ¼ 1. Sites of initial segment-wise perturbation are visible as discs. Grid size is 500790 nodes. See details in [159]. ( j)
Composite half-adder implemented in two-dimensional BZ vesicles: S ¼ x  y, C ¼ x  y, where inputs and outputs are all connected to a central reactor disc which can
achieve both the AND and XOR functions. Adapted from [160]. (k) Half-adder made from uniform BZ vesicles. Adapted from [160]. (Online version in colour.)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
13
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

The future potential of liquid-based computing is enor-
mous. By selecting an appropriate cargo in liquid marbles,
we can implement chemical reactions with two marbles.
Thus information values carried by the marbles will not be
just the binary physical presence of a marble at a given
time in a given space but also concentrations of chemical
species inside input and output marbles. A droplet or a
marble filled with Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction
medium can perform massive-parallel computation by itself
because there are thousands of chemical micro-reactors that
may act as elementary processors. At the same time, several
BZ marbles can implement billiard-ball computing when
rolling under gravity in a geometrically constrained space.
In this brief review, I have touched on all principal devel-
opments in liquid computing but liquid electronics. The
breadth and depth of the liquid electronics ‘eco-system’
would require a separate review paper. Example ‘species’
of liquid electronics devices are liquid–solid phase reversible
change of conductivity controlled by temperature [182], field-
controlled electrical switch [183], liquid field effect transistor
[184] and optical liquid droplet switch [185]. There is a also a
huge, and largely unexplored, potential in combining mech-
anical properties of the liquid jets, droplets and marbles
with electrical and optical properties of their solvents and
solutes. All these provide scope for future studies.
The primary disadvantages of fluidic computers are now,
as they were in the 1960s, lower operating speed (unless air jets
are employed), higher power loss and entrapped air [186].
These problems become less important when considered in
the context of reconfigurable bioinspired robots or control
systems where speed is not critical.
What are the advantages of liquid computers? They do
not need an electricity or any other artificial power source
and can work just under gravity. This makes liquid compu-
ters invincible to electro-magnetic fields and fault tolerant
(this is why some components from fluidic logic devices
from the 1960s are still used in nuclear reactor control systems
[187–189] and fighter jets [190–192]). In many prototypes of
fluid computers, there are no moving parts (apart from fluid);
therefore the devices have a lifetime substantially longer than
mechanical or electrical computers. Fluidic devices can be
integrated with and embedded in sensing and actuating
materials; therefore they are impeccable controllers for soft-
bodied robots [193]. The advantage of liquid droplets and
marbles is the ease of their generation and manipulation;
this is already well demonstrated by digital microfluidics
applications [194–196].
Competing interests. The author declares that he has no competing
interests.
Funding. No funding has been received for this article.
Endnotes
1Analyses of fluid-like behaviour of ants was inspired by early results
on fluid-like behaviour of crowds [14–16].
2Tesla diode was proposed in 1920s but in relation to computation [31].
3The hydraulic equation solvers are discussed in the context of elec-
trical and mechanical solvers in [25].
References
1.
Alim K, Amselem G, Peaudecerf F, Brenner MP,
Pringle A. 2013 Random network peristalsis in
Physarum polycephalum organizes fluid flows across
an individual. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,
13 306–13 311. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1305049110)
2.
Sato M, Wong TZ, Allen RD. 1983 Rheological
properties of living cytoplasm: endoplasm of
Physarum plasmodium. J. Cell Biol. 97, 1089–1097.
(doi:10.1083/jcb.97.4.1089)
3.
Tero A, Yumiki K, Kobayashi R, Saigusa T, Nakagaki
T. 2008 Flow-network adaptation in Physarum
amoebae. Theory Biosci. 127, 89–94. (doi:10.1007/
s12064-008-0037-9)
4.
Wohlfarth-Bottermann K. 1979 Oscillatory
contraction activity in Physarum. J. Exp. Biol. 81,
15–32.
5.
Alim K, Andrew N, Pringle A, Brenner MP. 2017
Mechanism of signal propagation in Physarum
polycephalum. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 5136–
5141.
6.
Alim K. 2018 Fluid flows shaping organism
morphology. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 373, 20170112.
(doi:10.1098/rstb.2017.0112)
7.
Boisseau RP, Vogel D, Dussutour A. 2016
Habituation in non-neural organisms: evidence from
slime moulds. Proc. R. Soc. B 283, 20160446.
(doi:10.1098/rspb.2016.0446)
8.
Dussutour A, Latty T, Beekman M, Simpson SJ. 2010
Amoeboid organism solves complex nutritional
challenges. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
4607–4611. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0912198107)
9.
Vallverdu´ J et al. 2018 Slime mould: the
fundamental mechanisms of biological cognition.
Biosystems 165, 57–70. (doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.
2017.12.011)
10. Whiting JG, Jones J, Bull L, Levin M, Adamatzky A.
2016 Towards a Physarum learning chip. Sci. Rep. 6,
19 948. (doi:10.1038/srep19948)
11. Burd M, Archer D, Aranwela N, Stradling DJ. 2002
Traffic dynamics of the leaf-cutting ant, Atta
cephalotes. Am. Nat. 159, 283–293. (doi:10.1086/
338541.)
12. Fourcassie´ V, Dussutour A, Deneubourg J-L. 2010
Ant traffic rules. J. Exp. Biol. 213, 2357–2363.
(doi:10.1242/jeb.031237)
13. Detrain C, Deneubourg J-L. 2006 Self-organized
structures in a superorganism: do ants ‘behave’ like
molecules? Phys. Rev. 3, 162–187. (doi:10.1016/j.
plrev.2006.07.001)
14. Helbing D. 1998 A fluid dynamic model for the
movement of pedestrians. See http://arxiv.org/abs/
9805213.
15. Henderson LF. 1974 On the fluid mechanics of
human crowd motion. Transp. Res. 8, 509–515.
(doi:10.1016/0041-1647(74)90027-6)
16. Hughes RL. 2003 The flow of human crowds. Annu.
Rev. Fluid Mech. 35, 169–182. (doi:10.1146/
annurev.fluid.35.101101.161136)
17. Adamatzky A. 1996 Reaction-diffusion computer:
massively parallel chemical computation. In Parcella
1996, Proc. VII Int. Workshop on Parallel
Processing by Cellular Automata and Arrays, Berlin,
Germany, 16–20 September 1996 (ed. R Vollmar,
W Erhard, V Jossifov), pp. 287–290. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
18. Adamatzky A, Costello BDL, Asai T 2005 Reaction-
diffusion computers. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier.
19. Adamatzky A. 2002 On dynamics of affective liquids.
Dyn. Psychol. 1, pp. 1–12.
20. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Melhuish C,
Ratcliffe N. 2003 Liquid brains for robots.
AISB Q. 112, 5.
21. Adamatzky A, Holland O, Rambidi N, Winfield A.
1999 Wet artificial brains: towards the chemical
control of robot motion by reaction-diffusion and
excitable media. In Proc. 5th Eur. Conf. Advances in
Artificial Life, ECAL’99, Lausanne, Switzerland,
13–17 September 1999 (ed. D Floreano,
J-D Nicoud, F Mondada), pp. 304–313. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
22. Adamatzky A. 2005 Parachemistry of mind: case
studies of doxastic and affective mixtures. In Visions
of mind: architectures for cognition and affect
(ed. DN Davis), pp. 1–20. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
23. Adamatzky A. 2005 Non-linear dynamics in affective
solutions: analysis of massive collectives of
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
14
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

emotional agents. Kybernetes 34, 652–665.
(doi:10.1108/03684920510595346)
24. Emch A. 1901 Two hydraulic methods to extract the
nth root of any number. Am. Math. Month. 8,
10–12. (doi:10.1080/00029890.1901.12000520)
25. Frame J. 1945 Machines for solving algebraic
equations. Math. Comput. 1, 337–353. (doi:10.
1090/S0025-5718-1945-0011196-2)
26. Gibb D. 1914 The instrumental solution of
numerical equations. In Modern instruments
and methods of calculation: a handbook
of the Napier Tercentenary Exhibition
(ed. EM Horsburgh), pp. 259–268. Edinburgh,
UK: Royal Society of Edinburgh.
27. Luk’yanov V. 1939 Hydraulic instruments for
technical calculations. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR 2,
pp. 34–56.
28. Moore A. 1936 The hydrocal. Ind. Eng. Chem. 28,
704–708. (doi:10.1021/ie50318a022)
29. Bissell C. 2007 Historical perspectives - the Moniac a
hydromechanical analog computer of the 1950s.
IEEE Control Syst. 27, 69–74. (doi:10.1109/MCS.
2007.284511)
30. Moore A. 1949 Fields from fluid flow mappers.
J. Appl. Phys. 20, 790–804. (doi:10.1063/1.
1698529)
31. Tesla N. 1920 Valvular conduit. US Patent no.
1,329,559.
32. Bowles RE. 1965 Passive pure fluid component. US
Patent no. 3,191,623.
33. Drake RT, Gehring JAJ, Marvin J. 2006 Pure fluid
computer. US Patent no. 3,190,554.
34. Hobbs EV. 1963 Fluid amplification. 9. Logic
elements. Technical report no. TR-1114.
Washington, DC: Harry Diamond Laboratories.
35. Pul FW. 1969 Fluid mechanics of the momentum
flueric diode. In Proc. IFAC Symp. Fluidics, vol. 1,
pp. 1–15. London: Royal Aeronautical Society.
36. Bauer P. 1965 “and” gate. US Patent no.
3,191,611.
37. Agladze K, Aliev R, Yamaguchi T, Yoshikawa K.
1996 Chemical diode. J. Phys. Chem. 100,
13 895–13 897. (doi:10.1021/jp9608990)
38. Gorecki J, Yoshikawa K, Igarashi Y. 2003 On
chemical reactors that can count. J. Phys. Chem. A
107, 1664–1669. (doi:10.1021/jp021041f)
39. Kuhnert L, Agladze K, Krinsky V. 1989 Image
processing using light-sensitive chemical
waves. Nature 337, 244–247. (doi:10.1038/
337244a0)
40. Steinbock O, Kettunen P, Showalter K. 1996
Chemical wave logic gates. J. Phys. Chem. 100,
18 970–18 975. (doi:10.1021/jp961209v)
41. Adamatzky A. 1994 Constructing a discrete
generalized Voronoi diagram in reaction-diffusion
media. Neural Netw. World 6, 635–643.
42. Adamatzky A. 1996 Reaction-diffusion computer:
massively parallel molecular computation. Math.
Res. 96, 287–290.
43. Adamatzky A, Tolmachiev D. 1997 Chemical
processor for computation of skeleton of planar
shape. Adv. Mater. Opt. Electron. 7, 135–139.
(doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1099-0712)
44. Tolmachiev D, Adamatzky A. 1996 Chemical
processor for computation of Voronoi diagram. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 6, 191–196. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-
0712(199607)6:4,191::AID-AMO238.3.0.CO;2-G)
45. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Melhuish C,
Ratcliffe N. 2004 Experimental implementation
of mobile robot taxis with onboard Belousov–
Zhabotinsky chemical medium. Mater. Sci.
Eng. C 24, 541–548. (doi:10.1016/j.msec.2004.
02.002)
46. Fuerstman MJ, Deschatelets P, Kane R, Schwartz A,
Kenis PJ, Deutch JM, Whitesides GM. 2003 Solving
mazes using microfluidic networks. Langmuir 19,
4714–4722. (doi:10.1021/la030054x)
47. Cheow LF, Yobas L, Kwong D-L. 2007 Digital
microfluidics: droplet based logic gates. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 90, 054107. (doi:10.1063/1.2435607)
48. Fair RB. 2007 Digital microfluidics: is a true lab-on-
a-chip possible? Microfluid. Nanofluid. 3, 245–281.
(doi:10.1007/s10404-007-0161-8)
49. Prakash M, Gershenfeld N. 2007 Microfluidic bubble
logic. Science 315, 832–835. (doi:10.1126/science.
1136907)
50. Toepke MW, Abhyankar VV, Beebe DJ. 2007
Microfluidic logic gates and timers. Lab. Chip 7,
1449–1453. (doi:10.1039/b708764k)
51. Cˇejkova´ J, Nova´k M, Sˇteˇpa´nek F, Hanczyc MM. 2014
Dynamics of chemotactic droplets in salt
concentration gradients. Langmuir 30,
11 937–11 944. (doi:10.1021/la502624f)
52. Lagzi I, Soh S, Wesson PJ, Browne KP, Grzybowski
BA. 2010 Maze solving by chemotactic droplets.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 1198–1199. (doi:10.1021/
ja9076793)
53. Mertaniemi H, Forchheimer R, Ikkala O, Ras RH.
2012 Rebounding droplet-droplet collisions on
superhydrophobic surfaces: from the phenomenon
to droplet logic. Adv. Mater. 24, 5738–5743.
(doi:10.1002/adma.v24.42)
54. Draper TC, Fullarton C, Phillips N, de Lacy Costello
BP, Adamatzky A. 2017 Liquid marble interaction
gate for collision-based computing. Mater. Today
20, 561–568. (doi:10.1016/j.mattod.2017.09.004)
55. Arlazorov M. 1952 Mashina s vysshem
obrazovaniem [A machine with higher education].
Ogoniok 31 (in Russian).
56. The Polytechnic Museum. 2018 Online exhibition.
Water computer (in Russian). See https://polymus.
ru/ru/museum/fonds/tours/vodyanoy-
kompyuter#virt-tour-item-4.
57. Hele-Shaw HS, Hay A. 1900 Lines of induction in a
magnetic field. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 67, 234–236.
58. Hele-Shaw H, Hay A, Powell P. 1905
Hydrodynamical and electromagnetic investigations
regarding the magnetic-flux distribution in toothed
core armatures. J. Inst. Electr. Eng. 34, 21–37.
(doi:10.1049/jiee-1.1905.0001)
59. Moore A. 2018 Arthur D. Moore papers:
1916–1984. See https://quod.lib.umich.edu/b/
bhlead/umich-bhl-851959?view=text (accessed
June 2018).
60. McFee R, Stow RM, Johnston FD. 1952 Graphic
representation of electrocardiographic leads by
means of fluid mappers. Circulation 6, 21–29.
(doi:10.1161/01.CIR.6.1.21)
61. Clem JD. 1954 The use of the fluid mapper in an
investigation of flow into symmetrical openings
obstructed by plane surfaces. PhD thesis, Georgia
Institute of Technology.
62. Adamatzky A. 2017 Physical maze solvers. all
twelve prototypes implement 1961 LEE algorithm.
In Emergent computation (ed. A. Adamatzky),
pp. 489–504. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
63. Golovin A, Gupalo I, Riazantsev I. 1986 O
khemotermokapilliarnom effekte dlia dvizheniia
kapli v zhidkosti [The chemothermocapillary effect
for drop motion in a fluid]. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Dok.
290, 35–39 (in Russian.)
64. Golovin A, Ryazantsev YS. 1990 The drift of reacting
drop owing to chemosolutocapillary effect. Izv.
Akad. Nauk SSSR, Mekh. Zhidk. Gaza 3, 23–27.
65. Levich VG. 1963 Physicochemical hydrodynamics.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
66. Velarde MG. 1998 Drops, liquid layers and the
Marangoni effect. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 356,
829–842. (doi:10.1098/rsta.1998.0190)
67. Yoshinaga N. 2014 Spontaneous motion and
deformation of a self-propelled droplet. Phys. Rev. E
89, 012913. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.89.012913)
68. Young N, Goldstein J, Block MJ. 1959 The motion
of bubbles in a vertical temperature gradient.
J. Fluid Mech. 6, 350–356. (doi:10.1017/
S0022112059000684)
69. Cˇejkova´ J, Banno T, Hanczyc MM, Sˇteˇpa´nek F. 2017
Droplets as liquid robots. Artif. Life 23, 528–549.
(doi:10.1162/ARTL_a_00243)
70. Chiolerio A, Quadrelli MB. 2017 Smart fluid systems:
the advent of autonomous liquid robotics. Adv. Sci.
4, 1700036. (doi:10.1002/advs.v4.7)
71. Adamatzky A. 2012 Slime mold solves maze in one
pass, assisted by gradient of chemo-attractants. IEEE
Trans. Nanobioscience 11, 131–134. (doi:10.1109/
TNB.2011.2181978)
72. Ricigliano V, Chitaman J, Tong J, Adamatzky A,
Howarth DG. 2015 Plant hairy root cultures as
plasmodium modulators of the slime mold
emergent computing substrate Physarum
polycephalum. Front. Microbiol. 6, 720. (doi:10.
3389/fmicb.2015.00720)
73. Conway A 1971 Guide to fluidics. London, UK:
Macdonald & Co. (Publishers).
74. Kirshner JM, Katz S 1975 Design theory of fluidic
components. New York, NY: Academic Press.
75. Moylan MJ 1968 Fluid logic in simple terms. London,
UK: Machinery Publishing Co.
76. Belsterling CA 1971 Fluidic systems design.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
77. Dummer GWA, Robertson JM. 2013 Fluidic components
and equipment 1968–9: Pergamon electronics data
series. Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Elsevier.
78. Gunji G et al. 2011 Embodied swarming based on
back propagation through time shows water-
crossing, hourglass and logic-gate behaviors. In
ECAL (ed. T Lenaerts, M Giacobini, H Bersini,
P Bourgine, M Dorigo, R Doursat), pp. 294–301.
Paris, France: Springer.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
15
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

79. Gunji Y-P, Nishiyama Y, Adamatzky A. 2011
Robust soldier crab ball gate. Complex Syst. 20, 2.
pp. 93–104.
80. Nishiyama Y, Gunji Y-P, Adamatzky A. 2013
Collision-based computing implemented by
soldier crab swarms. Int. J. Parallel Emergent Distrib.
Syst. 28, 67–74. (doi:10.1080/17445760.2012.
662682)
81. Adamatzky A, Harding S, Erokhin V, Mayne R, Gizzie
N, Balusˇka F, Mancuso S, Sirakoulis GC. 2018
Computers from plants we never made:
speculations. In Inspired by nature (ed. A
Adamatzky), pp. 357–387. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
82. Adamatzky A, Sirakoulis GC, Martinez GJ, Balusˇka F,
Mancuso S. 2017 On plant roots logical gates.
BioSystems 156, 40–45. (doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.
2017.04.002)
83. Nishiyama Y, Gunji Y-P, Adamatzky A. 2013
Collision-based computing implemented by
soldier crab swarms. Int. J. Parallel Emergent
Distrib. Syst. 28, 67–74. (doi:10.1080/17445760.
2012.662682)
84. Ciszak M, Comparini D, Mazzolai B, Balusˇka F,
Arecchi FT, Vicsek T, Mancuso S. 2012 Swarming
behavior in plant roots. PLoS ONE 7, e29759.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0029759)
85. Morgan AJ, Barrow DA, Adamatzky A, Hanczyc MM.
2016 Simple fluidic digital half-adder. See http://
arxiv.org/abs/1602.01084.
86. Fredkin E, Toffoli T. 2002 Conservative logic. In
Collision-based computing (ed. A Adamatzky).
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
87. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B. 2002 Collision-free
path planning in the Belousov–Zhabotinsky
medium assisted by a cellular automaton.
Naturwissenschaften 89, 474–478. (doi:10.1007/
s00114-002-0363-6)
88. Rabe C, Malet J, Feuillebois F. 2010 Experimental
investigation of water droplet binary collisions and
description of outcomes with a symmetric Weber
number. Phys. Fluids 22, 047101. (doi:10.1063/1.
3392768)
89. Ashgriz N, Poo J. 1990 Coalescence and separation
in binary collisions of liquid drops. J. Fluid Mech.
221, 183–204. (doi:10.1017/S0022112090003536)
90. Aussillous P, Que´re´ D. 2001 Liquid marbles. Nature
411, 924–927. (doi:10.1038/35082026)
91. Draper TC, Fullarton C, Phillips N, de Lacy Costello
BP, Adamatzky A. 2018 Mechanical sequential
counting with liquid marbles. In Proc. Int. Conf.
Unconventional Computation and Natural
Computation (ed. S Stepney, S Verlan), pp. 59–71.
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
92. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B. 2016 Computing
with liquid marbles. EPSRC grant EP/P016677/1.
See https://gow.epsrc.ukri.org/NGBOViewGrant.
aspx?GrantRef=EP/P016677/1.
93. Godfrey JT. 1968 Binary digital computer. US Patent
no. 3,390,471.
94. Bormashenko E, Bormashenko Y, Grynyov R, Aharoni
H, Whyman G, Binks BP. 2015 Self-propulsion of
liquid marbles: Leidenfrost-like levitation driven by
Marangoni flow. J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 9910–9915.
(doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b01307)
95. Ooi CH, van Nguyen A, Evans GM, Gendelman O,
Bormashenko E, Nguyen N-T. 2015 A floating self-
propelling liquid marble containing aqueous
ethanol solutions. RSC Adv. 5, 101006–101012.
(doi:10.1039/C5RA23946J)
96. Paven M, Mayama H, Sekido T, Butt H-J,
Nakamura Y, Fujii S. 2016 Light-driven delivery
and release of materials using liquid marbles.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 26, 3199–3206. (doi:10.1002/
adfm.201600034)
97. Burr HS, Lane C. 1935 Electrical characteristics of
living systems. Yale J. Biol. Med. 8, 31–35.
98. Buzsaki G 2006 Rhythms of the brain. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
99. Levin M. 2007 Large-scale biophysics: ion flows and
regeneration. Trends Cell Biol. 17, 261–270.
(doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2007.04.007)
100. Balusˇka F, Mancuso S. 2013 Root apex transition
zone as oscillatory zone. Front. Plant Sci. 4, 354.
(doi:10.3389/fpls.2013.00354)
101. Balusˇka F, Mancuso S, Volkmann D, Barlow P. 2010
Root apex transition zone: a signalling-response
nexus in the root. Trends Plant Sci. 15, 402–408.
(doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2010.04.007)
102. Brenner E, Stahlberg R, Mancuso S, Vivanco J,
Balusˇka F, Van Volkenburgh E. 2006 Plant
neurobiology: an integrated view of plant signaling.
Trends Plant Sci. 11, 413–419. (doi:10.1016/j.
tplants.2006.06.009)
103. Fromm J, Lautner S. 2007 Electrical signals and
their physiological significance in plants. Plant Cell
Environ. 30, 249–257. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-3040.
2006.01614.x)
104. Gagliano M, Renton M, Depczynski M, Mancuso S.
2014 Experience teaches plants to learn faster and
forget slower in environments where it matters.
Oecologia 175, 63–72. (doi:10.1007/s00442-013-
2873-7)
105. Mancuso S. 1999 Hydraulic and electrical
transmission of wound-induced signals in Vitis
vinifera. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 26, 55–61. (doi:10.
1071/PP98098)
106. Mancuso S. 2000 Electrical resistance changes
during exposure to low temperature measure
chilling and freezing tolerance in olive tree
(Olea europaea L.) plants. Plant Cell Environ. 23,
291–299. (doi:10.1046/j.1365-3040.2000.00540.x)
107. Masi E et al. 2009 Spatiotemporal dynamics of the
electrical network activity in the root apex. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 4048–4053. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.0804640106)
108. Shabala S, Shabala L, Gradmann D, Chen Z,
Newman I, Mancuso S. 2006 Oscillations in plant
membrane transport: model predictions,
experimental validation, and physiological
implications. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 171–184. (doi:10.
1093/jxb/erj022)
109. Achenbach U, Wohlfarth-Bottermann K. 1981
Synchronization and signal transmission in
protoplasmic strands of Physarum - effects of
externally applied substances and mechanical
influences. Planta 151, 574–583. (doi:10.1007/
BF00387437)
110. Adamatzky A, Jones J. 2011 On electrical correlates
of Physarum polycephalum spatial activity: can we
see Physarum machine in the dark? Biophys. Rev.
Lett. 6, 29–57. (doi:10.1142/S1793048011
001257)
111. Alonso S, Strachauer U, Radszuweit M, B´’ar M,
Hauser M. 2016 Oscillations and uniaxial
mechanochemical waves in a model of an active
poroelastic medium: application to deformation
patterns in protoplasmic droplets of Physarum
polycephalum. Physica D 318–319, 58–69.
(doi:10.1016/j.physd.2015.09.017)
112. Ebine M. 2014 Estimation of plasmodial activity in
response to electrical stimulation and the potential
use of this measurement as an environmental
indicator: the correlation between galvanotaxis and
ATP levels in the plasmodium. IEEJ Trans. Electron.
Inf. Syst. 134, 1755–1759. (doi:10.1541/ieejeiss.
134.1755)
113. Ha¨der D. 1985 Role of calcium in phototaxis of
Physarum polycephalum. Plant Cell Physiol. 26,
1411–1417.
114. Radszuweit M, Engel H, Barr M. 2011 A model for
oscillations and pattern formation in protoplasmic
droplets of Physarum polycephalum. Eur. Phys. J.
Spec. Top. 191, 159–172. (doi:10.1140/epjst/
e2010-01348-2)
115. Whiting J, de Lacy Costello B, Adamatzky A. 2014
Towards slime mould chemical sensor: mapping
chemical inputs onto electrical potential dynamics
of Physarum polycephalum. Sens. Actuators B 191,
844–853. (doi:10.1016/j.snb.2013.10.064)
116. Adamatzky A. 2018 On spiking behaviour of oyster
fungi Pleurotus djamor. Sci. Rep. 8, 7873. (doi:10.
1038/s41598-018-26007-1)
117. Slayman C, Scott Long W, Gradmann D. 1976
‘Action potentials’ in Neurospora crassa, a mycelial
fungus. BBA Biomembranes 426, 732–744. (doi:10.
1016/0005-2736(76)90138-3)
118. Jaffe L. 2010 Fast calcium waves. Cell Calcium 48,
102–113. (doi:10.1016/j.ceca.2010.08.007)
119. Malho R, Moutinho A, van der Luit A, Trewavas A.
1998 Spatial characteristics of calcium signalling:
the calcium wave as a basic unit in plant cell
calcium signalling. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 353,
1463–1473. (doi:10.1098/rstb.1998.0302)
120. Nakamura A, Kohama K. 1999 Calcium regulation of
the actin-myosin interaction of Physarum
polycephalum. Int. Rev. Cytol. 191, 53–98. (doi:10.
1016/S0074-7696(08)60157-6)
121. Ng C-Y, Mcainsh M. 2003 Encoding specificity in
plant calcium signalling: hot-spotting the ups and
downs and waves. Ann. Bot. 92, 477–485. (doi:10.
1093/aob/mcg173)
122. Ranty B, Cotelle V, Galaud J-P, Mazars C. 2012
Nuclear calcium signaling and its involvement in
transcriptional regulation in plants. Adv. Exp. Med.
Biol. 740, 1123–1143. (doi:10.1007/978-94-007-
2888-2)
123. Stephan A, Schroeder J. 2014 Plant salt stress status
is transmitted systemically via propagating calcium
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
16
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

waves. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 6126–6127.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.1404895111)
124. Teplov V. 2017 Role of mechanics in the
appearance of oscillatory instability and standing
waves of the mechanochemical activity in the
Physarum polycephalum plasmodium. J. Phys. D
Appl. Phys. 50, 213002. (doi:10.1088/1361-6463/
aa6727)
125. Yoshiyama S, Ishigami M, Nakamura A, Kohama K.
2010 Calcium wave for cytoplasmic streaming of
Physarum polycephalum. Cell Biol. Int. 34, 35–40.
126. Adamatzky A. 2011 Topics in reaction-diffusion
computers. J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 8, 295–303.
(doi:10.1166/jctn.2011.1693)
127. Adamatzky A. 2012 Reaction-diffusion computing.
In Computational complexity: theory, techniques, and
applications, pp. 2594–2610. New York, NY:
Springer.
128. Belousov B. 1959 Periodicheski dejstvuijuschaja
reakcia [periodically acting reaction and its
mechanism]. Sbornik referatov po radiatsionnoj
medicine [Collection of reports on radioactive
medicine] 147, 145 (in Russian.)
129. Zaikin A, Zhabotinsky A. 1970 Concentration wave
propagation in two-dimensional liquid-phase self-
oscillating system. Nature 225, 535–537. (doi:10.
1038/225535b0)
130. Zhabotinsky AM. 1964 Periodical oxidation of
malonic acid in solution (a study of the Belousov
reaction kinetics). Biofizika 9, 306–311.
131. Yokoi H, Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Melhuish
C. 2004 Excitable chemical medium controller
for a robotic hand: closed-loop experiments.
Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 14, 3347–3354. (doi:10.
1142/S0218127404011363)
132. Kuhnert L. 1986 A new optical photochemical
memory device in a light-sensitive chemical
active medium. Nature 319, 393. (doi:10.1038/
319393a0)
133. Agladze K, Obata S, Yoshikawa K. 1995 Phase-shift
as a basis of image processing in oscillating
chemical medium. Physica D 84, 238–245. (doi:10.
1016/0167-2789(95)00029-4)
134. Aliev RR. 1994 Oscillation phase dynamics in the
Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction. Implementation to
image processing. J. Phys. Chem. 98, 3999–4002.
(doi:10.1021/j100066a016)
135. Rambidi N, Kuular T-O, Makhaeva E. 1998
Information-processing capabilities of chemical
reaction–diffusion systems. 1. Belousov–Zhabotinsky
media in hydrogel matrices and on solid supports.
Adv. Mater. Opt. Electron. 8, 163–171. (doi:10.1002/
(ISSN)1099-0712)
136. Rambidi N, Shamayaev K, Peshkov GY. 2002 Image
processing using light-sensitive chemical waves.
Phys. Lett. A 298, 375–382. (doi:10.1016/S0375-
9601(02)00583-2)
137. Rambidi NG. 2005 Biologically inspired information
processing technologies: reaction-diffusion
paradigm. Int. J. Unconv. Comput. 1, 101–120.
138. Sielewiesiuk J, Go´recki J. 2001 Logical functions of a
cross junction of excitable chemical media. J. Phys.
Chem. A 105, 8189–8195. (doi:10.1021/jp011072v)
139. Costello BDL, Adamatzky A, Jahan I, Zhang L. 2011
Towards constructing one-bit binary adder in
excitable chemical medium. Chem. Phys. 381,
88–99. (doi:10.1016/j.chemphys.2011.01.014)
140. Zhang G-M, Wong I, Chou M-T, Zhao X. 2012
Towards constructing multi-bit binary adder based
on Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction. J. Chem. Phys.
136, 164108. (doi:10.1063/1.3702846)
141. Sun M-Z, Zhao X. 2013 Multi-bit binary decoder
based on Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction. J. Chem.
Phys. 138, 114106. (doi:10.1063/1.4794995)
142. Motoike IN, Adamatzky A. 2005 Three-valued logic
gates in reaction–diffusion excitable media. Chaos
Solitons Fractals 24, 107–114. (doi:10.1016/S0960-
0779(04)00461-8)
143. Stevens WM, Adamatzky A, Jahan I, de Lacy
Costello B. 2012 Time-dependent wave selection for
information processing in excitable media. Phys.
Rev. E 85, 066129. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.85.
066129)
144. Sendin˜a-Nadal I, Mihaliuk E, Wang J, Pe´rez-
Mun˜uzuri V, Showalter K. 2001 Wave propagation in
subexcitable media with periodically modulated
excitability. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1646–1649.
(doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.1646)
145. Adamatzky A. 2004 Collision-based computing in
Belousov–Zhabotinsky medium. Chaos Solitons
Fractals 21, 1259–1264. (doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2003.
12.068)
146. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B. 2007 Binary
collisions between wave-fragments in a sub-
excitable Belousov–Zhabotinsky medium. Chaos
Solitons Fractals 34, 307–315. (doi:10.1016/j.chaos.
2006.03.095)
147. Costello BDL, Adamatzky A. 2005 Experimental
implementation of collision-based gates in
Belousov–Zhabotinsky medium. Chaos Solitons
Fractals 25, 535–544. (doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2004.
11.056)
148. de Lacy Costello B, Toth R, Stone C, Adamatzky A,
Bull L. 2009 Implementation of glider guns in the
light-sensitive Belousov–Zhabotinsky medium.
Phys. Rev. E 79, 026114. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.79.
026114)
149. Toth R, Stone C, de Lacy Costello B, Adamatzky A,
Bull L. 2010 Simple collision-based chemical logic
gates with adaptive computing. In Theoretical
and technological advancements in nanotechnology
and molecular computation: interdisciplinary
gains (ed. B MacLennan), p. 162. New York, NY:
Nova Science Publishers.
150. Agladze K, Magome N, Aliev R, Yamaguchi T,
Yoshikawa K. 1997 Finding the optimal path with
the aid of chemical wave. Physica D 106, 247–254.
(doi:10.1016/S0167-2789(97)00049-3)
151. Rambidi N, Yakovenchuk D. 2001 Chemical reaction-
diffusion implementation of finding the shortest
paths in a labyrinth. Phys. Rev. E 63, 026607.
(doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.63.026607)
152. Steinbock A, To´th A´, Showalter K. 1995 Navigating
complex labyrinths: optimal paths from chemical
waves. Science 267, 868–871. (doi:10.1126/science.
267.5199.868)
153. Adamatzky A, Dehshibi MM. 2018 Exploring Tehran
with excitable medium. See http://arxiv.org/abs/
1807.09023.
154. Adamatzky A, Phillips N, Weerasekera R,
Tsompanas M-A, Sirakoulis GC. 2018 Street map
analysis with excitable chemical medium. Phys.
Rev. E 98, 012306. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.98.
012306)
155. Litschel T, Norton MM, Tserunyan V, Fraden S. 2018
Engineering reaction–diffusion networks with
properties of neural tissue. Lab. Chip 18, 714–722.
(doi:10.1039/C7LC01187C)
156. Murase Y, Maeda S, Hashimoto S, Yoshida R. 2008
Design of a mass transport surface utilizing
peristaltic motion of a self-oscillating gel. Langmuir
25, 483–489. (doi:10.1021/la8029006)
157. Balazs AC, Aizenberg J. 2014 Reconfigurable soft
matter. Soft Matter 10, 1244–1245. (doi:10.1039/
c4sm90006e)
158. Yoshida R. 2010 Self-oscillating gels driven by the
Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction as novel smart
materials. Adv. Mater. 22, 3463–3483. (doi:10.
1002/adma.200904075)
159. Adamatzky A. 2015 Binary full adder, made of
fusion gates, in a subexcitable Belousov–
Zhabotinsky system. Phys. Rev. E 92, 032811.
(doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.92.032811)
160. Adamatzky A, Holley J, Dittrich P, Gorecki J, Costello
BDL, Zauner K-P, Bull L. 2012 On architectures of
circuits implemented in simulated Belousov–
Zhabotinsky droplets. BioSystems 109, 72–77.
(doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.12.007)
161. Adamatzky A. 2017 Fredkin and Toffoli gates
implemented in Oregonator model of Belousov–
Zhabotinsky medium. Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 27,
1750041. (doi:10.1142/S0218127417500419)
162. Costello BDL, Jahan I, Ahearn M, Holley J, Bull L,
Adamatzky A. 2012 Initiation of waves in BZ
encapsulated vesicles using light-towards design of
computing architectures. See http://arxiv.org/abs/
1212.2244.
163. Delgado J, Li N, Leda M, Gonza´lez-Ochoa HO,
Fraden S, Epstein IR. 2011 Coupled oscillations in a
1D emulsion of Belousov–Zhabotinsky droplets.
Soft Matter 7, 3155–3167. (doi:10.1039/
c0sm01240h)
164. Tomasi R, Noe¨l J-M, Zenati A, Ristori S, Rossi F,
Cabuil V, Kanoufi F, Abou-Hassan A. 2014 Chemical
communication between liposomes encapsulating a
chemical oscillatory reaction. Chem. Sci. 5,
1854–1859. (doi:10.1039/C3SC53227E)
165. Torbensen K, Rossi F, Ristori S, Abou-Hassan A. 2017
Chemical communication and dynamics of droplet
emulsions in networks of Belousov–Zhabotinsky
micro-oscillators produced by microfluidics. Lab.
Chip 17, 1179–1189. (doi:10.1039/C6LC01583B)
166. Vanag VK. 2004 Waves and patterns in reaction–
diffusion systems. Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction in
water-in-oil microemulsions. Phys. Usp. 47,
923–941. (doi:10.1070/PU2004v047n09ABEH001742)
167. Vanag VK, Epstein IR. 2011 Excitatory and
inhibitory coupling in a one-dimensional array of
Belousov-Zhabotinsky micro-oscillators: theory.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
17
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

Phys. Rev. E 84, 066209. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.84.
066209)
168. Vanag VK, Hanazaki I. 1996 pH dependence of the
Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction in water-in-oil
reverse microemulsion of AOT in octane. J. Phys.
Chem. 100, 10 609–10 614. (doi:10.1021/
jp953063q)
169. Gruenert G, Gizynski K, Escuela G, Ibrahim B,
Gorecki J, Dittrich P. 2015 Understanding networks
of computing chemical droplet neurons based on
information flow. Int. J. Neural Syst. 25, 1450032.
(doi:10.1142/S0129065714500324)
170. Kaminaga A, Vanag VK, Epstein IR. 2006 A
reaction–diffusion memory device. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 45, 3087–3089. (doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1521-
3773)
171. Wang A, Gold J, Tompkins N, Heymann M,
Harrington K, Fraden S. 2016 Configurable NOR gate
arrays from Belousov-Zhabotinsky micro-droplets.
Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 225, 211–227. (doi:10.
1140/epjst/e2016-02622-y)
172. Fullarton C, Draper TC, Phillips N, Costello BP,
Adamatzky A. 2018 Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction
in liquid marbles. See http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.
07181.
173. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Bull L. 2011 On
polymorphic logical gates in subexcitable chemical
medium. Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 21, 1977–1986.
(doi:10.1142/S0218127411029574)
174. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Dittrich P,
Gorecki J, Zauner K-P. 2014 On logical universality
of Belousov–Zhabotinsky vesicles. Int. J. Gen.
Syst. 43, 757–769. (doi:10.1080/03081079.2014.
921000)
175. Holley J, Adamatzky A, Bull L, Costello BDL, Jahan
I. 2011 Computational modalities of Belousov–
Zhabotinsky encapsulated vesicles. Nano Commun.
Netw. 2, 50–61. (doi:10.1016/j.nancom.2011.
02.002)
176. Holley J, Jahan I, Costello BDL, Bull L, Adamatzky A.
2011 Logical and arithmetic circuits in Belousov–
Zhabotinsky encapsulated disks. Phys. Rev. E 84,
056110. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.84.056110)
177. Gorecki J, Gorecka J, Adamatzky A. 2014
Information coding with frequency of oscillations in
Belousov–Zhabotinsky encapsulated disks. Phys.
Rev. E 89, 042910. (doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.89.
042910)
178. Gizynski K, Gruenert G, Dittrich P, Gorecki J. 2017
Evolutionary design of classifiers made of droplets
containing a nonlinear chemical medium. Evol.
Comput. 25, 643–671. (doi:10.1162/evco_a_
00197)
179. Adamatzky A, de Lacy Costello B, Ratcliffe NM. 2002
Experimental reaction–diffusion pre-processor for
shape recognition. Phys. Lett. A 297, 344–352.
(doi:10.1016/S0375-9601(02)00289-X)
180. de Lacy Costello B, Ratcliffe N, Adamatzky A, Zanin
AL, Liehr AW, Purwins H-G. 2004 The formation of
Voronoi diagrams in chemical and physical systems:
experimental findings and theoretical models.
Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 14, 2187–2210. (doi:10.
1142/S021812740401059X)
181. Margolus N, Levitin LB. 1998 The maximum speed
of dynamical evolution. Physica D 120, 188–195.
(doi:10.1016/S0167-2789(98)00054-2)
182. Zheng R, Gao J, Wang J, Chen G. 2011 Reversible
temperature regulation of electrical and thermal
conductivity using liquid–solid phase transitions.
Nat. Commun. 2, 289. (doi:10.1038/ncomms1288)
183. Wissman J, Dickey MD, Majidi C. 2017 Field-
controlled electrical switch with liquid metal. Adv.
Sci. 4, 1700169. (doi:10.1002/advs.201700169)
184. Kim DY, Herman S, Steckl AJ. 2008 IV and gain
characteristics of electrowetting-based liquid field
effect transistor. In Proc. 17th Biennial University/
Government/Industry Micro/Nano Symp., 2008. UGIM
2008, pp. 2–5. Louisville, KY: IEEE Press.
185. Ren H, Wu S-T. 2010 Optical switch using a
deformable liquid droplet. Opt. Lett. 35,
3826–3828. (doi:10.1364/OL.35.003826)
186. Taft C. 1967 Hydraulic fluidics. Technical report.
Warrendale, PA: SAE.
187. Ball R. 1974 Nuclear reactor control system. US
Patent no. 3,793,141.
188. Lee S-S, Kim S-H, Suh K-Y. 2009 The design features
of the advanced power reactor 1400. Nucl. Eng.
Technol. 41, 995–1004. (doi:10.5516/NET.2009.41.
8.995)
189. Takayama S, Mosadegh B. 2011 Microfluidic control
systems. US Patent App. no. 13/119,359.
190. Magill J, McManus K. 1998 Control of dynamic stall
using pulsed vortex generator jets. In Abstr. 36th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno,
NV, USA, 12–15 January 1998, p. 675.
191. Shmilovich A, Kent SR. 2016 Fluidic traverse
actuator. US Patent no. 9,511,849.
192. Tang WC, Lee AP. 2001 Defense applications of
MEMS. MRS Bull. 26, 318–319. (doi:10.1557/
mrs2001.70)
193. Mazzolai B, Mattoli V. 2016 Robotics: generation
soft. Nature 536, 400–401. (doi:10.1038/536400a)
194. Chang Y-H, Lee G-B, Huang F-C, Chen Y-Y, Lin J-L.
2006 Integrated polymerase chain reaction chips
utilizing digital microfluidics. Biomed. Microdevices
8, 215–225. (doi:10.1007/s10544-006-8171-y)
195. Cho SK, Moon H, Kim C-J. 2013 Creating, transporting,
cutting, and merging liquid droplets by
electrowetting-based actuation for digital microfluidic
circuits. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 12, 70–80.
196. Su F, Hwang W, Chakrabarty K. 2006 Droplet
routing in the synthesis of digital microfluidic
biochips. In DATE ’06. Proc. Conf. Design, Automation
and Test in Europe, Munich, Germany, 6–10 March
2006 (ed. G Gielen), vol. 1, pp. 323–328. Leuven,
Belgium: European Design and Automation
Association.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180372
18
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 March 2023 

