MULTI-AUTHOR REVIEW
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins
and phosphoproteins orchestrate the molecular interplay
of transcription and replication
Sonia Longhi1,2 • Louis-Marie Bloyet3,4,5,6,7 • Stefano Gianni8 • Denis Gerlier3,4,5,6,7
Received: 17 May 2017 / Accepted: 1 June 2017 / Published online: 9 June 2017
 Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Abstract In this review, we summarize computational and
experimental data gathered so far showing that structural
disorder is abundant within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins
(N) and phosphoproteins (P). In particular, we focus on
measles, Nipah, and Hendra viruses and highlight both
commonalities and differences with respect to the closely
related Sendai virus. The molecular mechanisms that
control the disorder-to-order transition undergone by the
intrinsically disordered C-terminal domain (NTAIL) of their
N proteins upon binding to the C-terminal X domain (XD)
of the homologous P proteins are described in detail. By
having a signiﬁcant residual disorder, NTAIL–XD com-
plexes are illustrative examples of ‘‘fuzziness’’, whose
possible functional signiﬁcance is discussed. Finally, the
relevance of N–P interactions as promising targets for
innovative antiviral approaches is underscored, and the
functional advantages of structural disorder for paramyx-
oviruses are pinpointed.
Keywords Paramyxoviruses  Nucleoprotein 
Phosphoprotein  Intrinsic structural disorder 
Induced folding  Fuzzy complexes 
Protein–protein interactions  Antiviral approaches
The replicative complex of paramyxoviruses
Negative-stranded RNA viruses (NSRVs) are responsible
for numerous human and animal diseases. Some NSRV are
classiﬁed as potential agents of bio-terrorism, and several
have been included in the priority pathogen lists of the
NIAID (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Dis-
eases) (http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/biodefenserelated/
Pages/default.aspxand) and of the CDC (Center for Disease
Control
and
Prevention)
(http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/
agentlist.asp#m). NSRVs embrace two groups: viruses
with segmented RNA genomes and viruses with non-seg-
mented
RNA
genomes.
The
latter
constitute
the
Mononegavirales order, which includes severe human
pathogens such as the Ebola, rabies, mumps, and respira-
tory syncytial viruses (Fig. 1). This order is characterized
by remarkable common features of their replication
machinery
minimally
involving
three
proteins
that
dynamically
associated
with
constitute
a
polymerase
complex that uses a protein–RNA structure, the nucleo-
capsid, as template.
The Paramyxoviridae family is among the viral families
that belong to this order. This family encompasses some of
the major and ubiquitous disease-causing viruses in
humans and animals. An illustrative example is measles
virus (MeV), a Morbillivirus member, which is one of the
& Sonia Longhi
Sonia.Longhi@afmb.univ-mrs.fr
1
Aix-Marseille Univ, AFMB UMR 7257, 163, avenue de
Luminy, Case 932, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France
2
CNRS, AFMB UMR 7257, 13288 Marseille, France
3
CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research,
Universite´ de Lyon, Lyon, France
4
INSERM, U1111, Lyon, France
5
Ecole Normale Supe´rieure de Lyon, Lyon, France
6
Universite´ Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre International de
Recherche en Infectiologie, Lyon, France
7
CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon, France
8
Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti and Istituto di
Biologia e Patologia Molecolari del CNR, Dipartimento di
Scienze Biochimiche ‘‘A. Rossi Fanelli’’, Sapienza
Universita` di Roma, 00185 Rome, Italy
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. (2017) 74:3091–3118
DOI 10.1007/s00018-017-2556-3
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
123

most infectious viruses ever known [1]. The widespread
use of vaccines for MeV has drastically reduced the
worldwide incidence of measles infection. Despite this
success, measles remains endemic in many developing
countries. Measles infections remain a major cause of
childhood morbidity and mortality, especially in the Afri-
can and South East Asian regions [2]. In addition, measles
re-emerged also in western countries (USA and Europe)
and is still a major concern for human health with 134,200
deaths
worldwide
in
2015
(http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/).
Beyond a number of older, well-studied human and
animal pathogens, paramyxoviruses, also include newly
emerged severe human pathogens, e.g., the Nipah (NiV)
and Hendra (HeV) viruses [3]. Although these newly
emerged viruses appear to retain many of the genetic and
biological properties of other Paramyxoviridae members,
they also have a number of unique characteristics that set
them aside and have justiﬁed their classiﬁcation within the
new Henipavirus genus [1, 3, 4]. Henipaviruses are the
only currently recognised zoonotic paramyxoviruses and
are responsible for severe encephalitis in human beings,
with case fatality rates reaching more than 75% [4, 5]. Fruit
bats of the Pteropus genus have been identiﬁed as their
natural reservoir [5]. Notably, these fruit bats constitute the
natural reservoir for an increasing number of new and often
deadly zoonotic viruses [6]. HeV came to light in 1994 in
the Hendra suburb of Brisbane (Australia) as a new etio-
logic agent responsible for a sudden outbreak of acute
respiratory disease within horses [5]. NiV emerged in 1998
in Malaysia as the etiologic agent of an outbreak of disease
in pigs and humans. The ﬁrst NiV outbreak in Malaysia
resulted in 265 human cases of encephalitis and 105 deaths
[5]. After the ﬁrst cases of human infection in 1998 in
Malaysia, NiV has regularly re-emerged since 2001 in
Bangladesh. The ability of NiV to be transmitted by direct
inter-human transmission further extends its potential to
cause deadly outbreaks. In addition, the discovery of
henipaviruses in other species of bats in West Africa and
China underscores the threat that these viruses constitute to
human health. Their high pathogenicity, wide host range,
and interspecies transmission led to the classiﬁcation of
henipaviruses as biosecurity level 4 (BSL4) pathogens and
as potential bio-terrorism agents.
Paramyxoviruses are enveloped viruses with a pleo-
morphic structure. Their envelope is derived from the
plasma membrane of the host cell enriched in two envelope
glycoproteins: a fusion protein (F) and a receptor-binding
attachment protein (G/H). Beneath the envelope, the viral
matrix protein (M) bridges the cytoplasmic tails of F and
G/H proteins with the nucleocapsid and is responsible for
virus budding. As in all Mononegavirales members, the
genome of paramyxoviruses is encapsidated by the nucle-
oprotein (N) giving rise to a helical nucleocapsid (N–RNA)
with a characteristic herringbone-like structure [7–12].
Following fusion between the viral envelope and the host
cell membrane, the nucleocapsid is released in the cyto-
plasm. A peculiar feature of Mononegavirales members is
that the nucleocapsid, and not naked RNA, is the template
used by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)
during both transcription and replication. The RdRp is
made of the large protein (L) and the phosphoprotein (P).
During RNA synthesis, the N–P interaction ensures the
tethering of L onto the N–RNA template. The P protein is,
therefore, an essential polymerase cofactor in that it allows
the L protein to be recruited onto the nucleocapsid tem-
plate. The complex formed by the N, P, and L proteins
constitutes the viral replicative unit (Fig. 2a). The N, P, and
L proteins are necessary and sufﬁcient to sustain the
replication of viral RNA in Paramyxoviridae [1, 13]. As
detailed below, during the synthesis of viral RNA, the
components of the viral replication machinery engage in a
complex macromolecular ballet.
The number of nucleotides in the genome of paramyx-
oviruses
is
a
multiple
of
six,
consistent
with
the
experimentally supported ‘‘rule of six’’, which posits that
only the genomes, whose number of nucleotides is a mul-
tiple of six, will be replicated [13–15]. This rule reﬂects the
ability of each nucleoprotein to bind six nucleotides (for a
Fig. 1 Phylogenetic tree of the Mononegavirales order showing the
viruses mentioned in this review. The tree was built using the
maximum likelihood method on the L protein sequences aligned by
ClustalW. The viral genera (italic) and the viral families (bold) have
been classiﬁed using the last taxonomy of the Mononegavirales order
[235]. MeV measles virus, RDV rinderpest virus, CDV canine
distemper virus, NiV Nipah virus, HeV Hendra virus, SeV Sendai
virus, hPIV3 human parainﬂuenza type 3, NDV Newcastle disease
virus, MuV mumps virus, PIV5 parainﬂuenza virus 5, EboV Ebola
virus, RSV respiratory syncytial virus, hMPV human metapneu-
movirus, VSV vesicular stomatitis virus, RabV rabies virus
3092
S. Longhi et al.
123

review, see Ref. [16]). Deviation from the rule of six is
prevented because of structural constraints imposed by the
N to RNA binding. The genome organization of heni-
paviruses is close to that of others paramyxoviruses. Their
genome is, however, bigger (18,234 nt for HeV and
18,246 or 18,252 nt for NiV Malaysia and Bangladesh,
respectively) than that of typical paramyxovirus members
characterized by an average genome length of approxi-
mately 15,500 nt [17]. This extra-length of the genome is
due to the presence of long non-coding sequences at the 50
end of each gene and to the particular large size of the P
protein of henipaviruses.
Upon intracytoplasmic delivery of the viral ribonucleo-
protein complexes, transcription of viral genes occurs using
endogenous NTPs as a substrate. The polymerase enters the
nucleocapsid at the promoters for transcription and replica-
tion located at the 30 end of the genome. Transcription of the
genes is sequential. At each intergenic region (IGR), the
polymerase ends and re-initiates at the downstream gene.
Gene-end (GE) signal corresponds to the polyadenylation of
the upstream gene. Then, the polymerase scans over three
nucleotides (30-GAA-50 or 30-GCA-50) without transcribing
them in search of the downstream gene-start (GS) signal to
resume transcription. The efﬁciency with which the poly-
merase re-initiates transcription decreases with increasing
distance from the 30 end, thereby leading to a gradient in the
transcripts, with the most distal genes being the least
expressed [1] (Fig. 2b).
Fig. 2 Scheme
of
Paramyxoviridae
RNA
synthesis
and
viral
genome. a Schematic illustration of the Paramyxoviridae replicative
complex during replication of the viral genome or anti-genome. The
N protein is drawn with a bilobal shape according to available
structural data. It encapsidates both the viral RNA used as a template
and the neo-synthetized RNA. The intrinsically disordered protein
regions of N and P are symbolized by lines and a helixes by
rectangles. The P–L complex forms the RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RdRp) complex, which cartwheels onto the nucleocapsid
complex via the X domain of P (XD). P oligomerizes through its
multimerization domain (PMD) and is shown as a tetramer to reﬂect
the prevalence of this oligomeric state in paramyxoviral P proteins.
The a-MoRE at the N-terminus of P (PNTD) binds a monomeric N
protein and forms the N0–P complex that prevents N self-assembly
and binding to cellular RNA. The long disordered N-terminal region
of P (PNT) may allow the binding of multiple monomers of N by a
single oligomer of P. In the N0–P complex, XD might also bind to
NTAIL. The extended conformation of the disordered regions would
allow the formation of a tripartite complex between N0, P, and L that
may enhance nucleocapsid assembly by bringing N0 near the
encapsidation site. b Schematic representation of the genome of
Paramyxoviridae. The negative-sense genomic RNA is presented in
the 30–50 orientation. Below, the genome is shown a schematic
representation of the expression gradient of the mRNA as a result of
inefﬁcient transcription re-initiation by the polymerase during tran-
scription [1]
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3093
123

At some stage after primary transcription, the poly-
merase switches to a replication mode to synthesize a full,
complementary strand of genome length leaving the IGRs
unrecognized. The sole use of this positive-stranded RNA
(anti-genome) is to serve as a template intermediate for
genome replication [1]. The relative level of transcription
versus replication is postulated to be controlled by the
intracellular concentration of the N protein. When the
concentration of N is high enough to allow encapsidation
of the nascent RNA chain, the replicase mode of the
polymerase is favored over the transcription mode (see Ref.
[18] for review).
As the most abundant viral protein in infected cells, the
N protein from Paramyxoviridae members exists in two
forms: a soluble, monomeric one (named N0) and a
nucleocapsid assembled one (named NNUC) [19, 20]. Once
the N protein has been synthesized, a chaperone is neces-
sary to maintain it in the unassembled form in the
cytoplasm. The illegitimate self-assembly of N is prevented
by the association with the P protein [21, 22]. The resulting
N0–P complex is used as the substrate for encapsidating the
nascent genomic RNA chain (Fig. 2a). When assembled
together with the RNA genome, N forms complexes with
both isolated P (to yield NNUC–P) and P bound to L (to
yield NNUC–P–L). These complexes are essential to RNA
synthesis
by
the
viral
polymerase
(see
Refs.
[1, 15, 18, 23, 24] for reviews on transcription and
replication).
Albeit in vitro and in the absence of P, L can synthesize
short RNA transcripts using naked RNA as a substrate
[25, 26]; in infected cells, P is required to allow the
recognition of the nucleocapsid template and also to sta-
bilize L. In the case of MeV, NiV, and mumps virus
(MuV), the cellular hsp90, in conjunction with P, is
required to enable L to fold into a functional, mature form
[27, 28]. The L protein carries out most (or even all)
enzymatic activities essential for transcription and repli-
cation, i.e., nucleotide polymerization, and the maturation
of viral mRNA (capping and polyadenylation). Being
unstable unless bound to the P protein, L accumulates in
low amounts in infected cells and this makes its molecular
characterization
very
challenging
[29].
The
present
knowledge on paramyxoviral L proteins is essentially
based on bioinformatics studies. In fact, no functional
paramyxoviral polymerase has been puriﬁed and bio-
chemically characterized so far. Among Paramyxoviridae
members, Rinderpest virus (RDV) and Sendai virus (SeV, a
Respirovirus) constitute the only two examples, where L
(or L/P) has been partially puriﬁed [30, 31], with SeV L
possesses a methyltransferase activity in its C-terminal
region [31], in agreement with predictions [32]. Within the
Mononegavirales order, the two best characterized poly-
merases are that of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV, a
Pneumoviridae member), whose RNA polymerase activity
is documented in vitro [33], and that from vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV, a Rhabdoviridae member), whose
structure is solved at almost atomic resolution using cryo-
electron microscopy (cryo-EM) [34].
Presently, N and P are the best characterized proteins of
the replicative complex of paramyxoviruses thanks to the
numerous efforts in their molecular characterization in the
last two decades. The N–P interaction has attracted a lot of
interest not only from a fundamental perspective, but also
from a more applied point of view. Indeed, by allowing the
recruitment of L onto the nucleocapsid template, the N–P
interaction is regarded as a potential target for antiviral
approaches.
In the course of the characterization of paramyxoviral N
and P proteins, they were found to be enriched in intrin-
sically disordered protein regions (IDPRs). These IDPRs
play key roles in the formation of the tripartite N–P–L
complex and enable a broad molecular partnership (for
reviews, see Refs. [18, 35–44]). From seminal observations
on MeV P and N proteins [8, 45], subsequent studies have
collectively contributed to enlarge the awareness of the
abundance and functional importance of structural disorder
within paramyxoviruses N and P.
Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDPRs are
ubiquitous functional proteins/regions that lack stable (i.e.,
highly populated) structure in the absence of a partner/
ligand under physiological conditions of pH and salinity
[46]. The inability of IDPs/IDPRs to fold is encoded by
their amino acid sequence. A speciﬁc imbalance in the
content of hydrophobic versus polar residues in IDP/IDPRs
confers them the ability to populate a continuum of con-
formations ranging from random coils, RC (i.e., completely
extended) to pre-molten globules and molten globules (i.e.,
more compact). The interactions of IDP/IDPRs with part-
ners dictate both their function and the conformational
ensemble that they can sample. The folding of IDPs/IDPRs
upon binding leads to either stable complexes amenable to
crystallization,
or, more frequently, to the so-called
‘‘fuzzy’’ complexes [47, 48]), i.e., complexes with signiﬁ-
cant residual disorder. These peculiar characteristics of
IDPs/IDPRs give them a number of advantages over folded
proteins, hence their prevalence in hubs in protein inter-
action networks and cell signaling (for a recent review on
IDPs/IDPRs, see Ref. [49]).
In this review, the molecular information that has been
gathered so far on the N and P proteins from three illus-
trative paramyxoviruses, namely, MeV, NiV, and HeV, is
described in detail and how structural disorder ensures an
efﬁcient replication and transcription of the paramyxoviral
genome is emphasized. The implications of induced fold-
ing and residual ﬂexibility in molecular partnership,
transcription, and replication are discussed. How targeting
3094
S. Longhi et al.
123

the N–P interaction can pave the way for new antiviral
approaches is then underscored. Finally, the functional
implications and potential advantages arising from struc-
tural disorder within paramyxoviruses are pointed out.
Structural disorder in paramyxoviral N and P
proteins
Structural organization of paramyxoviral P proteins
The P gene of paramyxoviruses manages to encode mul-
tiple information in a single gene: it gives rise to a number
of different products by means of either overlapping
reading frames (C protein) or messenger editing (V and W
proteins). The latter is a peculiar process, whereby one or
more non-templated nucleotides are inserted co-transcrip-
tionally at a speciﬁc site. This insertion results in a shift of
the open reading frame leading to a new protein product.
Depending on the number of nucleotides inserted at the
edition site, the V or W proteins are the end products. The
V and W proteins share with P their N-terminal domain and
possess each a unique C-terminal domain.
A similar P modular organization is generally observed
in paramyxoviruses with, however, a much larger size of
the Henipavirus P proteins (707 amino acids in HeV and
709 amino acids in NiV) than those of other paramyx-
oviruses
(507
amino
acids
in
MeV)
(Fig. 3a)
[4].
Bioinformatics analyses showed that paramyxoviral P
proteins consist of an intrinsically disordered N-terminal
domain (PNT), and a C-terminal domain (PCT) further
subdivided into various regions [50, 51]. The disordered
state of MeV, NiV, and HeV PNT is experimentally sup-
ported according to multiple biochemical and biophysical
approaches. Speciﬁcally, PNT domains (1) are highly
sensitive to proteolysis, (2) possess an anomalous elec-
trophoretic behavior (i.e., they migrated in SDS-PAGE
with an apparently higher molecular mass), (3) possess
NOESY and circular dichroism (CD) spectra typical of
IDPs, and (4) possess Stokes radii (RS) by far exceeding
than those of globular proteins with similar size [45, 50].
The PNT domain of henipaviruses is spectacularly large,
consisting of 404 (HeV) or 406 (NiV) residues, and
accounts for the extra-length of Henipavirus P proteins.
They are disordered not only in isolation but also within the
full-length P protein, as inferred from their high sensitivity
to proteolysis (Beltrandi, Habchi, Longhi, and Cavalli,
unpublished data). The extra-length of Henipavirus PNT
domains is consistent with the higher tolerance of disor-
dered regions to insertions or major rearrangements as
compared to ordered ones.
All the disorder predictors implemented in the MeDor
metaserver predicted the ﬁrst 40–50 amino acids of MeV,
NiV, and HeV P to be order prone [52] (data not shown and
[50]). Such an N-terminal module with a-helical folding
propensities
is
conserved
amongst
Avulavirus,
Heni-
pavirus, and Rubulavirus members [51]. Because this
N-terminal module has a certain propensity to bind to a
partner and to undergo induced folding (i.e., a disorder-to-
order
transition),
it
constitutes
a
so-called
a-helical
molecular recognition element (a-MoRE) [53–56]. The
involvement of this N-terminal region in binding to N0 has
been experimentally demonstrated in the case of NiV and
MeV. In these two viruses, the crystal structures of a
monomeric, RNA-free form of the N protein in complex
with the N-terminal N0-binding region of P (PNTD) were
solved and revealed that PNTD adopts an a-helical confor-
mation at the surface of N0 [57, 58] (see also ‘‘Structural
organization of paramyxoviral N proteins’’). Computa-
tional approaches showed that paramyxoviral P proteins
share a short (11–16 residues) sequence motif within PNTD
[59]. The authors proposed that this region is responsible
for binding to N0 and conserved in all Mononegavirales P
proteins as a result of divergent evolution [59]. Accord-
ingly, a similar N-terminal module was identiﬁed and
characterized also in the P proteins from RSV [60, 61],
human metapneumovirus (hMPV) [61], VSV [62], and in
the Ebola virus (EboV) VP35 protein (i.e., the P protein
counterpart in Filoviridae) [63]. In these viruses, this
module was shown to be globally disordered while con-
taining transient a-helices [63–65]. In the case of VSV,
EboV, and hMPV, this P motif was shown to fold upon
binding to the monomeric form of N [61–63].
By analogy with the closely related RDV and human
parainﬂuenza type 3 virus [66, 67] and with rabies virus
(RabV) and VSV [68, 69], PNTD might also bind additional
partners, such as L and/or SNAP29. In the case of VSV, the
N0-binding site of P does not overlap with the L-binding
site, thereby enabling a P molecule to be simultaneously
engaged in the N0–P complex and in the interaction with L.
This tripartite complex could bring N0 in close proximity
of the site of RNA synthesis, with transfer of N0 from P to
the nascent RNA chain being possibly promoted by the
polymerase [70]. Alternatively, as recently proposed by
Jamin and Yabukarsky [71], since Mononegavirales P form
homo-oligomers, a monomer of P may bind to L, while
another monomer may interact with N0, thereby bringing
the latter to the encapsidation site. Those studies also shed
light on the stoichiometry of the VSV N0–P complex
showing that each P monomer within the P dimer [72, 73]
can bind up to two client N proteins [70] (Fig. 1).
In accord with the presence of a transiently populated a–
MoRE, size exclusion chromatography (SEC), dynamic
light scattering (DLS), and far-UV CD studies unveiled
that MeV, NiV, and HeV PNT domains are not completely
unfolded: they conserve some degree of compactness and
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3095
123

residual, ﬂuctuating secondary structure that are typical of
a pre-molten globule conformation [45, 50]. Pre-molten
globules are characterized by an intermediate conforma-
tional state between a random coil and a molten globule
and possess a certain degree of residual compactness due to
the presence of residual and ﬂuctuating secondary and/or
tertiary structures [74, 75]. The extent of residual com-
pactness of the PNT domains varies according to the virus
species with the order NiV PNT [ HeV PNT [ MeV
PNT. Whether this different compactness reﬂects a dif-
ferent degree of pre-conﬁguration of their a-MoRE remains
to be established.
The disordered PNT domains contain most of the
phosphorylation
sites
of
Paramyxoviridae
P proteins
[51, 76–78]. This observation is in good agreement with
the relationship between structural disorder and post-
translational modiﬁcations and, in particular, phosphory-
lation [79].
PNT are not the only IDPRs of P. In fact, additional
IDPRs exist within PCT, where regions of disorder alter-
nate with ordered regions (Fig. 3a) [45, 50]. Consequently,
70–80% of the residues in P proteins from MeV, NiV, and
HeV are disordered. The ordered domains of PCT are the P
multimerization domain (PMD) and the C-terminal X
domain (XD). PMD ensures oligomerization and XD the
binding to the C-terminal domain of N (i.e., NTAIL)
[80–84]. PMD and XD are separated by a poorly ordered
and ﬂexible linker [51]. In the case of SeV, NMR studies
conﬁrmed that the region upstream XD is disordered
[85–87], while in the case of MeV, a proteolytic cleavage
site was mapped therein thus providing (indirect) support
for the disordered state of this region [8]. Besides, an
additional disordered region (referred to as ‘‘spacer’’)
occurs upstream of the PMD in MeV, NiV, and HeV
[50, 51, 88]. Notably, its counterpart in the SeV P protein is
ordered [89].
The structures of MeV and HeV XD consist of a bundle
of three antiparallel a-helices [82, 83, 90, 91] (Fig. 3a), in
line with predictions [50, 51] and spectroscopic studies
[92]. They display a large hydrophobic cleft delimited by
helices a2 and a3. The structure of NiV XD is expected to
adopt a structure similar to that of HeV XD (Fig. 3a)
because of high sequence similarity (94%) and common
spectroscopic features. Accordingly, a homology-derived
structural model of NiV XD was proposed [92]. High-
resolution structures X domains of the closely related SeV
and MuV were also solved either by nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) or by X-ray crystallography [86, 93].
Albeit SeV and MeV XD share similar overall structure,
the surface created by helices a2 and a3 in SeV is
Fig. 3 Modular organization of MeV, NiV, and HeV phosphopro-
teins. Domain organization of P showing two moieties, PNT and PCT.
Structured and disordered regions are represented as large or narrow
boxes, respectively. PNT N-terminal region of P, PCT C-terminal
region of P, PMD P multimerization domain, XD X domain of P
adopting a triple a-helical bundle. The a-MoRE at the N-terminal
region of P (PNTD), which is partly preconﬁgured in solution and
shown to adopt a stable a-helical conformation upon binding to N0, is
shown as a red helix. Available structures and models are shown:
MeV and NiV N0–PNTD complexes (PDB codes 5E4V and 4CO6,
respectively) [57, 58], MeV PMD: PDB code 4BHV [102], MeV XD:
PDB code 1OKS [82], HeV XD: PDB code 4HEO [91], structural
model of the PMD trimeric forms of NiV [111] and HeV [110],
structure of the tetrameric form in crystals (PDB code 4N5B) [104],
and structural model of NiV XD [92]. All structures were drawn using
Pymol [236]
3096
S. Longhi et al.
123

dominated by negatively charged residues [81]. A peculiar
feature of MuV XD is that it exists in solution in the form
of a molten globule, as judged from CD, NMR, and DLS
studies [93]. The observed structure in crystals results from
a stabilizing effect brought by a crystallization additive
[93]. MuV XD does not interact with the C-terminal, dis-
ordered region of N (NTAIL), but rather establishes contacts
with the structured NCORE region of N [84]. By analogy
with MuV, MeV XD might also bind to a secondary site
located on NCORE [94]. This would explain how tran-
scription and replication can be supported by a truncated
form of MeVN (N1–439) devoid of NTAIL [94, 95].
Interestingly, while in Paramyxoviridae members, the
C-terminal nucleocapsid-binding region of P is prevalently
folded, it is disordered in RSV, a Pneumoviridae member
[96, 97]. In Rubulavirus P proteins, intrinsic disorder fur-
ther extends to their X domains. Indeed, these X domains
span a structural continuum ranging from largely disor-
dered in solution to a triple a-helical bundle fold [93, 98].
In line with these observations, electron spray ionization
mass spectrometry (ESI–MS) studies on MeV XD indi-
cated that this domain is structurally heterogeneous,
populating at least two alternative conformations under
native conditions [99]. This conclusion is further supported
by a recent study, where the structure of a folding inter-
mediate of MeV XD was identiﬁed and characterized by
means of combined equilibrium and kinetic measurements
and replica-averaged metadynamics simulations [100]. The
chemical shifts of the ensemble obtained by metadynamics
much better agree with those derived by NMR than with
those derived from the crystal structure, suggesting that
some effects of the dynamics of the ensemble are lost
during the crystallization process and that most likely, the
protein explores both the intermediate and native state in
solution.
As already mentioned, beyond XD, Paramyxoviridae P
proteins contain another structured region that is respon-
sible for P multimerization (e.g., PMD). Paramyxoviridae
PMDs adopt a coiled-coil structure [50, 51, 96] as exper-
imentally conﬁrmed in the case of SeV [89], RDV [101],
MeV [88, 102], MuV [103], NiV [104], human metap-
neumovirus, and RSV (the two latter are Pneumoviridae
members) [96, 105, 106]. The fact that paramyxoviral P
proteins studied so far are oligomeric provides support to
the so-called ‘‘cartwheeling’’ mechanism proposed for
Paramyxoviridae. According to this model, the polymerase
complex cartwheels on adjacent N monomers within the
nucleocapsid to permit transcription and replication [107].
However, the quaternary organization of P varies among
paramyxoviruses as detailed below.
As revealed by X-ray crystallography, SeV [89], MeV
[88, 102] RDV [101], human metapneumovirus [105], RSV
[96, 108], and MuV [103], PMDs form a tetrameric coiled-
coil. A tetrameric organization is also conserved in the P
orthologue of EboV, i.e., VP35 [109]. MuV PMD has a
unique structural organization in that the tetramer consists
of two sets of parallel helices in opposite orientation, i.e., it
is a dimer of two antiparallel coiled-coil dimers [103],
while all the other paramyxoviral P proteins characterized
so far possess a parallel organization. How these differ-
ences in the organization can be compatible with a
common
mechanism
of
transcription
and
replication
remains to be deciphered. The corresponding PMDs of
RabV and VSV form dimers with a different structural
arrangement [72, 73].
However, from recent ﬁndings, Henipavirus PMDs
rather adopt a trimeric organization in solution [110, 111].
This conclusion was supported by several independent
biochemical and biophysical approaches (e.g., SEC, SDS-
PAGE, cross-linking with suberic acid bis N-hydroxy-
succinimide ester, SAB, analytical ultracentrifugation, and
SAXS) [110, 111]. However, crystallization [104] or cross-
linking experiments carried out with a different cross-lin-
ker (glutaraldehyde) [112] NiV PMD assemble into a
tetramer. It should be pointed out, however, that the very
high cross-linker concentrations used in the study by Sal-
vamani and co-workers may have introduced a bias and
could potentially have generated non-speciﬁc association.
SAXS studies conﬁrmed the trimeric state of HeV PMD
not only in isolation but also in the context of the entire
PCT region, a ﬁnding that extends and strengthens the
conclusions based on PMD [110]. The SAXS envelope of
HeV PMD is, however, different from that of NiV PMD,
e.g., HeV PMD has a much smaller Rg and Dmax. This
difference arises from a different orientation of the N-ter-
minal helical region (or ‘‘head’’) of PMD: the PMD heads
of NiV and HeV are in the ‘‘up’’ orientation (i.e., exposed
to the solvent) and in the ‘‘down’’ orientation (i.e., packed
back against to coiled-coil), respectively (Fig. 4a, b) [110].
In the crystal structure of NiV PMD, the ‘‘head’’ is in the
‘‘down’’ orientation as it is the case for SeV [89]. Because
of the high sequence similarity between NiV and HeV
PMDs, the structural differences noticed by SAXS were
ascribed to their ability to undergo conformational changes
resulting in coiled-coil structures of different lengths and
compaction, possibly related to the different functions that
P plays during the viral cycle [110].
What are the reasons for the observed discrepancies
between the conformations of NiV PMD in solution and in
crystals? The high local protein concentrations and/or the
strong inter-molecular interactions forced by crystallization
might favor a tetrameric organization at the expenses of a
trimeric one. That coiled-coils could adopt different oli-
gomeric
states
according
to
the
physico-chemical
conditions (pH, temperature, etc.) or depending on their
intra-
or
extra-cellular
location
is
well
established
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3097
123

[113, 114]. For example, the GCN4 leucine-zipper domain
can adopt different oligomeric states as a function of the
crystallization conditions. Thus, a given amino acid
sequence may not dictate a single oligomeric state [115].
Further conﬂicting experimental evidence is found for SeV
PMD that forms trimers in solution [116, 117] and adopts a
tetrameric coiled-coil conformation in crystals [89]. The
fact that SeV and NiV PMDs would form trimers in solu-
tion and tetramers in crystals would likely be a property
reﬂecting their intrinsic ability to adopt different oligo-
meric states. These different oligomeric states could
correspond to different functional forms of P and to the
different complexes (i.e., N–P, N0–P, and P–L) that this
pivotal protein can form in infected cells. In further support
of the ability of P proteins to adopt different oligomeric
states, the oligomerization domain of Marburg virus VP35
is a trimer both in crystals (in two different crystal forms)
and in solution [118], whereas the corresponding domain in
the highly related EboV is a tetramer in solution [109, 118].
Within Paramyxoviridae, structural heterogeneity of
PMDs is not unique to henipaviruses and also pertains
MeV PMD. Indeed, the comparison of crystallographic
structures of MeV PMD reveals surprising structural vari-
ations
[88,
102].
Although
all
these
structures
are
tetrameric coiled-coils, they differ both in the quaternary
structure and in the degree of disorder within the C-ter-
minal region of the coiled-coil (Fig. 4c). Furthermore, the
two crystal structures of NiV PMD (pdb codes 4N5B and
4GJW) display similar polymorphism in their quaternary
structure and in their amount of disorder at the C-terminal
end (Fig. 4d). The disorder could not be anticipated from
the amino acid sequence neither for MeV nor for NiV, an
observation that appears to exemplify the limitations of the
currently available predictors. These results also show that
coiled-coils can exhibit a certain degree of structural
freedom, being less rigid than previously thought, in spite
of
a
melting
temperature
exceeding
80 C
[88, 102, 110, 111]. They also defy to some extent the
Fig. 4 Structures of Henipavirus and MeV P multimerization
domains. Structural models of the trimeric coiled-coil PMDs of
NiV [111] (a) and HeV [110] (b) embedded into their SAXS-derived
ab initio envelopes. c Structural comparison of MeV PMD structures.
Left ribbon representations of the crystal structures of the MeV PMD
tetramers as observed in the three different MeV PMD forms solved
to date. Right superimposition of the three MeV PMD tetramers, with
PDB entries 4BHV, 4C5Q, and 3ZDO shown in red, yellow, and
green, respectively; data from [102] and reproduced with permission
of the International Union of Crystallography (http://journals.iucr.
org/). d Structural comparison of NiV PMD crystal structures. Left
Ribbon model of the two crystal structures of NiV PMD solved so.
Right superimposition of the two NiV PMD tetramers, with PDB
entries 4N5B and 4GJW shown in red and green, respectively
3098
S. Longhi et al.
123

reliability of predicting the valence of coiled-coils from
their amino acid sequence [102].
In conclusion, we can postulate that the ability to form a
transcriptase versus a replicase complex would rely on the
ability of the PMD region of P protein to adopt different
oligomeric states (SeV, NiV, and HeV) and/or to dynam-
ically sample different forms differing in the degree of
compaction and in the extent of disorder (MeV). Indeed,
such conformational changes might be the basis for the
ability of P to form different complexes critical for tran-
scription and replication. Although in the case of the
related viruses, such as human parainﬂuenza virus 3
(hPIV3), RSV, and VSV, mutational studies suggest that P
oligomerization is necessary for transcription and replica-
tion [119–121]; additional studies are required to draw
deﬁnite conclusions as to whether P oligomerization is
indispensable in all paramyxoviruses. Indeed, P oligomer-
ization
looks
dispensable
in
RabV
[122].
Likewise,
additional studies are necessary to unravel the functional
impact of varying the P oligomeric state.
Structural organization of paramyxoviral N proteins
Paramyxoviral N proteins are more than 500 amino acids in
length. They are responsible for encapsidating the viral
RNA into a helical nucleocapsid. This ribonucleoprotein
complex has a typical ‘‘herringbone’’-like structure in
electron micrographs [7, 19, 20, 91, 123]. Real-space
helical reconstruction of MeV nucleocapsids has been
achieved in 2004 by EM [9, 124]. In Paramyxoviridae,
each N protein covers precisely six nucleotides, hence
explaining the ‘‘rule of six’’. Once wrapped by the N
protein, the RNA genome is protected in a nuclease-re-
sistant form. N is, however, much more than a ‘‘simple’’
structural protein; in that, it renders the viral genome
competent for transcription and replication. In fact, only
minimal processivity of the polymerase is observed on
naked RNA without the transcription or replication of RNA
if the genome is not encapsidated by N [25, 26].
In infected cells, N selectively binds to genomic RNAs,
thus avoiding the encapsidation of cellular RNA or viral
mRNAs. Upon isolated expression in heterologous sys-
tems, N enwraps cellular RNAs into nucleocapsid-like
structures [10, 16, 19, 123]. Elegant studies that combined
real-time NMR and ﬂuorescence spectroscopy provided a
detailed kinetic description of the in vitro assembly process
of N (both full length and NTAIL-free) into nucleocapsid-
like particles upon the addition of six-nucleotide RNA
strands [125]. Incidentally, those studies demonstrated that
a continuous RNA polymer is not strictly required for N
self-assembly. The assembly efﬁciency strongly depends
on the RNA sequence, where genomic 50 end and poly-A6
sequences trigger assembling efﬁciently, while poly-U6
RNAs fail to do that. Taking into account the fact that N
has to encapsidate the entire genome, these results suggest
that successful encapsidation proceeds via the recognition
of an initial speciﬁc nucleation site [125]. Importantly,
these observations enable understanding why properly
capped viral messengers are not encapsidated.
Paramyxoviridae N proteins consist of two regions: a
globular N-terminal moiety, NCORE, and a disordered
C-terminal domain, NTAIL (Fig. 5a) (for reviews, see Refs.
[38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 126, 127]). NCORE is well conserved
and contains all the determinants required for self-assem-
bly and RNA binding. NTAIL protrudes from NCORE being
exposed on the nucleocapsid [7, 128–130]; it contains the
regions responsible for P binding in both N0–P and NNUC–
P complexes [8, 81, 83, 84, 126, 131, 132].
High-resolution structural data on Paramyxoviridae N
describe both monomeric and assembled forms of N. The
crystal structure of the parainﬂuenza virus 5 (PIV5, a
Rubulavirus member) N protein devoid of the disordered
NTAIL appendage reveals N:RNA rings that correspond to
the turns of the nucleocapsid helix [133]. The RNA is
tightly packed between two lobes, referred to as NTD and
CTD (for N- and C-terminal domains, respectively), sep-
arated by a hinge. The RNA is located on the external face
of the N:RNA rings [133]. Each N protomer contacts six
nucleotides. Two extended arms, N terminal and C termi-
nal (NTD arm and CTD arm) contact the preceding (Ni-1)
and following (Ni?1) protomer, respectively. A very similar
arrangement is observed in the case of RSV N:RNA rings,
except that each N protomers bind seven nucleotides and
that N is comparatively shorter and devoid of the disor-
dered NTAIL region [134].
Gutsche and co-workers ﬁrst docked a model of
MeV N:RNA into the electron density map of MeV
nucleocapsids using the structure of RSV N:RNA rings as
template [11]. Albeit unresolved, the disordered NTAIL
domain was predicted to points towards the interior of the
helical nucleocapsid [11]. This orientation was further
conﬁrmed by cryo-EM studies [12] that led to near-atomic
resolution of NCORE-made nucleocapsids and unveiled the
key role of both NTD- and CTD arms in maintaining the
cohesion of between neighboring N protomers (Fig. 5).
The NTD- and CTD arms also critically rigidify the CTD
maintaining the RNA trapped into a closed conformation of
NCORE.
Structural comparison between paramyxoviral N pro-
teins in their assembled form (i.e., PIV5 N:RNA rings and
MeV nucleocapsid) and in their monomeric, RNA-free
form explained the ability of P to prevent both N self-
assembly and RNA binding. Indeed, the crystal structures
of monomeric, RNA-free forms of both NiV and MeVN
devoid of the NTD arm and of NTAIL (N32–383 for NiV and
N21–408 for MeV) in complex with the N-terminal N0-
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3099
123

binding region of the homologous P (PNTD, P1–50 for NiV
and P1–48 for MeV) were also solved [57, 58]. The super-
imposition of structures of the RNA-free, monomeric N in
complex with PNTD and N in its assembled form reveals in
N0–PNTD structure the substitution of the a-helix of the
NTD arm of the MeV Ni-1 protomer by the helix a1 of
PNTD (Pa1) and the overlapping of the loop of the CTD
arm of the MeV Ni?1 protomer with helix a2 of PNTD (Pa2)
(Fig. 6). In other words, as proposed for NiV [57], Pa1 and
Pa2 compete with the NTD arm of the Ni-1 protomer and
the CTD arm of the Ni?1 protomer, respectively. Hence, P
can sterically prevent the association of adjacent protomers
to the growing helical nucleocapsid, thereby providing a
structural explanation for its chaperon role vis-a`-vis of N.
In the case of hMPV, in the N0–P complex, the CTD arm
occupies the RNA-binding cleft thus preventing unspeciﬁc
N–RNA binding by a distinct mechanism [61]. However, in
the MeV N0–P complex structure obtained by Guryanov
and co-workers [58], the CTD arm does not fold into the
RNA-binding site suggesting that this mechanism may not
be conserved in the Paramyxoviridae family or that it
requires the downstream residues of the MeV CTD arm.
The two MeV N structures exhibit another difference: the
CTD and NTD domains move relatively to each other by
40 [58] and this results in a modiﬁcation of the RNA-
binding groove. Thus, while in both NiV and MeV N0–
PNTD structures, the RNA-binding groove is open, and it is
closed in the assembled form of N. Similarly, modeling the
open conformation of PIV5 N onto its N:RNA ring struc-
ture shows a rotation of its CTD towards the centre of the
ring cavity, which results in the exposure of the RNA in the
RNA-binding groove that, therefore, becomes accessible
for the viral polymerase [133].
Besides the differential bending at the hinge between the
two lobes, another difference between the two states of N
concerns the location of the helix a6, which forms the
lower lobe of the RNA-binding cleft. The different con-
formations adopted by this helix result in a pronounced
change in the surface charge distribution. Of note, in both
the NiV N0–PNTD and PIV5 N–RNA structures [57, 124], a
Fig. 5 Modular organization of MeV, NiV, and HeV nucleoproteins
and structure of the assembled form of MeV N. a Modular
organization of N from MeV and henipaviruses consisting of a
folded domain, NCORE, and a C-terminal disordered region, NTAIL.
The various boxes corresponding to putative or experimentally proven
MoREs are shown. The a-MoRE involved in binding to XD (see light
blue helix) is highlighted by an arrow. b Schematic illustration of the
MeV NCORE region. c Cryo-electron microscopy reconstruction of the
MeV nucleocapsid [10, 124]. d Surface representation of the cryo-EM
3D reconstruction of the MeV trypsin-digested, helical nucleocapsid
(cut away view). The colour code is the same as in a. The RNA is
shown in green. The scale bar corresponds to 50 A˚ . Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [12]. e Schematic representation of three
adjacent N protomers with the same colour code as in b and d
3100
S. Longhi et al.
123

loop preceding the corresponding helix is not deﬁned in the
electron density further supporting the inherent mobility of
helix a6. Based on the ﬂexibility of different parts of N in
the various N structures, Severin and co-workers suggested
that the polymerase may interact only with this ﬂexible
loop-helix motif to release the RNA instead of inducing a
pronounced CTD rotation that would require more energy
[126].
The
amino
acid
sequence
of
NTAIL
domains
in
Paramyxoviridae members is highly variable and charac-
terized by a compositional bias (i.e., it is enriched in polar
and charged residues and depleted in hydrophobic residues)
[8, 50, 51, 80]. MeV NTAIL is hypersensitive to proteolysis
and cannot be visualized in (cryo)-EM reconstructions of
nucleocapsids [8, 11, 124]. All these features are hallmarks
of intrinsic structural disorder, and hydrodynamic and
spectroscopic analyses did effectively conﬁrm the disor-
dered state of NTAIL in the case of MeV, SeV, and
henipaviruses [8, 50, 80, 81]. The presence of a long dis-
ordered domain within paramyxoviral N proteins is thus a
conserved feature.
EM [8, 9, 11, 124, 135] and solid-state NMR studies
[136] revealed a cross-talk between NCORE and NTAIL: both
pitch and twist of the helicoidal nucleocapsid change upon
removal of the disordered NTAIL domain which results in a
more rigid helix.
As already mentioned, no direct structural data on the
disordered NTAIL domain could be obtained from EM
studies in that this domain was either unresolved [11] or
removed by limited proteolysis [12]. By combining NMR
and both small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering (SAXS
and SANS), a model of the RNA-bound form of full-length
MeV N could be obtained (Fig. 7) [130]. This model
showed that NTAIL conserves a high conformational free-
dom also in the context of the nucleocapsid: the ﬁrst 50
residues of NTAIL point towards the helix interior, and the
remainder of the chain sneaks out of the nucleocapsid
through the conﬁned interstitial space between successive
turns [130]. This model plausibly explains the increased
rigidity of MeV nucleocapsids observed upon proteolytical
removal of the ﬂexible NTAIL region [8, 9, 12].
Subsequently, similar NMR studies of nucleocapsids
showed that NiV and HeV NTAIL domains too remain
disordered with the ﬁrst 50 disordered amino acids of
NTAIL being conformationally restricted. MeV and heni-
paviruses
share,
therefore,
a
conserved
nucleocapsid
organization: the disordered NTAIL domain is only partly
exposed outside of the nucleocapsid and the ﬁrst 50 resi-
dues are packed between turns of the nucleocapsid.
All
the
studies
described
above
showed
that
in
Paramyxoviridae nucleocapsids, the RNA is hidden within
N protein protomers, and must be released, at least par-
tially, to become accessible to the polymerase. This implies
a local conformational change of few consecutive N sub-
units. The disordered NTAIL appendage and/or binding of P
are predicted to govern this conformational change. The
linear arrangement of N protomers within the nucleocapsid
is characterized by a structural polarity in that there is a
vacant P-binding site at the 30 end. It has been proposed
that this polarity may favor the recognition of the initiation
site and the assembly of the N0–P–L complex [58]. Indeed,
the initiation of both transcription and replication occurs at
the 30 end of the genomic RNA [107, 137]. Guryanov and
co-workers proposed that the primary interactions would
occur between the RNA polymerase complex, L–P, and the
nucleocapsid through the low-afﬁnity NTAIL–XD interac-
tion (see the next section). This transient interaction would
allow one-dimensional diffusion of the L–P complex along
the nucleocapsid. Proper positioning on the complex would
occur when PNTD binds to a vacant NTD-arm binding site
at the 30 end of the nucleocapsid. Binding of P may trigger
uncoiling of the latter, as observed with MuV [138], to ease
the release of the genomic RNA 30 end from the RNA-
binding groove.
Molecular mechanisms of the NTAIL–XD
interaction
Residual order within NTAIL domains
In the case of MeV NTAIL, in silico analyses highlighted
the presence of a putative a-MoRE (residues 488–499)
within one (namely, Box2) out of three regions conserved
Fig. 6 Structural illustration of the chaperon role of P. Cartoon
representation of the superimposition between MeV N0–PNTD (N0,
light blue; PNTD, orange, pdb code 5E4V) [58] and the assembled
form of N (gray, PDB code 4UFT) [12]. PNTD (aa 1–48 of P) overlaps
with both NTD arm of protomer Ni-1 (yellow) and CTD arm from the
Ni?1 protomer (pink). Molecules were aligned using the NTDs.
Modiﬁed from Ref. [58]
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3101
123

in Morbillivirus members (referred to as Box1, Box2, and
Box3) (Fig. 5a). This a-MoRE binds to XD while under-
going
an
a-helical-induced
folding
as
revealed
by
spectroscopic, biochemical [80], and structural studies
[83]. MD simulations showed that the isolated a-MoRE
behaves like a molten globule [139]. Indeed, most of the
conformations of the free form of the a-MoRE are more
compact than in the bound conformation (the folded state)
as shown by the smaller distribution of the radius of
gyration (Rg) of the a-MoRE in the unbound state. From
the analyses of the mobility of paramagnetic spin labels
grafted within Box2 and from analysis of the Ca chemical
shifts of NTAIL, the a-MoRE of MeV NTAIL appears to be
partly pre-folded in the absence of XD [90, 140, 141]. An
atomic-resolution ensemble description of a-MoRE of
MeV NTAIL was obtained by combining residual dipolar
coupling (RDC) measurements and ensemble optimization
methods [85, 142]. Those studies unveiled that the a-
MoRE exists in a conformational equilibrium between a
completely unfolded form (25%) and four conformers
containing a-helical segments of 6, 7, 14, and 18 residues
each, and accounting for 22, 30, 10, and 13% of the pop-
ulation, respectively [130]. Four aspartic acids or serines
located just upstream of the observed helices stabilize all
these a-helices through N-capping interactions [143]. Such
N-capping
stabilization
of
helices
has
already
been
observed in other IDPs, including SeV NTAIL [142], and
nicely illustrates how the primary sequence encodes pre-
recognition states. The SeV a-MoRE has a similar con-
formational behavior, although it samples only three
helical conformers [126, 142].
In N of henipaviruses, there are four putative MoREs
[50] (Fig. 5a). Their structural properties were unraveled
through conformational and spectroscopic analyses of
truncated forms bearing various combinations of the four
predicted MoREs [144]. Two of them (Box1 and Box4,
residues 408–422 and 523–532, respectively) possess
irregular forms (i.e., I-MoRE), while the other two (Box2,
aa 444–464 and Box3, aa 473–493) have a-helical
propensities (i.e., they are putative a-MoREs) [144]. It
should be noticed that Box2 had been, however, previously
predicted to be a b-strand [50]. This discrepancy between
experimental determination and prediction could reﬂect
either an intrinsic plasticity of Box2 that would be able to
adopt different conformations in a template-dependent
manner (as already shown for IDPs in general [145]) or
rather an intrinsic limitation of the predictors.
Box3 functionally corresponds to the Box2 of MeV
NTAIL, i.e., it is the XD-binding site [91, 92, 144, 146, 147],
while Box2 constitutes an additional putative MoRE with
respect to MeV (and also SeV). The presence of this extra
MoRE emphasizes the plasticity of IDPs/IDPRs that are
characterized by their tolerance to insertions/deletions in
functionally relevant regions.
For both NiV and HeV, site-directed spin-labeling
(SDSL) EPR spectroscopy studies revealed an important
conformational heterogeneity within Box3 arising from the
presence of multiple helical conformers of different lengths
[146]. Correlatively, Box3 appears to be at least transiently
populated as an a-helix as shown by the Ca chemical shifts
of free forms of HeV and NiV NTAIL. In spite of the high
sequence similarity between NiV and HeV NTAIL domains
(74%), hydrodynamic and spectroscopic studies pointed
out subtle conformational differences [144]. A second short
a-helical region is discernible within the Box2 of NiV
[91, 147]. Besides, 15N R2 values argue for a higher degree
of pre-conﬁguration of NiV Box3 with respect to its HeV
counterpart [147]. EPR measurements detect also a popu-
lation of longer lived interconverting a-helical segments
[146].
Partial pre-conﬁguration of the XD-binding region of
NTAIL is, therefore, a conserved feature shared by SeV,
Fig. 7 Proposed model of the location of NTAIL in intact nucleocap-
sids. NTAIL (red) escape from the interior of the nucleocapsid through
the conﬁned interstitial space between successive turns. NCORE
monomers are colored in green and yellow and RNA in blue.
a Representation of the conformational sampling of NTAIL from a
single N protomer in the capsid. Different copies of NTAIL are shown
to indicate the available volume sampling of the chain. Only the ﬁrst
50 amino acids of NTAIL are shown. b, c Representation of the 13
NTAIL conformers from a single turn of the nucleocapsid shown
across (b) or along (c) the axis of the nucleocapsid. Modiﬁed from
Ref. [130]
3102
S. Longhi et al.
123

MeV, and henipaviruses, implying a functional signiﬁ-
cance. The partial pre-conﬁguration of MoREs facilitates
the folding-upon-binding process. The residual structure
restrains the conformational space sampled by the IDP.
Consequently the number of interconverting conformers in
solution is reduced and less energy is demanded for the
structural transition to the (partially) folded conformation
[56]. Therefore, although disorder-to-order transitions are
entropically disfavored, it appears that IDPs can ﬁnely tune
their afﬁnity towards partners by varying the extent of pre-
conﬁguration of their MoREs.
Molecular polymorphism in NTAIL–PXD complexes
X domains from SeV, MeV, and henipaviruses form with
NTAIL a 1:1 stoichiometric complex, whose KD is in the lM
range [81, 92, 148]. Binding to XD triggers a-helical
folding of NTAIL [81–83, 92]. This structural transition
takes place within a short NTAIL region (Box2, aa 486–504
of MeV N, and Box3, aa 473–493 of Henipavirus N), while
the remainder of the chain remains disordered and does not
establish
stable
contacts
with
XD
[90–92, 140, 141, 144, 147, 149, 150]. The crystal structure
of an MeV chimeric construct in which XD is covalently
attached to the a-MoRE of NTAIL was solved at 1.8 A˚ [83]
(Fig. 8). The structure consists in a pseudo-four helix
complex in which the a-MoRE of NTAIL is embedded in a
parallel orientation within a large hydrophobic cleft created
by helices a2 and a3 of XD [83]. Indeed, interacting
residues
are
mainly
hydrophobic
involving
Leu481,
Leu484, Ile488, Phe497, Met500, and Ile504 from XD, and
Ser491, Ala494, Leu495, Leu498, and Met501 from NTAIL.
Burying of hydrophobic residues of the MeV a-MoRE at
the XD surface likely provides the driving force of its
induced folding. The structure of the MeV XD/a-MoRE
complex could be used as a template to model the structure
of the homologous Henipavirus complexes [92] (Fig. 8).
Speciﬁcally, the more hydrophobic side of the amphipathic
a-MoRE of Henipavirus NTAIL could be docked at the
hydrophobic surface delimited by helices a2 and a3 of XD
[92] (Fig. 8). The two modeled complexes display a rather
small interface area as generally observed at the interfaces
of complexes involving IDPs [56]. These models were
successively validated by SDSL EPR spectroscopy studies
[146].
In spite of the lack of direct structural data on Heni-
pavirus NTAIL–XD complexes, NMR studies provided
insights into the structure of these complexes and allowed
further model reﬁnement using constraints based on
chemical shifts [91]. In contrast with MeV, for both NiV
and HeV NTAIL domains, the resonances of the a-MoRE
vanish upon the addition of the homologous XD, a ﬁnding
consistent with a highly dynamic complex in which the a-
MoRE undergoes a-helical fraying at the surface of XD
[91, 92, 147]. The NiV NTAIL–XD complex is slightly
tighter than that of HeV [91, 92, 144, 147], a property that
is reﬂected in the ability to document by SEC complex
formation in the case of NiV but not in the case of HeV
[92]. SDSL EPR and NMR experiments further support
Box2 of NiV as an additional interaction site with XD
[146, 147].
Analysis of chemical shift perturbations in reciprocal
titration studies and of the crystal structure of HeV XD
identiﬁed residues involved in the interaction [91]. The
binding interface is prevalently hydrophobic, but acidic
residues line the binding pocket of XD. These residues
establish electrostatic interactions with the basic residues
of Box3, as highlighted by isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) studies carried out at different pH values and
mutational studies that targeted charged residues of both
NTAIL and XD [151]. Thus, the HeV NTAIL/XD complex
formation relies on the so-called ‘‘electrostatic steering
Fig. 8 Structures of XD and of the interacting MoRE from NTAIL in
MeV, NiV, and HeV. a Structure of the MeV Box2/XD complex
(PDB code 1T6O [83]). b, c Structural models of the NiV (b) and
HeV (c) Box3/XD complexes with XD [92]. b A model of NiV XD
[92], while c shows the crystal structure of HeV XD (pdb code 4HEO)
[91]. Box3 is shown in a parallel orientation according to Ref. [151].
In all panels, XD is in surface representation and the MoRE in ribbon
representation. Hydrophobic, basic (Arg and Lys), and acidic (Asp
and Glu) residues are represented in beige, blue, and red, respectively.
All the other residues are shown in gray. Modiﬁed from Ref. [151]
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3103
123

mechanism’’ [152]. Long-range electrostatic forces would
pull NTAIL towards the acidic patch on the surface of XD,
to lead to an ‘‘electrostatic encounter complex’’ [153] with
NTAIL being loosely anchored at the periphery of the
binding site [151]. According to this model, HeV NTAIL
would fold after binding, a scenario that is also supported
by NMR titration data (see below) [91].
The role of electrostatics in the association of the HeV
NTAIL and XD may explain the differential role of Box2 in
binding to XD in the two henipaviruses, since Asp457 in
HeV NTAIL is non-conservatively replaced by an Asn in
NiV NTAIL.
From a combination of mutational and SAXS analyses,
it was concluded that the MoRE adopts a parallel orienta-
tion at the surface of HeV XD [151], thus eliminating an
ambiguity that persisted even after the analysis of chemical
shift perturbations.
The conserved parallel orientation of the MoRE at the
XD surface in MeV and HeV argues for a functional rel-
evance. Does it govern the relative orientation of the whole
P protein with respect to the NTAIL region protruding from
the nucleocapsid and consequently favors an optimal
positioning of the polymerase onto the nucleocapsid tem-
plate? Does it favor a forward directionality of the
polymerase moving along the nucleocapsid?
The prevalently hydrophobic nature of the interface of
MeV, HeV, and, presumably, NiV NTAIL–XD complexes,
is in line with the frequent enrichment in hydrophobic
residues
of
binding
interfaces
of
protein
complexes
involving IDPs [154]. In the case of SeV, the interaction is
dominated by charges, thus giving a good example of how
selection pressure in the course of evolution shaped the
C-terminal domains of N and P to be structurally and
functionally analogous in spite of very limited sequence
identity [81].
The a-helical conformation of the XD-bound form of
MeV and Henipavirus NTAIL can be presaged from the
conformational ensemble that they sample as free forms of
in solution [83, 90, 91, 130, 147]. This pre-conﬁguration
might be taken as indicative of a ‘‘folding before binding’’
mechanism [155, 156]. However, the pre-existence of
ordered structures in IDPs does not necessarily commit to
such a mechanism. Indeed, quantitative analysis of NMR
titration data of the MeV NTAIL–XD-binding reaction [90]
unveiled the presence of a weak, non-speciﬁc encounter
intermediate complex, thus suggesting an induced folding
mechanism [157]. In support of this, a molecular dynamic
simulation study revealed that MeV NTAIL binding to XD
preferentially occurs via a folding after binding mechanism
[139]. Given the complexity of the experimental data,
which showed that hints of both induced folding and
conformational selection, this experimental system was
directly interrogated using kinetics [148] (Fig. 9a). In those
studies, a fortuitous complex dependence of the macro-
scopic rate constant kobs was observed that allowed
distinguishing the contribution of the binding and folding
steps in the reaction kinetics. Furthermore, by performing
pseudo-ﬁrst-order experiments as a function of the con-
centration of both XD and NTAIL [158], the clear signatures
of the ‘‘folding after binding’’ mechanism were detected,
indicating that a conformational selection mechanism,
while theoretically possible, is most likely too slow to be
operative [148].
A folding-upon-binding mechanism also occurs in the
case of HeV. Indeed, quantitative analysis of NTAIL peak
intensities at various XD titration points revealed that the
signal intensity for the residues located at the extremities of
the a-MoRE decreases faster. These residues have also a
smaller amount of residual helical structure in the unbound
form of NTAIL. Such a differential broadening is compati-
ble with the initial binding of XD to a short central helical
segment of the a-MoRE, followed by gradual extension of
this helix to the upstream and downstream residues [91].
Whether the higher helical sampling by the NiV NTAIL a-
MoRE reﬂects a different folding mechanism remains to be
investigated. A folding-upon-binding mechanism is also
shared by the SeV NTAIL–XD pair, where a detailed atomic
description of the molecular recognition trajectory could be
obtained from relaxation dispersion studies [159].
Residual disorder (e.g., fuzziness) in NTAIL–XD
complexes
The concept of ‘‘fuzziness’’ was coined by Tompa and
Fuxreiter to describe the persistence of a signiﬁcant
residual structural disorder in IDP-target complexes [47].
Static fuzziness describes the sampling of a number of IDP
conformations at the surface of the partner and dynamic
fuzziness describes the preservation of the disordered state
of the extremities of the binding segment. In this latter
case, it may be hypothesized that the ﬂexible adjacent
chains could serve as baits for partner ﬁshing through non-
speciﬁc and transient contacts [160, 161]. The abundance
of residual structural disorder in macromolecular com-
plexes advocates for a functional role [48].
The
NTAIL–XD
complexes
from
paramyxoviruses
combine both static and dynamic fuzziness. Indeed, the a-
MoRE of Henipavirus NTAIL remains highly dynamic at
the surface of XD and presumably samples many sub-
conformations [91, 147] (static fuzziness). Concomitantly,
a dynamic fuzzy complex is also formed, since the
remainder of the NTAIL chain remains ﬂexible within the
NTAIL–XD complexes of the three viruses (see also [162]).
A large set of experimental data support the ‘‘fuzziness’’
of these viral complexes. (1) The majority of NTAIL in the
three viruses remains disordered in the bound form, since
3104
S. Longhi et al.
123

the chemical shifts of most of the peaks are almost unal-
tered upon the addition of XD [90–92, 147, 149]. (2) The
NiV NTAIL–XD complex exhibits RS about 1.6 times larger
than expected for a compact complex [92]. (3) From EPR
data, MeV Box1 and Henipavirus Box1 and Box4 are not
involved in complex formation [141, 146]. (4) The intrinsic
ﬂuorescence spectroscopy of a Trp residue introduced
within Box4 of Henipavirus NTAIL remains unchanged in
the presence of bound XD as expected for a high confor-
mational freedom and solvent exposure of the C-terminal
region [92]. (5) In a low-resolution model of the MeV
NTAIL–XD complex built from SAXS analyses, most of
NTAIL (amino acids 401–488) remains disordered within
the complex with XD [149]. (6) In the downstream region,
the MoRE remains highly ﬂexible in the MeV complex as
concluded by combining SDSL EPR spectroscopy and
Monte Carlo simulations [163]. (7) Atomistic models of the
MeV NTAIL–XD complex built by combining ESI-Ion
Mobility-MS and modeling showed different levels of
compaction,
i.e.,
high
structural
heterogeneity
[99]
(Fig. 9b). In addition, a previously undetected collapsed
form of the complex was identiﬁed based on a bimodal
charge-state distribution consisting of a high-charge com-
ponent (18?) and a low-charge (11?) component. The
former is compatible with an ‘‘open’’ conformation, in
which the disordered arms of NTAIL ﬂanking the a-MoRE
maintain high accessibility to the solvent. The latter would
represent a compact or ‘‘closed’’ conformation in which
these ﬂanking arms collapse onto the surface of the folded
partner [99]. Structural models the ‘‘open’’ form of the
complex were generated using experimental chemical
shifts as restraints. Their solvent accessible surface area
Fig. 9 Molecular mechanisms of MeV NTAIL–XD complex forma-
tion. a Kinetic-based model showing the folding after binding
mechanism of the MeV NTAIL–XD interaction. NTAIL recognizes XD
by ﬁrst forming a weak encounter complex in a disordered
conformation and is then subsequently locked-in by a folding step.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [148]. Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society. b Cartoon representation of the structural model of
the NTAIL–XD complex as derived from a combined ESI–IM–MS and
modeling approach. The disordered NTAIL and ordered X domain of P
are shown in blue and orange, respectively. A typical MS spectrum is
shown. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [99]. Copyright 2014
The American Society for Mass Spectrometry. c Schematic illustra-
tion showing the location of the NTAIL regulatory sites (stars), as
identiﬁed by random mutagenesis coupled to split-GFP re-assembly
assays, in the NTAIL fuzzy appendage [173]. d Schematic illustration
highlighting the self-inhibitory impact of the NTAIL fuzzy appendage
on binding to XD [174]. Structures were drawn using Pymol [236]
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3105
123

(SASA) was found to be in a very good agreement with the
SASA experimentally determined by ESI–MS SASA. In
the models, the inter-molecular interactions are predomi-
nantly hydrophobic both in the ordered core of the complex
and in the disordered regions.
Fuzziness may confer many functional advantages,
including the ability of interacting with alternative partners
or on the contrary of establishing simultaneous interactions
with different partners. Moreover, non-speciﬁc, transient
contacts mediated by disordered appendages can promote
partner ﬁshing. Fuzzy parts of complexes can be the target
of post-translational modiﬁcation with regulatory activities.
In addition, the reduced entropic penalty of the disorder-to-
order transition due to fuzziness can enhance afﬁnity. The
interaction strength between an IDP and its partner can thus
be modulated by tuning the IDP fuzziness.
In line with these expectations, the fuzzy Box3 region of
MeV NTAIL serves as a low-afﬁnity binding site for the
major inducible heat-shock protein hsp70 [164, 165] that
stimulates
both
viral
transcription
and
replication
[166–168]. The major hsp70-binding site is, however,
located within Box2 [166, 169] and can compete out XD
binding to NTAIL [164]. This suggests a model in which
hsp70 would enhance viral RNA synthesis by decreasing
the stability of NTAIL–XD complexes, thereby promoting
P–L cartwheeling on the nucleocapsid [149, 164].
In addition, the major phosphorylation sites of MeV
(S479 and S510) and NiV (S451) NTAIL fall in the fuzzy
region [170–172], and the phosphorylation of MeV N
upregulates transcription in minigenome assays [170].
Likewise, a rapid turnover of the phosphorylation of NiV N
critically impacts viral RNA synthesis [172].
Finally, fuzzy regions ﬂanking MoREs can also posi-
tively or negatively modulate the interactions established
by IDPs. In fact, natural dampeners located in the N-ter-
minal fuzzy region of NTAIL have been identiﬁed in MeV
by random mutagenesis NTAIL [173] (Fig. 9c). Similarly,
the fuzzy Box3 region would naturally serve as a damp-
ener, since MeV NTAIL constructs devoid of Box3 display
an enhanced interaction with XD. The impact of the long
N-terminal fuzzy region of MeV NTAIL on binding to XD
was thoroughly investigated though the generation of
truncated forms [174] (Fig. 9d). The shortening of the
NTAIL N-terminal fuzzy region increases binding to XD in
the case of MeV and henipaviruses, and also to hsp70 in the
former case. Although binding increases with decreasing
hydrodynamic radius of the NTAIL variants, the relationship
is not linear. The molecular bases of this non-monotonic
behavior remain, however, to be elucidated, with possible
charge-related effects having been ruled out. Results
obtained by replacing the MeV NTAIL fuzzy region with a
highly dissimilar artiﬁcial disordered sequence indicate
that the inhibitory effect of the fuzzy region is sequence
independent. Kinetics experiments that made use of single-
site Trp MeV XD variant and of either NTAIL or a peptide
mimicking the a-MoRE shed light on the mechanism by
which the fuzzy appendage could inhibit binding. In fact,
as recalled above, in the case of NTAIL, there is a hyperbolic
dependence of the observed rate constant (kobs) on ligand
concentration likely reﬂecting the fact that folding of NTAIL
becomes rate-limiting at high reactant concentrations.
Conversely, a linear dependence was observed with a
truncated synthetic peptide that mimics the isolated MoRE.
Thus, the fuzzy appendage of NTAIL may have a direct
effect on the folding of the MoRE, possibly by lowering its
rate constant of folding [174]. The molecular determinants
of these effects, however, remain to be established.
Irrespective of the underlying mechanism, results sug-
gest that the fuzziness of NTAIL provides a means to
modulate the strength of interactions that this domain
establishes with partners. Taking into account the fact that
the NTAIL–XD interaction needs to be tightly regulated (see
below), the discovery that the fuzzy region preceding the
a-MoRE dampens the interaction provides a conceptual
framework to understand why the MoRE in paramyxoviral
NTAIL domains is preceded by a rather long disordered arm.
It is tempting to speculate that in the course of evolution,
the length of this region has been under selective pressure
so as to ensure a ‘‘balanced’’ afﬁnity towards XD, i.e., the
arm would have been elongated until the optimized
dampening level of the a-MoRE–XD interaction was
reached.
Functional impact of the NTAIL–XD interaction
The hypothesis that the NTAIL–XD interaction triggers the
opening of the nucleocapsid to expose the viral RNA, so
that the polymerase can access to it has been dismissed by
NMR studies that could not document any major nucleo-
capsid rearrangement upon addition of HeV XD [91]. In
agreement with these ﬁndings, when PNT or PCT from
MuV is added to puriﬁed MuV nucleocapsids, only PNT
induces uncoiling [138]. The addition of PCT creates
additional densities on the outside of the nucleocapsid. The
size of these extra-densities corresponds to the size of the
MuV XD-a-MoRE complex suggesting that MuV XD-a-
MoRE complexes may be stabilized on the nucleocapsid
core, possibly due to additional interactions between PCT
and NCORE. Structural comparison between the crystal
structure of VSV N:RNA rings bound or not to VSV PCT
shows very little discernable differences, with the only
differences concerning the P-binding site [175]. This
observation thus reinforces the idea that PCT binding to
nucleocapsid does not trigger much conformational rear-
rangement. The opening of the nucleocapsid to grant access
to the polymerase would then require either full-length P,
3106
S. Longhi et al.
123

the P–L complex, and/or cellular cofactors. Hsp70, a MeV
NTAIL partner [164–166], appears as a potential candidate.
Indeed, hsp70–nucleocapsid complexes of canine distem-
per virus, a closely related morbillivirus, display an
expanded helical diameter and an increased fragility par-
alleled by an increased sensitivity of the genomic RNA to
nuclease degradation suggesting enhanced solvent expo-
sure [176, 177].
The interaction of NTAIL with XD is critical as it can
mediate recruitment of the L–P complex onto the nucleo-
capsid
and/or
can
ensure
optimal
transcription
and
replication [36, 37, 39]. The role of Box2 in recruiting the
MeV polymerase complex has been challenged by the
ﬁnding that Box2 is dispensable for MeV transcription and
replication in the absence of the upstream NTAIL region
[95]. A truncated form of NTAIL (N1–439) is active in
transcription and replication of a minigenome and in a
recombinant virus [95]. However, the MeV variant suffered
from a severe growth defect [95] and the N variant was
very inefﬁcient in supporting transcription re-initiation at
the N–P junction in minigenome assays (see below) [94].
By analogy with MuV XD, it is conceivable that XD may
bind directly to NCORE, thereby ensuring recruitment of L
onto the nucleocapsid in the absence of NTAIL.
According to the so-called ‘‘cartwheeling’’ model, the
polymerase would progress along the nucleocapsid by
dynamically making/breaking contacts between NTAIL and
XD to allow transcription and replication to take place.
This model implies that the modiﬁcations of the N–P
afﬁnity would affect the interaction dynamics and, there-
fore, the processivity of the polymerase. To directly assess
the relationship between the binding afﬁnity of the NTAIL–
XD pair and the polymerase elongation rate, a mutational
study that targeted the MoRE of MeV NTAIL was carried
out [178]. Surprisingly, no relationship was found between
the binding strength of the NTAIL–XD pair and the ability
of NTAIL to undergo XD-induced folding. Concomitantly,
MeV mutants bearing those substitutions were generated
and the elongation rates within infected cells were mea-
sured. Quite unexpectedly, a reduced binding strength had
no impact on the elongation rate. It can, however, be
speculated that this tolerance of the polymerase to NTAIL
substitutions holds only in a certain range of afﬁnities: in
spite of a lower afﬁnity, the NTAIL–XD interaction would
still allow the recruitment of the polymerase. This absence
of effect of the binding strength on the RNA synthesis was,
however, challenged by a recent study, where a correlation
was found between the XD–NTAIL afﬁnity and the mRNA
accumulation rates [94] (see below). The same result was
obtained by mutational studies that targeted MeV XD:
while the abrogation of the NTAIL–XD interaction renders
the polymerase non-functional, a 1.7-fold increase in the
afﬁnity of the NTAIL–XD pair is associated with a 1.7-fold
reduction in transcript accumulation rate [179]. Thus, the
NTAIL–XD interaction appears to tightly control viral
polymerase progression along the nucleocapsid template.
The corollary of this property is that the NTAIL–XD inter-
action strength has to be kept into a precise window to
ensure efﬁcient transcription and replication. In line with
this requirement, mutational studies carried out on MeV
NTAIL showed that random substitutions in Box2 lead to a
reduction in the binding strength [173]. This ﬁnding
implies that the Box2 sequence is poorly evolvable,
because it has been naturally selected to bind XD in an
optimal way. In support of this observation, the amino acid
sequence of Box2 is rather well conserved in naturally
occurring MeV strains [173]. The amino acid sequence
conservation of Box2 is by no means an exception among
IDPs, since MoREs tend to be conserved in spite of the
higher evolutionary rates of IDPs compared to structured
proteins [180]. Random mutagenesis studies identiﬁed
substitutions within the N-terminal region of Box2 (aa
489–493) as the most critical ones in terms of interaction
strength, a ﬁnding that could be rationalized using struc-
tural data [173]. Furthermore, a critical NTAIL residue
(Arg497) that had escaped detection in previous structural
studies was unveiled. This led to a ﬁner description of the
hydrogen bonding network that stabilizes the NTAIL–XD
complex. Finally, regulatory sites located in the fuzzy
NTAIL region (i.e., outside the binding interface) were also
identiﬁed (Fig. 9c). This well illustrates that in spite of
their general power and usefulness, structural studies suffer
from some limitations that could be nicely overcome by
‘‘descriptive random mutagenesis’’ approach in that it
provided additional information on the NTAIL–XD com-
plex. As such, a combinatorial experimental approach is a
valuable general approach to characterize complexes
involving IDPs/IDPRs.
The molecular mechanisms were subsequently investi-
gated
by
examining
the
functional
consequences of
substituting critical NTAIL positions on the viral polymerase
activity. To this end, molecular dynamics (MD) simula-
tions
and
biochemical
and
functional
studies
were
combined. Signiﬁcant conclusions could be made thanks to
the use of recombinant viruses and of minigenomes
designed to accurately quantify transcription re-initiation
after polymerase scanning through each of the ﬁve IGRs of
MeV [94]. A detailed molecular explanation for the key
role of NTAIL 491 and 497 residues in stabilizing the
NTAIL–XD complex was achieved [94]. A correlation
between NTAIL–XD afﬁnity and the ability of N to re-ini-
tiate transcription at a downstream gene unveiled the key
role of this protein interaction in transcription re-initiation
at each intergenic region [94] (Fig. 10). In conclusion, the
NTAIL–XD interaction is proposed to maintain the poly-
merase anchored to the nucleocapsid during its scanning
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3107
123

upon crossing the IGRs and/or in the transcription re-ini-
tiation at each intergenic region. A natural selection for an
optimal binding strength of NTAIL–XD would have occur-
red, since both increasing [179] or decreasing [94] the
NTAIL–XD afﬁnity reduces the viral growth. This suggests
the establishment of an optimal equilibrium between
polymerase recruitment, processivity, and transcription re-
initiation efﬁciency. Consistent with this, none of 1,218
non-redundant circulating MeV sequences harbor the sub-
stitutions with the most dramatic impact (i.e., R490S,
S491L, and R497G), while others with less drastic impact
are found [173]. Accordingly, a conserved amino acid
residue and fuzzy appendage length code appear to have
shaped the interaction between NTAIL and XD in the course
of evolution.
Although polymerase activity is lost upon deletion of the
last 43 residues of MeV NTAIL (comprising the a-MoRE),
it is restored when the deletion is expanded to encompass
the last 86 residues of NTAIL. This result led Krumm and
co-workers to propose that NTAIL may inhibit polymerase
access to the template, and by binding the a-MoRE, XD
may overcome this inhibition by ordering NTAIL [95].
Therefore, the NTAIL–XD interaction would not only favor
the polymerase anchoring and govern the RNA synthesis
dynamics, but may also overcome the inhibition effect
created
by
the
disordered
appendages
covering
the
nucleocapsid.
Interestingly, the VP30 of EboV that serves as an anti-
terminator transcription factor displays a similarly tightly
regulated interaction with optimal binding to N being
associated with optimal RNA synthesis [181]. One of the
major evolution constraints to which the polymerase
machinery of MeV, and possibly of paramyxoviruses in
general, is subjected to is the need for an optimized
interaction between the P and N proteins. It remains to be
established whether binding of the C-terminus of P to the
globular moiety of N (NCORE), as observed in Monone-
gavirales, has a similar functional role and thus needs to be
similarly tightly controlled.
N–P interactions as potential targets for antivirals
If marketed drugs target mostly the active site of enzymes
[182] or ligand-binding sites of receptors [183], there is a
growing interest in the inhibition of protein–protein
Fig. 10 Model of MeV transcription re-initiation. 1 The polymerase
complex, composed of the L and P proteins, transcribes the genome. 2
After the addition of the poly-A tail and release of the mRNA, the
polymerase complex may re-initiate transcription and transcribe the
next gene (a) or stop transcribing (b). Whether the polymerase
complex detaches from the genome template (b.i) or travels on it until
reaching the 50 end of the genome (b.ii) remains to be determined.
The higher is KD of the NTAIL–XD interaction, the less efﬁcient is the
re-initiation of transcription, thus leading to a steeper mRNA
gradient. The schematic representation of the polymerase complex
transcribing the genome is reproduced from Ref. [94]
3108
S. Longhi et al.
123

interactions (PPIs) for therapeutic purposes. The theoretical
advantages of targeting PPIs lie in the limited conservation
of protein interfaces, thus increasing the chances of highly
speciﬁc inhibition. The inhibition of PPIs constitutes a new
way to modulate the activity of proteins. A ‘‘proof of
concept’’ of the validity of antiviral approaches relying on
PPI inhibition has been obtained by targeting the HIV-1
Nef–SH3 binding surface [184].
Although there is no doubt that targeting viral entry and/
or the polymerase (complex) is a valuable approach for
antiviral strategies [185], a promising way to inhibit the
replication of paramyxoviruses could rely on inhibition of
the N–P interaction (i.e., the dual NTAIL–XD and N0–PNTD)
that
is crucially involved
in both
transcription and
replication.
The antiviral activity of peptides targeting the interac-
tion between N0 and PNTD in NiV [57], RSV [60], and
RabV [68] demonstrates the relevance of choosing this
interaction as a target for the design of antivirals. The fact
that both NTAIL–XD and N0–PNTD interactions involve an
IDPR adds further promise for antiviral approaches. In fact,
many reports showed how valuable are PPIs involving
IDPRs as drug discovery targets [186–192].
The interaction surface between a globular protein and
an IDP is reminiscent of that occurring between an enzyme
and its substrate or a receptor and its ligand that are often
easily targeted by small molecules. Indeed, the binding of
IDPs often occur through the accommodation of a MoRE
into a groove of the partner. However, there are several
differences. (1) The size of the interfaces of IDPs is *25%
smaller than those of ordered complexes (1141 ± 110 A˚ 2
[56] versus 1600 ± 400 A˚ 2 [193]). (2) Interfaces involving
IDPs and globular proteins usually involve a single con-
tinuous and multiple (often discontinuous) segments [154],
respectively. (3) Hydrophobic residues are preferentially
exposed at the interface in the case of IDPs (40–90%
exposition for IDPs versus only 5–15% for globular pro-
teins [154]) favoring hydrophobic interactions over polar–
polar interactions (33 versus 22%, respectively [154, 194]).
These features make interfaces involving IDPs more easily
‘‘druggable’’ by small hydrophobic compounds that are
usually more cell permeable, a property that constitutes a
prerequisite
for
targeting
paramyxoviral
replication
machineries, and many other validated therapeutic intra-
cellular targets. There are several examples of small
molecule drugs that successfully inhibit PPIs relying on
IDRs (see Refs. [188, 190] and references therein cited).
They include the complex between Mdm2 and p53
[195–197], as well as the C-terminal disordered region of
PTP1B and the N-terminal disordered domain of the
androgen receptor, the two latter being validated thera-
peutic targets for diabetes/obesity and prostate cancer,
respectively [198, 199].
The NTAIL–XD and N0–PNTD interactions are attractive
targets as they both imply an IDPR. Furthermore, NTAIL
should be easily competed out by small molecule drugs for
binding to XD owing to the rather weak binding afﬁnity
(KD in the lM range). The KD of N0–PNTD interaction is
still unknown in the case of MeV and henipaviruses, but it
is expected to be relatively weak, having to be competi-
tively inhibited by both the CTD arm of the Ni?1 protomer
and the NTD arm of the Ni-1 protomer to allow the
encapsidation of the nascent RNA chain. It is worth to note,
however, that in the case of EboV, the binding afﬁnity of
the N-terminal region of VP35 towards the N protomer
(i.e., a truncated from of NCORE devoid of the N-terminal
arm) is surprisingly high (KD in the nM range) [63].
The relatively small area that is buried at the interface of
the NTAIL–XD complex in MeV (\450 A˚ 2 [82]) and in
Henipavirus (\700 A˚ 2 as predicted in [92]) presages easy
destabilization, in line with the admitted correlation
between buried interface area and complex stability [200].
The higher total interface area of N0–PNTD complex in NiV
and EboV (1440 and *2600 A˚ 2, respectively) may not be
less favorable, since the contacting PNTD is a bipartite helix
separated by a kink [57] with each binding interface being
individually ‘‘druggable’’.
The NTAIL–XD interfaces of henipaviruses and MeV
combine core hydrophobic contacts and peripheral elec-
trostatics interactions. Known inhibitors preferentially
target hydrophobic interfaces such as those found in PPIs
involving IDPRs [201]. Mimicry by small inhibitory
molecules is a priori facilitated by the fact that the inter-
action relies on the embedding of an a-helix in a
hydrophobic cleft of the structured partner in both NTAIL–
XD and N0–PNTD complexes. In addition, any inhibitor of
Henipavirus NTAIL–XD should inhibit both viruses, since
their NTAIL and XD domains cross-bind to each other
[144]. At the same time, the development of strain speciﬁc
inhibitors remains possible, since the mode by which NTAIL
binds to XD in NiV and HeV subtly differs.
Functional advantages of structural disorder
within paramyxoviral N and P proteins
In the previous sections, the numerous experimental lines
of evidence pointing to the abundance of structural disorder
in the N and P proteins of paramyxoviruses have been
described. An obvious question is: ‘‘which is the functional
beneﬁt that partly/largely disordered N and P proteins bring
to paramyxoviruses that couldn’t be brought by fully
structured replicative proteins?’’ In other words, which is
the ‘‘added value’’ of structural disorder? Below, the
unique functional advantages conferred by structural dis-
order are discussed.
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3109
123

Disorder as a determinant of interactivity
and of extension
Structural disorder is known to be a determinant of protein
interactivity: the increased plasticity typical of IDPs/IDPRs
enables them to engage in a broad molecular partnership
[202–204]. In line with this, MeV NTAIL binds to multiple
partners including the viral P (XD) [8, 80, 82, 149] and M
proteins [206], hsp70 [164–166], a nuclear export protein
[205], peroxiredoxin 1 [207], cell cytoskeleton components
[208, 209] the interferon regulatory factor 3 [210, 211], and
a yet unidentiﬁed protein cell receptor [212, 213]. A likely
broader molecular partnership of NiV and HeV NTAILs is to
be identiﬁed, because they bear an additional MoRE (i.e.,
Box2). PNT domains also interact with multiple partners,
including N [57, 58, 95, 214], cellular proteins [67, 215],
and possibly the viral L protein [216].
Coordinated interactions between the polymerase com-
plex and a large surface area of the nucleocapsid are
expected to beneﬁt from the presence of IDPRs within both
P and N proteins. Strikingly, MeV PNT can extend up to
40 nm (as determined by SAXS, Longhi, and Receveur-
Bre´chot, unpublished data). Consequently, the L–P com-
plex could simultaneously bind to successive turns of the
helical nucleocapsid that is *6 nm high in compact
nucleocapsids [9, 12, 19]. In addition, since paramyxoviral
P proteins are multimeric, they could have an even higher
extension. That P remains overall extended upon binding to
the nucleocapsid has been shown in the case of VSV [70].
The very large size of both PNT and NTAIL (MeV NTAIL
can extend up to 13 nm in solution [8]), together with the
additional ﬂexibility brought by the ‘‘spacer’’ and ‘‘linker’’
regions of P, could enable N and P to act as scaffolding
engines for partner tethering. Such a long-distance scaf-
folding property ﬁts very well with the postulated assembly
between the N0–P encapsidation substrate and the L–P
polymerase complex to yield a tripartite N0–P–L complex.
Disorder as a determinant of nucleocapsid
polymorphism
As already mentioned, MeV and henipaviruses share a
conserved nucleocapsid structural organization, where the
ﬁrst 50 NTAIL residues are located in the interstitial space
between successive turns of the nucleocapsid. The inherent
ﬂexibility of the NTAIL region sandwiched between suc-
cessive turns (and hence, it is potential to undergo
conformational
changes)
can
be
responsible
for
the
observed variations in pitch and twist [10]. In turn, these
conformational differences may affect the recognition of
the replication and transcription promoters. Two discon-
tinuous elements constitute the replication promoter at the
30 end of the viral genome. If juxtaposed on two successive
helical turns, they are thought to form a functional unit
[217]. This model predicts that the changes of the helical
conformation of the nucleocapsid, i.e., changes in the
number of N monomers (and thus of nucleotides) per turn,
may dictate the switch between transcription and replica-
tion by the disruption of the replication or the transcription
promoter at the expenses of each other. The large confor-
mational ﬂexibility within Paramyxoviridae nucleocapsids
observed in EM supports this postulate [19, 124, 176, 177].
Disorder as a powerful solution to modulate binding
afﬁnities
As described in detail in this review, in paramyxoviruses,
two critical (and dynamic) interactions for transcription
and replication, i.e., N0–PNTD and NTAIL–XD, rely on a
disordered segment that undergoes a-helical folding-upon-
binding to the structured partner. One can thus raise the
question as to why these viruses have conserved this
peculiar interaction mode.
Structural disorder is known to allow protein interac-
tions to occur with both high speciﬁcity and low afﬁnity
[75, 218–225]. The uncoupling between afﬁnity and
speciﬁcity (i.e., the low afﬁnity coupled to decent speci-
ﬁcity) is known to arise from the entropic penalty that is
associated with the disorder-to-order transition. However,
the persistence of residual disorder in IDP complexes (in
the form of fuzzy appendages) and a partial pre-conﬁgu-
ration of binding motifs prior to binding afford a way to
modulate the binding afﬁnity (for a review, see Ref. [226]).
Static fuzziness, i.e., dynamic binding of the binding motif
at the surface of the partner as in Henipavirus NTAIL–XD
complexes, brings an additional means for regulating the
interaction strength.
Taking into account that both N0–PNTD and NTAIL–XD
interactions need to be dynamically established and broken
to ensure RNA synthesis, their interaction strength has to
be tightly controlled. The involvement of disordered
regions in these complexes provides an exquisite means to
modulate the interaction strength: by tuning the extent of
pre-conﬁguration of the binding motifs and/or the length of
neighboring fuzzy appendages, the virus can achieve an
optimal binding strength.
In addition, the extreme allostery that typiﬁes IDPs (i.e.,
the long-range nature of the effects of substitutions) affords
a supplementary layer of regulation. As a result, amino acid
substitutions in fuzzy regions located far away from the
binding site have the potential to affect binding.
Disorder as a lessener of evolutionary constraints
Encoding structural disorder is much less constrained than
encoding
order,
because
IDRs
have
much
fewer
3110
S. Longhi et al.
123

intramolecular interactions and are much more tolerant of
substitutions or insertions as well illustrated by the extra-
length of the Henipavirus PNT region with respect to other
paramyxoviruses [50]. Furthermore, disorder reduces the
evolutionary constraints exerted on overlapping reading
frames, i.e., regions encoding multiple proteins. This is the
case of PNT, which also encodes the C protein, and of the
‘‘spacer’’ region preceding PMD that also encodes the
C-terminal domain of the V and W proteins [50, 51]. The
disordered nature of these regions is in line with the pin-
pointed relationship between overlapping reading frames
and structural disorder [51, 227–230]. Because disorder is
encoded by a much broader sequence space compared to
order, encoding disorder in one of the alternative reading
frames may represent a strategy by which genes with
overlapping coding capacities may lessen evolutionary
constraints imposed on the sequence by the overlap,
allowing the encoded overlapping protein products to
sample a wider sequence space without losing function.
After the ﬁrst seminal observations that unveiled the
abundance of disorder in paramyxoviral N and P proteins
[8, 45, 51, 231], several subsequent computational and
experimental studies have reported the prevalence of dis-
order in viral proteins and especially in the proteome of
RNA viruses (see Ref. [232] and references therein cited).
The high mutation rates of RNA viruses and the need for
compacting the genetic information into an as small as
possible genome may explain the wide occurrence of dis-
ordered regions in viral proteins: disorder would allow
buffering the deleterious effects of mutations and would
also afford a broad molecular partnership [233, 234]. More
generally, the principal advantage conferred by disorder
would reside in an expanded coding capacity, where a
single gene would (1) encode a single protein product able
to exert multiple concomitant biological effects thanks to
its promiscuity and (2) would code for multiple products
through overlapping reading frames.
Acknowledgements S.L. wishes to thank all the members of her lab
and her co-workers for their critical contribution to the studies herein
summarized. Within her group, she thanks David Karlin, Franc¸ois
Ferron, Jean-Marie Bourhis, Kenth Johansson, Antoine Gruet, Johnny
Habchi, David Blocquel, Jenny Erales, Lorenzo Baronti, Marion
Dosnon, Jennifer Roche and Matilde Beltrandi (previous members),
and Christophe Bignon (present members). The authors also wish to
thank David Blocquel who is the author of Fig. 9c. Among her
numerous past and present co-workers, she thanks Bruno Canard
(AFMB, Marseille, France), Maria Mate´ (AFMB, Marseille, France),
Michael Oglesbee (Ohio State University, Columbus, USA), He´le`ne
Valentin (CIRI, Lyon, France), Valerie Belle and Bruno Guigliarelli
(BIP, Marseille, France), Janez Strancar (Jozef Stefan Institute,
Ljubljana, Slovenia), Gary Daughdrill (University of South Florida,
USA), Martin Blackledge, Malene Ringkjobin-Jensen and Guillaume
Communie (Institut de Biologie Structurale, Grenoble, France), Jin
Wang (Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Changchun, China), Roberta Pierattelli and Isabella Felli
(CERM, Florence, Italy), Rita Grandori (Universita’ degli Studi
Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy), Andrea Cavalli (IRB, Bellinzona,
Switzerland), Pascale Barbier (CRO2 UMR_S911, Marseille, France),
Paolo Carloni (Institute for Advanced Simulation IAS-5 and Institute
of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-9, Ju¨lich, Germany), Joanna
Brunel (CIRI, Lyon, France), Daniela Bonetti (Sapienza, Universita’
of Rome, Italy), and Carlo Camilloni and Michele Vendruscolo
(Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, UK). She is
particularly grateful to Vladimir Uversky (University of South Flor-
ida, USA) for the numerous stimulating discussions and for his useful
advice on various issues. The studies herein reviewed were carried out
with the ﬁnancial support of the Agence Nationale de la Recherche,
speciﬁc programs ‘‘Physico-Chimie du Vivant’’, ANR-08-PCVI-
0020-01, and ‘‘ASTRID’’, ANR-11-ASTR-003-01 to S.L and D.G.
They also beneﬁted from support from the CNRS, the Direction
Ge´ne´rale de l’Armement (DGA) and the Fondation pour la Recherche
Me´dicale (FRM). Work partly supported by grants from the Italian
Ministero dell’Istruzione dell’Universita` e della Ricerca (Progetto di
Interesse ‘Invecchiamento’ to S.G.) and Sapienza University of Rome
(C26A155S48 to S.G). The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Lamb RA, Parks GD (2013) Paramyxoviridae. In: Knipe DM,
Howley PM (eds) Fields virology. Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp 957–995
2. Wolfson LJ, Strebel PM, Gacic-Dobo M, Hoekstra EJ, McFar-
land JW, Hersh BS, Measles I (2007) Has the 2005 measles
mortality reduction goal been achieved? A natural history
modelling study. Lancet 369:191–200
3. Eaton BT, Mackenzie JS, Wang LF (2007) Henipaviruses. In:
Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM (eds) Fields virology, 5th
edn. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, pp 1587–1600
4. Wang LF, Yu M, Hansson E, Pritchard LI, Shiell B, Michalski
WP, Eaton BT (2000) The exceptionally large genome of
Hendra virus: support for creation of a new genus within the
family Paramyxoviridae. J Virol 74:9972–9979
5. Eaton BT, Broder CC, Middleton D, Wang LF (2006) Hendra
and Nipah viruses: different and dangerous. Nat Rev Microbiol
4:23–35
6. Drexler JF, Corman VM, Gloza-Rausch F, Seebens A, Annan A,
Ipsen A, Kruppa T, Muller MA, Kalko EK, Adu-Sarkodie Y,
Oppong S, Drosten C (2009) Henipavirus RNA in African bats.
PLoS One 4:e6367
7. Karlin D, Longhi S, Canard B (2002) Substitution of two resi-
dues in the measles virus nucleoprotein results in an impaired
self-association. Virology 302:420–432
8. Longhi S, Receveur-Brechot V, Karlin D, Johansson K, Darbon
H, Bhella D, Yeo R, Finet S, Canard B (2003) The C-terminal
domain of the measles virus nucleoprotein is intrinsically dis-
ordered and folds upon binding to the C-terminal moiety of the
phosphoprotein. J Biol Chem 278:18638–18648
9. Schoehn G, Mavrakis M, Albertini A, Wade R, Hoenger A,
Ruigrok RW (2004) The 12 A structure of trypsin-treated
measles virus N-RNA. J Mol Biol 339:301–312
10. Bhella D (2007) Measles virus nucleocapsid structure, confor-
mational ﬂexibility and the rule of six. In: Longhi S (ed)
Measles virus nucleoprotein. Nova Publishers Inc., Hauppage
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3111
123

11. Desfosses A, Goret G, Farias Estrozi L, Ruigrok RW, Gutsche I
(2011) Nucleoprotein–RNA orientation in the measles virus
nucleocapsid by three-dimensional electron microscopy. J Virol
85:1391–1395
12. Gutsche I, Desfosses A, Effantin G, Ling WL, Haupt M, Rui-
grok RW, Sachse C, Schoehn G (2015) Near-atomic cryo-EM
structure of the helical measles virus nucleocapsid. Science
348(6235):704–707
13. Halpin K, Bankamp B, Harcourt BH, Bellini WJ, Rota PA
(2004) Nipah virus conforms to the rule of six in a minigenome
replication assay. J Gen Virol 85:701–707
14. Kolakofsky D, Pelet T, Garcin D, Hausmann S, Curran J, Roux
L (1998) Paramyxovirus RNA synthesis and the requirement for
hexamer genome length: the rule of six revisited. J Virol
72:891–899
15. Roux L (2005) Dans le ge´nome des Paramyxovirinae, les pro-
moteurs et leurs activite´s sont fac¸onne´s par la « re`gle de six.
Virologie 9:19–34
16. Ruigrok RW, Crepin T, Kolakofsky D (2011) Nucleoproteins
and nucleocapsids of negative-strand RNA viruses. Curr Opin
Microbiol 14:504–510
17. Chan YP, Chua KB, Koh CL, Lim ME, Lam SK (2001) Com-
plete nucleotide sequences of Nipah virus isolates from
Malaysia. J Gen Virol 82:2151–2155
18. Blocquel D, Bourhis JM, Ele´oue¨t JF, Gerlier D, Habchi J, Jamin
M, Longhi S, Yabukarski F (2012) Transcription et re´plication
des Monone´gavirales: une machine mole´culaire originale.
Virologie 16:225–257
19. Bhella D, Ralph A, Murphy LB, Yeo RP (2002) Signiﬁcant
differences in nucleocapsid morphology within the Paramyx-
oviridae. J Gen Virol 83:1831–1839
20. Tan WS, Ong ST, Eshaghi M, Foo SS, Yusoff K (2004) Solu-
bility,
immunogenicity
and
physical
properties
of
the
nucleocapsid protein of Nipah virus produced in Escherichia
coli. J Med Virol 73:105–112
21. Huber M, Cattaneo R, Spielhofer P, Orvell C, Norrby E, Mes-
serli M, Perriard JC, Billeter MA (1991) Measles virus
phosphoprotein retains the nucleocapsid protein in the cyto-
plasm. Virology 185:299–308
22. Spehner D, Drillien R, Howley PM (1997) The assembly of the
measles virus nucleoprotein into nucleocapsid-like particles is
modulated by the phosphoprotein. Virology 232:260–268
23. Albertini AAV, Schoehn G, Ruigrok RW (2005) Structures
implique´es dans la re´plication et la transcription des virus a`
ARN non segmente´s de sens ne´gatif. Virologie 9:83–92
24. Longhi S, Canard B (1999) Me´canismes de transcription et de
re´plication des Paramyxoviridae. Virologie 3:227–240
25. Morin B, Rahmeh AA, Whelan SP (2012) Mechanism of RNA
synthesis initiation by the vesicular stomatitis virus polymerase.
EMBO J 31:1320–1329
26. Morin B, Liang B, Gardner E, Ross RA, Whelan SP (2016) An
in vitro RNA synthesis assay for rabies virus deﬁnes critical
ribonucleoprotein interactions for polymerase activity. J Virol
91(1):e01508-16
27. Bloyet LM, Welsch J, Enchery F, Mathieu C, de Breyne S,
Horvat B, Grigorov B, Gerlier D (2016) HSP90 Chaperoning in
addition to phosphoprotein required for folding but not for
supporting enzymatic activities of measles and Nipah virus L
polymerases. J Virol 90:6642–6656
28. Katoh H, Kubota T, Nakatsu Y, Tahara M, Kidokoro M, Takeda
M (2017) Heat shock protein 90 ensures efﬁcient mumps virus
replication by assisting with viral polymerase complex forma-
tion. J Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.02220-16
29. Chattopadhyay S, Banerjee AK (2009) Phosphoprotein, P of
human parainﬂuenza virus type 3 prevents self-association of
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, L. Virology 383:226–236
30. Gopinath M, Shaila MS (2008) Recombinant L and P protein
complex of Rinderpest virus catalyses mRNA synthesis in vitro.
Virus Res 135:150–154
31. Ogino T, Kobayashi M, Iwama M, Mizumoto K (2005) Sendai
virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase L protein catalyzes cap
methylation
of
virus-speciﬁc
mRNA.
J
Biol
Chem
280:4429–4435
32. Ferron F, Longhi S, Henrissat B, Canard B (2002) Viral RNA-
polymerases—a predicted 20-O-ribose methyltransferase domain
shared by all Mononegavirales. Trends Biochem Sci 27:222–224
33. Noton SL, Deﬂube LR, Tremaglio CZ, Fearns R (2012) The
respiratory syncytial virus polymerase has multiple RNA syn-
thesis activities at the promoter. PLoS Pathog 8:e1002980
34. Liang B, Li Z, Jenni S, Rahmeh AA, Morin BM, Grant T,
Grigorieff N, Harrison SC, Whelan SP (2015) Structure of the L
protein of vesicular stomatitis virus from electron cryomi-
croscopy. Cell 162:314–327
35. Bourhis JM, Longhi S (2007) Measles virus nucleoprotein:
structural organization and functional role of the intrinsically
disordered C-terminal domain. In: Longhi S (ed) Measles virus
nucleoprotein. Nova Publishers Inc., Hauppage, pp 1–35
36. Longhi S (2007) Measles virus nucleoprotein. Nova Publishers
Inc., Hauppage, NY
37. Longhi S (2009) Nucleocapsid structure and function. Curr Top
Microbiol Immunol 329:103–128
38. Longhi S, Oglesbee M (2010) Structural disorder within the
measles virus nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein. Protein Pept
Lett 17:961–978
39. Longhi S (2011) Structural disorder within the measles virus
nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein: functional implications for
transcription and replication. In: Luo M (ed) Negative strand
RNA virus. World Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore, pp 95–125
40. Habchi
J,
Longhi
S
(2012)
Structural
disorder
within
paramyxovirus nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins. Mol Bio-
Syst 8:69–81
41. Habchi J, Mamelli L, Longhi S (2012) Structural disorder within
the nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein from measles, Nipah and
Hendra viruses. In: Uversky VN, Longhi S (eds) Flexible viru-
ses: structural disorder in viral proteins. Wiley, Hoboken,
pp 47–94
42. Communie G, Ruigrok RW, Jensen MR, Blackledge M (2014)
Intrinsically disordered proteins implicated in paramyxoviral
replication machinery. Curr Opin Virol 5:72–81
43. Longhi S (2015) Structural disorder within paramyxoviral
nucleoproteins. FEBS Lett 589:2649–2659
44. Habchi
J,
Longhi
S
(2015)
Structural
disorder
within
paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins in their free
and bound forms: from predictions to experimental assessment.
Int J Mol Sci 16:15688–15726
45. Karlin D, Longhi S, Receveur V, Canard B (2002) The N-ter-
minal domain of the phosphoprotein of Morbilliviruses belongs
to the natively unfolded class of proteins. Virology 296:251–262
46. Dunker AK, Babu MM, Barbar E, Blackledge M, Bondos SE,
Doszta´nyi Z, Dyson HJ, Forman-Kay J, Fuxreiter M, Gsponer J,
Han K-H, Jones DT, Longhi S, Metallo SJ, Nishikawa K,
Nussinov R, Obradovic Z, Pappu RV, Rost B, Selenko P,
Subramaniam V, Sussman JL, Tompa P, Uversky VN (2013)
What’s in a name? Why these proteins are intrinsically disor-
dered. Intrinsically Disord Proteins 1:e24157
47. Tompa P, Fuxreiter M (2008) Fuzzy complexes: polymorphism
and structural disorder in protein–protein interactions. Trends
Biochem Sci 33:2–8
48. Miskei M, Antal C, Fuxreiter M (2016) FuzDB: database of
fuzzy complexes, a tool to develop stochastic structure-function
relationships for protein complexes and higher-order assemblies.
Nucleic Acids Res 45:D228–S235
3112
S. Longhi et al.
123

49. Habchi J, Tompa P, Longhi S, Uversky VN (2014) Introducing
protein intrinsic disorder. Chem Rev 114:6561–6588
50. Habchi J, Mamelli L, Darbon H, Longhi S (2010) Structural
disorder within Henipavirus nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein:
from
predictions
to
experimental
assessment.
PLoS
One
5:e11684
51. Karlin D, Ferron F, Canard B, Longhi S (2003) Structural dis-
order and modular organization in Paramyxovirinae N and P.
J Gen Virol 84:3239–3252
52. Lieutaud P, Canard B, Longhi S (2008) MeDor: a metaserver for
predicting protein disorder. BMC Genom 9:S25
53. Garner E, Romero P, Dunker AK, Brown C, Obradovic Z (1999)
Predicting binding regions within disordered proteins. Genome
Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform 10:41–50
54. Oldﬁeld CJ, Cheng Y, Cortese MS, Romero P, Uversky VN,
Dunker AK (2005) Coupled folding and binding with alpha-
helix-forming molecular recognition elements. Biochemistry
44:12454–12470
55. Mohan A, Oldﬁeld CJ, Radivojac P, Vacic V, Cortese MS,
Dunker AK, Uversky VN (2006) Analysis of molecular recog-
nition features (MoRFs). J Mol Biol 362:1043–1059
56. Vacic V, Oldﬁeld CJ, Mohan A, Radivojac P, Cortese MS,
Uversky VN, Dunker AK (2007) Characterization of molecular
recognition features, MoRFs, and their binding partners. J Pro-
teome Res 6:2351–2366
57. Yabukarski F, Lawrence P, Tarbouriech N, Bourhis JM, Dela-
forge E, Jensen MR, Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M, Volchkov V,
Jamin M (2014) Structure of Nipah virus unassembled nucleo-
protein in complex with its viral chaperone. Nat Struct Mol Biol
21:754–759
58. Guryanov SG, Liljeroos L, Kasaragod P, Kajander T, Butcher SJ
(2016) Crystal structure of the measles virus nucleoprotein core
in complex with an N-terminal region of phosphoprotein. J Virol
90:2849–2857
59. Karlin D, Belshaw R (2012) Detecting remote sequence
homology in disordered proteins: discovery of conserved motifs
in the N-termini of Mononegavirales phosphoproteins. PLoS
One 7:e31719
60. Galloux M, Gabiane G, Sourimant J, Richard CA, England P,
Moudjou M, Aumont-Nicaise M, Fix J, Rameix-Welti MA,
Eleouet JF (2015) Identiﬁcation and characterization of the
binding site of the respiratory syncytial virus phosphoprotein to
RNA-free nucleoprotein. J Virol 89:3484–3496
61. Renner M, Bertinelli M, Leyrat C, Paesen GC, Saraiva de Oli-
veira LF, Huiskonen JT, Grimes JM (2016) Nucleocapsid
assembly in pneumoviruses is regulated by conformational
switching of the N protein. Elife 5:e12627
62. Leyrat C, Jensen MR, Ribeiro EA Jr, Gerard FC, Ruigrok RW,
Blackledge M, Jamin M (2011) The N(0)-binding region of the
vesicular stomatitis virus phosphoprotein is globally disordered
but contains transient alpha-helices. Protein Sci 20:542–556
63. Leung DW, Borek D, Luthra P, Binning JM, Anantpadma M,
Liu G, Harvey IB, Su Z, Endlich-Frazier A, Pan J, Shabman RS,
Chiu W, Davey RA, Otwinowski Z, Basler CF, Amarasinghe
GK (2015) An intrinsically disordered peptide from Ebola virus
VP35 controls viral RNA synthesis by modulating nucleopro-
tein–RNA interactions. Cell Rep 11:376–389
64. Leyrat C, Yabukarski F, Tarbouriech N, Ribeiro EA Jr, Jensen
MR, Blackledge M, Ruigrok RW, Jamin M (2011) Structure of
the vesicular stomatitis virus N(0)–P complex. PLoS Pathog
7:e1002248
65. Pereira N, Cardone C, Lassoued S, Galloux M, Fix J, Assrir N,
Lescop E, Bontems F, Eleouet JF, Sizun C (2017) New insights
into structural disorder in human respiratory syncytial virus
phosphoprotein and implications for binding of protein partners.
J Biol Chem 292:2120–2131
66. Sweetman DA, Miskin J, Baron MD (2001) Rinderpest virus C
and V proteins interact with the major (L) component of the
viral polymerase. Virology 281:193–204
67. Ding B, Zhang G, Yang X, Zhang S, Chen L, Yan Q, Xu M,
Banerjee AK, Chen M (2014) Phosphoprotein of human
parainﬂuenza virus type 3 blocks autophagosome–lysosome
fusion
to
increase
virus
production.
Cell
Host
Microbe
15:564–577
68. Castel G, Chteoui M, Caignard G, Prehaud C, Mehouas S, Real
E, Jallet C, Jacob Y, Ruigrok RW, Tordo N (2009) Peptides that
mimic the amino-terminal end of the rabies virus phosphopro-
tein have antiviral activity. J Virol 83:10808–10820
69. Rahmeh AA, Morin B, Schenk AD, Liang B, Heinrich BS,
Brusic V, Walz T, Whelan SP (2012) Critical phosphoprotein
elements that regulate polymerase architecture and function in
vesicular
stomatitis
virus.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
109:14628–14633
70. Yabukarski F, Leyrat C, Martinez N, Communie G, Ivanov I,
Ribeiro EA Jr, Buisson M, Gerard FC, Bourhis JM, Jensen MR,
Bernado P, Blackledge M, Jamin M (2016) Ensemble structure
of the highly ﬂexible complex formed between vesicular stom-
atitis virus unassembled nucleoprotein and its phosphoprotein
chaperone. J Mol Biol 428:2671–2694
71. Jamin M, Yabukarski F (2017) Nonsegmented negative-sense
RNA viruses-structural data bring new insights into nucleocap-
sid assembly. Adv Virus Res 97:143–185
72. Ding H, Green TJ, Lu S, Luo M (2006) Crystal structure of the
oligomerization domain of the phosphoprotein of vesicular
stomatitis virus. J Virol 80:2808–2814
73. Ivanov I, Crepin T, Jamin M, Ruigrok RW (2010) Structure of
the dimerization domain of the rabies virus phosphoprotein.
J Virol 84:3707–3710
74. Uversky VN (2002) Natively unfolded proteins: a point where
biology waits for physics. Protein Sci 11:739–756
75. Dunker AK, Lawson JD, Brown CJ, Williams RM, Romero P,
Oh JS, Oldﬁeld CJ, Campen AM, Ratliff CM, Hipps KW, Ausio
J, Nissen MS, Reeves R, Kang C, Kissinger CR, Bailey RW,
Griswold MD, Chiu W, Garner EC, Obradovic Z (2001)
Intrinsically disordered protein. J Mol Graph Model 19:26–59
76. Fuentes SM, Sun D, Schmitt AP, He B (2010) Phosphorylation
of paramyxovirus phosphoprotein and its role in viral gene
expression. Future Microbiol 5:9–13
77. Gerard FC, RibeiroEde A Jr, Leyrat C, Ivanov I, Blondel D,
Longhi S, Ruigrok RW, Jamin M (2009) Modular organization
of rabies virus phosphoprotein. J Mol Biol 388:978–996
78. Leyrat C, Gerard FC, de Almeida Ribeiro E, Jr Ivanov I, Rui-
grok RW, Jamin M (2010) Structural disorder in proteins of the
rhabdoviridae
replication
complex.
Protein
Pept
Lett
17:979–987
79. Iakoucheva LM, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, O’Connor TR, Sikes
JG, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK (2004) The importance of intrinsic
disorder
for
protein
phosphorylation.
Nucleic
Acids
Res
32:1037–1049
80. Bourhis J, Johansson K, Receveur-Bre´chot V, Oldﬁeld CJ,
Dunker AK, Canard B, Longhi S (2004) The C-terminal domain
of measles virus nucleoprotein belongs to the class of intrinsi-
cally disordered proteins that fold upon binding to their
physiological partner. Virus Res 99:157–167
81. Houben K, Marion D, Tarbouriech N, Ruigrok RW, Blanchard L
(2007) Interaction of the C-terminal domains of Sendai virus N
and P proteins: comparison of polymerase-nucleocapsid inter-
actions within the paramyxovirus family. J Virol 81:6807–6816
82. Johansson K, Bourhis JM, Campanacci V, Cambillau C, Canard
B, Longhi S (2003) Crystal structure of the measles virus
phosphoprotein domain responsible for the induced folding of
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3113
123

the C-terminal domain of the nucleoprotein. J Biol Chem
278:44567–44573
83. Kingston RL, Hamel DJ, Gay LS, Dahlquist FW, Matthews BW
(2004) Structural basis for the attachment of a paramyxoviral
polymerase
to
its
template.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
101:8301–8306
84. Kingston RL, Walter AB, Gay LS (2004) Characterization of
nucleocapsid binding by the measles and the mumps virus
phosphoprotein. J Virol 78:8630–8640
85. Bernado P, Blanchard L, Timmins P, Marion D, Ruigrok RW,
Blackledge M (2005) A structural model for unfolded proteins
from residual dipolar couplings and small-angle X-ray scatter-
ing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:17002–17007
86. Blanchard L, Tarbouriech N, Blackledge M, Timmins P,
Burmeister WP, Ruigrok RW, Marion D (2004) Structure and
dynamics of the nucleocapsid-binding domain of the Sendai
virus phosphoprotein in solution. Virology 319:201–211
87. Houben K, Blanchard L, Blackledge M, Marion D (2007)
Intrinsic dynamics of the partly unstructured PX domain from
the Sendai virus RNA polymerase cofactor P. Biophys J
93:2830–2844
88. Communie G, Crepin T, Maurin D, Jensen MR, Blackledge M,
Ruigrok RW (2013) Structure of the tetramerization domain of
measles virus phosphoprotein. J Virol 87:7166–7169
89. Tarbouriech N, Curran J, Ruigrok RW, Burmeister WP (2000)
Tetrameric coiled coil domain of Sendai virus phosphoprotein.
Nat Struct Biol 7:777–781
90. Gely S, Lowry DF, Bernard C, Ringkjobing-Jensen M, Black-
ledge M, Costanzo S, Darbon H, Daughdrill GW, Longhi S
(2010) Solution structure of the C-terminal X domain of the
measles virus phosphoprotein and interaction with the intrinsi-
cally disordered C-terminal domain of the nucleoprotein. J Mol
Recognit 23:435–447
91. Communie G, Habchi J, Yabukarski F, Blocquel D, Schneider
R, Tarbouriech N, Papageorgiou N, Ruigrok RW, Jamin M,
Ringkjøbing-Jensen M, Longhi S, Blackledge M (2013) Atomic
resolution description of the interaction between the nucleo-
protein and phosphoprotein of Hendra virus. PLoS Pathog
9:e1003631
92. Habchi J, Blangy S, Mamelli L, Ringkjobing Jensen M,
Blackledge M, Darbon H, Oglesbee M, Shu Y, Longhi S (2011)
Characterization of the interactions between the nucleoprotein
and
the
phosphoprotein
of
Henipaviruses.
J
Biol
Chem
286:13583–13602
93. Kingston RL, Gay LS, Baase WS, Matthews BW (2008)
Structure of the nucleocapsid-binding domain from the mumps
virus polymerase; an example of protein folding induced by
crystallization. J Mol Biol 379:719–731
94. Bloyet L, Brunel J, Dosnon M, Hamon V, Erales J, Gruet A,
Lazert C, Bignon C, Roche P, Longhi S, Gerlier D (2016)
Modulation of re-initiation of measles virus transcription at
intergenic regions by PXD to NTAIL binding strength. PLoS
Pathog 12:e1006058
95. Krumm SA, Takeda M, Plemper RK (2013) The measles virus
nucleocapsid protein tail domain is dispensable for viral poly-
merase recruitment and activity. J Biol Chem 288:29943–29953
96. Llorente MT, Barreno-Garcia B, Calero M, Camafeita E, Lopez
JA, Longhi S, Ferron F, Varela PF, Melero JA (2006) Structural
analysis of the human respiratory syncitial virus phosphoprotein:
characterization of an a-helical domain involved in oligomer-
ization. J Gen Virol 87:159–169
97. Tran TL, Castagne N, Bhella D, Varela PF, Bernard J, Chil-
monczyk S, Berkenkamp S, Benhamo V, Grznarova K,
Grosclaude J, Nespoulos C, Rey FA, Eleouet JF (2007) The nine
C-terminal amino acids of the respiratory syncytial virus protein
P are necessary and sufﬁcient for binding to ribonucleoprotein
complexes in which six ribonucleotides are contacted per N
protein protomer. J Gen Virol 88:196–206
98. Yegambaram K, Bulloch EM, Kingston RL (2013) Protein
domain deﬁnition should allow for conditional disorder. Protein
Sci 22:1502–1518
99. D’Urzo A, Konijnenberg A, Rossetti G, Habchi J, Li J, Carloni
P, Sobott F, Longhi S, Grandori R (2015) Molecular basis for
structural heterogeneity of an intrinsically disordered protein
bound to a partner by combined ESI-IM-MS and modeling.
J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 26:472–481
100. Bonetti D, Camilloni C, Visconti L, Longhi S, Brunori M,
Vendruscolo M, Gianni S (2016) Identiﬁcation and structural
characterization of an intermediate in the folding of the measles
virus X domain. J Biol Chem 291:10886–10892
101. Rahaman A, Srinivasan N, Shamala N, Shaila MS (2004)
Phosphoprotein of the rinderpest virus forms a tetramer through
a coiled coil region important for biological function. A struc-
tural insight. J Biol Chem 279:23606–23614
102. Blocquel D, Habchi J, Durand E, Sevajol M, Ferron F, Erales J,
Papageorgiou N, Longhi S (2014) Coiled-coil deformations in
crystal structures: the measles virus phosphoprotein multimer-
ization domain as an illustrative example. Acta Crystallogr D
70:1589–1603
103. Cox R, Green TJ, Purushotham S, Deivanayagam C, Bedwell
GJ, Prevelige PE, Luo M (2013) Structural and functional
characterization of the mumps virus phosphoprotein. J Virol
87:7558–7568
104. Bruhn-Johannsen JF, Barnett K, Bibby J, Thomas J, Keegan R,
Rigden D, Bornholdt ZA, Saphire EO (2014) Crystal structure of
the Nipah virus phosphoprotein tetramerization domain. J Virol
88:758–762
105. Leyrat C, Renner M, Harlos K, Grimes JM (2013) Solution and
crystallographic structures of the central region of the phos-
phoprotein from human metapneumovirus. PLoS One 8:e80371
106. Castagne N, Barbier A, Bernard J, Rezaei H, Huet JC, Henry C,
Da Costa B, Eleouet JF (2004) Biochemical characterization of
the respiratory syncytial virus P–P and P–N protein complexes
and localization of the P protein oligomerization domain. J Gen
Virol 85:1643–1653
107. Kolakofsky D, Le Mercier P, Iseni F, Garcin D (2004) Viral
DNA polymerase scanning and the gymnastics of Sendai virus
RNA synthesis. Virology 318:463–473
108. Llorente MT, Taylor IA, Lopez-Vinas E, Gomez-Puertas P,
Calder LJ, Garcia-Barreno B, Melero JA (2008) Structural
properties of the human respiratory syncytial virus P protein:
evidence for an elongated homotetrameric molecule that is the
smallest orthologue within the family of paramyxovirus poly-
merase cofactors. Proteins 72:946–958
109. Luthra P, Jordan DS, Leung DW, Amarasinghe GK, Basler CF
(2015) Ebola virus VP35 interaction with dynein LC8 regulates
viral RNA synthesis. J Virol 89:5148–5153
110. Beltrandi M, Blocquel D, Erales J, Barbier P, Cavalli A, Longhi
S (2015) Insights into the coiled-coil organization of the Hendra
virus phosphoprotein from combined biochemical and SAXS
studies. Virology 477:42–55
111. Blocquel D, Beltrandi M, Erales J, Barbier P, Longhi S (2013)
Biochemical and structural studies of the oligomerization
domain of the Nipah virus phosphoprotein: evidence for an
elongated coiled-coil homotrimer. Virology 446:162–172
112. Salvamani S, Goh Z, Ho K, Tey B, Tan W (2013) Oligomer-
ization state of the multimerization domain of Nipah virus
phosphoprotein. Process Biochem 48:1476–1480
113. Dutta K, Alexandrov A, Huang H, Pascal SM (2001) pH-in-
duced
folding
of
an
apoptotic
coiled
coil.
Protein
Sci
10:2531–2540
3114
S. Longhi et al.
123

114. Lupas AN, Gruber M (2005) The structure of alpha-helical
coiled coils. Adv Protein Chem 70:37–78
115. Oshaben KM, Salari R, McCaslin DR, Chong LT, Horne WS
(2012) The native GCN4 leucine-zipper domain does not
uniquely specify a dimeric oligomerization state. Biochemistry
51:9581–9591
116. Curran J (1998) A role for the Sendai virus P protein trimer in
RNA synthesis. J Virol 72:4274–4280
117. Curran J, Boeck R, Lin-Marq N, Lupas A, Kolakofsky D (1995)
Paramyxovirus phosphoproteins form homotrimers as deter-
mined by an epitope dilution assay, via predicted coiled coils.
Virology 214:139–149
118. Bruhn JF, Kirchdoerfer RN, Urata SM, Li S, Tickle IJ, Bricogne
G, Saphire EO (2017) Crystal structure of the Marburg virus
VP35 oligomerization domain. J Virol 91. doi:10.1128/JVI.
01085-16
119. Asenjo A, Mendieta J, Gomez-Puertas P, Villanueva N (2008)
Residues in human respiratory syncytial virus P protein that are
essential for its activity on RNA viral synthesis. Virus Res
132:160–173
120. Chen M, Ogino T, Banerjee AK (2006) Mapping and functional
role of the self-association domain of vesicular stomatitis virus
phosphoprotein. J Virol 80:9511–9518
121. Choudhary SK, Malur AG, Huo Y, De BP, Banerjee AK (2002)
Characterization of the oligomerization domain of the phos-
phoprotein of human parainﬂuenza virus type 3. Virology
302:373–382
122. Jacob Y, Real E, Tordo N (2001) Functional interaction map of
lyssavirus phosphoprotein: identiﬁcation of the minimal tran-
scription domains. J Virol 75:9613–9622
123. Warnes A, Fooks AR, Dowsett AB, Wilkinson GW, Stephenson
JR (1995) Expression of the measles virus nucleoprotein gene in
Escherichia coli and assembly of nucleocapsid-like structures.
Gene 160:173–178
124. Bhella D, Ralph A, Yeo RP (2004) Conformational ﬂexibility in
recombinant measles virus nucleocapsids visualised by cryo-
negative stain electron microscopy and real-space helical
reconstruction. J Mol Biol 340:319–331
125. Milles S, Jensen MR, Communie G, Maurin D, Schoehn G,
Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M (2016) Self-assembly of measles
virus nucleocapsid-like particles: kinetics and RNA sequence
dependence. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 55:9356–9360
126. Jensen MR, Bernado P, Houben K, Blanchard L, Marion D,
Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M (2010) Structural disorder within
Sendai virus nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein: insight into the
structural basis of molecular recognition. Protein Pept Lett
17:952–960
127. Erales J, Blocquel D, Habchi J, Beltrandi M, Gruet A, Dosnon
M, Bignon C, Longhi S (2015) Order and disorder in the
replicative complex of Paramyxoviruses. Adv Exp Med Biol
870:351–381
128. Heggeness MH, Scheid A, Choppin PW (1980) Conformation of
the helical nucleocapsids of paramyxoviruses and vesicular
stomatitis virus: reversible coiling and uncoiling induced by
changes in salt concentration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
77:2631–2635
129. Heggeness MH, Scheid A, Choppin PW (1981) The relationship
of conformational changes in the Sendai virus nucleocapsid to
proteolytic
cleavage
of
the
NP
polypeptide.
Virology
114:555–562
130. Ringkjøbing Jensen M, Communie G, Ribeiro ED Jr, Martinez
N, Desfosses A, Salmon L, Mollica L, Gabel F, Jamin M,
Longhi S, Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M (2011) Intrinsic disorder
in measles virus nucleocapsids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
108:9839–9844
131. Bankamp B, Horikami SM, Thompson PD, Huber M, Billeter
M, Moyer SA (1996) Domains of the measles virus N protein
required for binding to P protein and self-assembly. Virology
216:272–277
132. Liston P, Batal R, DiFlumeri C, Briedis DJ (1997) Protein
interaction domains of the measles virus nucleocapsid protein
(NP). Adv Virol 142:305–321
133. Alayyoubi M, Leser GP, Kors CA, Lamb RA (2015) Structure of
the paramyxovirus parainﬂuenza virus 5 nucleoprotein–RNA
complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:E1792–E1799
134. Tawar RG, Duquerroy S, Vonrhein C, Varela PF, Damier-Piolle
L, Castagne´ N, MacLellan K, Bedouelle H, Bricogne G, Bhella
D, Eleouet JF, Rey FA (2009) 3D structure of a nucleocapsid-
like nucleoprotein–RNA complex of respiratory syncytial virus.
Science 326:1279–1283
135. Severin C, Terrell JR, Zengel JR, Cox R, Plemper RK, He B,
Luo M (2016) Releasing the genomic RNA sequestered in the
mumps virus nucleocapsid. J Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.01422-16
136. Barbet-Massin E, Felletti M, Schneider R, Jehle S, Communie
G, Martinez N, Jensen MR, Ruigrok RW, Emsley L, Lesage A,
Blackledge M, Pintacuda G (2014) Insights into the structure
and dynamics of measles virus nucleocapsids by 1H-detected
solid-state NMR. Biophys J 107:941–946
137. Noton SL, Fearns R (2015) Initiation and regulation of
paramyxovirus
transcription
and
replication.
Virology
479–480:545–554
138. Cox R, Pickar A, Qiu S, Tsao J, Rodenburg C, Dokland T, Elson
A, He B, Luo M (2014) Structural studies on the authentic
mumps virus nucleocapsid showing uncoiling by the phospho-
protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:15208–15213
139. Wang Y, Chu X, Longhi S, Roche P, Han W, Wang E, Wang J
(2013) Multiscaled exploration of coupled folding and binding
of an intrinsically disordered molecular recognition element in
measles
virus
nucleoprotein.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
110:E3743–E3752
140. Morin B, Bourhis JM, Belle V, Woudstra M, Carrie`re F, Gui-
gliarelli B, Fournel A, Longhi S (2006) Assessing induced
folding of an intrinsically disordered protein by site-directed
spin-labeling
EPR
spectroscopy.
J
Phys
Chem
B
110:20596–20608
141. Belle V, Rouger S, Costanzo S, Liquiere E, Strancar J, Gui-
gliarelli B, Fournel A, Longhi S (2008) Mapping alpha-helical
induced folding within the intrinsically disordered C-terminal
domain of the measles virus nucleoprotein by site-directed spin-
labeling EPR spectroscopy. Proteins Struct Funct Bioinform
73:973–988
142. Jensen MR, Houben K, Lescop E, Blanchard L, Ruigrok RW,
Blackledge M (2008) Quantitative conformational analysis of
partially folded proteins from residual dipolar couplings:
application to the molecular recognition element of Sendai virus
nucleoprotein. J Am Chem Soc 130:8055–8061
143. Serrano L, Fersht AR (1989) Capping and alpha-helix stability.
Nature 342:296–299
144. Blocquel D, Habchi J, Gruet A, Blangy S, Longhi S (2012)
Compaction and binding properties of the intrinsically disor-
dered C-terminal domain of Henipavirus nucleoprotein as
unveiled by deletion studies. Mol BioSyst 8:392–410
145. Hazy E, Tompa P (2009) Limitations of induced folding in
molecular recognition by intrinsically disordered proteins.
ChemPhysChem 10:1415–1419
146. Martinho M, Habchi J, El Habre Z, Nesme L, Guigliarelli B,
Belle V, Longhi S (2013) Assessing induced folding within the
intrinsically disordered C-terminal domain of the Henipavirus
nucleoproteins by site directed spin labeling EPR spectroscopy.
J Biomol Struct Dyn 31:453–471
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3115
123

147. Baronti L, Erales J, Habchi J, Felli IC, Pierattelli R, Longhi S
(2015) Dynamics of the intrinsically disordered C-terminal
domain of the Nipah virus nucleoprotein and interaction with the
X domain of the phosphoprotein as unveiled by NMR spec-
troscopy. ChemBioChem 16:268–276
148. Dosnon M, Bonetti D, Morrone A, Erales J, di Silvio E, Longhi
S, Gianni S (2015) Demonstration of a folding after binding
mechanism in the recognition between the measles virus NTAIL
and X domains. ACS Chem Biol 10:795–802
149. Bourhis JM, Receveur-Bre´chot V, Oglesbee M, Zhang X,
Buccellato M, Darbon H, Canard B, Finet S, Longhi S (2005)
The intrinsically disordered C-terminal domain of the measles
virus nucleoprotein interacts with the C-terminal domain of the
phosphoprotein via two distinct sites and remains predominantly
unfolded. Protein Sci 14:1975–1992
150. Belle V, Rouger S, Costanzo S, Longhi S, Fournel A (2010)
Site-directed spin labeling EPR spectroscopy. In: Uversky VN,
Longhi S (eds) Instrumental analysis of intrinsically disordered
proteins: assessing structure and conformation. Wiley, Hoboken
151. Erales J, Beltrandi M, Roche J, Mate´ M, Longhi S (2015)
Insights into the Hendra virus NTAIL-XD complex: evidence
for a parallel organization of the helical MoRE at the XD surface
stabilized by a combination of hydrophobic and polar interac-
tions. Biochim Biopys Acta 1854:1038–1053
152. Schreiber G, Haran G, Zhou HX (2009) Fundamental aspects of
protein–protein association kinetics. Chem Rev 109:839–860
153. Xue Y, Yuwen T, Zhu F, Skrynnikov NR (2014) Role of elec-
trostatic interactions in binding of peptides and intrinsically
disordered proteins to their folded targets. 1. NMR and MD
characterization of the complex between the c-Crk N-SH3
domain and the peptide Sos. Biochemistry 53:6473–6495
154. Meszaros B, Tompa P, Simon I, Dosztanyi Z (2007) Molecular
principles of the interactions of disordered proteins. J Mol Biol
372:549–561
155. Tsai CD, Ma B, Kumar S, Wolfson H, Nussinov R (2001)
Protein folding: binding of conformationally ﬂuctuating building
blocks via population selection. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol
36:399–433
156. Tsai CJ, Ma B, Sham YY, Kumar S, Nussinov R (2001)
Structured disorder and conformational selection. Proteins
Struct Funct Bioinform 44:418–427
157. Shoemaker BA, Portman JJ, Wolynes PG (2000) Speeding
molecular recognition by using the folding funnel: the ﬂy-cast-
ing mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:8868–8873
158. Gianni S, Dogan J, Jemth P (2014) Distinguishing induced ﬁt
from conformational selection. Biophys Chem 189:33–39
159. Schneider R, Maurin D, Communie G, Kragelj J, Hansen DF,
Ruigrok RW, Jensen MR, Blackledge M (2015) Visualizing the
molecular recognition trajectory of an intrinsically disordered
protein using multinuclear relaxation dispersion NMR. J Am
Chem Soc 137:1220–1229
160. Fuxreiter M, Tompa P (2009) Fuzzy interactome: the limitations
of models in molecular biology. Trends Biochem Sci 34:3
161. Fuxreiter M (2012) Fuzziness: linking regulation to protein
dynamics. Mol BioSyst 8:168–177
162. Longhi S (2012) The measles virus N(TAIL)-XD complex: an
illustrative
example
of
fuzziness.
Adv
Exp
Med
Biol
725:126–141
163. Kavalenka A, Urbancic I, Belle V, Rouger S, Costanzo S, Kure
S, Fournel A, Longhi S, Guigliarelli B, Strancar J (2010) Con-
formational analysis of the partially disordered measles virus
NTAIL-XD complex by SDSL EPR spectroscopy. Biophys J
98:1055–1064
164. Zhang X, Bourhis JM, Longhi S, Carsillo T, Buccellato M,
Morin B, Canard B, Oglesbee M (2005) Hsp72 recognizes a P
binding motif in the measles virus N protein C-terminus.
Virology 337:162–174
165. Couturier M, Buccellato M, Costanzo S, Bourhis JM, Shu Y,
Nicaise M, Desmadril M, Flaudrops C, Longhi S, Oglesbee M
(2010) High afﬁnity binding between Hsp70 and the C-terminal
domain of the measles virus nucleoprotein requires an Hsp40 co-
chaperone. J Mol Recognit 23:301–315
166. Zhang X, Glendening C, Linke H, Parks CL, Brooks C, Udem
SA, Oglesbee M (2002) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a
regulatory domain on the carboxyl terminus of the measles virus
nucleocapsid protein. J Virol 76:8737–8746
167. Carsillo T, Zhang X, Vasconcelos D, Niewiesk S, Oglesbee M
(2006) A single codon in the nucleocapsid protein C terminus
contributes to in vitro and in vivo ﬁtness of Edmonston measles
virus. J Virol 80:2904–2912
168. Oglesbee M (2007) Nucleocapsid protein interactions with the
major inducible heat shock protein. In: Longhi S (ed) Measles
virus nucleoprotein. Nova Publishers Inc., Hauppage, pp 53–98
169. Carsillo T, Traylor Z, Choi C, Niewiesk S, Oglesbee M (2006)
hsp72, a host determinant of measles virus neurovirulence.
J Virol 80:11031–11039
170. Hagiwara K, Sato H, Inoue Y, Watanabe A, Yoneda M, Ikeda F,
Fujita K, Fukuda H, Takamura C, Kozuka-Hata H, Oyama M,
Sugano S, Ohmi S, Kai C (2008) Phosphorylation of measles
virus nucleoprotein upregulates the transcriptional activity of
minigenomic RNA. Proteomics 8:1871–1879
171. Sugai A, Sato H, Yoneda M, Kai C (2013) Phosphorylation of
measles virus nucleoprotein affects viral growth by changing
gene
expression
and
genomic
RNA
stability.
J
Virol
87:11684–11692
172. Huang M, Sato H, Hagiwara K, Watanabe A, Sugai A, Ikeda F,
Kozuka-Hata H, Oyama M, Yoneda M, Kai C (2011) Deter-
mination of a phosphorylation site in Nipah virus nucleoprotein
and its involvement in virus transcription. J Gen Virol
92:2133–2141
173. Gruet A, Dosnon M, Vassena A, Lombard V, Gerlier D, Bignon
C, Longhi S (2013) Dissecting partner recognition by an
intrinsically disordered protein using descriptive random muta-
genesis. J Mol Biol 425:3495–3509
174. Gruet A, Dosnon M, Blocquel D, Brunel J, Gerlier D, Das RK,
Bonetti D, Gianni S, Fuxreiter M, Longhi S, Bignon C (2016)
Fuzzy regions in an intrinsically disordered protein impair
protein–protein interactions. FEBS J 283:576–594
175. Green TJ, Luo M (2009) Structure of the vesicular stomatitis
virus nucleocapsid in complex with the nucleocapsid-binding
domain of the small polymerase cofactor, P. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 106:11713–11718
176. Oglesbee M, Ringler S, Krakowka S (1990) Interaction of
canine distemper virus nucleocapsid variants with 70K heat-
shock proteins. J Gen Virol 71:1585–1590
177. Oglesbee M, Tatalick L, Rice J, Krakowka S (1989) Isolation
and characterization of canine distemper virus nucleocapsid
variants. J Gen Virol 70(Pt 9):2409–2419
178. Shu Y, Habchi J, Costanzo S, Padilla A, Brunel J, Gerlier D,
Oglesbee M, Longhi S (2012) Plasticity in structural and func-
tional
interactions
between
the
phosphoprotein
and
nucleoprotein of measles virus. J Biol Chem 287:11951–11967
179. Brunel J, Chopy D, Dosnon M, Bloyet LM, Devaux P, Urzua E,
Cattaneo R, Longhi S, Gerlier D (2014) Sequence of events in
measles virus replication: role of phosphoprotein–nucleocapsid
interactions. J Virol 88:10851–10863
180. Huang H, Sarai A (2012) Analysis of the relationships between
evolvability, thermodynamics, and the functions of intrinsically
disordered proteins/regions. Comput Biol Chem 41:51–57
3116
S. Longhi et al.
123

181. Kirchdoerfer RN, Moyer CL, Abelson DM, Saphire EO (2016)
The Ebola virus VP30-NP interaction is a regulator of viral RNA
synthesis. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005937
182. Sebolt-Leopold JS, English JM (2006) Mechanisms of drug
inhibition of signalling molecules. Nature 441:457–462
183. Lagerstrom MC, Schioth HB (2008) Structural diversity of G
protein-coupled receptors and signiﬁcance for drug discovery.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 7:339–357
184. Betzi S, Restouin A, Opi S, Arold ST, Parrot I, Guerlesquin F,
Morelli X, Collette Y (2007) Protein protein interaction inhibi-
tion (2P2I) combining high throughput and virtual screening:
application to the HIV-1 Nef protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
104:19256–19261
185. Cox R, Plemper RK (2015) The paramyxovirus polymerase
complex as a target for next-generation anti-paramyxovirus
therapeutics. Front Microbiol 6:459
186. Cheng Y, Legall T, Oldﬁeld CJ, Mueller JP, Van YY, Romero P,
Cortese MS, Uversky VN, Dunker AK (2006) Rational drug
design via intrinsically disordered protein. Trends Biotechnol
24:435–442
187. Uversky VN (2010) Targeting intrinsically disordered proteins
in neurodegenerative and protein dysfunction diseases: another
illustration of the D(2) concept. Expert Rev Proteomics
7:543–564
188. Dunker AK, Uversky VN (2010) Drugs for ‘protein clouds’:
targeting intrinsically disordered transcription factors. Curr Opin
Pharmacol 10:782–788
189. Uversky VN (2012) Intrinsic disorder-based protein interactions
and their modulators. Curr Pharm, Des
190. Uversky VN (2012) Intrinsically disordered proteins and novel
strategies for drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov
7:475–488
191. Marasco D, Scognamiglio PL (2015) Identiﬁcation of inhibitors
of biological interactions involving intrinsically disordered
proteins. Int J Mol Sci 16:7394–7412
192. Joshi P, Vendruscolo M (2015) Druggability of intrinsically
disordered proteins. Adv Exp Med Biol 870:383–400
193. Lo Conte L, Chothia C, Janin J (1999) The atomic structure of
protein–protein recognition sites. J Mol Biol 285:2177–2198
194. Gunasekaran K, Tsai CJ, Nussinov R (2004) Analysis of ordered
and disordered protein complexes reveals structural features
discriminating between stable and unstable monomers. J Mol
Biol 341:1327–1341
195. Klein C, Vassilev LT (2004) Targeting the p53-MDM2 inter-
action to treat cancer. Br J Cancer 91:1415–1419
196. Vassilev LT (2004) Small-molecule antagonists of p53-MDM2
binding: research tools and potential therapeutics. Cell Cycle
3:419–421
197. Vassilev LT, Vu BT, Graves B, Carvajal D, Podlaski F, Fili-
povic Z, Kong N, Kammlott U, Lukacs C, Klein C, Fotouhi N,
Liu EA (2004) In vivo activation of the p53 pathway by small-
molecule antagonists of MDM2. Science 303:844–848
198. Krishnan N, Koveal D, Miller DH, Xue B, Akshinthala SD,
Kragelj J, Jensen MR, Gauss CM, Page R, Blackledge M,
Muthuswamy SK, Peti W, Tonks NK (2014) Targeting the
disordered C terminus of PTP1B with an allosteric inhibitor. Nat
Chem Biol 10:558–566
199. Monaghan AE, McEwan IJ (2016) A sting in the tail: the
N-terminal domain of the androgen receptor as a drug target.
Asian J Androl 18:687–694
200. Dey S, Pal A, Chakrabarti P, Janin J (2010) The subunit inter-
faces of weakly associated homodimeric proteins. J Mol Biol
398:146–160
201. Bourgeas R, Basse MJ, Morelli X, Roche P (2010) Atomic
analysis of protein–protein interfaces with known inhibitors: the
2P2I database. PLoS One 5:e9598
202. Dunker AK, Cortese MS, Romero P, Iakoucheva LM, Uversky
VN (2005) Flexible nets. FEBS J 272:5129–5148
203. Uversky VN, Oldﬁeld CJ, Dunker AK (2005) Showing your ID:
intrinsic disorder as an ID for recognition, regulation and cell
signaling. J Mol Recognit 18:343–384
204. Haynes C, Oldﬁeld CJ, Ji F, Klitgord N, Cusick ME, Radivojac
P, Uversky VN, Vidal M, Iakoucheva LM (2006) Intrinsic dis-
order is a common feature of hub proteins from four eukaryotic
interactomes. PLoS Comput Biol 2:e100
205. Sato H, Masuda M, Miura R, Yoneda M, Kai C (2006) Mor-
billivirus nucleoprotein possesses a novel nuclear localization
signal and a CRM1-independent nuclear export signal. Virology
352:121–130
206. Iwasaki M, Takeda M, Shirogane Y, Nakatsu Y, Nakamura T,
Yanagi Y (2009) The matrix protein of measles virus regulates
viral RNA synthesis and assembly by interacting with the
nucleocapsid protein. J Virol 83:10374–10383
207. Watanabe A, Yoneda M, Ikeda F, Sugai A, Sato H, Kai C (2011)
Peroxiredoxin 1 is required for efﬁcient transcription and
replication of measles virus. J Virol 85:2247–2253
208. De BP, Banerjee AK (1999) Involvement of actin microﬁla-
ments in the transcription/replication of human parainﬂuenza
virus type 3: possible role of actin in other viruses. Microsc Res
Tech 47:114–123
209. Moyer SA, Baker SC, Horikami SM (1990) Host cell proteins
required for measles virus reproduction. J Gen Virol 71:775–783
210. tenOever BR, Servant MJ, Grandvaux N, Lin R, Hiscott J (2002)
Recognition of the measles virus nucleocapsid as a mechanism
of IRF-3 activation. J Virol 76:3659–3669
211. Colombo M, Bourhis JM, Chamontin C, Soriano C, Villet S,
Costanzo S, Couturier M, Belle V, Fournel A, Darbon H, Gerlier
D, Longhi S (2009) The interaction between the measles virus
nucleoprotein and the Interferon Regulator Factor 3 relies on a
speciﬁc cellular environment. Virol J 6:59
212. Laine D, Bourhis J, Longhi S, Flacher M, Cassard L, Canard B,
Saute`s-Fridman C, Rabourdin-Combe C, Valentin H (2005)
Measles virus nucleoprotein induces cell proliferation arrest and
apoptosis through NTAIL/NR and NCORE/FcgRIIB1 interac-
tions, respectively. J Gen Virol 86:1771–1784
213. Laine D, Trescol-Bie´mont M, Longhi S, Libeau G, Marie J,
Vidalain P, Azocar O, Diallo A, Canard B, Rabourdin-Combe C,
Valentin H (2003) Measles virus nucleoprotein binds to a novel
cell surface receptor distinct from FcgRII via its C-terminal
domain: role in MV-induced immunosuppression. J Virol
77:11332–11346
214. Chen M, Cortay JC, Gerlier D (2003) Measles virus protein
interactions in yeast: new ﬁndings and caveats. Virus Res
98:123–129
215. Devaux P, Priniski L, Cattaneo R (2013) The measles virus
phosphoprotein interacts with the linker domain of STAT1.
Virology 444:250–256
216. Curran J, Marq JB, Kolakofsky D (1995) An N-terminal domain
of the Sendai paramyxovirus P protein acts as a chaperone for
the NP protein during the nascent chain assembly step of gen-
ome replication. J Virol 69:849–855
217. Tapparel C, Maurice D, Roux L (1998) The activity of Sendai
virus genomic and antigenomic promoters requires a second
element past the leader template regions: a motif (GNNNNN)3
is essential for replication. J Virol 72:3117–3128
218. Dunker AK, Garner E, Guilliot S, Romero P, Albrecht K, Hart J,
Obradovic Z, Kissinger C, Villafranca JE (1998) Protein disor-
der
and
the
evolution
of
molecular
recognition:
theory,
predictions and observations. Pac Symp Biocomput 3:473–484
219. Wright PE, Dyson HJ (1999) Intrinsically unstructured proteins:
re-assessing the protein structure-function paradigm. J Mol Biol
293:321–331
How order and disorder within paramyxoviral nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate…
3117
123

220. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z (2001) The protein trinity–linking
function and disorder. Nat Biotechnol 19:805–806
221. Dunker AK, Brown CJ, Obradovic Z (2002) Identiﬁcation and
functions of usefully disordered proteins. Adv Protein Chem
62:25–49
222. Uversky VN, Li J, Souillac P, Jakes R, Goedert M, Fink AL
(2002) Biophysical properties of the synucleins and their
propensities to ﬁbrillate: inhibition of alpha-synuclein assembly
by beta- and gamma- synucleins. J Biol Chem 25:25
223. Gunasekaran K, Tsai CJ, Kumar S, Zanuy D, Nussinov R (2003)
Extended disordered proteins: targeting function with less
scaffold. Trends Biochem Sci 28:81–85
224. Fink AL (2005) Natively unfolded proteins. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 15:35–41
225. Dyson HJ, Wright PE (2005) Intrinsically unstructured proteins
and their functions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6:197–208
226. Pancsa R, Fuxreiter M (2012) Interactions via intrinsically
disordered
regions:
what
kind
of
motifs?
IUBMB
Life
64:513–520
227. Jordan IK, Sutter BA, McClure MA (2000) Molecular evolution
of the Paramyxoviridae and Rhabdoviridae multiple-protein-
encoding P gene. Mol Biol Evol 17:75–86
228. Narechania A, Terai M, Burk RD (2005) Overlapping reading
frames in closely related human papillomaviruses result in
modular
rates
of
selection
within
E2.
J
Gen
Virol
86:1307–1313
229. Rancurel C, Khosravi M, Dunker KA, Romero PR, Karlin D
(2009) Overlapping genes produce proteins with unusual
sequence properties and offer insight into de novo protein cre-
ation. J Virol 83:10719–10736
230. Kovacs E, Tompa P, Liliom K, Kalmar L (2010) Dual coding in
alternative reading frames correlates with intrinsic protein dis-
order. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:5429–5434
231. Bourhis JM, Canard B, Longhi S (2006) Structural disorder
within the replicative complex of measles virus: functional
implications. Virology 344:94–110
232. Xue B, Blocquel D, Habchi J, Uversky AV, Kurgan L, Uversky
VN, Longhi S (2014) Structural disorder in viral proteins. Chem
Rev 114:6880–6911
233. Tokuriki N, Oldﬁeld CJ, Uversky VN, Berezovsky IN, Tawﬁk
DS (2009) Do viral proteins possess unique biophysical fea-
tures? Trends Biochem Sci 34:53–59
234. Xue B, Williams RW, Oldﬁeld CJ, Goh GK, Dunker AK,
Uversky VN (2010) Viral disorder or disordered viruses: do
viral proteins possess unique features? Protein Pept Lett
17:932–951
235. Afonso CL, Amarasinghe GK, Banyai K, Bao Y, Basler CF,
Bavari S, Bejerman N, Blasdell KR, Briand FX, Briese T,
Bukreyev A, Calisher CH, Chandran K, Cheng J, Clawson AN,
Collins PL, Dietzgen RG, Dolnik O, Domier LL, Durrwald R,
Dye JM, Easton AJ, Ebihara H, Farkas SL, Freitas-Astua J,
Formenty P, Fouchier RA, Fu Y, Ghedin E, Goodin MM,
Hewson R, Horie M, Hyndman TH, Jiang D, Kitajima EW,
Kobinger GP, Kondo H, Kurath G, Lamb RA, Lenardon S,
Leroy EM, Li CX, Lin XD, Liu L, Longdon B, Marton S,
Maisner A, Muhlberger E, Netesov SV, Nowotny N, Patterson
JL, Payne SL, Paweska JT, Randall RE, Rima BK, Rota P,
Rubbenstroth D, Schwemmle M, Shi M, Smither SJ, Stenglein
MD, Stone DM, Takada A, Terregino C, Tesh RB, Tian JH,
Tomonaga K, Tordo N, Towner JS, Vasilakis N, Verbeek M,
Volchkov VE, Wahl-Jensen V, Walsh JA, Walker PJ, Wang D,
Wang LF, Wetzel T, Whitﬁeld AE, Xie JT, Yuen KY, Zhang
YZ, Kuhn JH (2016) Taxonomy of the order Mononegavirales:
update 2016. Adv Virol 161:2351–2360
236. DeLano WL (2002) The PyMOL molecular graphics system.
Proteins Struct Funct Bioinform 30:442–454
3118
S. Longhi et al.
123

