J. Geom. 108 (2017), 319–354
c⃝2016 Springer International Publishing
0047-2468/17/010319-36
published online July 19, 2016
DOI 10.1007/s00022-016-0342-2
Journal of Geometry
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling
and its self-similarity
Ruth Maria Katharina Dietl and Jost-Hinrich Eschenburg
To Paul Hildebrandt, Zometool Inc.
Abstract. We investigate a 3-dimensional analogue of the Penrose tiling, a
class of 3-dimensional aperiodic tilings whose edge vectors are the vertex
vectors of a regular icosahedron. It arises by an equivariant orthogonal
projection of the unit lattice in euclidean 6-space with its natural repre-
sentation of the icosahedral group, given by its action on the 6 icosahedral
diagonals (with orientation). The tiling has a canonical subdivision by a
similar tiling (“deﬂation”). We give an essentially local construction of
this subdivision, independent of the actual position inside the tiling. In
particular we show that the subdivisions of the edges, faces and tiles (with
some restriction) are unique.
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 52C23, 51M20, 51M15.
Keywords. Quasicrystals, icosahedron, isozonohedra, deﬂation,
subdivision, locality.
1. Introduction
In 1974 Roger Penrose (see [19]) constructed a class of tilings of the euclidean
plane which are not periodic but quasiperiodic, a concept introduced by Harald
Bohr [2] in 1924. The tilings consist of two congruence types of tiles which are
the two isosceles triangles formed by edges and diagonals of a regular pentagon.
The triangular tiles compose pairwise to two types of rhombs all of whose edges
are parallel to the vertex vectors of a ﬁxed regular pentagon. These tilings
enjoy some kind of self-similarity: the tiles are subdivided uniquely by smaller
tiles with equal shapes, and also these can be subdivided again and again,
always by the same rule. On every stage, the small tiles together form another
Penrose tiling. This process is called “deﬂation”, its inverse process “inﬂation”.
This work was completed with the support of Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. We thank
the referee for several valuable hints and suggestions.

320
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
This property of the tiling follows in an elementary way from the pentagon
geometry [7], and it is a purely local property: the subdivision in each part is
independent from the rest of the tiling. But many (not all, see [9]) of these
tilings can be obtained also globally by a 2-dimensional projection of part of
the 5-dimensional standard grid Z5 ⊂R5. This method has been introduced
ﬁrst by Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn [4], see also [1]. It can be extended to other
dimensions, see Sect. 2.1, and it is a useful tool in order to construct many
other tilings in euclidean 2-plane and 3-space. However, most of these tilings
do not admit a subdivision for which a local construction is possible, see [8].
The physicist Alan Mackay is one of the ﬁrst observing possible applications
of the Penrose tiling in the ﬁeld of solid state physics, see [15,16]. With the
discovery of quasicrystals by Dan Shechtman in 1982 for which he was awarded
with the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 2011, the interest in aperiodic tilings
started growing: neighbouring disciplines such as crystallography, chemistry
or physics considered these tilings as possible models for quasicrystals. In this
context also the question of a 3-dimensional generalization of the Penrose tiling
of the plane arised. Some years earlier, in 1976, Robert Ammann, considering
himself as an “amateur doodler with math background” [20, p.11], has already
proposed such a generalization: two diﬀerent types of rhombohedra can tile the
space only aperiodically if they are marked in a certain way, see [20,21]. These
rhombohedra have been described earlier by Kowalewski [14] in connection
with 6-dimensional geometry; for details see Sect. 4 in our Appendix. In 1984
Peter Kramer and Roberto Neri provided a theoretical approach for such tilings
consisting of Kowalewski’s rhombohedra, see [13]. For this purpose they worked
with the projection from R12 via R6 to R3 and introduced a “Hexagrid” in R3
as an analogue to de Bruijn’s “Pentagrid” in R2. Furthermore they associated
these tilings with the icosahedral group, isomorphic to A5. Since these tilings
have all edges parallel to the vertex vectors of a ﬁxed regular icosahedron,
they will be called icosahedral tilings. Michel Duneau and Andr´e Katz answered
some important questions concerning the self-similarity properties of this tiling
in 1986, see [10]: the scaling factor is Φ3 (where Φ denotes the golden ratio;
in case of the Penrose tiling of the plane the scaling factor is Φ), furthermore
they showed that the tiles can’t be subdivided in a unique way by deﬂation.
The question how a possible subdivision of the two tiles looks like was not
addressed. At the same time also the Japanese Tohru Ogawa dealed with
the icosahedral tiling, see [17,18]. He generated the tiling by inﬂation and
distinguished two parts for each tile (“skeleton part” and “internal part”).
Some years later, Ogawa also worked with a projection method and presented
the diﬀerent types of vertices for icosahedral tilings.
In this paper the problem of a locally deﬁned subdivision for the icosahedral
tiling is investigated, more precisely, for the class of 3-dimenisonal tilings of
Kramer/Neri and Ogawa where in some sense the pentagon (from the Penrose
tiling of the plane) is replaced by the icosahedron. The article is based on the
thesis of the ﬁrst named author, see [6]. As described above the question of a
local construction has some physical signiﬁcance, however this paper follows

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
321
a purely mathematical course and it is based on geometry. It shows how to
understand the icosahedral tiling just by elementary local geometric construc-
tions. In Sect. 2 starting from the projection method from 6 to 3 dimensions,
the two tiles are constructed and the speciﬁc deﬂation is determined. Section
3 investigates what happens to the tiles under deﬂation: do these tilings gen-
erated by the projection method allow a unique locally deﬁned subdivision,
like the Penrose tilings? Or at least, are there certain invariant substructures
present in the subdivision of every tiling?
The main result of this paper is the construction of such an invariant sub-
structure in each tile, having the full symmetry of the tile. It determines the
subdivision completely up to small gaps which allow several ﬁllings; these ﬁll-
ings just diﬀer by symmetries which however do not extend to the ambient
tiling. Since the local structure of the tilings can be read oﬀfrom the sub-
divisions of tiles, our result shows that the icosahedral tiling is essentially
determined locally. Note that some of ﬁgures become clearer when displayed
online in colour.
2. Generating icosahedral tilings
2.1. Projection method
We describe ﬁrst a general form of the projection method which includes the
cases of de Bruijn [4] and Kramer–Neri [13]. The space Rd on which the tiling
will be constructed is considered as a d-dimensional aﬃne subspace E ⊂Rn.
We call Rn the ambient space and E ∼= Rd the projection space. The vertex
set ME ⊂E of the tiling is the orthogonal projection onto E of the set of
“admissible” integer vectors, those in the “strip” Σ = E + Cn where C =
(−1
2, + 1
2) is the centered unit interval,
ME = πE(Zn ∩Σ).
(2.1)
The tiles are projections of d-dimensional faces of the Zn-tiling in Rn; more
precisely, a d-dimensional face is projected onto a tile in E if and only if all
its vertices are admissible. This gives a tiling when E is in general position
with respect to the shifted lattice (Z + 1
2)n which means that any point x =
(x1, . . . , xn) ∈E has at most d coordinates xi ∈Z + 1
2, see e.g. [23].
Additionally, let us assume there is a a group G of orthogonal integer matrices
on Rn. Then G preserves the cube Cn ⊂Rn. Suppose further that G preserves
also the linear subspace Eo parallel to E in the sense that E = Eo +a for some
a ∈Rn. Let xo ∈E be any point close enough to some integer point zo ∈Zn.
Then G (more precisely, the conjugate group tzoGt−zo where tzo(x) = x + zo
is the translation by zo) acts on the strip Σ′ = Eo + zo + Cn which is close to
Σ = Eo + xo + Cn, and hence ME has an almost G-symmetry, a G-symmetry
which fails only for those admissible points z ∈Σ with z ̸∈Σ′.
In our case we have n = 6 and d = 3, and the group G is the group of rotations
and reﬂections of a regular icosahedron (isomorphic to A5 × Z2 where A5 is

322
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
the group of even permutations of {1, . . . , 5}). However, we start with R12.
Its standard basis {c1, . . . , c12} will be denoted also as {a1, . . . , a6, b1, . . . , b6}.
We assign these vectors to the 12 vertices v1, . . . , v12 of the icosahedron in R3
in the following way: if a6 is assigned to some vertex v6, then a1, . . . , a5 will
be assigned to the ﬁve vertices v1, . . . , v5 which are the direct neighbours of
v6, in their cyclic ordering. Moreover, we require that bi and ai are assigned
to antipodal vertices, for i = 1, . . . , 6. Then the antipodal map −I on R3 is
represented by the permutation of the basis
A : ai →bi,
bi →ai, for i = 1, . . . , 6.
(2.2)
Let W and W ′ be the eigenspaces of A corresponding to the eigenvalues −1
and 1, hence
W = Span {ai −bi : i = 1, . . . , 6}
W ′ = Span {ai + bi : i = 1, . . . , 6}
Now the symmetry group G of the icosahedron becomes a group of 12 × 12-
matrices permuting the standard basis like the vertex set of the icosahe-
dron. Clearly G is centralized by A, hence the eigenspaces W and W ′ are
6-dimensional representation spaces of G. From now on we will restrict our
attention only to W.1 We identify the eigenspace W with R6 using the basis
ei := ai −bi for 1 ≤i ≤6 and G permutes the vectors ±e1, . . . , ±e6 like the
oriented diagonals of the icosahedron.
Furthermore we consider the linear map U on R12, commuting with G, which
is deﬁned as follows:
U : ci →

direct neighbours of ci
for all 1 ≤i ≤12.
(2.3)
The subspace W is kept invariant by U and is decomposed into the G-invariant
eigenspaces of U.
Theorem 2.1. The eigenvalues of U on W are ±
√
5. The eigenspaces W± are
3-dimensional G-invariant irrational subspaces.
Proof. Put si =
1
√
5U(ei). Then
U(e6) =
√
5 s6
and
U(s6) =
√
5 e6
The ﬁrst equality is clear by deﬁnition, the second one follows from 5
i=1 U(ei)
= 5e6, this is because all neighbours ̸= e6 come in antipodal pairs and cancel
each other. Thus U keeps the plane Span (e6, s6) invariant and has eigenvalues
±
√
5 with eigenvectors e6 ± s6. A similar statement holds for Span (ei, si) for
i = 1, . . . , 5. The eigenvectors ±(ei + si) corresponding to the eigenvalue
√
5
form a G-orbit with the geometry of the vertex set of an icosahedron with
radius
√
2, thus they span a 3-dimensional subspace W+ ⊂W. The same
holds for the eigenvectors ±(ei −si) corresponding to the eigenvalue −
√
5.
1W ′ contains the vector e = 
i(ai + bi) ﬁxed unter A5, and the orthogonal complement
W ′′ = W ′ ⊖R e is a 5-dimensional irreducible representation space of A5. In fact, the map
U deﬁned below is a multiple of the identity on W ′′. There is no G-invariant 3-dimensional
subspace in W ′.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
323
Next we show that W± is an irrational subspace, i.e. W± does not contain any
nonzero integer vector. Suppose we have such a vector 0 ̸= v ∈W± ∩Z6. Then
gv ∈W± ∩Z6 for any g ∈G. Since W± is irreducible for G, these vectors span
W±. Thus W± is spanned by integer vectors, and therefore W± ∩Z6 is a lattice
preserved by G. But this contradicts to the crystallograpic restriction since G
contains rotations of order 5 in 3-space which cannot preserve a lattice.
□
Now we put
S := 2I −U
(2.4)
having eigenvalues 2∓
√
5 on W±. Since (2+
√
5)(2−
√
5) = −1, the matrix S on
W = R6 is integer invertible. Observe that 2 +
√
5 = Φ3 where Φ = 1
2(1 +
√
5)
is the golden ratio, the positive solution of the equation Φ2 = Φ + 1, while
2 −
√
5 = −ϕ3 where ϕ = Φ −1 = 1
Φ. The space
F := W−
(2.5)
will be called orthogonal space. Choosing a ∈F suitably we can arrange that
the aﬃne subspace
E = W+ + a
(2.6)
avoids any point x ∈R6 with more than three coordinates in Z + 1
2 (general
position).2 By projecting all integer points inside the 6-dimensional strip Σ =
E + C6 orthogonally onto E we obtain the corresponding icosahedral tiling3
ME = πE(Σ ∩Z6), cf. (2.1). The basis vectors e1, . . . , e6 of the ambient space
W project onto E and F to the vectors
± vi = πE(±ei),
(2.7)
±wi = πF (±ei),
(2.8)
i = 1 . . . 6, in the way that both ±vi and ±wi point to the 12 vertices of an
icosahedron, but in two diﬀerent parametrisations.4
Therefore the terms (basic) vector ±vi resp. ±wi and vertex (vector) of the
icosahedron ±vi resp. ±wi will not be distinguished. Without loss of general-
ity we can ﬁx the constellation as shown in Fig. 1.5 The tiles of the icosahedral
tilings are the projections of the 3-dimensional faces of the 6-dimensional unit
cube C6 onto E. In other words: the tiles are built by the span of three linearly
independent vertex vectors of an icosahedron in the projection space E. But
how many of such combinations of vertices are possible? Concerning this we
have to take a look at the icosahedron and the diﬀerent relations between its
2Choose any four diﬀerent indices i, j, k, l ∈{1, . . . , 6}. For any four integers p, q, r, s ∈Z let
Apqrs = {x ∈R6 : xi = p+ 1
2 , xj = q + 1
2 , xk = r + 1
2 , xl = s+ 1
2 } and Bpqrs = πF (Apqrs).
Then Apqrs intersects Eo+b precisely for b ∈Bpqrs. If we choose a ∈F outside the countably
many planes Bpqrs ⊂F, for any p, q, r, s ∈Z and any combination of four diﬀerent indices
i, j, k, l, then no point x ∈E = Eo + a can have four coordinates in Z + 1
2 .
3In the following we do not distinguish between the terms tiling and vertex set, cf. Theorem
3.5.
4The two diﬀerent 3-dimensional irreducible representations of the icosahedral group G diﬀer
by an outer automorphism of A5.
5In Fig. 1 we see that U(v6) = v1 + v2 + v3 + v4 + v5. On the other hand, U(v6) =
√
5v6,
cf. Theorem 2.1. Therefore v1 + v2 + v3 + v4 + v5 =
√
5v6.

324
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 1 Left the projection of the basis vectors e1, . . . , e6
onto E and right the projection of the basis vectors onto F
Figure 2 Vertex labelling
vertices, cf. Fig. 2. For the vertex 6, three types of neighbours exist: the direct
neighbours 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, the indirect neighbours −1, −2, −3, −4, −5, and the an-
tipodal vertex −6. Therefore two arbitrary linearly independent basic vectors
v and v′ with v, v′ ∈{±v1, . . . , ±v6} are either direct or indirect neighbours
of the icosahedron. They always span a golden rhomb,6 denoted by R(v, v′) in
the following.
Altogether there are four diﬀerent types of linearly independent vertices
1. Three pairwise direct neighbours, e.g. 1, 5, 6
2. Two direct neighbours and an indirect neighbour, e.g. 1, 2, 5
3. Two indirect neighbours and a direct neighbour, e.g. 1, 3, 4
4. Three pairwise indirect neighbours, e.g. 1, −2, 3
and we obtain two diﬀerent types of tiles: a ﬂat tile and a long tile. Both are
equilateral rhombohedra with golden rhombs as faces, see Fig. 3.7 The vertices
6This is a rhomb with diagonals in golden ratio proportion. Of course, the analogous state-
ment also holds for two arbitrary linearly independent vectors w, w′ ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6}.
7By courtesy of Paul Hildebrandt, Zoometool Inc.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
325
Figure 3 Left the long tile and right the ﬂat tile
Figure 4 From left to right: long tile, seen from its acute
vertex (yellow) and from its obtuse vertex (purple), as well as
the ﬂat tile, seen from its acute vertex (green) and from its
obtuse vertex (red) (colour ﬁgure online)
of the ﬂat tile are of type 2 (for the acute vertex) and 4 (for the obtuse vertex)
while for the long tile the vertices are of type 1 (acute) and type 3 (obtuse).
Below a schematic representation of the tiles will be important. In Fig. 4 we
have drawn a planar projection of the six vertices of a half icosahedron (plus
ﬁve antipodal vertices in the right ﬁgure), and each coloured edge corresponds
to the rhomb spanned by two vertex vectors in 3-space.
Using the orthogonal space F we have an alternative characterization of the 6-
dimensional strip Σ = E+C6 which serves to reduce the considered dimensions
from six to three. It is called window V ⊂F and it satisﬁes
Σ = E + C6 = E + V
with V := πF (C6)
(2.9)
Being a projection onto F of the convex unit cube C6, the window V itself
is convex and it is bounded by the projections of the 2-dimensional faces of
C6. These projections are spanned by linearly independent vectors w and w′
with w, w′ ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6} which form always a golden rhomb, cf. footnote
6. Since there are
6
2

= 15 pairs of linearly independent vectors w and w′ we
obtain 15 parallel classes of golden rhombs.8 By convexity of the projection,
parallel rhombs always come in pairs, cf. proof of Lemma 6 in the appendix,
and therefore the window V is a rhombic triacontahedron: a convex equilateral
polyhedron bounded by 30 golden rhombs with 32 vertices and 60 edges, see
Fig. 5.9
But the window V is more than just a lower dimensional substitute for the
strip; it distinguishes which integer vectors z ∈Z6 are admissible, i.e. projected
8By courtesy of Paul Hildebrandt, Zoometool Inc.
9The rhombic triacontahedron was discovered and named by Johannes Kepler, [11], [12, p.
62], https://archive.org/stream/ioanniskepplerih00kepl#page/n85/.

326
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 5 The window V in the orthogonal space F 8
to vertices of our tiling. For any grid point z ∈Z6 let zE := πE(z) and
zF := πF (z). Then10
zE belongs to ME
⇐⇒z is projected onto E
⇐⇒z ∈(E + C6) ⊂R6
⇐⇒zF ∈V
(2.10)
Using the linearity of the projection we can apply these equivalences also to
the neighbour points11 of the grid point z ⊂Z6 which are z ± ei ⊂Z6 for all
1 ≤i ≤6:
zE ± vi belongs to ME
⇐⇒zF ± wi ∈V
(2.11)
Thus the window V also gives a decision criterion for admissible neighbour
points of an arbitrary grid point z ⊂Z6 and it provides information about
all the possible vertex conﬁgurations of the tiling ME. In fact, we may ask:
where in V ⊂F must zF be located so that for zE in the projection space E
a certain neighbour point zE + v with v ∈{±v1, . . . , ±v6} is also part of the
tiling ME? By systemizing this concept we get a partition of the window V in
disjoint regions and each region belongs to a certain vertex conﬁguration, see
[6].
Remark 2.2. In the following the equivalences in (2.10) and (2.11) will be
important because they allow us to switch back and forth (without any loss of
information) between the ambient space W on the one side and the projection
space E or the orthogonal space F on the other side.
10Here we are using that the eigenspaces of U are irrational, i.e. they do not contain any
nonzero integer vector, see Theorem 2.1.
11In the present paper neighbour or neighbour point of a grid point always means another
integer point one of whose coordinates diﬀers by ±1.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
327
2.2. Inﬂation and deﬂation
We now introduce the concept of inﬂation and its inverse, called deﬂation. By
applying the linear map S = 2I −U introduced in (2.4), the following situation
occurs on the strip Σ = E + C6 with E = W+ + a and a ∈F:
S(Σ) = S(E + V ) = E′ + Φ3V
(2.12)
since S(E) = S(W+ + a) = W+ + Φ3a =: E′. The symmetric matrix S itself is
integer and because of det S = −1 also integer invertible. Therefore we obtain
two diﬀerent tilings on the parallel subspace E′. The tiling
SME := πE′
Z6 ∩S(Σ)

= πS(E)

S(Z6 ∩Σ)

(2.13)
as well as the tiling
ME′ = πE′(Z6 ∩Σ′)
(2.14)
where Σ′ := E′ + C6. What is the relation between the tiling ME on the
subspace E and the tilings ME′ and SME on the shifted subspace E′?
Theorem 2.3. The tiling SME is a proper reﬁnement of ME′, i.e. ME′ ⊂SME.
Proof. Σ′ ⊂S(Σ) because the transformed strip S(Σ) is by the factor Φ3 larger
than the usual strip Σ′. With (2.13) and (2.14) we observe
ME′ = πE′(Z6 ∩Σ′) ⊂πE′
Z6 ∩S(Σ)

= SME.
□
Theorem 2.4. The tiling SME is homothetic to the tiling ME. More precisely:
SME is an image of ME, point reﬂected and scaled-down by the factor ϕ3.
Proof. By deﬁnition the subspace E is a translated eigenspace of S and hence
S ◦πE = πE ◦S, which means that we can also ﬁrst project and then apply
S. Because of (2.1) and (2.13) we have
SME = πS(E)

S(Z6 ∩Σ)

= S

πE(Z6 ∩Σ)

= S(ME)
with ME ⊂E and S has eigenvalue −ϕ3 in the direction of E.
□
This shows the inﬂation property of the tiling, see Fig. 6: the vertex set SME
which is a homothetic image of ME has ME′ as a subset. Thus the vertex set
ME′ can be extended to the vertex set of another icosahedral tiling whose tiles
are smaller by the factor ϕ3. Therefore we call ME′ inﬂation tiling or coarse
tiling of SME and the linear transformation S also inﬂation map. The inverse
of this procedure is called deﬂation: the tiling SME is the deﬂation tiling or
ﬁne tiling of ME′ and T := S−1 the deﬂation map, see [8]. The vertices of ME′
will also be called old vertices. Thereby the following question arises: what
happens to the coarse tiles of ME′ under deﬂation? For the Penrose tilings of
the plane the procedure of deﬂation is deﬁned in such a way that every coarse
tile has the same subdivision, cf. [5], but does the subdivision of the tiles also
occur in an unique way in the case of icosahedral tilings in space?
Figuring out this problem the following idea is necessary: let z ∈Z6 be a point
inside the strip Σ′ ⊂S(Σ) then zE′ := πE′(z) belongs to the coarse tiling
ME′ as well as to the ﬁne tiling SME. But viewing zE′ as an element of ME′

328
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 6 The process of inﬂation and deﬂation: the projec-
tion space corresponds to the straight line E and the orthog-
onal space to the straight line F
it has another vertex conﬁguration than when we view it as an element of
SME.12 Therefore understanding the procedure of deﬂation involves to ﬁgure
out the connection between the old vertex conﬁguration of zE′ in ME′ and the
new vertex conﬁguration of zE′ in SME. Because SME is homothetic to the
tiling ME on the subspace E, cf. Theorem 2.4, we can answer this question by
studying the connection between ME′ and ME. Hence we may use the deﬂation
map T = S−1 and we have to investigate what happens to the window V under
T.
3. Deﬂation in the case of the icosahedral tilings
We adopt the terminology introduced in 2.1 and 2.2. Let zE′ always denote an
arbitrary old vertex of the coarse tiling ME′ in the projection space E′ then
zF ′ denotes the corresponding point in the orthogonal space F, cf. remark 2.2.
If zE′ resp. zF ′ has j neighbour points then zE′ resp. zF ′ is called vertex of
type ωj.13
Concerning the question of a possible subdivision of the tiles we proceed step
by step. We ﬁrst examine: what happens to all old vertices under deﬂation?
12See Fig. 6: for z ⊂(E′ + C6) ⊂(E′ + SC6) we have z′ ̸⊂(E′ + V ), but z′ ⊂(E′ + Φ3V );
i.e. zE′ belongs not to the coarse tiling ME′, however zE′ is an element of the ﬁne tiling
SME.
13Of course j can be speciﬁed; in the case of icosahedral tilings it is j ∈{4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12},
see [6]. Because for 1 ≤i ≤6 the basic vectors ±vi point to the vertices of an icosahedron
in a diﬀerent conﬁguration than the basic vectors ±wi, cf. Fig. 1 and footnote 4, a vertex
of type ωj can have another shape in the projection space E than in the orthogonal space
F, cf. Fig. 10.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
329
3.1. Subdivision at vertices
Theorem 3.1. All vertices zE′ of the coarse tiling ME′ turn into vertices of
type ω12 with respect to the ﬁne tiling SME.
Proof. The deﬂation factor is ϕ3 =
√
5 −2 and therefore the deﬂation map
T shrinks the window V by exactly this factor. According to the equiva-
lences in (2.10) and (2.11) we have to ask: for which basic vector w with
w ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6} we have
ϕ3V + w ⊂V ?
(3.1)
Consider the homothetic map h : x →ϕ3x + w.14 Its scale factor is ϕ3 and for
the ﬁxed point y we obtain y =
1
1−ϕ3 w. Concerning Lemma 1 in the Appendix
we have to verify
y ⊂V
for each w ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6}
(3.2)
then (3.1) holds for all w ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6} satisfying (3.2). Since
1
1−ϕ3 =
Φ3
Φ3−1 = 1 + 1
2ϕ (recall that Φ2 = Φ + 1 and hence Φ3 = Φ2 + Φ = 2Φ + 1) and
Φ = 1 + ϕ, we have
1
1−ϕ3 < Φ.
Because Φw is a vertex of the window V for all w ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6}, the scaled
down window ϕ3V can be shifted in any direction of the 12 basic vectors ±wi
for all 1 ≤i ≤6 without leaving the original window V .15 Thus all old vertices
zE′ of the coarse tiling ME′ turn into vertices of type ω12 in the ﬁne tiling
SME.
□
Condition (3.1) can be illustrated by considering the projection image of the
window V , see Fig. 7.16 From Theorem 2.3 it is known that the tiles of the ﬁne
tiling SME are by the factor ϕ3 smaller than the tiles of the coarse tiling ME′.
By construction the tiles of ME′ are spanned by the basic vectors ±v1, . . . , ±v6,
therefore the tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME are spanned by the reduced basic
vectors ±ϕ3v1, . . . , ±ϕ3v6 and in terms of the ﬁne tiling SME we also call
±ϕ3v1, . . . , ±ϕ3v6 basic vectors. The situation can be illustrated as shown in
Fig. 8. Concerning the question of a possible subdivision of the coarse tiling
ME′ we have to do a further step: what about the neighbours of the old vertices
in the ﬁne tiling SME? Which vertex conﬁgurations are possible for them?
For v ∈{±v1, . . . , ±v6} the neighbour point zE′ + ϕ3v of an arbitrary old
vertex zE′ in the ﬁne tiling SME is named ﬁrst neighbour.
14It is h = t ◦h′ where h′ : x 
→ϕ3x is a homothety and t : x 
→x + w is a translation. Such
composition is a homothetic map with a diﬀerent center.
15The vertices of the window V are projections of the vertices of the 6-dimensional unit cube
C6 onto F. Therefore the vertices of V are sums built by ±w1, . . . , ±w6, cf. page 6. But not
all of these 26 = 64 possible sums span the convex polyhedron V . Altogether there are two
types of maximal sums, i.e. sums not lying inside the window but building a vertex of V : the
maximal sum Φw with w ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6} pointing to the 12 vertices of an icosahedron
and the maximal sum pointing to the 20 vertices of a dodecahedron, see [6].
16As the projection plane we always choose the plane of a rhomb of the window V .

330
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 7 The window V under the deﬂation map T
(a)
(b)
Figure 8 Transformation of the vertices of the coarse tiling
ME′ into vertices of type ω12 in the ﬁne tiling SME
Theorem 3.2. The ﬁrst neighbours of all old vertices zE′ in the ﬁne tiling SME
are vertices of type ω6 and look like ﬂowers in the projection space E′.
More precisely: the edge between an old vertex zE′ and its ﬁrst neighbour
always builds the ﬂower stalk, the ﬁve remaining basic vectors form the petals.
Proof. From Theorem 3.1 it is known that in the ﬁne tiling SME the old
vertex zE′ is a vertex of type ω12. In order to ﬁnd out the type of vertex for
the ﬁrst neighbours of zE′ we have to ask: for which vectors w and w′ with
w, w′ ∈{±w1, . . . , ±w6} we have
ϕ3V + w + w′ ⊂V ?
(3.3)
Considering the symmetry of the icosahedron the basic vectors w and w′ can
be related in four diﬀerent ways:
1. If w′ = −w we obtain the trivial case ϕ3V ⊂V and condition (3.3) holds
naturally.
2. If w′ is a indirect neighbour of w then w + w′ is the short diagonal of
R(w, w′) and the proof is as given in Theorem 3.1. In this case we consider
the homothety h : x →ϕ3x + w + w′. Its ﬁxed point is y =
1
1−ϕ3 (w + w′)

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
331
Figure 9 Shifting ϕ3V + w to w′ is not admissible if w′ is a
direct neighbour of w or if w′ = w, see left ﬁgure. The right
ﬁgure illustrates case 2 where w′ is a indirect neighbours of w
and w + w′ now points to the direction of the midpoint of the faces of
the rhombic triacontahedron, see Fig. 9. But we still obtain y ⊂V and
therefore condition (3.3) holds for all indirect neighbours w′ of w.
3. If w′ is a direct neighbour of w then w + w′ is the long diagonal of
R(w, w′). By planar geometry considering the projection image of V we
can prove that condition (3.3) fails for all direct neighbours w′ of w, see
Fig. 9. In each case we have to choose the projection plane parallel to
the two pairs of basic vectors ±w and ±w′. Then the translation of the
reduced window ϕ3V to w + w′ is mapped isometrically and we obtain
(ϕ3V + w + w′) ∩V = ∅.
4. If w′ = w we can apply the proof given in case 3, see Fig. 9. It follows
(ϕ3V + 2w) ∩V = ∅and therefore also in this case condition (3.3) fails.
Therefore in the projection space E′ an arbitrary ﬁrst neighbour zE′ + ϕ3v of
any old vertex zE′ always has the neighbour points
zE′ + ϕ3v −ϕ3v = zE′
and
zE′ + ϕ3v + ϕ3v′
(3.4)
where v ∈{±v1, . . . , ±v6} and v′ is a direct neighbour of v, cf. the equivalences
in (2.10) and (2.11).17 We call this type of vertex ω6. Because of its shape in
the projection space E′ we also call it ﬂower (vertex), see Fig. 10.
□
Moreover we also know which tiles surround each ﬂower stalk:
Theorem 3.3. The ﬂower stalk of any vertex of type ω6 is surrounded by ﬁve
long tiles.
Proof. Fixing the ﬁrst neighbour zE′ + ϕ3v6, we may ask: which tiles surround
the edge between zE′ and zE′ +ϕ3v6? Because all ﬁrst neighbours of zE′ in the
ﬁne tiling SME are vertices of type ω6 we know that the blue marked edges
in Fig. 11 (left) exist.
17In (3.3) we investigate the tiling ME, homothetic to the ﬁne tiling SME, cf. Theorem 2.4.
Transferring results from ME to SME which are not invariant under similarity transforma-
tions therefore needs to apply S and therefore v′ is now a direct (not indirect) neighbour of
v.

332
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 10 A vertex of type ω6 in the orthogonal space F
and in the projection space E
Figure 11 The long tiles around zE′ and zE′ + ϕ3v6 in the
ﬁne tiling SME, the notation is according to footnote 18
As a result we obtain the rhombs R(1, 5), R(1, 6), R(5, 6).18 These three rhombs
are pairwise non-parallel and they form a long tile.19 With the same arguments
four further long tiles exist around the edge between zE′ and zE′ + ϕ3v6 and
hence we get the situation shown in Fig. 11 (right). For the sake of clarity just
three of the ﬁve long rhombs are shown. The same considerations can be made
for all other ﬁrst neighbours of zE′ and Theorem 3.3 is proved.
□
Directly from Theorem 3.3 we obtain:
Theorem 3.4. The petals of any ﬂower span a blossom of ﬁve rhombs.
18For the sake of brevity the ﬁrst neighbour zE′ ± ϕ3vk is denoted by ±k for 1 ≤k ≤6.
19The 3D-tiling induces a 2D-tiling on the sphere S around each vertex. The three rhombs
R(1, 5), R(1, 6), R(5, 6) intersect S in three edges of the 2D-tiling bounding a triangle in S.
This is the intersection of S with a 3d-tile. Thus these three rhombs bound a common (long)
tile.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
333
5 long tiles
ong til
5 long tiles
B 
B'
O
O'
Figure 12 Unﬁnished subdivision of an arbitrary coarse edge
Proof. In Fig. 11 we see: two neighbouring petals of any ﬂower span a rhomb.
Because each ﬂower has ﬁve petals we obtain a blossom of altogether ﬁve
rhombs.
□
Therefore an arbitrary old vertex zE′ of the coarse tiling ME′ is surrounded
by altogether 20 long tiles in the ﬁne tiling SME: according to the Theorems
3.1 and 3.2 the old vertex zE′ is a vertex of type ω12 in SME and all of its
12 ﬁrst neighbours are ﬂowers. Each stalk of these ﬂowers is surrounded by 5
long tiles, see Theorem 3.3, but three neighbouring stalks always have a long
tile in common.
3.2. Subdivision along edges
3.2.1. Subdivision along edges near endpoints. Based on the results of 3.1 we
obtain the situation as shown in Fig. 12.
Comments on ﬁgure 12:
•
A coarse edge and its endpoints, denoted by O and O′, are marked orange.
O and O′ are both old vertices, thus they are vertices of type ω12 in the
ﬁne tiling SME, cf. Theorem 3.1.
•
The two blue marked points B and B′ are ﬁrst neighbours of O and O′.
Concerning Theorem 3.2 they are ﬂowers and their ﬂower stalks OB and
O′B′ are both surrounded by ﬁve long tiles, cf. Theorem 3.3.
•
The petals of B and B′ are marked red and the two blossoms spanned by
them are drawn above, cf. Theorem 3.4. Note that each rhomb of these
blossoms is the face of one of the long tiles surrounding OB and O′B′.
Hence each coarse edge near its endpoints is surrounded by ﬁve long tiles in
the ﬁne tiling SME.
3.2.2. Subdivision along edges near midpoints. We have to close the remaining
gap in Fig. 12. The drawn ten rhombs separate into two blossoms adjoining
to the ﬁrst neighbours B and B′, cf. Theorem 3.4. Because B and B′ are
antipodal points these blossoms are antipodal. Furthermore we have
|B −B′| = |O −O′| −2ϕ3|v| = |v| −2ϕ3|v| =
√
5 ϕ3|v|
where by construction v ∈{±v1, . . . , ±vn} is an edges of the coarse tiling and
ϕ3v an edge of the ﬁne tiling SME. Therefore the ten rhombs in Fig. 12 form

334
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
a lense:20 a convex equilateral polyhedron bounded by 20 golden rhombs with
22 vertices and 40 edges. The following theorem guarantees the existence of
the missing edges (the ten edges between the green points in Fig. 12):
Theorem 3.5. If two points in the icosahedral tilings diﬀer by an admissible
edge vector then they are connected by an edge.
Proof. Let z1E and z2E be two points in an arbitrary tiling ME which diﬀer
by an admissible edge vector, i.e.
z1E −z2E = v
with v ∈{±v1, . . . , ±v6}. We want to prove that the edge between z1E and
z2E exists in fact.
For the inverse image point z1 = π−1
E (z1E) in the ambient space W we have
z1 ∈(E + C6) ⊂R6, cf. (2.10), and the admissible edge v corresponds to the
unit vector e = π−1
E (v) with e ∈{±e1, . . . , ±e6}. Moving from z1 along e we
reach the point z1 +e = z∗. Because the orthogonal space F is irrational, i.e. it
does not contain any nonzero integer vector, no two diﬀerent grid points in W
can be projected onto the same point in E. Therefore it is z∗= z2 = π−1
E (z2E).
But with z1 and z2 also the line segment between these two points lies inside
the strip Σ = (E + C6) ⊂R6 since the strip is convex. Hence in the tiling ME
the edge between zE1 and zE2 exists.
□
Thus each coarse edge near its midpoint is surrounded by a lense, see Fig. 13.
We prove in the Appendix, see Lemma 3, that each lense can be ﬁlled with
ﬁve long and ﬁve ﬂat tiles and the ﬁlling is unique up to isometries of the
lense. The question remains if all of these ten congruent ﬁllings are realized
for each of the lenses. The answer to this problem needs some more detailed
knowledge, for this purpose see [6].
3.3. Subdivision of the faces
Each face of the icosahedral tiling is a golden rhomb. Transferring the results
from 3.2 to the four edges of a coarse rhomb we directly obtain the subdivision
of a coarse face in the ﬁne tiling SME.
Comments on Fig. 14:
•
Each of the four vertices of the coarse rhomb, marked orange, is sur-
rounded by 20 long tiles in ﬁne tiling SME. The intersection of these long
tiles with the coarse rhomb depends on whether the two coarse edges at
the old vertex are direct or indirect neighbours in the icosahedron, cf.
page 6.
–
If the coarse edges are direct neighbours then the intersection is a
golden rhomb, more precisely a face of the ﬁne tiling SME, orange
marked.
20See comments on Fig. 32 and Remark 4.1 in the Appendix.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
335
Figure 13 Subdivision of an arbitrary coarse edge. On the
left, the lense around the middle part of the coarse edge is
shown, on the right we see the lense together with the ﬁve
long tiles adjoining to the lense from left and right, see 3.2.1
Figure 14 Subdivision of the face
–
If the coarse edges are indirect neighbours then the intersection
contains the diagonal and has the shape of a certain parallelogram,
yellow marked, cf. Fig. 22 below
•
Each coarse edge near its midpoint is surrounded by a lense, see 3.2.2.
The four green marked quadrangles are the intersections of these lenses
with the coarse rhomb.
•
In the center of the coarse rhomb the four yellow marked rhombs just
enclose a further golden rhomb, purple marked21
3.4. Subdivision of the tiles
We obtain the situation as shown in Fig. 15. For both tiles the lenses 1 to
6 are called inner lenses, accordingly the lenses 7 to 12 are also called outer
lenses. Also the corresponding edges will be named inner and outer edges,
accordingly. The following two questions remain:
21The four edges enclosing a rhomb actually bound a face of the tiling since they are pro-
jected from an admissible square in the lattice Z6, see proof of Theorem 3.5.

336
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 15 Subdivision of the edges of an arbitrary coarse
tile: left the ﬂat and right the long tile. For the sake of clarity
the ﬁve long tiles always adjoining to the lenses from left and
right are not shown
Figure 16 15 of the 20 possibilities to build a long tile in
SME arising from zE′
1. Which of the 20 long tiles surrounding each old vertex, cf. 3.1, belong to
the coarse tiles?
2. What about the interior part of the coarse tiles (long and ﬂat)?
3.4.1. Subdivision of the ﬂat tile.
Long tiles inside the coarse ﬂat tile. The ﬁrst question can be answered by
considering the schematic representation of the vertices of the tiles, cf. Fig. 4.
In Fig. 16 we see the six vertices of an icosahedron lying in a common half
space (marked dark bold) and ﬁve antipodal vertices. Only the antipodal vertex
of the bold marked vertex in the center is invisible. Assuming that the bold
marked vertex in the center is an old vertex zE′, Fig. 16 shows 15 of the 20
long tiles surrounding zE′.
Theorem 3.6. At the two obtuse vertices always four whole long tiles and six
half long tiles (belonging to the ﬁne tiling SME) lie inside the coarse ﬂat tile.
At the six acute vertices always two half long tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME lie
inside the coarse ﬂat tile.
Proof.
Comments on Fig. 17:
•
Three vertices of an icosahedron which together span a ﬂat tile seen from
its obtuse vertex are marked red, three vertices of an icosahedron which
together span a ﬂat tile seen from its acute vertex are marked green.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
337
Figure 17 Left the schematic representation of an obtuse
vertex of the ﬂat tile, right an acute vertex of the ﬂat tile
always together with 15 of the 20 possibilities to build a long
tile seen from its acute vertex
•
Yellow marked are always 15 of the 20 possibilities to build a long tile
seen from its acute vertex.
•
Therefore in the left ﬁgure the four triangles highlighted in yellow corre-
spond to long tiles at an obtuse vertex lying completely inside the coarse
ﬂat tile and the six numbered triangles correspond to long tiles lying half
inside the coarse ﬂat tile.
•
Similary, in the right ﬁgure the two triangles highlighted in yellow cor-
respond to long tiles at an acute vertex lying half inside the coarse ﬂat
tile.
□
The interior part The two obtuse vertices of the coarse ﬂat tile are close to
each other. This fact leads to the following result:
Theorem 3.7. The two obtuse vertices of the coarse ﬂat tile are connected by
a long tile of the ﬁne tiling SME.
Proof. In the Appendix, Lemma 4, we prove that the ratio of the long diagonal
of the long tile and the short diagonal of the ﬂat tile corresponds to Φ3. Since
the deﬂation factor of the icosahedral tilings is also Φ3 the length of the short
diagonal of a coarse ﬂat tile corresponds to the length of the long diagonal of
a ﬁne long tile. According to 3.1 each old vertex of the coarse tiling ME′ is
surrounded by 20 long tiles in the ﬁne tiling SME. One of them is pointing
straight inward. Therefore the two obtuse vertices of the coarse ﬂat tile are
connected by a long tile in SME.
□
Remark 3.8. This long tile of the ﬁne tiling SME connecting the two obtuse
vertices of the coarse ﬂat tile is also called transversal tile.
With the help of the transversal tile the question of the interior part of the
coarse ﬂat tile can be ﬁnally answered, see Fig. 18. We obtain:
Theorem 3.9. The interior part of the coarse ﬂat tile is ﬁlled by 7 whole and
12 half long tiles as well as 6 whole ﬂat tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME.
Proof.
Comments on Fig. 18:
•
The two orange vertices in the center (the second one is underneath)
are the two obtuse vertices of the coarse ﬂat tile, the blue vertices are

338
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 18 Inner part of the coarse ﬂat tile (colour ﬁgure online)
their ﬁrst neighbours in the direction of the edges of the coarse ﬂat
tile.
•
The edges of the transversal tile in the center are marked blue and orange.
The six blue marked edges are all ﬂower stalks. In view of Theorem 3.3,22
we obtain six long tiles, which adjoin to the six faces of the transversal
tile and lie completely inside the coarse ﬂat tile, and 12 long tiles lying
just half inside the coarse ﬂat tile. For the sake of clarity the half-tiles
are not shown in Fig. 18 we obtain six long tiles, which adjoin to the six
faces of the transversal tile and lie completely inside the coarse ﬂat tile,
and twelve long tiles lying just half inside the coarse ﬂat tile.
•
There are two triples of long tiles adjacent to the 3+3 faces of the
transversal tile T (3 on each end). Two tiles A, B belonging to diﬀer-
ent triples and sharing an edge e, one of the 6 “outer” (middle) edges of
T, are connected by a ﬂat tile, see Fig. 19 which is a projection into the
plane perpendicular to e.
□
Hence the subdivision of the coarse ﬂat tile is known and we can calculate the
number of ﬁne tiles subdividing the coarse ﬂat tile. Note that this is not a
subdivison by whole tiles but by parts of tiles (in fact by tenths) since some
ﬁne tiles are cut into pieces by the walls of the coarse tile. However, recollecting
the pieces we obtain the following integers (in fact Fibonacci numbers):
Theorem 3.10. Any ﬂat tile of the coarse tiling ME′ is ﬁlled altogether by 34
long and 21 ﬂat tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME, more precisely, by 340 tenths of
a long tile and 210 tenths of a ﬂat tile.
Proof. Each of the inner lenses takes part of the coarse ﬂat tile by the ratio 2
5,
each of the outer lenses by the ratio
1
10. This is seen by projecting the coarse
tile into the plane perpendicular to the edge carrying the lense. The projection
22Each stalk is surrounded by ﬁve long tiles: the transversal tile and four further long tiles.
Two of these are directly adjacent to the transversal tile and lie completely inside the coarse
ﬂat tile; in fact, each of those belong to two diﬀerent ﬂower stalks. The other two long tiles
lie just half inside the coarse tile. Hence altogether we obtain six whole long tiles and 12
half long tiles inside the coarse ﬂat tile.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
339
Figure 19 Long tiles A, B adjacent to transversal tile T at
edge e are connected by a ﬂat tile F (projection plane e⊥)
of a ﬂat tile into the plane perpendicular to any of its edges is always a rhomb
with angles
1
10 · 2π and 2
5 · 2π, see Fig. 19. Thus the coarse tile cuts out a
fraction of
1
10 from the lenses sitting on an outer edge and 2
5 from those on
the inner edges. Therefore denoting the long tiles by L and the ﬂat tiles by F
we obtain for the number of tiles, using the Theorems 3.6, 3.9 and Lemma 3
of the Appendix:
6

2· 1
2L


	

acute vertices
+

7+ 12
2

L + 6F

	

interior part
+ 6
 1
10(5L+5F)


	

outer lenses
+ 6
2
5(5L+5F)


	

inner lenses
= 34L + 21F.
□
3.4.2. Subdivision of the long tile. Long tiles inside the coarse long tile Also
in this case we ﬁrst want to examine which of the 20 long tiles of the ﬁne tiling
SME surrounding each old vertex lie inside the coarse long tile.
Theorem 3.11. At the six obtuse vertices always one whole long tile and four
half long tiles (belonging to the ﬁne tiling SME) lie inside the coarse long tile.
At the two acute vertices always one whole long tile of the ﬁne tiling SME lies
inside the coarse long tile.
Proof.
Comments on Fig. 20:
•
Three vertices of an icosahedron which together span a long tile seen from
its obtuse vertex are marked purple, three vertices of an icosahedron
which together span a long tile seen from its acute vertex are marked
orange.
•
Yellow marked are always 15 of the 20 possibilities to build a long tile
seen from its acute vertex.
•
Therefore in the left ﬁgure the triangle highlighted in yellow corresponds
to a long tile at an obtuse vertex lying completely inside the coarse long
tile and the four numbered triangles correspond to long tiles lying half
inside the coarse long tile.

340
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 20 Left the schematic representation of an obtuse
vertex of the long tile, right an acute vertex of the long tile
always together with 15 of the 20 possibilities to build a long
tile seen from its acute vertex
•
Similarly, in the right ﬁgure the triangle highlighted in yellow corresponds
to a long tile at an acute vertex lying completely inside the coarse long
tile.
□
The interior part. The question of ﬁlling the interior part must be answered
in two steps. We ﬁrst examine the shape of the interior part.
Comments on Fig. 21:
•
The inner lenses 1, 2, 3 and 4, 5, 6 pairwise share a rhomb. For example:
lense 2 has a rhomb (marked green) in common with lense 1 and lense 3.
Lense 1 and lense 3 also share a rhomb, but being perpendicular to the
viewing direction we just see the edge marked yellow, see left ﬁgure.
•
The outer lenses of the long tile form a ring of lenses, see right ﬁgure.
Each outer lense shares a rhomb with both of its neighbour lenses, marked
green.
Considering the results from 3.1 to 3.3 we obtain:
Theorem 3.12. The interior part of the coarse long tile has the shape of two
intersecting rhombic triacontahedra intersecting in a ﬂat tile of the ﬁne tiling
SME.
Proof. We investigate the cross section along the long diagonal of the coarse
long tile, perpendicular to one of the faces:
Comments on Fig. 22:
•
The “edges” AB and CD are both long diagonals of a coarse rhomb,
while AC and BD are edges of a coarse rhomb
•
The four orange marked vertices of the cross section are old vertices
•
The yellow parallelograms and the orange rhombs are the long tiles sur-
rounding any old vertex, the lenses are marked green
•
The drawn rhombs and lenses enclose a pink marked gap. It has the shape
of two intersecting rhombic triacontahedra intersecting in a ﬂat tile of the
ﬁne tiling SME, marked purple, cf. footnote 21
□
In a second step we ask: which tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME ﬁll these intersecting
rhombic triacontahedra? For a better understanding we ﬁrst have to get in

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
341
Figure 21 Left the connection between three of the inner
lenses, right the outer lenses of the long tile rotated by 90◦
and isolated from the rest of the tile (colour ﬁgure online)
Figure 22 The cross section of the interior part
Figure 23 Minilense23
touch23 with another convex equilateral polyhedron. We call it minilense and
it is bounded by 12 golden rhombs with 14 vertices and 24 edges, see Fig. 23.
With the help of the minilenses it is possible to construct an invariant structure
inside the two intersecting rhombic triacontahedra of the coarse long tile.
23By courtesy of Paul Hildebrandt, Zoometool Inc.

342
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Theorem 3.13. The interior part of the coarse long tile is subdivided by an in-
variant structure consisting of seven ﬂat and eight long tiles and six minilenses
in the ﬁne tiling SME.
Proof. The considerations made in 3.1 and 3.2 have been too coarse in some
sense: in order to investigate what happens to an arbitrary coarse long tile
under deﬂation we actually don’t have to work with the whole window V .
Excursus 1
Let zE be a point of an arbitrary tiling ME in the projection space E and
assume that zE is an acute vertex of a long tile with edge vectors vi, vj, vk.24
Therefore besides zE also the seven remaining vertices of that long tile must
belong to the tiling ME, i.e. the points zE + v for v ∈{vi, vj, vk, vi + vj, vi +
vk, vj + vk, vi + vj + vk}. According to the equivalences in (2.10) and (2.11)
we observe the following conditions for the corresponding point zF in the
orthogonal space F:
1. zF ∈V
2. zF + w ∈V for w∈{wi, wj, wk, wi + wj, wi + wk, wj + wk, wi + wj + wk}
Let Ω(i,j,k) be the part of the window V satisfying the conditions (1) and (2).
Then we obtain
zF ∈Ω(i,j,k) ⇐⇒from zE arises a long tile by vi, vj, vk
(3.5)
Ω(i,j,k) itself has the shape of a long tile, see Lemma 5 in the Appendix.
According to the 20 possibilities of choosing three pairwise direct icosahedral
neighbours, cf. footnote 24, there are altogether 20 congruent regions inside
the window V realizing a long tile from its acute vertex. Each of these regions
is also called region of type Ω.25
From excursus 1 it follows: let zE′ be an old vertex of the coarse tiling ME′
and assume that from zE′ arises a coarse long tile from its acute vertex by the
basic vectors vi and vj as well as vk. Then it holds true
zF ′ ∈Ω(i,j,k)
(3.6)
for the corresponding point zF ′ in the orthogonal space F and Ω(i,j,k) is the
part of V we have to work with. Hence concerning the question what happens
to the long tile under deﬂation the following steps are neccessary:
1. Apply the deﬂation map T to the region Ω(i,j,k)
2. Find the region of the window V in which the image of Ω(i,j,k) under T
lies
3. Apply S to the results of step 2, cf. footnote 17
24In that case vi, vj, vk are pairwise direct icosahedral neighbours. Altogether there are 20
possible combinations for three pairwise direct neighbours in the icosahedron.
25Of course the same considerations can be made for the long tile seen from its obtuse
vertex and the ﬂat tile seen from its acute or obtuse vertex. The corresponding regions in
the window V always have the same shapes as the tiles we are starting from, cf. Lemma 5
in the appendix.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
343
Figure 24 From left to right three illustrations of the region
of type Ω: perspective, projection and cross section
Figure 25 Illustration of the steps 1–3, where Ω(i,j,k) is
marked orange
Figure 26 From zE arises a double tile by vi, vj, vk
Figure 25 illustrates the steps 1–3: applying T to Ω(i,j,k) (left) means to reduce
it by the factor ϕ3 (middle) and the reduction lies inside a certain red marked
region (right). In order to ﬁgure out what it is about this region it is necessary
to investigate more about the window V and its diﬀerent regions. All in all we
register
zF ′ ∈ϕ3(Ω(i,j,k)) ⊂red marked region
(3.7)
Excursus 2
Again let zE be part of an arbitrary tiling ME. In the sequel of the considera-
tions made in excursus 1 we can ask: where in the window V does zF have to
lie so that from zE arise two long tiles in a row by the basic vectors vi, vj, vk,
as shown in Fig. 26? We call such a tile also double tile.
According to the equivalences in (2.10) and (2.11) as well as the results from
excursus 1 in the orthogonal space F the condition for the existence of such a
double tile spanned by vi, vj, vk in the projection space E is
zF ∈Ω(i,j,k)
and
zF + wi + wj + wk

	

:= d
∈Ω(i,j,k)
(3.8)

344
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 27 Construction of the region of type Γ
That gives us a simple construction guide for the wanted region in V , which
we denote by Γ(i,j,k):
Γ(i,j,k) = Ω(i,j,k) ∩

Ω(i,j,k) −d

(3.9)
It is Γ(i,j,k) ⊂Ω(i,j,k) and also Γ(i,j,k) itself has the shape of a (somewhat
smaller) long tile. Corresponding to the 20 congruent regions of type Ω there
are also 20 congruent regions of type Γ.
Summing up excursus 2 we obtain
zF ∈Γ(i,j,k) ⇐⇒from zE arises a double tile by vi, vj, vk
(3.10)
Based on this knowledge we can return to Fig. 25. The so far unknown red
marked region corresponds to the region denoted by Γ(−i,−j,−k) and therefore
(3.7) means
zF ′ ∈Γ(−i,−j,−k)
i.e. from zE′ arises a double tile by the basic vectors −vi and −vj as well as
−vk. Applying S to this results, cf. step 3, it follows that in the ﬁne tiling
SME from zE′ arises a double tile by the basic vectors ϕ3vi and ϕ3vj as well
as ϕ3vk. Thus we can complete Fig. 22:
By restricting ourselves to the left rhombic triacontahedron of Fig. 28 and
considering Theorem 3.5 we obtain the invariant structure shown in Fig. 29.
It consists of four long tiles and four ﬂat tiles as well as three minilenses.
Comments on Fig. 29:
•
In both parts of the ﬁgure (left and right), the left triacontahedron in-
side the long coarse tile (as shown in Fig. 28) is projected to the plane
perpendicular to the long diagonal of the coarse tile. This projection is a
regular hexagon.
–
Left View from the acute vertex (marked with A in Fig. 28) of the
second tile of the “doubled tile” (second long tile in Fig. 28) in the
direction of the long diagonal up to the obtuse vertex (marked with
O in Fig. 28) of the connecting ﬂat tile,
–
Right View from O in Fig. 28) in the opposite direction,
•
Left At each of the three faces of the “doubled” tile (dashed lines) adjacent
to A a long tile is adjoined. Any two of these long tiles having only an
edge in common are connected by a ﬂat tile, like in Fig. 19.

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
345
Figure 28 The two double tiles existing in the ﬁne tiling
SME on the two acute vertices of the coarse long tile are
marked yellow
Figure 29 Structure of the left triacontahedron inside the
coarse long tile
•
Right The vertex O is an obtuse vertex of the ﬂat tile connecting the two
triacontahedra. At each of the three faces of that tile (marked with dashed
lines) a minilense is adjoined. Each of these three minilenses shares a face
with the “doubled” tile.
The same considerations hold for the right rhombic triacontahedron of Fig. 28
and therefore we obtain an invariant structure inside the coarse long tile,
which consists of altogether seven ﬂat tiles and eight long tiles as well as
six minilenses.
□
Hence the subdivision of the coarse long tile is known. We prove in the Ap-
pendix, see Lemma 2, that each minilense can be ﬁlled with two long and two
ﬂat tiles and the ﬁlling is unique up to isometries of the minilense. Therefore
we can also calculate the number of ﬁne tiles “subdividing” the coarse long
tile.
Theorem 3.14. An arbitrary long tile of the coarse tiling ME′ is ﬁlled with
altogether 55 long tiles and 34 ﬂat tiles of the ﬁne tiling SME, more precisely,
of 550 tenths of a long tile and 340 tenths of a ﬂat tile.
Proof. Each of the outer lenses belonging to the ring of lenses takes part of the
coarse long tile by the ratio
3
10, each of the inner lenses by the ratio
2
10. This

346
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 30 The three minilenses inside the left rhombic tri-
acontahedron of ﬁgure 28: marked blue and grey, left ﬁgure,
and black, right ﬁgure (colour ﬁgure online)
is seen by projecting the coarse tile into the plane perpendicular to the edge
carrying the lense. The projection of a long tile into the plane perpendicular to
any of its edges is always a rhomb with angles
2
10 · 2π and
3
10 · 2π, see Fig. 19.
Thus the coarse tile cuts out a fraction of
3
10 from the lenses sitting on an
outer edge and
2
10 from those on the inner edges. Therefore denoting again the
long tiles by L and the ﬂat tiles by F we obtain for the number of tiles, using
Theorems 3.11, 3.13 and Lemmas 2, 3:
6 · (L + 4 · 1
2 L)

	

obtuse vertices
+
2 L
	

acute vertices
+ 8 L + 7 F + 6 · (2 L + 2 F)

	

interior part
+ 6 ·
 3
10(5 L + 5 F)


	

outer lenses
+ 6 ·
 2
10(5 L + 5 F)


	

inner lenses
= 55 L + 34 F.
□
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we have analyzed the icosahedral tiling: a certain class of tilings
of euclidean 3-space where all edges are icosahedral vertex vectors, vectors from
the center to a vertex of the regular icosahedron (also called basic vectors).
We have constructed this class of tilings by projecting a subset of the regular
6-dimensional lattice Z6 ⊂R6 onto a certain 3-dimensional aﬃne subspace
E. In fact, the symmetry group G of the icosahedron acts in a canonical way
on R6 by integer matrices, and over the reals, this representation decomposes
into two 3-dimensional irreducible subrepresentations, where the subspace E
is parallel to one of these submodules. The group G acts on the unit cube
C6 ⊂R6 with C = (−1
2, 1
2), and this action has precisely two orbits on the
set of 3-dimenisonal subcubes; their projections to E form the two tiles: a

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
347
long one and a ﬂat one. Further we have constructed an integer invertible
matrix S on R6 commuting with the group action which is expanding on the
submodule F perpendicular to E. This matrix causes what is called deﬂation:
the subdivision of the tiling by a similar tiling whose edge length is smaller by
the factor 1/Φ3 where Φ = (1 +
√
5)/2 is the golden ratio. We observed that
any vertex of the old (coarse) tiling is the common tip of 20 long tiles of the
new (ﬁne) tiling. This determines the subdivision of all coarse edges and 2-
faces, using that any two vertices diﬀering by an icosahedral vertex vector are
actually joined by an edge. With some more eﬀort, the subdivision of the tiles
can also be determined, up to some small areas (lenses and minilenses) whose
ﬁllings may diﬀer just by local isometries (however, the actual ﬁllings of these
areas are not independent from each other as explained in [6]). Thus the local
structure of the tiling is everywhere the same which might be of importance for
the application to quasicrystals: each atom joining the quasicrystal knows its
place. As a consequence we see that the coarse long tile is ﬁlled with 55 long and
34 ﬂat tiles of the ﬁne tiling while for the coarse ﬂat tile these numbers are 34
and 21; however, some of the ﬁlling tiles are decomposed into smaller fractions.
Our main references on aperiodic tilings have been [4,13,17]. We wish to men-
tion in particular the work of Ogawa (see [17,18]) who already found an in-
variant local structure (not complete) for this tiling, and using this he already
computed the above numbers for the subdivision of the tiles. But we also like
to mention the contribution of Coxeter (cf. [21]) who investigated the ﬁve iso-
zonohedra all of which play a prominent role in our investigation. Last not
least, it is hard to imagine how this paper could have been written without
the help of the Zometool construction kit. Even the theoretical idea of a system
of rods which is invariant under certain orthogonal projections was extremely
helpful for us. Therefore we gratefully dedicate this paper to Paul Hildebrandt,
founder and creative head of Zometool Inc. We encourage the reader to build
the subdivisions using the Zoomtool rods since mere photographs of the three-
dimensional situations are hard to understand. We also would be happy to
show our own models to the interested reader.
Appendix
In this appendix we will give some details of the geometry of the icosahedron
and the isozonohedra which are used in the paper.
Convexity and homothety
Lemma 1. Consider a convex set K ⊂Rn and a homothetic map h with scale
factor 0 < t < 1 and ﬁxed point y ∈K. Then K is invariant under h, i.e.
h(K) ⊂K.
Proof. Without loss of generality we can choose the ﬁxed point y as origin.
Then the homothetic map h becomes h = t · I where I is the identity and
0 < t < 1.

348
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Let x be a point inside K then tx is a point inside the reduced polyhedron tK.
Since we have 0 < t < 1 the point tx lies on the line segment [0x] and therefore
tx is inside K, because K is a convex set. Hence we obtain h(K) ⊂K.
□
Minilense and lense
Lemma 2. For the minilense there are precisely two ﬁllings. They are congruent
and consist of two long and two ﬂat tiles.
Proof. By ﬁxing one of the 14 vertices of the minilense, marked orange in Fig. 31
(left) we consider possible tiles adjoining to this vertex inside the minilense.
Comments on Fig. 31:
•
Possibility 1 There is an edge adjoining to the orange vertex, see middle
ﬁgure. Considering Theorem 3.5 the three green marked edges exist. But
hence the ﬁlling of the minilense is completed: two long tiles and a ﬂat
tile adjoin to the orange vertex, a further ﬂat tile adjoins to these three
tiles inside the minilense.
•
Possibility 2 There is no interior edge adjoining to the orange vertex,
see right ﬁgure. Then a ﬂat tile adjoins to the orange vertex, also marked
orange. Considering Theorem 3.5 the green marked edge exists and hence
we obtain a further ﬂat tile as well as to long tiles inside the minilense.
These two possibilities of ﬁlling the minilense are symmetric to the plane per-
pendicular to the central rhomb in Fig. 31.
□
Lemma 3. For the lense there are precisely ten ﬁllings. They are pairwise
congruent and consist of ﬁve long and ﬁve ﬂat tiles.
Proof. Two of the 22 vertices of each lense are ﬂowers, cf. Figs. 12 and 13. At
one of these ﬂowers we start ﬁlling the lense.
Comments on Fig. 32:
•
We start at the blue marked ﬂower vertex denoted by B. The vertex at
the end of the ﬂower stalk, an old vertex, is marked orange and the points
of the blossom spanned by the petals of B are marked red and green, cf.
Fig. 12
•
Up to a ﬁvefold rotational symmetry we can only span a long tile and
two ﬂat tiles using the petals, cf. Fig. 4. In the left ﬁgure the long tile is
in the middle, left and right a ﬂat tile always adjoins.
Figure 31 The ﬁlling of the minilense

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
349
Figure 32 The ﬁlling of the lense
•
Only the three black marked points lie inside the lense, all colored marked
points are part of the shell of the lense, cf. Fig. 12. Hence in view of
Theorem 3.5 three further tiles exist: two long tiles, adjoining to the ﬂat
and the long tiles built by the petals, and a ﬂat tile between these two
long tiles. One vertex of this ﬂat tile is the second ﬂower vertex of the
lense, denoted by B′ and marked blue, see right ﬁgure.
•
Therefore we obtain a structure consisting of altogether three long and
three ﬂat tiles. The rest of the interior part of the lense is a minilense,
cf. Fig. 31. In the right ﬁgure the rhombs belonging to the lower part of
shell of the minilense are marked orange.
•
Note that the two ﬂower vertices B and B′ are antipodal points. Therefore
the blossom spanned by the petals of B is antipodal to the blossom
spanned by the petals of B′.
Because the minilense can be ﬁlled in two congruent ways, see Fig. 31, there
are altogether ten ﬁllings of the lense, being pairwise congruent.
□
Lemma 4. The ratio between the long diagonal of the long tile and the short
diagonal of the ﬂat tile corresponds to Φ3.
Proof. The diagonals of both tiles are the projections of the diagonals of a
3-dimensional subcube C3 of the 6-dimensional unit cube C6 onto E.
In general the diagonals of any 3-cube split up into three parts, in Fig. 33
denoted by P1, P2, P3. Since the projection preserves proportions it is suﬃcient
to investigate
P1L
P1S
where P1L denotes the P1-part of the long diagonal of the long tile and P1S
the P1-part of the short diagonal of the ﬂat tile.

350
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 33 Diagonal of a three-dimensional cube
Figure 34 Icosahedron and its golden rectangles
In the following we consider the long tile spanned by the pairwise direct neigh-
bours 3, 4, 6 and the ﬂat tile spanned by the pairwise indirect neighbours
−1, 2, 5, see Fig. 34, left. Note that 3, 4, 6 and −1, 2, 5 lie in two parallel planes.
Furthermore we assume that the two golden rectangles spanned by the vertices
±3, ±5 (marked blue) and ±4, ±6 (marked green) have edge length 2 and 2Φ.
Hence we obtain
P1L
P1S
= |OP|
|OP ′| = |OS|
|OS′| =
Φ
Φ −2ϕ =
Φ
1 −ϕ = Φ
ϕ2 = Φ3
because |OS′| = |OS| −(|SS′′| + |S′′S′|) and |SS′′| = |S′′S′| = Φ −1 = ϕ, see
Fig. 34, right.
□
Locus of deﬂation
Lemma 5. The region Ω ⊂V to where a given vertex of any admissible long
tile is projected has again the shape of a long tile. Vice versa, if πF (z) ∈Ω for
some z ∈Z6, then πE(z) is a vertex of an admissible long tile. The analogous
statements hold for a ﬂat tile.
Proof. The unit cube C6 is the Cartesian product of two 3-dimensional sub-
cubes: C6 = C3
1×C3
2 ⊂R3
1×R3
2 where C3
1 ⊂Span (e1, e2, e3), C3
2 ⊂Span (e4, e5,

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
351
e6) and e1, . . . , e6 denote the basis vectors of the ambient space W ∼= R6 per-
muted by the icosahedral group G like the oriented diagonals of the icosa-
hedron, cf. page 4. The subcubes C3
1 and C3
2 are inequivalent under G, see
Lemma 6 below, and hence project to diﬀerent types of tiles onto the pro-
jection space E. Further, we know by Fig. 1: if the E-projection πE of a
3-dimensional subcube is a long tile, then its F-projection πF is a ﬂat tile, and
vice versa. A subset A ⊂R6 is called admissible if A ⊂Σ with Σ = E + C6 or
equivalently if πF (A) ⊂V = πF (C6), see (2.9) and (2.10).
In particular, the 3-dimensional subcube Xy := C3
1 × {y} with y ∈R3
2 is
admissible if and only if y ∈C3
2. We have C6 = 
y∈C3
2 Xy with Xy = C3
1 ×{y}
and thus Σ = 
y∈C3
2 Xy + E. If Xyo ⊂Σ for some yo ∈R3
2, then there is some
y ∈C3
2 with y −yo ∈E. But E ∩R3
2 = {0} and hence yo = y ∈C3
2.
Choose any x ∈C3
1. Let Yx = {x} × C3
2. Then we obtain
πF (Xy) ⊂V = πF (C6)
⇐⇒
πF (x, y) ∈πF (Yx)
because πF (Xy) ⊂V
⇐⇒y ∈C3
2 ⇐⇒(x, y) ∈Yx ⇐⇒πF (x, y) ∈πF (Yx).
Now a tile T = πE(Xy) is admissible iﬀT ′ = πF (Xy) ⊂V . If T is a long
tile, then T ′ is ﬂat. When T has vertex πE(x, y), admissability means that
πF (x, y) ∈T ′′ = πF (Yx), and since T ′ = πF (Xy) was ﬂat, Ω = T ′′ is a long
tile. A similar argument holds for the ﬂat tile.
□
Coxeter’s golden isozonohedra
According to H.M.S. Coxeter a zonohedron is as a convex polyhedron each of
whose faces is centrally symmetrical, see [3]. If its faces are all golden rhombs
then a zonohedron is called golden isozonohedron, cf. [3,21]. Altogether there
are ﬁve golden isozonohedra. In Coxeter’s notation: the rhombic triacontahe-
dron K30, the rhombic icosahedron F20 and the rhombic dodecahedron B12,
denoted according to their discoverers Kepler, Fedorov and Bilinski, as well as
the long and the ﬂat tile, denoted by A6 and O6, where A stands for acute
and O for oblate. The index speciﬁes the number of faces, see Fig. 35, from
left to right. They all occur in the icosahedral tilings: the two hexahedra are
the two sorts of tiles, dodecahedron and icosahedron are the minilense and the
lense, and the triacontahedron is the shape of the window. We want to show
that these bodies are projections of the 6-dimensional cube and its subcubes
onto our 3-dimensional subspace E ⊂R6. Essentially, this has been observed
already by Kowalewski [14] in 1938.26
Lemma 6. K30 = πE(C6), F20 = πE(C5), B12 = πE(C4), O6 = πE(C3
1)
and A6 = πE(C3
2). The faces of these bodies are golden rhombs congruent to
πE(C2).
Proof. The icosahedral group G ∼= A5 × Z2 leaves C6 ⊂R6 invariant. It acts
transitively on the set of faces of C6 with dimension or codimension one since
it acts transitively on the oriented icosahedric diagonals corresponding to the
26By courtesy of Paul Hildebrandt, Zometool Inc.

352
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
Figure 35 The ﬁve golden isozonohedra
vectors ±ei, i = 1, . . . , 6, the unit normals of the codimenison-one faces. Fur-
ther any two of the 6 diagonals are neighbours, hence the group G acts also
transitively on the pair of diagonals, i.e. on the subsets {±ei, ±ej} for i ̸= j.
Each of these subsets determines a class of parallel faces of C6 with dimen-
sion or codimension two. But G acts no longer transitively on the triples of
diagonals. In fact, there are precisely two diﬀerent conﬁgurations: the diag-
onal vectors may form a chain, an isosceles but not equilateral triangle, like
those corresponding to e1, e2, e3 or else an equilateral triangle, like the ones cor-
responding to e4, e5, e6. Thus we obtain precisely two subcubes C3
1, C3
2 with
dimension or codimension 3 which are inequivalent under G.
Since convexity is preserved under orthogonal projections, πE(Ck) are convex
bodies, where k = 3, 4, 5, 6. We have already seen, cf. page 6, that πE(C2) is
a golden rhomb. The 2-dimensional boundary of πE(Ck) consists of projec-
tions of 2-dimensional cubes C2, hence these bodies are bounded by golden
rhombs. There are
k
2

classes of parallel 2-dimensional faces in Ck. Every class
contributes to the boundary of πE(Ck): if we consider a 2-face C2 = Ck ∩P
for some 2-plane P ⊂Rk and its projection πE(P) ⊂E, the hyperplane
(P +F)∩Rk is also projected to P. Then a parallel hypersurface (P ′ +F)∩Rk
(where P ′ and P are parallel) will be a support hypersurface of Ck, and the
corresponding face Ck ∩P ′ is projected to the boundary of πE(Ck). In fact,
since Ck as well as πE(Ck) are invariant under the antipodal map −I, each
2-face appears (at least) twice, up to parallelity. But by convexity it cannot
appear more than twice: the boundary of πE(Ck) cannot contain more than
two parallel 2-faces since the plane of a 2-face in the boundary of πE(Ck) is
a support plane, and obviously there are not more than two parallel support
planes for a convex body in 3-space. Thus πE(Ck) has 2
k
2

= k(k −1) 2-faces
which is the right number: 30 for k = 6, 20 for k = 5, 12 for k = 4 and 6 for
k = 3.
□
Remark 4.1. Because of v1 + v2 + v3 + v4 + v5 =
√
5 v6, see footnote 5, the
diameter of F20 = πE(C5) (the lense) is
√
5 |v| and the diameter of K30 =
πE(C6) (the window) is
√
5 |v| + |v| = 2Φ |v| where |v| is the edge length.
References
[1] Baake, M., Kramer, P., Schlottmann, M., Zeidler, D.:Planar patterns with ﬁve-
fold symmetry as sections of periodic structures in 4-space. Int. J. Modern Phys.
B 4, 2217–2268 (1990)

Vol. 108 (2017)
The icosahedral quasiperiodic tiling and its self-similarity
353
[2] Bohr, H.: Zur Theorie der fastperiodischen Funktionen. Acta Math. 45, 29–127
(1924) (46, 101–214 1924)
[3] Coxeter, H.S.M.: The Beauty of Geometry: Twelve Essays. Dover Publications,
Mineola 1999. Unver¨anderte Neuver¨oﬀentlichung von Twelve Geometric Essays.
Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale (1968)
[4] De Bruijn, N.G.: Algebraic Theory of Penrose’s Non-Periodic Tilings of the
Plane. Indag. Math. 43, 39–66 (1981). http://www.math.brown.edu/∼res/
M272/pentagrid
[5] Dietl, R.: Penrose-Muster: Unterteilung und Projektionsmethode. Schriftliche
Hausarbeit zur 1. Staatspr¨ufung f¨ur das Lehramt an Gymnasien. Augsburg
(2008).
http://myweb.rz.uni-augsburg.de/∼eschenbu/ZulassungsarbeitScan.
PDF
[6] Dietl, R.: Dreidimensionale Penrose-Muster und Selbst¨ahnlichkeit. Dissertation.
Augsburg (2011). http://myweb.rz.uni-augsburg.de/∼eschenbu/diss dietl
[7] Eschenburg, J.-H.: Die Zahl F¨unf und die Quasikristalle. Augsburg (2004).
http://myweb.rz.uni-augsburg.de/∼eschenbu/penrose
[8] Eschenburg, J.-H., Rivertz, H.J.: Self similar symmetric planar tilings. J. Geom.
87, 55–75 (2007)
[9] Eschenburg, J.-H., Rivertz, H.J.: The Penrose Decagon (2016) (preprint)
[10] Katz, A., Duneau, M.: Quasiperiodic patterns and icosahedral symmetry. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 47, 181–196 (1986)
[11] Kepler, J.: Strena Seu de Nive Sexangula, Frankfurt 1511. In: Caspar, M., Ham-
mer, F. (eds.) Gesammelte Werke, vol. IV, pp. 259–280. M¨unchen (1941). http://
www.thelatinlibrary.com/kepler/strena.html
[12] Kepler,
J.:
Harmoniae
Mundi,
Linz
(1619).
http://archive.org/stream/
ioanniskepplerih00kepl#page/
[13] Kramer, P., Neri, R.: On periodic and non-periodic space ﬁllings of Em obtained
by projection. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A 40, 580–587 (1984)
[14] Kowalewski, G.: Der Keplersche K¨orper und andere Bauspiele. K.F. Koehlers
Antiquarium, Leipzig (1938)
[15] Mackay, A.L.: De Nive Quinquangula: On the Pentagonal Snowﬂake, Soviet
Physics. Crystallography 26, 517–522 (1981)
[16] Mackay, A.L.: Crystallography and the Penrose Pattern. Phys. A 114, 609–613
(1982)
[17] Ogawa, T.: On the Structure of a Quasicrystal—Three-Dimensional Penrose
Transformation. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 54, 3205–3208 (1985)
[18] Ogawa, T.: Symmetry of three-dimensional quasicrystals. Mater. Sci. Forum 22–
24, 187–200 (1987)
[19] Penrose, R.: Pentaplexity—a class of non-periodic tilings of the plane. Math.
Intell. 2, 32–37 (1979)
[20] Senechal, M.: The Mysterious Mr. Ammann. Math. Intell. 26, 10–21 (2004)
[21] Senechal, M.: Donald and the Golden Rhombohedra. In: Davis, C., Ellers
E.W. (eds.) The Coxeter Legacy. AMS Fields, Providence (2006)
[22] Shechtman D., Blech, I., Gratias, D., Cahn, J.W.: Metallic phase with long-
range orientational order and no translational symmetry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53,
1951–1953 (1984)

354
R. M. K. Dietl and J.-H. Eschenburg
J. Geom.
[23] Stern, D.: Penrose type tilings. Diplomarbeit, Augsburg (2002). http://myweb.
rz.uni-augsburg.de/∼eschenbu/diplomarbeit
Ruth Maria Katharina Dietl and Jost-Hinrich Eschenburg
Universit¨atsstrasse 14
86135 Augsburg
Germany
e-mail: rumaka@gmx.de
eschenburg@math.uni-augsburg.de
Received: July 17, 2012.
Revised: May 16, 2016.

