The Visual Computer
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-022-02486-2
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements
and possible solutions
Ankit Garg1
· Anuj Kumar Singh1
Accepted: 27 March 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
Nowadays, many efﬁcient content-aware image resizing techniques are being used to safeguard the prominent regions of the
image so that aesthetically pleasing retargeting results can be generated. In this paper, ﬁrstly various energy map generation
methods are analyzed based on the conventional seam carving technique. After objective image quality assessment of the
retargeted image obtained from the conventional seam carving technique, it has been found that the percentage of similarity
obtained from the gradient energy map generation method is 77.44% which is higher than the other methods. Further, to
minimize the deformations on the parameters such as luminance, color, and structure the improved seam carving technique
utilizes the gradient energy generation method to obtain the energy map of all kinds of input images during the retargeting
operation.Tochecktheefﬁciencyoftheimprovedretargetingtechniquetheobtainedresultsarecomparedwiththeconventional
seam carving technique based on different properties of the objects present in the image. After objective image quality
assessment based on SSIM, it is found that the improved seam carving technique produces 70% similarity between reference
andretargetedimageswhichis10%higherthantheconventionalseamcarvingtechnique.Furthermore,theenergymodiﬁcation
operation of the improved seam carving technique also plays its signiﬁcant contribution to minimize the deformation on the
deﬁned parameters. After the subjective and objective image quality assessment, it is found that the high percentage similarity
in the retargeted results justiﬁes the efﬁciency of the improved seam carving technique.
Keywords Seam carving · Image retargeting · Saliency detection · Multi-operator · Energy map · Gradient operators
1 Introduction
With the exponential growth of digitization, images are being
used on various multimedia devices with varying screen
sizes. To ﬁt the image in the small screen the aspect ratio
of the image is required to change in a content-aware fash-
ion. The objective of all the available retargeting techniques
is to minimize the structural deformations on the salient
regions present in the image. In the initial phase of the image
retargeting technique ﬁrstly, the energy map of the image is
created using various energy map generation methods such
as entropy, gradient, and histogram of gradient (HoG). These
methods identify pixels from the image where the variation
in the intensity is considerably high [1]. The image retarget-
ing operation requires four major steps [2]: (a) generating
energy map of the image; (b) determining optimal seams; (c)
B Ankit Garg
ankitgitm@gmail.com
1
Amity University, Gurugram, Haryana 122413, India
eliminate least energy pixels from the image; (d) generate
retargeted image.
From the literature [3–7], it is found that no single image
retargeting operator is best suited to generate distortion-free
retargeted images. Therefore, to improve the process of
image retargeting the researchers are trying to develop
the hybrid sequence of image retargeting operators by
integrating scaling, cropping, warping, and seam carving
techniques. The conventional seam carving technique suffers
from various limitations that have been observed by the
researchers while the development of its improved version.
The presence of line structure, curved-shaped objects, highly
overlapped objects, and symmetry objects are some major
factors that are responsible for image deformations. From
the literature [8–10] it is found that the conventional seam
carving technique produces deformation on the prominent
line segments when the successive optimal seams intersect
them at the same location. The conventional seam carving
technique selects the least energy pixels from the image
and adds them into the seam paths for their elimination. In
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
image forensics various techniques are being developed to
detect the locations of objects deleted by the seam carving
technique [11]. The seam carving technique demands high
computational time to eliminate optimal seams in successive
manner. Therefore, an improved seam carving technique is
proposed that eliminates or insert multiple pixel wide batch
seam in a single iteration [12].
The improved seam carving technique (ISC) utilizes the
gradient energy map generation method to obtain the energy
map of the image. The structure of the prominent regions
highlighted by the energy map can be preserved from defor-
mations using energy enhancement operation. The improved
seam carving technique increases the energy of the local
neighborhood at the intersection of optimal seams on the
line structure and diverts them at other locations. The diver-
sion of seams in this manner restricts the other optimal seams
to be intersected at the same location. The deformation on
the objects can produce an aliasing effect as the nonadjacent
pixels become neighbors after retargeting operation. There-
fore, to minimize the effect of the aliasing the retargeting
techniques can be integrated with advanced antialiasing tech-
niques [13]. The existing image retargeting techniques can
be used to perform other useful tasks such as inpainting [14],
object removal [15], content ampliﬁcation [1], and image
synthesis [16], video resizing [17], etc. To justify the per-
formance of newly developed image retargeting techniques
and to compare their results researchers are utilizing vari-
ous image databases such as RetargetME [18] and CUHK
[19]. Further, to assess the visual quality of the retargeted
images subjective and objective image quality assessment
can be carried out. In the ﬁeld of image quality assessment
(IQA)severalimagequalityassessmentmetricsareavailable.
The objective of every IQA metric is to provide assessment
scores that are similar to human (subjective) scores. In this
paper, the performance of the improved seam carving tech-
nique is justiﬁed using subjective and objective image quality
assessments that are applied to the retargeted images. In the
objective IQA structural similarity index metric (SSIM) is
used to obtain objective scores based on three parameters
such as luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). The SSIM
helps the observers to obtain different values on the loss of
correlation, luminance distortion, and contrast distortion.
The major contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows:
1. The paper presents the efﬁciency of the energy map
generation methods based on the experiment (phase-1).
Deformations on the image are observed based on some
parameters such as luminance (l), color (c), and structure
(s).
2. The paper presents the objective image quality assess-
ment of the retargeted results obtained from the conven-
tional seam carving technique justiﬁes the effectiveness
of the gradient energy map generation method.
3. The paper presents an experiment (phase-2) to compare
the results obtained from conventional and improved
seam carving techniques.
4. In the paper, the performance of the improved seam
carving technique is justiﬁed based on objective and sub-
jective image quality assessment.
5. The paper highlights the limitations of the conventional
seam carving algorithm and provides possible solutions
to overcome them.
6. At the end of the paper, possible future directions are
provided to the researchers to develop improved seam
carving techniques.
In this paper, Sect. 2 provides the background study that
mainly focuses on the literature that pertains to the conven-
tionalseamcarvingtechniques.InSect.3someterminologies
are discussed in detail to improve the understanding of the
reader. Section 4 provides the details about the ﬂow of two-
phase experiments (phase-1 and phase-2). Section 5 explains
the energy map generation methods that can be used in the
processofimageretargeting.Section6focusesontheprocess
of the conventional seam carving technique, and its limita-
tions. In Sect. 7 various requirements are identiﬁed related
to the dataset, subjective IQA, and objective IQA to experi-
ment(phase-1andphase-2)ontheimages.Section8provides
the details of the experiment (phase-1). In this section, the
performance of the conventional seam carving technique is
analyzed based on different energy map generation meth-
ods. To justify the performance of energy map generation
methods an objective IQA is performed on the retargeted
results. In Sect. 9 the critical analysis of the experiment
(phase-1) is given that justiﬁes the performance of gradi-
ent energy map generation method based on SSIM values.
In Sect. 10 the details about the experiment (phase-2) are
given. Furthermore, the results obtained from conventional
and improved seam carving techniques are compared based
on the objective and subjective IQA. In Sect. 11 the crit-
ical analysis of the experiment (phase-2) is provided that
explores improvements and limitations of improved seam
carving technique. Section 12 provides various solutions to
overcome the limitations of the conventional seam carving
technique. In Sect. 13 various advantages and limitations of
ISC are identiﬁed. Finally, Sect. 14 concludes the overall
analysis conducted in the paper and provides some future
directions to the researchers to develop advanced image retar-
geting algorithms.
2 Background study
In this section, an intensive literature review is carried out on
the existing seam carving technique. Different important and
relevant papers are selected based on some speciﬁc keywords
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
such as seam carving, saliency detection, edge detection,
content-aware-retargeting, Multi-Operator, and image qual-
ity assessment (IQA). In the selection of relevant papers,
certain important factors such as initial development, prob-
lem deﬁnition, and the latest research work have been
considered. Moreover, the background study focuses on the
signiﬁcant contributions of researchers in the ﬁeld of image
retargeting.
2.1 Seam carving operator
Seam carving is an image retargeting technique that is being
used to change the size of the image in a content-aware
fashion. The optimal seam paths are computed based on
the identiﬁed least energy pixels from the image. After the
elimination of the optimal seams, the size of the image can
be changed with fewer structural deformations. To improve
the efﬁciency of the conventional seam carving technique
researchers are integrating other image processing tech-
niques such as shadow detection algorithms [20, 21], line
detection algorithms [22], edge detection algorithm [23], and
saliency detection algorithms [24] with it.
Patel et al. [25] proposed an image retargeting technique
that accelerates the process of seam carving technique. The
novelty of the proposed technique is to eliminate or insert the
optimal seams that are generated by the selection of multiple
least energy pixels in their paths. The computational time of
theproposedtechniqueislowandisbasedonthewidthfactor.
Xu et al. [26] proposed an image retargeting technique based
on quasi-conformal mapping. The novelty of the proposed
technique is to set up a bijective map between the source
and retargeted image. The mapping is setup to safeguard the
salient spatial information of the image. Guo et al. [27] pro-
pose a method to preserve the shape of prominent contents of
the image. The novelty of the proposed technique is to com-
bine the gradient graph and the signiﬁcant graph to redeﬁne
the energy of the image. The combined approach signiﬁ-
cantly identiﬁes the important contents of the image that are
needed to protect from the distortions. Zhang et al. [28] pro-
posed a hybrid sequence of operators to retarget the images.
The novelty of the proposed technique is the utilization of
seam caving in the combination of warping operator. In the
proposed technique the focused area of the image remains
intact using warping. The seam ﬁnding scheme of the pro-
posed technique addresses the problem of focus detection.
Shaﬁeyan et al. [29] proposed an efﬁcient energy function.
The integration of saliency map, depth map, and gradient
map to obtain useful information from the image is the nov-
elty of the proposed technique. After assigning weights to
all the importance maps the applicability of seam carving
is based on the switching threshold. Solanki et al. [30] pro-
posed a retargeting technique that utilizes an energy gradient
function. In the energy map and cumulative map, the least
value of the three neighborhoods is computed and then added
to obtain the value of the pixel to form a new cost matrix.
Guo et al. [31] proposed an improved seam carving tech-
nique based on image blocking. The novelty of the proposed
technique is to segment the image into protected and non-
protected blocks. After segmentation, each block is assigned
to the corresponding carving seams. To maintain the balance
in the carving process the proposed technique fuses block-
ing with the seam carving (SC) method. Gharahbagh et al.
[32] presented an improved retargeting approach that mini-
mizes the computational time of seam carving. The novelty
of the proposed technique is the utilization of Dijkstra to
obtain the optimal seams. To minimize the computational
time the unlimited Dijkstra depth search is replaced with
a limited depth search. Patel et al. [33] proposed an efﬁ-
cient imageretargetingtechniquethat preserves thereﬂection
symmetry present in the image. The novelty of the proposed
technique is to identify the symmetry regions using symme-
try axis detection and object proposals. After that, optimized
reﬂected optimal seams are identiﬁed using the seam carv-
ing approach. Arai [34] proposed an improved seam carving
technique that incorporates a mechanism to efﬁciently switch
from the traditional method to resizing method based on the
size of the objects. The novelty of the proposed technique
is to preserve the shape of the dominant objects present in
the image using the resizing method. In the proposed tech-
nique video data compression based on the seam carving in
the time domain is presented. Choi et al. [35] proposed a
solution for panorama images when scattered information
and distorted contours are mainly found. The novelty of the
proposed technique is the utilization of dynamic program-
ming to obtain the weight map that reduces the panoramic
deformations. No single operator is best suited to generate
aesthetically pleasing image retargeting results. Therefore,
researchers are introducing a hybrid sequence of operators
that combines various existing operators such as seam carv-
ing, cropping, warping, and scaling. The computational time
required to generate retargeted results using multi-operator
sequences is signiﬁcantly high. Rubinstein et al. [36] pro-
posed a hybrid sequence of image retargeting operators such
as cropping, scaling, seam carving, warping, and Multi-Op.
The novelty of the proposed technique is the optimized inte-
gration of resizing operators in resizing space, incorporating
Bi-Directional Warping (BDW), and dynamic programming
to obtain retargeted results. Dong et al. [37] proposed an
image retargeting technique that is guided by the image sim-
ilarity measure. The novelty of the proposed technique is
the applicability of the combined approach in the process
of image retargeting using seam carving, scaling, and crop-
ping. To execute the resizing operation using hybrid sequence
dynamic programming is used. Kiess et al. [38] proposed
a technique in which seam carving and cropping operators
are combined. The novelty of the proposed technique is the
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
utilization of seam carving up to a deﬁned threshold to sup-
press the visual artifacts. Later on, a variable-size cropping
window is selected to repeatedly perform the retargeting
operation. Zhou et al. [39] proposed a multi-operator-based
image retargeting that incorporates the Markov decision-
making process. In the proposed approach reinforcement
learning (RL) is applied to optimize the entire process. The
novelty of the proposed technique is to design high-level
semantic and aesthetic reward functions. In addition to this,
a new semantics and aesthetics aware multi-operator image
retargeting (SAMIR) framework have also been proposed.
Valdez-Balderas et al. [40] proposed a novel image retar-
geting method that suppresses the warping distortions by
utilizing the cropping operator. In the proposed approach
ﬁrstly the importance map is obtained using saliency detec-
tion techniques. Then, axis-aligned deformations are applied
to compute the warping mesh. Finally, the cropping operator
is applied to generate the retargeted results. Mei et al. [41]
proposed an image retargeting technique that provides a solu-
tion based on deep supervised image retargeting. The novelty
of the proposed technique is to perform resizing operation
in feature space based on the distortion process of resized
images.
3 Related terminologies
In the analysis of the conventional seam carving technique,
various terminologies have been used to connect various con-
cepts. The subsequent sections provide discussion on the
terminologies that helps the readers and researchers to eas-
ily understand the experiments and analysis conducted on
different types of input images.
3.1 Energy map
The conventional seam carving technique utilizes the energy
map that can be used to identify the low energy pixels to
generate the optimal seams paths. The elimination of optimal
seams from the image can reduce its size and preserve the
image ROIs from deformations. To obtain the energy map
various energy generation methods such as Entropy, HoG,
and Gradient are used [42].
3.2 Aliasing
In literature [10, 14, 43] various improvements have been
suggested to reduce the deformations on the line segments.
The integration of line detection algorithms at the initial
stage of the conventional seam carving technique can identify
the prominent line structures that can be preserved from the
distortions. The aliasing effect can be visible due to the inter-
section of multiple optimal seams on the same location on the
line structures. After the elimination of optimal seams, the
nonadjacent pixels become neighbors and distort the struc-
ture of line segments [44, 45].
3.3 Image segmentation
The conventional seam carving technique also suffers from
the segmentation of images when a large portion is elimi-
nated from them. The artiﬁcial inclusion of low energy by
the user in the salient regions of the image forces the optimal
seam to travel on image ROIs. The seam elimination process
eliminates a bunch of least energy pixels from the image that
lies inside the objects. After the elimination of a number of
pixels, the image can be segmented into different regions
due to the creation of false edges. To overcome this problem
image stitching techniques can be integrated with the con-
ventional seam carving technique so that different segments
of the image can be joined in an effective manner and the
distortion cannot be visible to the viewer [46, 47].
3.4 Saliency detection
In the conventional seam carving technique, the visual qual-
ity of the retargeted results depends upon the energy map. A
low-quality energy map may announce the presence of only
a few high-energy pixels in the image that can damage the
structure of the salient regions. To overcome this problem,
the conventional seam carving technique can be integrated
with the edge detection operators such as Canny, Sobel, and
Prewitt [48]. To improve the efﬁciency of the seam carv-
ing technique it is required to select the right edge detection
operator. A number of identiﬁed edges from the image rep-
resent the prominent areas that are required to protect from
the deformation [49, 50].
4 Flow of experiments (phase-1 and phase-2)
To test the efﬁciency of the existing seam carving technique,
experiments are conducted in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase
of the experiment the three energy map generation methods
such as Entropy, Histogram of gradient (HoG), and Gradient
method are selected to obtain the energy map of the image.
The obtained energy map is supplied to the existing seam
carving technique to identify the least energy pixels present
in the image. To reduce the size of the input image optimal
seams are identiﬁed. The optimal paths are constructed by
iteratively adding the least energy pixels. The optimal seams
are eliminated from the image and nonadjacent pixels in the
image become the neighbor to obtain the retargeted image.
In the experiment, the deformations of the image contents
are observed based on the three deﬁned parameters namely
luminance, color, and structure. After retargeting the input
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 1 Representation of the ﬂow
of two phase experiments
images the objective image quality analysis is conducted to
assess the retargeting results. The objective scores obtained
from the SSIM metric are used to analyze the performance of
the energy map generation methods. The ﬂow of experiments
is shown in Fig. 1. After objective image quality assessment,
the critical analysis is conducted based on the visual quality
of the retargeted results. In the second phase of the exper-
iment, the energy map of the image is generated using the
best energy map generation method that is been observed
in the phase-1 experiment. The input image is resized based
on the input size of the retargeted image using conventional
and improved seam carving techniques. After resizing the
image the results are analyzed based on objective and sub-
jective image quality assessment. To analyze the limitations
of the conventional seam carving technique various types
of images are considered based on the structural properties
of the contents. To observe the visual quality of retargeted
results the parameters that are deﬁned in the phase-1 exper-
iment are considered again. In the phase-2 experiment, the
objective IQA is being conducted on the retargeted results
using the SSIM metric. The deformations on the parame-
ters are observed based on the obtained SSIM values. After
conducting an objective image quality assessment of the
retargeted results, the subjective image quality assessment is
also conducted to check the efﬁciency of the improved seam
carving technique. The subjective scores obtained from dif-
ferent observers are further used to justify the performance of
the improved seam carving technique. After conducting the
objective and subjective analysis the critical analysis of the
experiment is presented in which efﬁciency of the conven-
tional seam carving algorithm and improved seam carving
technique is justiﬁed based on the percentage of similar-
ity.
In the critical analysis, the average percentage distortion
is computed for different retargeted results that are obtained
from the conventional and improved seam carving tech-
niques.
5 Energy map generation methods
Energy map generation methods play a signiﬁcant role to
obtain the aesthetic image retargeting results. These meth-
ods can be integrated with the conventional and improved
seam carving techniques to identify the least energy pixels
present in the image. In the subsequent sections, energy map
generation methods are discussed in detail.
5.1 Entropy method
The basic energy function cannot generate the desired out-
come from the image retargeting operation. To generate the
basic energy map of the image a local entropy ﬁlter can be
applied to the image. Further, to improve the basic energy
map the entropy of the 9 × 9 neighborhood around the cor-
responding pixels in the input image is ﬁrstly computed and
further added to the gradient energy map. To compute the
entropy of the image Eq. 1 can be used.
−
n−1

i0
pilogb pi
(1)
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
where n is the count of gray levels, pi is the probability of a
pixel having gray level i, and b is the base of the logarithm
function.
5.2 Histogram of gradient (HoG) method
To compute the gradient energy map of the image Histogram
of Gradients (Hog) method can be used. At every pixel of
the image, the histogram of oriented gradients is computed
using Eq. 2. To obtain the efﬁcient gradient energy map an
8 bin histogram can be computed over an 11 × 11 window
around the pixels of the image.
eHoG(I) 
 ∂
∂x I
 +
 ∂
∂y I

max(HoG(I(x, y))
(2)
In Eq. 2, I is original image, ∂
∂x I is the variation of gradient
in x direction, ∂
∂y I is the variation of gradient in y direction,
x, y are the location of the pixels in the image.
5.3 Gradient magnitude method
In the ﬁeld of image retargeting, various methods can be used
to obtain high-energy pixels from the image. To extract the
detail of unnoticeable pixel from the image various gradient
operator such as Sobel, Canny, Prewitt, etc. can be applied.
The convolution operation can be applied to the image using
a gradient operator to observe the intensity variations in both
horizontal and vertical directions using Eq. 3 [47].
e(x, y) 

∂I
∂x
 +

∂I
∂y

(3)
In Eq. 3 e(x, y) is the energy of pixel at location x, y, ∂I
∂x
is the change of intensity in x direction, ∂I
∂y is the change of
intensity in y direction.
Theabove-mentionedenergymapgenerationmethodscan
be used in the conventional seam carving algorithm to ﬁnd
out the optimal seam paths. In each iteration of the algorithm,
the least energy pixels are identiﬁed based on the variation at
the intensity level. The pixels having the least variation are
selected in the optimal seam paths. Several possible seams
are eliminated from the image to reduce its size. The quality
of the retargeted results depends upon the deformation of the
imagecontents.Anoptimizedenergymapgenerationmethod
can minimize the deformations on the salient regions of the
image.
6 Conventional seam carving technique
and its limitations
The conventional seam carving technique is executed on
different types of images to observe its limitations. The ref-
erence images are selected based on some speciﬁc properties
of the image contents. The conventional seam carving algo-
rithm is a well-known technique among the various existing
image retargeting operators. In this technique, the image is
ﬁrst convoluted by image ﬁlters to obtain the energy map of
the image. The energy map identiﬁes the objects present in
the image based on low-level features [51, 52]. The obtained
energy map is further utilized by the algorithm for the elimi-
nation and duplication of optimal seams to change the aspect
ratio of the image. The optimal seams are eliminated and
artiﬁcially introduced to decrease and increase the size of
the image respectively.
Figure 2 shows the algorithm of the conventional seam
carving technique. In the conventional approach, ﬁrstly
Resizing_Vertical () function is called to perform the image
retargeting operation. In this function, two parameters such
as the original image and scale factors have been passed.
The supplied scale factors are used to change the aspect
ratio of the original image after the image retargeting oper-
ation. In this function, a new function Retarget_Vertical ()
is called to obtain the ﬁnal retargeted image. Further, the
Min_Optimal_Seam () function is called to compute the pos-
sible optimal seams. The function Calc_Energy () is used to
compute the gradient of the input image both in horizontal
and vertical directions using convolution operation.
To perform convolution operation two 3 × 3 Sobel ﬁlters
for each direction have been used. After that, the addition of
directional change of intensity is computed using Eq. 4 [53].
f
′(x, y) 

∂IMG
∂x
 +

∂IMG
∂y

(4)
The obtained energy map that is computed by the convo-
lution operation is further utilized to compute the cost of the
optimal seam using Eq. 5 [54].
C(IMGs) 
m

i1
f

IMG

SeamVi

(5)
To compute the minimum cost of the optimal vertical seam
Eq. 6 is used [53].
Sov  min
s C(IMGs)  min
s
m

i1
f

Img

SeamVi

(6)
In Min_Optimal_Seam() function the second row of the
energy map is selected. In this row, the energy of the ﬁrst-
pixel p(x, y) is compared with its three neighbors (left, top,
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 2 Algorithm: Conventional
seam carving technique
right) that are present in the ﬁrst row. The cumulative sum of
the energy is computed using Eq. 7 by adding the minimum
energy that is obtained from the three neighboring pixels
[54].
Energymin(i, j)  f (i, j) + min[Energymin(i −1, j −1);
Energymin(i −1, j); Energymin(i −1, j +1)]
(7)
The backtrack matrix is updated based on the values of the
least energy pixel p(x, y). The function ﬁnally returns the
modiﬁed energy map M and backtrack matrix to the Retar-
get_Vertical() function. In Retarget_Vertical() function a 2D
mask is initialized to zero. The last row of the cumulative
energy map is selected to obtain the least energy pixel. The
entire energy map is traced from bottom to top with the help
of the backtrack matrix to obtain the optimal seams both in
horizontal and vertical directions using Eqs. 8 and 9 respec-
tively [53].
(8)
SeamH 

Sy
Hj
	n
j1  {( j, y ( j))}n
j1
: ∀j, |y ( j) −y ( j −1)| ≤1
(9)
SeamV 

Sx
Vi
	m
i1  {(x (i) , i)}m
i1
: ∀i, |x (i) −x (i −1)| ≤1
To retarget the image in a horizontal direction a function
Resizing_Horizontal()isalsoused.Inthisfunction,arotation
operation is performed with an angle of 90°. After rotating
the image the same procedure applied for vertical seam carv-
ing is repeated. After the elimination of horizontal optimal
seams, an inverse rotation operation is performed to obtain
the ﬁnal retargeted image. The conventional seam carving
technique is executed on different types of images to iden-
tify the associated problems that are presented in Sect. 6.1.
The identiﬁed limitations of the conventional seam carving
technique are listed below. To provide more clarity on the
limitations the obtained retargeted results are analyzed based
on the deformation of the image contents.
6.1 Observations on limitations
In this section, the limitations of the conventional seam
carving technique are analyzed based on structural defor-
mations on the image contents. To observe the limitations of
the conventional seam carving technique several images are
selected having different structural properties of the image
contents such as images having a similar color composi-
tion in foreground and background regions, images having
line structures, an image having foreground and background
objects, and an image having symmetry property in the con-
tents.
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
6.1.1 Limitation-1
In the traditional seam carving technique energy map of the
image only presents the edges of the objects and ignores the
color composition of the image.
Observation In Fig. 3, an input image is selected for image
resizing (See Fig. 3a). To obtain the retargeted image a total
of 100 vertical optimal seams are eliminated from the image
(See Fig. 3b). After removal of the optimal seams the right
shoulder of the snowman is distorted which is marked by
the red box (See Fig. 3c). The distortions in the input image
occur due to color uniformity in foreground and background
regions that reduces the energy of the pixels which lie in
the region of the right shoulder of the snowman. The optimal
seams select the least energy pixels from the object from their
elimination. Therefore, the deformation on the structure of
the object occurs as shown in Fig. 3d.
6.1.2 Limitation-2
The conventional seam carving technique produces deforma-
tions on the line structures present in the image [10, 13, 43,
45].
Observation To observe the structural deformations on the
prominent line structures present in the image (See Fig. 4a),
the conventional seam carving technique is integrated with
the line detection algorithm. In the retargeting operation, it
is found that multiple optimal seams are intersecting with
the line structures are various locations or at the same loca-
tion (See Fig. 4b). The elimination of the pixels from the
prominent line structures distorts their shape. After the elim-
ination of the least energy pixels from the image the line
segments start transforming their shape into curved-shaped
objects (See Fig. 4c). Therefore, it is ﬁnally observed that
the elimination of too many optimal seams from the image
may completely distort the shape of line segments that can
be easily visible to the viewer (See Fig. 4d).
6.1.3 Limitation- 3
The deformation of the image contents can be visible by
the viewer when salient objects present in the image overlap
each other [3, 8]. The other reason for the deformation can
be possible when there is no clear distinction between the
background and foreground objects that are present in the
image. When foreground objects are removed from the image
the structure of the background object can be distorted.
Observation The horizontal seam carving is performed on
the input image (See Fig. 5a). To eliminate the foreground
object from the image the energy of the pixels that are lying in
the region of the foreground object is decreased (See Fig. 5b).
To decrease the energy of the pixels pertains to the fore-
ground object user interaction with the conventional seam
carving may be required. The optimal seams select the low-
energy pixels from the image and eliminate them to reduce
the size of the image. From Fig. 5c, it is observed that if
the foreground object is removed from the image the struc-
ture of the background object is distorted. In addition to this,
signiﬁcant distortions are also been observed when multiple
foregrounds and background objects are present in the image
that is being overlapped. If the objects are highly overlapped
then the deformation on luminance, color, and structure can
be observed. After performing the zooming operation on
retargeted results shown in Fig. 5d, e, the deformation on the
background object can be easily noticeable. From Fig. 5d, e
it can be observed that the neck of the horse and its promi-
nent edges are being distorted that deﬁnes the structure and
shape of the horse in the background region of the image.
The deformations are highlighted in the RED box.
6.1.4 Limitation- 4
The structural distortion on the image contents can also be
visible due to the intersection of optimal seams in a single
row or column at various places in the input image [8].
Observation To observe the limitation-4 of the conven-
tional seam carving technique an input image is taken (See
Fig. 6a). The conventional seam carving technique is applied
in both horizontal and vertical directions to the image. After
applying conventional approach in the horizontal direction
it is found that the optimal seams are intersecting with each
other in a single row at several places over the contents of
the image (See Fig. 6b). The intersection of optimal seams
at a single point repeatedly distorts the structural property
of the objects present in the image (See Fig. 6c). To closely
observe the deformation the retargeted image is zoomed as
shown in Fig. 6d. Similarly, to observe the deformation in
vertical direction the input image is supplied to the conven-
tional seam carving technique (See Fig. 6e). In this case, the
optimal seams are intersected at various places in multiple
columnsoftheimage(SeeFig.6f).Theeliminationofthelow
energy pixels from the intersection point of optimal seams
can distort the contents of the image (See Fig. 6g). To observe
the deformation on the contents of the image the retargeted
results of vertical seam caving is presented in Fig. 6h. From
the retargeted results obtained from conventional seam carv-
ing technique in both the directions it is evident that the dome
of the Tajmahal is distorted due the intersection of optimal
seams. The distortion the structures of the Tajmahal is shown
in the RED box.
6.1.5 Limitation- 5
The contents of the image can be deformed when multiple
optimal seams cover numerous pixels in single row and col-
umn beyond the threshold [3]. The elimination of several
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 3 Image distortion when
seam carving ignores the color
composition
Fig. 4 Line structures distortion
after the elimination of vertical
seams
Fig. 5 Image distortion due to
overlapped foreground and
background objects
pixels from a single row and column can distort the struc-
tural properties of the salient objects.
Observation To observe the limitation of the conventional
seam carving technique an input image is taken (See Fig. 7a).
From the input image ﬁrstly several horizontal optimal seams
are traced from the image.
In the generation of the optimal seams, it is found that
some optimal seams are selecting several least energy pixels
from the image in a single row (See Fig. 7b). After elimina-
tion of these optimal seams from the image it is found that the
structure of the pencils is distorted (See Fig. 7c). To observe
the deformation in horizontal seam caring operation the retar-
geted image is zoomed that is shown in Fig. 7d. Similarly,
the same input image is taken for its resizing using vertical
seam carving (See Fig. 7e). In the process of optimal seam
generation, it is found that several optimal seams are select-
ing the least energy pixels in their path from a single column
(See Fig. 7f). From Fig. 7g, it is observed that the distortions
occur over the structure of pencil when several least energy
pixels are eliminated from the image beyond the threshold.
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
Fig. 6 Image distortions due to
intersection of optimal seams in a
single row and column
Fig. 7 Image distortions due to
coverage of numerous pixels in
single row and column
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 8 Image distortions due to
elimination of a large portion
from the image
To closely observe the deformations over the image contents
in the vertical direction the retargeted result after zooming is
shown in Fig. 7h. The deformations in both cases are shown
in the retargeted images using the RED box.
6.1.6 Limitation- 6
In the process of object removal using the conventional seam
carving technique it can be observed that multiple image seg-
ments can be generated. After eliminating the objects from
the image an extra false edge among the image contents can
be observed in the retargeted results [47, 50].
Observation In the object removal process of conventional
seam carving technique user interaction may be required to
decrease the energy of the pixels that are required to eliminate
fromtheimage.Toperformobjectremovaloperationaninput
image is taken (See Fig. 8a). From the input image, the object
is removed (See Fig. 8b).
After the removal of the object from the image, an extra
false edge is created among the objects that can be notice-
able by the viewer. After eliminating a large portion of the
object it can be observed that the shape of nearby objects is
also affected (See Fig. 8c). The deformations on the image
contents and segmentation present in the retargeted image
are shown in Fig. 8d after zooming operation using the RED
box.
7 Requirements for experimentation
(phase-1 and phase-2)
To conduct the experiments of phase-1 and phase-2 different
requirements are identiﬁed in the initial phase. In experiment
phase-1 and phase-2 to test the efﬁciency of the energy map
generation methods, conventional seam carving technique,
and improved seam carving technique an image dataset is
required. To assess the visual quality of retargeted results
obtained from various energy map methods, conventional
and improved seam carving techniques the requirement of
an objective quality assessment metric is identiﬁed. In the
subjective assessment of the retargeted results, the require-
ment of different observers is also identiﬁed to obtain the
subjective scores. In the subsequent sections, the explana-
tion of various requirements and their fulﬁllment is explained
broadly.
7.1 Dataset
To test the visual quality of the retargeted results obtained
from the experiments that are conducted in phase-1 and
phase-2 different high-resolution images are selected from
the pixabay website [55]. The images that are available in
the database of the website contain various properties of the
objects that are needed to be observed while retargeting the
images. For experiments, the images can also be selected
from the existing databases such as CUHK and RetargetMe
[18, 19].
7.2 Objective and subjective image quality
assessment
In the literature [56, 57] it is found that the image retarget-
ing operators generate distortions on the three main quality
parameters of the image such as luminance, contrast, and
structure.Theseparametersdeﬁnetheoverallstructuralprop-
erty of the objects present in the image. In the experiment
of phase-1, the objective quality of the energy generation
methods is assessed based on the retargeted results obtained
from the conventional seam carving technique. In experiment
phase-2, subjective IQA and objective IQA are performed
to compare the results obtained from the conventional seam
carvingtechniqueandimprovedseamcarvingtechnique.The
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
retargeted images obtained in experiment phase-2 are com-
pared with the reference images to justify the efﬁciency of
the improved seam carving technique and to disclose the lim-
itations of the conventional seam carving technique.
7.2.1 Objective image quality assessment
In the initial phase of the experiment (Phase-1 and phase-2)
SSIM is selected to obtain the valid and reliable objective
assessment values. The full reference SSIM metric com-
bines all the three functions of its components to generate
the SSIM index for each retargeted image. The input and
retargeted images are processed by the function of SSIM to
obtain different types of SSIM indexes. The function col-
lectively generates the different SSIM index values for each
retargeted image typically in the range [0–1]. The informa-
tion related to the luminance (l), color (c), and structural (s)
deformation can be obtained from the SSIM using Eq. 10
respectively [58].
SSIM(a, b) 

l(a, b)α.c(a, b)β.s(a, b)γ 
(10)
7.2.2 Subjective image quality assessment
In the initial phase of the experiment (Phase-2), several
requirements are identiﬁed to establish the setup for sub-
jective IQA. The viewing conditions are set up according
to the standard IQA requirements to produce reliable results
from subjective image quality assessment. To obtain statis-
tically accurate voting a total of 6 observers are selected
based on their professional expertise. In the initial phase
of the subjective assessment, the nature and characteristics
of the test sequences are deﬁned efﬁciently. To generate
the test sequence three major parameters such as luminance
(l), contrast (c), and structural information (s) are consid-
ered. At the time of subjective evaluation, the prepared test
sequences are presented to the observers having different
types of distortions. The obtained scores are recorded for
statistical analysis. In addition to this, some test sessions are
also executed to provide an understanding of the assessment
procedure to the observers. The evaluation scores are also
checked whether the distribution of scores is normal or not.
The abnormal distribution of scores obtained from the sub-
jects is rejected as an outlier. After the collection of subjective
scores from the observer, the data is statistically processed
to transform it into a meaningful form. In subjective IQA the
subjective scores of displayed stimuli are obtained from the
observersusingtheMeanOpinionScore(MOS)whichisalso
known as Absolute Category Rating (ACR) [59]. To evaluate
the relationship between two stimuli the average of obtained
opinions is computed on a 5-grade impairment scale.
8 Experiment (phase -1)
To conduct experiment phase-1 different energy generation
methods are selected to obtain the energy map of the input
images. The input images are selected based on various
structural properties. After obtaining the energy maps of the
images conventional seam carving technique is applied to
the source images. The retargeted results are observed based
on the deformations on parameters. Finally, at the end of the
experiment critical analysis is presented to justify the per-
formance of different energy map generation methods. The
detailed process of the experiment is elaborated in the sub-
sequent sections.
8.1 Analysis of seam carving based on energy map
methods
To analyze the results obtained from the conventional seam
carvingtechniquebasedontheenergymaps, different images
are selected. The properties of the images that are consid-
ered during their selection are (a) images having foreground
andbackgroundobjects;(b)imageshavingseveralprominent
line structures; (c) images having curved shaped objects.
8.2 Objective analysis of retargeted results
To conduct the objective assessment of results obtained from
the conventional seam carving technique SSIM index is used.
The energy map of the input images is obtained after inte-
grating the energy map generation methods such as Entropy,
histogram of gradient (HoG), and Gradient with the con-
ventional seam carving technique. The visual quality of the
retargeted image is observed based on the deformation in
luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). The objective
assessment discloses the effectiveness of Gradient energy
map generation methods that can be further used in the
development of improved seam carving techniques. The per-
formance comparison of different energy map generation
methods is given in the subsequent sections.
8.2.1 Performance comparison of energy map generation
methods
The effectiveness of the conventional seam carving technique
is tested based on the energy map generation methods. The
optimal vertical seams are detected from the source image
using entropy, image gradient, and histogram of gradient
(Hog) method [60]. To reduce the size of the reference image
a total of 200 optimal seams are eliminated from the various
input images of each type. The visual quality of the obtained
results is tested based on the variations in luminance (l), color
(c), and structure (s).
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
• Image type-1 (foreground and background objects)
To check the efﬁciency of the energy map generation meth-
ods the input image having foreground and background
objects is selected and supplied to the conventional seam
carving to change its aspect ratio.
InFig.9aninputimagehavingforegroundandbackground
objects is selected to test the efﬁciency of the energy gen-
eration methods (See Fig. 9a). To obtain the energy map of
the image different energy map generation methods such
as entropy, gradient, and HoG method are applied on the
image respectively (See Fig. 9b, d, f). The energy map
generation methods highlight the most signiﬁcant areas
of the image that are needed to protect from deforma-
tion while retargeting the image. The conventional seam
carving technique selects the least energy pixels from the
image to form its various optimal seam paths. The identi-
ﬁed optimal seams are then eliminated from the image. The
removal of the optimal seam paths from the image reduces
its size according to the input dimension supplied by the
user (See Fig. 9c, e, g). After eliminating optimal seams
from the image various kinds of deformations are analyzed
using the SSIM index. The efﬁciency of the energy map
methods is further observed based on the obtained SSIM
index that ranges from 0 to 1. The low value of the SSIM
index shows the signiﬁcant deformations on the parame-
ters that can be easily observed by the viewer.
• Image type-2 (Curved shaped objects)
To check the efﬁciency of the energy map generation meth-
ods the image having curved shaped objects is selected.
To justify the performance of the energy map generation
methods a different type of input image is selected in
which curved shaped objects are present (See Fig. 10a).
The energy maps obtained from entropy, gradient, and
HoG are shown in Fig. 10b, d, f respectively. The energy
maps highlight the important image features based on the
variations of the intensity in both horizontal and vertical
directions. The region of the image where the variations
of intensity are very high is considered as the Region of
Interest (ROI). The conventional seam carving algorithm
utilizes the energy maps to generate the optimal seam paths
in such a manner that they bypass the region of interest
(ROI) to avoid deformations on the salient objects. The
results of image retargeting are presented in Fig. 10c, e,
g. The deformations on the quality parameters are again
observed in the retargeted results through objective image
quality assessment using SSIM.
• Image type-3 (Line structures)
To check the efﬁciency of the energy map methods the
image having line structures is selected.
The efﬁciency of the energy generation methods is tested
on the input image in which lots of line structures are present.
The energy map generation methods produce a different
Fig. 9 Generation of retargeted images based on image type-1
kinds of energy maps of the image to complete the image
retargeting process. In Fig. 11b, d, f different line structures
present in the image are highlighted. The efﬁciency of the
energy map depends upon the number of salient objects that
are being highlighted inside it. The energy map having a high
number of highlighted salient objects can be considered as
the efﬁcient energy map. The obtained energy map is sup-
plied to the conventional seam carving technique to produce
three different types of retargeting results (See Fig. 11c, e, g).
To check the visual quality of the retargeted results objective
analysis of image quality is conducted based on the SSIM.
In Fig. 12 different local SSIM maps are produced to
observe the visual quality of the retargeted images. The retar-
geting results obtained from the conventional seam carving
algorithm are supplied to the SSIM function to obtain various
global SSIM values for each local SSIM map.
The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) is a perceptual
metric that quantiﬁes image quality degradation caused by
the processing of the image such as resizing and data com-
pression [8, 61]. It is a full reference metric that requires two
images i.e. a reference image and a processed image.
In all the obtained local SSIM maps small values of local
SSIM appear as dark pixels. The regions of the image having
a small local SSIM value represent the areas of the image
where the retargeted image is different from the reference
image. Large values of local SSIM appear as bright pixels.
The regions of the retargeted images having large local SSIM
are similar to the reference image. These regions are not
affected by the image retargeting operation performed by the
conventional seam carving algorithm. The value 1 represents
the highest visual similarity between the reference and retar-
geted image. In addition to this, the smaller values of the
SSIM index present the dissimilarity between reference and
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
Fig. 10 Generation of retargeted
images based on image type-2
Fig. 11 Generation of retargeted
images based on image type-3
retargeted images. From Fig. 12a, b, c it can be observed that
the global SSIM index value of Fig. 12b is higher than other
the global SSIM value obtain from Fig. 12a, c. Similarly, for
the other two local SSIM maps shown in Fig. 12e and h, the
SSIM value is higher than the global SSIM value obtained
for Fig. 12d, f and g, i respectively. From the obtained SSIM
values of each local SSIM map, it can be observed that the
Gradient energy map generation method is performing well
as compared to other energy map methods. Further, to justify
the performance of the energy generation methods percent-
age similarity is shown in Fig. 13.
From Fig. 13 it is observed that the similarity percentage is
high for the image retargeting results that are obtained from
the conventional seam carving technique after integrating the
gradient energy map generation method. For foreground and
background, image similarity is 86.86%, for an image having
curved-shaped objects it is 74.97%, and for an image having
line structures it is 61.51%. Moreover, based on the similarity
percentage obtained from the global SSIM for image type-1,
2, and 3 it is observed that the visual quality of retargeting
results obtained from the gradient method produces fewer
deformations on the image quality parameters as compared to
the other two methods. Furthermore, it is also observed that
the Entropy method produces a high percentage similarity
for an image having line structures and the image having
curved-shaped objects as compared to the HoG method. The
image retargeting results obtained from the Entropy energy
generation method produces high percentage similarity i.e.
74.91% and 61.34% as compared to the HoG method i.e.
73.97 and 58.92% respectively.
To justify the performance of the gradient energy gener-
ation method the average percentage similarity is computed
in From the graph shown in Fig. 14a, it is observed that
the average percentage similarity obtain from the gradient
energy method is high than the entropy and HoG method i.e.
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 12 Local SSIM maps with global SSIM values for retargeting
results, a SSIM: (0.79889); b SSIM: (0.86857); c SSIM: (0.81244);
d SSIM: (0.74907); e SSIM: (0.74971); f SSIM: (0.75797); g SSIM:
(0.61335); h SSIM: (0.61506); i SSIM: (0.58919)
74.44% for all image types. The average percentage similar-
ity i.e. 72.04% obtained from the entropy method is higher
than the HoG method i.e. 71.38%. From the analysis, it is
evident that the HoG method serves well for the image hav-
ing foreground and background objects and produces high
percentage similarity i.e. 81.24% as compared to the entropy
method i.e. 79.89%.
The effectiveness of the HoG method is signiﬁcantly
reduced when this method is applied to the image having
line segments. Moreover, the effectiveness of all the energy
generation methods is fully dependent upon the type of
image contents. It may be possible that the energy generation
method which is best suited for an image does not perform
well for another image type. In Fig. 14b the average per-
centage similarity is shown for all the image types. From
Fig. 14b it is observed that the energy generation methods
produce high percentage similarity when the conventional
seam carving technique is applied on the image having fore-
ground and background objects i.e. 82.66%. In addition to
this, image retargeting operation produces high deformation
on the image contents when the image contains lots of line
structures i.e. 60.59%. In Fig. 14b the percentage of similar-
ity for the image type- 3 is low i.e. 60.59% as compared to
the image type-2 i.e. 74.62% in which curved-shaped objects
are present.
9 Critical analysis of experiment (phase-1)
To improve the efﬁciency of the improved seam carving algo-
rithm the efﬁciency of the energy map generation methods
such as entropy method, gradient method, and HoG method
is ﬁrstly tested and analyzed based on the conventional seam
carving algorithm. The deformations on the salient objects
present in different regions of the image are observed in
the objective image quality assessment (IQA) of retargeted
results. The energy map generation methods identify the low
energy pixels present in the image that are further needed
to form the optimal seam paths. All the energy map gen-
eration methods generate a different kind of energy maps
that is further supplied to the conventional seam carving
technique. To observe the similarity between original and
retargeted images their visual contents are analyzed based
on the structural similarity index metric (SSIM). For every
retargeted image different SSIM values are observed based
on the deﬁned parameters. The objective analysis carried out
Fig. 13 Objective analysis of the
retargeted image based on energy
generation method
79.89
86.86
81.24
74.91
74.97
73.97
61.34
61.51
58.92
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
Entropy Method
Gradient Method
HoG Method
SIMILARITY  PERCENTAGE
ENERGY MAP GENERATION METHODS
Foreground & Background Objects (Type-1)
Curve Shaped Objects (Type-2)
Line Structures (Type-3)
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
)
b
(
)a(
0.00
50.00
100.00
Entropy
Method
Gradient
Method
HoG Method
72.04
74.44
71.38
SIMILARITY 
PERCENTAGE
ENERGY MAP GENERATION METHODS
0.00
50.00
100.00
  Foreground
 &
Background
Curved
 Shaped
Straight
 line
82.66
74.62
60.59
SIMILARITY 
PERCENTAGE
IMAGE TYPE
Fig. 14 a Comparison of Energy map generation methods based on the average percentage similarity; b Comparison of image types based on the
average percentage similarity
on the retargeted images reveals the efﬁciency of the gradient
energy map generation method in terms of the percentage
of deformation on the image contents. From the different
SSIM values, it can be analyzed that the retargeted results
that are being generated by the gradient method produce
74.44% average similarity among reference images and their
retargeted results. In addition to this, it is also observed that
the similarity percentage obtained from the gradient method
is higher than the entropy and HoG methods. The average
similarity percentage of retargeted results obtained from the
entropy method is higher than the HoG method i.e. 72.04%.
After the experiment on the energy map generation method,
the average similarity based on the image types is analyzed.
From the analysis, it is found that the deformations on the
parameters are highly observed on the image having promi-
nent line segments i.e. 60.59%. The average percentage of
similarity that is observed on the image having foreground
and background objects is 82.66% which is higher than the
image having curved-shaped objects i.e. 74.62%. From the
objective analysis of the retargeted results obtained from the
conventional seam carving technique, it is concluded that the
gradient map energy generation method is best suited among
all the other energy map generation methods. Therefore, to
improve the process of the improved seam carving technique
the gradient energy map generation method can be integrated
with it so that an accurate energy map of the image can be
further utilized to generate optimal seams path to retarget the
input image.
10 Experiments (phase-2)
This experiment is conducted to compare the retargeted
results obtained from the improved and conventional seam
carving technique. To conduct experiment phase-2, ﬁrstly,
the gradient energy map generation method which is found
efﬁcient in the experiment (phase-1) is integrated with the
improved seam carving technique. To conduct the experi-
ment different input images are selected based on various
structural properties. The obtained energy maps of all image
types are supplied to the improved seam carving technique
to perform the retargeting operation. Further, the retargeted
results from both techniques are observed based on the con-
tentdeformationsondeﬁnedparameters.Finally,attheendof
the experiment (phase-2) critical analysis of the experiment
is presented to justify the performance of improved seam
carving technique based on objective and subjective image
quality assessment. The detailed process of the experiment
(phase-2) is elaborated in the subsequent sections.
10.1 Improved seam carving technique
To improve the process of the conventional seam carving
algorithm the improved seam carving algorithm is integrated
with the line detection algorithm [49]. To detect the promi-
nent line structures canny line edge detection operator is
used which computes the variations of the gradient in both
horizontal and vertical directions. All the signiﬁcant steps
involved in the canny edge detections operator are applied
over the input image. After detection of line segments, the
optimal seams are computed in the vertical direction. After
that, for each optimal seam, its intersection with the line
structures is observed. In the process of image retargeting it
is found that optimal seams can intersect at the same location
on the line structure repeatedly. The repetition of intersection
on the line segments that occur by the optimal seams on the
same location is the main reason for their structural deforma-
tion. To preserve the structure of the line segments an energy
modiﬁcation function is utilized that increases the energy of
the neighboring pixels that are encountered in the vicinity of
the intersection point. The energy modiﬁcation function of
the algorithm ﬁrst computes the 8 local neighborhood of the
intersection point and increase their energy in such a manner
that no other optimal seam can intersect at the same loca-
tion. In this manner, the optimal seam can divert at some
other location or on nearby pixels that are located on the
same line segment. The seam diversion operation performed
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 15 Flowchart of Integrated
approach for structure
preservation
by the improved seam carving technique preserves the struc-
ture of the prominent line segments. To increase the energy
of the local neighborhoods recursive procedure is applied to
each local neighborhood of the intersection point. The inte-
grated gradient method also gives its signiﬁcant contribution
to identify the prominent line segments that are needed to
protect the entire image retargeting operation. The work-
ﬂow of the improved seam carving technique is shown in
Fig. 15. From the combined approach shown in Fig. 15, it
can be observed that detection of prominent line structures
present in the image and energy modiﬁcation of the neighbor-
ing pixels at intersection points are the two major operations.
The recursive procedure of energy map generation preserves
the structural properties of the line segments present in the
image. In Fig. 15, ﬁrstly, the energy map of the input image
is computed by the gradient energy map generation method.
The obtained energy map highlights the salient regions of
the image that are needed to protect while resizing. Further,
the optimal seams are computed based on the energy map to
changetheaspectratiooftheimage.Intheprocessoftheopti-
mal seam elimination, the intersections of the optimal seams
with the detected line segments are observed. The recursive
energy modiﬁcation operation of the improved seam carving
technique increases the energy of the 8 local neighborhoods
computed at the intersection point. The intersection point is
selected as the initial point from where the increment of the
energy at 8 local neighborhoods starts. In each recursive call
of the energy enhancement function, 8 local neighborhoods
of each intersection point are selected.
After enhancement of the energy at the pixel level, the
modiﬁed energy map is computed that is further used to divert
the successive optimal seams to the nearby areas. This pro-
cess is repeated for every intersection point of the optimal
seams on the prominent line structures. Finally, the retar-
geted image is generated from the improved seam carving
technique according to the desired size which has been pro-
vided by the user at the initial phase of the algorithm. The
improved seam carving technique can be integrated with the
other edge detection operators such as Sobel, Laplacian, and
Prewitt,etc.todetectthelinestructures[62].Accordingtothe
literature [60], it is found that the canny operator is best suited
among other edge detection operators to detect the possible
edges from the image. In the improved seam carving tech-
nique,thenumberofseamdiversionoperationsdependsupon
the number of intersection points that are occurred on the line
structures. Therefore, an improved seam carving technique
requires a high computation time to generate the retargeted
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
results if the number of detected line structures is consid-
erably high. The number of detected line segments depends
upon the type of content present in the image.
10.2 Analysis of retargeted results based of content
deformation
In the experiment (phase-1) the performance of the energy
generation methods is tested based on objective analysis.
After integrating the gradient energy map generation method
with the improved seam carving technique the retargeted
results are compared with the conventional seam carving
technique. The efﬁciency of the improved seam carving
technique (ISC) is tested based on objective and subjective
analysis of obtained results. To compare the visual quality
of the obtained results three parameters are selected such
as luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). To perform
the objective image quality assessment structural similarity
index metric (SSIM) is used. The different SSIM index val-
ues are further analyzed to justify the performance of the
improved seam carving technique. Furthermore, to compare
the results obtained from both techniques a subjective image
quality assessment is also carried out that justiﬁes the effec-
tiveness of the improved seam carving technique based on
observer’s voting and statistical analysis.
10.2.1 Comparison based on objective image quality
assessment
To check the performance of the improved seam carving
technique three different types of images are selected. The
selection of the images is based on the structural properties
of the contents. In results obtained from the conventional
seam carving technique, the deformation is highly visible on
the line structures, curved-shaped objects, symmetry objects,
and foreground and background objects. The performance of
the improved seam carving algorithm is tested based on these
properties.
(a)
Building
In the comparison, ﬁrstly, an input image is taken (See
Fig. 16a). From the input image, a total of 100 vertical
seams are eliminated using conventional and improved
seamcarvingtechniques.FromFig.16b,c)itisobserved
that the line structures that are detected by the line detec-
tion algorithm are being deformed. In both retargeted
images the deformations are highlighted using the RED
color box.
The main reason for the deformation is the intersection
of multiple optimal seams at the same location on the
line structures. The energy modiﬁcation function of the
improved seam carving algorithm minimizes the defor-
mations by diverting the optimal seams to the nearby
areas. To justify the performance of the improved seam
carving (ISC) algorithm the obtained results are ana-
lyzed based on the SSIM index values shown in Fig. 17.
From Fig. 17 it is observed that the SSIM value obtained
for the result generated by the conventional seam carv-
ing technique is 0.55 while in the case of the improved
seam carving algorithm it is 0.72. From the obtained
SSIM values it is observed that the similarity index of
the result obtained from the improved seam carving
algorithm is higher than the conventional seam carv-
ing algorithm. Therefore, based on the SSIM index it
is concluded that the improved seam carving algorithm
produces fewer deformations on the three parameters.
Hence, the structural similarity of contents present in the
result of the improved seam carving technique is higher
than the conventional seam carving technique.
(b) Foreground and Background
In Fig. 18a, an input image is taken having fore-
ground and background objects. The deformations on
the foreground and background objects are shown in
the retargeted results obtained from the conventional
and improved seam carving technique (See Fig. 18b,
c). From the results, it is analyzed that the conventional
seam carving algorithm produces deformation on the
image contents when the distance between foreground
and background is signiﬁcantly low. The improved
seam carving technique utilized the energy enhance-
ment operation to divert the optimal seam at the nearby
locations to prevent deformations on the prominent
regions of the image. The quality of the results obtained
from both algorithms (SC and ISC) is tested based on
the three parameters. The SSIM index values obtained
for both retargeted images are presented in Fig. 19.
From Fig. 19, it is observed that the SSIM index values
obtained for the retargeted images generated by con-
ventional seam carving are 0.63 which is less than the
improvedseamcarvingtechnique.FromtheSSIMindex
values, it is predicted that the percentage of deformation
on the parameters in the case of conventional seam carv-
ing is higher than improved seam carving. The SSIM
value obtained from the retargeted image generated
from the ISC is closer to 1 which justiﬁes its perfor-
mance. To justify the effectiveness of the improved seam
carving technique it is further tested on other images in
which the number of objects and the distance among
them is high. After testing it is found that the improved
seam carving algorithm serves well as compared to the
conventional seam carving algorithm. The analysis of
other images is not shown in this section due to the
space constraints.
(c)
Symmetry
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 16 Retargeted results of
image having line structures:
a Original image; b Conventional
seam carving algorithm;
c Improved seam carving
algorithm
Fig. 17 Analysis of retargeted
images having line segments
0.55
0.72
0.00
0.50
1.00
SC
ISC
SSIM INDEX
IMAGE RETARGETING OPERATORS
Building (Straight Lines)
Fig. 18 Retargeted results of
image having foreground and
background objects: a Original
image; b Conventional seam
carving algorithm; c Improved
seam carving algorithm
To justify the performance of the improved seam carving
technique an input image is taken having symmetry objects
(See Fig. 20a). The obtained results are observed based on
the three quality parameters. In Fig. 20b, c, the deformations
on the image contents are observed on the results obtained
from SC and ISC respectively. For both retargeted images the
global values of local SSIM maps are computed to justify the
performance of the improved seam carving technique.
From the obtained SSIM index values shown in Fig. 21a,
it is observed that the SSIM index value for the conven-
tional seam carving algorithm is higher than the improved
seam carving technique i.e. 0.61. From the obtained SSIM
values it is predicted that the improved seam carving algo-
rithm produces signiﬁcant structure deformation when the
image contains symmetry objects. In this case, another rea-
son for distortions in the retargeted result is the closeness of
Fig. 19 Analysis of retargeted
images having foreground and
background objects
0.63
0.80
0.00
0.50
1.00
SC
ISC
SSIM INDEX
IMAGE RETARGETING OPERATORS
Foreground & Background 
Fig. 20 Retargeted results of
image having symmetry objects:
a Original image; b Conventional
seam carving algorithm;
c Improved seam carving
algorithm
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
(a) 
(b) 
0.64
0.72
0.59
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Building
Foreground &
Background
Symmetry
PERCENTAGE
SIMILARITY
IMAGE TYPE
0.61
0.57
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
SC
ISC
SSIM INDEX
IMAGE RETARGETING OPERATORS
Symmetry
Fig. 21 a Analysis of retargeted images having symmetry objects; b Analysis of average similarity percentage based on image type
the objects and their high overlapping. Therefore the defor-
mations on one object can affect the structural property of
other nearby objects present in the image.
Further, to observe the deformations on the retargeted
images average similarity percentage is computed based on
the image type. The obtained SSIM values are used for the
analysis of the visual contents of the images. From Fig. 21b it
is observed that both conventional and improved seam carv-
ing techniques produce less average percentage similarity on
the image having symmetry objects i.e. 59%. The average
similarity percentage for a building image is 64% that is less
than the image having foreground and background objects
i.e. 72% and higher than the image having symmetry objects.
In the case of an image having foreground and background
objects the main reason behind the fewer deformations is the
presence of fewer line structures and symmetry objects.
Further, to justify the performance of the improved seam
carving technique the retargeted results of conventional seam
carving are compared with the reference image of each image
type. After the comparison of the visual quality of the image,
it is found that the similarity percentage obtained from the
improved seam carving technique is 70% that is 10% higher
than the conventional seam carving technique (See Fig. 22).
The effectiveness of ISC is observed due to the integration
of gradient energy map generation method and incorporation
of energy modiﬁcation function in it. The incorporation of
the energy modiﬁcation function diverts the optimal seams to
the nearby locations to prevent their intersection at the same
location recursively. The diversion of the optimal seams to
the nearby locations protects the shape of line structures to
be transformed into the shape of a curve.
10.2.2 Comparison based on subjective image quality
assessment
After conducting the objective image quality assessment
(IQA) on the visual quality of retargeted results obtained
from conventional and improved seam carving techniques a
subjective (IQA) is performed. In subjective IQA the similar-
ityoftheretargetedresultswiththeircorrespondingreference
images is compared through statistical analysis of voting
obtained from 6 different observers. To compare the visual
quality of reference and retargeted images, a comparison
scale is used. Typically, the pair of images are shown to the
observers one after another or maybe also presented simul-
taneously.
The participant compares stimuli presented to them based
on the three quality parameters such as luminance (l), color
(c), and structure (s). In the experiment, MOS for each test
image is computed using the Eq. 11 [63].
MOS( j)  1
n
n

i1
S(i, j)
(11)
where n denotes the number of subjects involved in the sub-
jective experiment and S(i, j) the subjective score given by
the ith subjects for image j.
Figure 23 presents the subjective analysis of 3 different
image types obtained after the retargeting operation. The
subjective scores of each retargeted image are obtained from
the observers that are being retargeted from SC and ISC.
From the values plotted in the graph, it is observed that the
prediction of the visual quality of the retargeted images in
the subjective assessment is almost similar to the objective
IQA. After observing the subjective scores it can evident
that the SSIM performs well to provide the objective scores
in the agreement of the human visual system. To justify the
performance of the improved seam carving technique the
average similarity of retargeted images is computed as shown
in Fig. 24. Figure 24 presents the average mean opinion score
(MOS) computed in the subjective IQA to predict the level
of distortions produced by SC and ISC. The average subjec-
tive scores obtained for all the retargeted images are almost
similar to the percentage similarity obtained during objective
IQA. After conducting the subjective analysis it is found the
improved seam carving technique produces high distortions
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
Fig. 22 Analysis of average
similarity percentage
technique-wise
0.60
0.70
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Seam Carving (SC)
Improved Seam Caeving
(ISC)
PERCENTAGE 
SIMILARITY
RETARGETING TECHNIQUES
2.75
3.6
2.73
3.2
2.71
3.4
2.77
3.7
2.75
3.4
2.72
3.7
3.15
4
3.11
3.8
3.17
3.98
3.2
3.7
3.18
3.97
3.12
3.9
3.05
2.85
3.01
2.75
3.06
2.95
3.08
2.88
3.02
2.8
3.04
2.77
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
SC
ISC
SC
ISC
SC
ISC
SC
ISC
SC
ISC
SC
ISC
SUBJECT-1
SUBJECT-2
SUBJECT-3
SUBJECT-4
SUBJECT-5
SUBJECT-6
Building
Foreground & Background
Symmetry
Fig. 23 Subjective image quality assessment of retargeted results
Fig. 24 Subjective analysis of
average similarity based on MOS
2.7
3.1
3.0
3.7
3.9
2.8
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Building
Foreground &
Background
Symmetry
SIMILARITY
RETARGETING TECHNIQUES
SC
ISC
over the image contents when the input image contains sym-
metry objects. The improved seam carving technique serves
well whentheimagecontains theforegroundandbackground
objects. In the case of an image having line structures, the
ISC technique performs well as compared to the conventional
seam carving technique as the average subjective scores are
2.7 and 3.7 respectively. After the average subjective analysis
based on different MOS, it is concluded that the presence of
a high number of straight lines, overlapping objects, curved-
shaped objects, and their closeness are some main reasons for
the structural deformation of objects. Moreover, the elimina-
tion of the least energy pixels from the image also affects the
luminance (l) and color components (c) of various regions
and objects present in the image.
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
11 Critical analysis of experiment (phase-2)
In the experiment (phase-2) objective and subjective IQA is
performed to justify the performance of SC and ISC. The
efﬁciency of ISC is tested based on different kinds of images
such as images having line segments, foreground and back-
ground objects, and symmetry objects. From the objective
IQA, it is analyzed that the quality of image retargeting
results depends upon the type of image content. After the
experiment, it is observed that ISC produces 72% similarity
that is higher than the SC i.e. 55% for an image having line
structures. Similarly, the percentage of dissimilarity obtained
for the image having foreground and background objects
using ISC is 20% that is signiﬁcantly less than to SC i.e.
37%. Finally, the percentage of similarity obtained from ISC
in the case of an image having symmetry objects is 57%
that is less than SC i.e. 61%. After objective analysis of the
results, it is found that ISC produces high percentage distor-
tionsontheimagehavingsymmetryobjects.Themainreason
behind the deformations is the closeness and high overlap-
ping of objects. The deformations on the symmetry objects
can also affect the structure of the nearby objects present
in the image. From the experiment, it is also observed that
the energy modiﬁcation function of ISC also plays a signif-
icant role to produce the aesthetic image retargeting results.
The energy modiﬁcation function increases the energy of the
local neighborhoods found at points where optimal seams
start intersecting on the prominent line structures. The suc-
cessivediversionofoptimalseamsfromtheintersectionpoint
suppresses the happening of the intersection of other optimal
seams at the same location. The diversion of the optimal
seams from the intersection point protects the structure of
line segments to be transformed into curved-shaped objects.
In the case of an image having symmetry objects, the same
energy modiﬁcation operation diverts the optimal seams to
the nearby locations where other salient objects are present.
The energy enhancement and seam bypassing operation of
ISC that is applied on the image having foreground and back-
ground objects also affect the luminance (l), contrast (c), and
structure (s) of the objects that are less noticeable by the
viewer.
Further, to justify the efﬁciency of ISC and to ﬁnd out the
main causes of distortions a subjective IQA is also conducted.
For each retargeted result the mean opinion scores (MOS) are
obtained from the observers. The subjective analysis reveals
that most of the distortions occur on curved-shaped objects,
line segments, and overlapped objects. The subjective scores
obtained from the observers are also used to analyze the
deformations of luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s)
on the image contents. Finally based on the average MOS
it is predicted that most of the deformations are observed
on the image having symmetry objects. Moreover, ISC per-
forms well for all the image types except the image having
symmetry objects in which the distance among the objects is
signiﬁcantly low and most of the image contents are being
overlapped. Finally, from the critical analysis, it is concluded
that ISC produces image distortions especially on the image
type that contains a large number of symmetry objects and
line segments. From the analysis, it is also found that ISC per-
forms well when the objects in the image are scattered and
the distance among them is high. Moreover, the additional
operations of ISC namely, detection of line segments, edges,
energy enhancement, and seam diversion also increase the
computational time to generate the retargeted results. The
computational time of ISC can also increase when lots of
salient regions and line structures are detected by integrated
image processing techniques such as saliency and line detec-
tion algorithms.
12 Possible solutions to limitations
of conventional seam carving technique
After experiments (phase-1 and phase-2) various limita-
tions of conventional seam carving technique are identiﬁed.
The researchers can contribute their signiﬁcant efforts to
overcome these limitations through the improvement of the
conventional approach. To overcome the limitations other
image processing techniques can be integrated with its
improved technique in the initial phase of development. The
identiﬁed limitations and their possible solutions are elabo-
rated in the subsequent sections.
12.1 Color uniformity in foreground
and background objects (limitation-1)
After conducting experiments (Phase-1 and phase-2) on the
images it is observed that SC produces deformations on the
salient objects of the image due to the uniformity of the
color in foreground and background regions (See Sect. 6.1,
limitation-1). Due to the uniformity of color, the optimal
seams select the least energy pixels from both the regions
and add them into their path for elimination. The elimina-
tion of the least energy pixels from the image can distort the
structural properties of the important contents.
Solution: To minimize the deformations on the salient
regions the contour detection algorithm can be integrated
with SC. At the initial phase, ﬁrstly, the contours of the
salient objects are detected then image morphological opera-
tions such as dilation can be applied to the image to increase
the width of contours. The energy of the pixels available on
the contours can be increased so that the successive optimal
seams can be diverted at some distance from the boundary of
the salient objects. The diversion of the optimal seams in this
way protects the shape of salient objects from the elimination
of the pixels that lie inside them. After the elimination of the
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
optimal seams, the erosion image morphological operation
can be applied to the image to invert the effect of dilation on
the image contents.
12.2 Deformation of line structures (limitation-2)
The conventional seam carving technique produces deforma-
tions on line structures present in the image. The deforma-
tions occur due to the intersection of optimal seams at the
same location on line structures (See Sect. 6.1, limitation-
2). The occurrence of successive intersection on the line
structure at the same location transforms their shape into
curve-shaped objects and also produce an aliasing effect on
them.
Solution: To preserve the structure of line segments and
other prominent edges the conventional seam carving tech-
nique can be integrated with the line and edge detection
algorithms. At the initial stage of the algorithm, the line
structures and edges are ﬁrstly detected from the source
image. After that, the energy of the intersection point can
be increased in such a manner that the successive optimal
seams can be diverted from the intersection point. The diver-
sion of successive optimal seams at the nearby locations can
preserve the shape of the line structures and edges [10, 13].
The elimination of pixels from the image can also reduce the
effect of aliasing on the shape of line structures and edges.
12.3 Distortion due to presence of foreground
and background objects (limitation-3)
After the experiment on the image having foreground and
background objects (See Sect. 6.1, limitation-3) it can be
observed that the object removal process of the conventional
seam carving algorithm applied on the foreground object can
distort the shape of the background objects.
Solution: To overcome this limitation the conventional
seam carving algorithm can be integrated with the efﬁ-
cient saliency detection algorithms. The efﬁcient saliency
map obtained from these algorithms computes the variation
of energy for both foreground and background regions of
the image. The generation of the energy map of the image
depends upon the type of image content. For more complex
images the energy map can detect several regions that can
be considered as image ROIs while retargeting the image.
After identifying the background and foreground regions as
image ROI the optimal seams can only travel to the nearby
locations and do not select the pixels from these regions for
theirelimination.Thecomputationaltimeoftheconventional
seam carving algorithm can be signiﬁcantly increased due to
the generation of a complex energy map. After utilizing the
energy map the local and global features of the image can be
protected from any kind of deformation [3].
12.4 Intersection of optimal seams at single point
(limitation-4)
From the experiment on the conventional seam carving
technique in Sect. 6.1 (See limitation-4) it is evident that
the deformations on the important image contents can be
observed when optimal seams intersect at a single point in
both horizontal and vertical directions.
Solution: To overcome this limitation the conventional
seam carving algorithm can introduce an energy enhance-
ment operation that increases the energy of the pixels at the
intersection point. In this operation, the maximum energy of
the pixel available in the corresponding row and column can
be searched to replace the energy of the pixel at the inter-
section point. The improvement of the energy in the manner
diverts the optimal seams at the nearby location in the image.
The repetition of energy enhancement operation for every
identiﬁed intersection point suppresses the deformation of
image contents [8].
12.5 Coverage of numerous pixels in single row
and column (limitation-5)
From the experiment on the conventional seam carving tech-
nique in Sect. 6.1 (See limitation-5) it is evident that the
deformations on the important contents of the image can be
observed when optimal seams select several pixels from the
image in both horizontal and vertical directions.
Solution: To overcome this limitation the conventional
seam carving algorithm can introduce an energy enhance-
ment operation that can increase the energy of the pixels
at the entry point from where optimal seams start traveling
in row and column. In this case, the maximum energy of
the pixel from the corresponding row and column can be
searched to replace it at the entry point. The improvement
of the energy in this manner diverts the optimal seams at
the nearby location in the image. To identify the number of
pixels covered by the optimal seams in a single row and col-
umn a threshold should be deﬁned. When the optimal seams
select the number of pixels beyond the deﬁned threshold the
energy modiﬁcation function is activated to divert the opti-
mal seams. The repetition of this entire procedure for every
successive optimal seam suppresses the deformations on the
content of the image [3].
12.6 Image segmentation (limitation-6)
From the experiment carried out in Sect. 6.1 (See limitation-
6) it has been observed that the conventional seam carving
technique produces image deformation when a large portion
of the image is removed from it. In the object removal process
of the conventional seam carving technique, the nonadjacent
pixels of the image comes closer that is not found neighbor
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
of each other. Hence, when the nonadjacent pixels become
the neighbors an extra false edge among the image segments
can be created that can be easily noticeable by the human
eye. The creation of a false edge within the image divides the
image into different segments [10].
Solution: To overcome this limitation, image stitching
algorithms can be integrated with the conventional seam
carving technique to eliminate the false edges that are being
created while object removal. The integrated algorithm [64]
astutely joins different segments of the image so that the
effect of false edge and segmentation can be minimized.
13 Advantages and limitations of ISC
After experiment (phase-2) various advantages and limita-
tions of improved seam carving techniques are identiﬁed
which are listed below.
13.1 Advantages
• ISC minimizes the deformations on the images having
prominent line structures.
• ISC is simple to generate aesthetic retargeted results.
• ISC performs well for the images having foreground and
background objects with different color compositions.
• ISCproducesfewerdeformationsifthedistanceamongthe
objects is considerably high and they are not overlapping
each other.
13.2 Limitations
• The computational time of ISC is high.
• ISC produces deformations on the image contents if the
objects are highly overlapped and their color composition
is almost the same.
14 Conclusion and future scope
To improve the process of image retargeting researchers are
trying to integrate various image processing algorithms with
the conventional approaches. These algorithms can be edge
detection, line detection, saliency detection, shadow detec-
tion, and image stitching algorithms. The integration of these
algorithms improves the process of image retargeting and
also increases the computational time of the image retarget-
ing operation. To improve the process of conventional seam
carving technique different energy map generation meth-
ods can be utilized to generate an efﬁcient energy map of
the image. The efﬁcient energy map of the image helps to
detect the optimal seams in such a manner that the salient
regions of the image can be protected from deformations
while retargeting. From the experiments (phase-1 and phase-
2) conducted in this paper, it is concluded that the gradient
energy map generation method is the best-suited method for
the conventional seam carving technique. In the experiment
(phase-1) it is analyzed that due to the integration of gradi-
ent map generation method with conventional seam carving
technique less percentage of deformations is observed. In
the experiment (phase-2) it is analyzed that the ISC produces
fewer deformations on the image that contains the foreground
and background objects. Furthermore, ISC produces a high
percentage of deformations on the image having symmetry
objects. To minimize the deformations ISC utilizes the gra-
dient energy map generation method to obtain the energy
map of the image as it is found best suited in the exper-
iment (phase-1). The efﬁciency of ISC is analyzed based
on the objective and subjective image quality assessment
in the experiment (phase-2). To assess the visual quality of
retargeted results obtained from both SC and ISC, the SSIM
image quality assessment metric is used. From the compar-
ative analysis of both retargeting approaches, it is found that
low distance among the objects, overlapping of the objects,
a high number of line segments are a few major factors that
are responsible for the deformation of image contents. In the
experiments, various limitations of conventional seam carv-
ing techniques are identiﬁed.
In the future, the efﬁciency of the ISC can be improved
to retarget the images in which the objects are highly over-
lapped. The improved seam carving technique produces
content distortion when the image contains similar color
compositions in foreground and background regions. The
ISC does not recognize the shadow of the object as a promi-
nent region. The optimal seams can easily travel on the
shadow as most of the pixels inside these regions contain
the least energy. The shadow of the objects deﬁnes the shape
and structural properties of objects. To protect these regions
the process of the ISC can be improved astutely. The con-
ventional seam carving technique can only be applicable
for rectangular-shaped images. To resize the nonrectangular-
shaped images the researchers can contribute their signiﬁcant
effort to improve the process of conventional seam carv-
ing technique. The normal energy map generation methods
just identify energy at the edges and ignore the important
information related to color. The ignorance of spatial color
information causes undesired deformations and useful data
from the image can be lost. The conventional seam carving
technique can be integrated with the visual saliency detection
algorithms to consider the color information of the image.
The goal of these algorithms is to generate a saliency map of
the image by identifying the pixels concerning their neigh-
borhoods in terms of color and luminance properties. In the
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
conventional seam carving technique, the paths of optimal
seams are identiﬁed by dynamic programming. To search
the least energy pixels from the image other methods such as
graph-cut can also be used to improve its efﬁciency. In the
ﬁeld of image retargeting, most of the methods are unsuper-
vised. The image retargeting process using these methods
may fail to protect the salient regions of the image and
produce deformations. The unsupervised image retargeting
methods can be improved using some novel supervised meth-
ods. The learning-based image retargeting methods identify
the region of interest (ROI) based on a set of training images
then key factors are used to perform the image retargeting
operations. The incorporation of recent technologies such
as artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and
deep learning can improve the efﬁciency of traditional seam
carving technique so that better-retargeted images can be pro-
duced with fewer deformations. The image segmentation is
also a problem associated with the conventional seam carving
technique when a large portion of the image is eliminated. To
join the two distinct image sets an efﬁcient image stitching
technique can be integrated so that the generation of false
edges in between two disjoint image sets can be suppressed
completely.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of inter-
est.
References
1. Avidan, S. and Shamir, A.: Seam carving for content-aware image
resizing. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 papers, pp. 10-
es, (2007) doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/1275808.1276390
2. Shamir, A., Avidan, S.: Seam carving for media retargeting. Com-
mun. ACM 52(1), 77–85 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1145/1435417.
1435437
3. Garg, A., Negi, A.: Structure preservation in content-aware
image retargeting using multi-operator. IET Image Proc. 14(13),
2965–2975 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2019.1032
4. Zhang, Y., Sun, Z., Jiang, P., Huang, Y., Peng, J.: Hybrid image
retargeting using optimized seam carving and scaling. Multim.
Tools Appl. 76(6), 8067–8085 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11042-016-3318-1
5. Fang, Y., Fang, Z., Yuan, F., et al.: Optimized multioperator image
retargeting based on perceptual similarity measure. IEEE Trans.
Syst., Man, Cybern.: Syst. 47(11), 2956–2966 (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1109/TSMC.2016.2557225
6. Tang, Z., Yao, J., Zhang, Q.: Multi-operator image retargeting in
compressed domain by preserving aspect ratio of important con-
tents. Multim. Tools Appl. 3, 1–22 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11042-021-11376-z
7. Abhayadev, M., Santha, T.: Multi-operator content aware image
retargeting on natural images. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 78, 193–198 (2019)
8. Garg, A., Negi, A., Jindal, P.: Structure preservation of image
using an efﬁcient content-aware image retargeting technique.
SIViP 15(1),185–193(2021).https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-020-
01736-x
9. Garg, A., Negi, A.: A survey on content aware image resizing
methods. KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst. (TIIS). 14(7), 2997–3017
(2020). https://doi.org/10.3837/tiis.2020.07.015
10. Chang, C.H., Chuang, Y.Y.: A line-structure-preserving approach
to image resizing. In: IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 1075–1082, 2012 doi: https://doi.org/10.
1109/CVPR.2012.6247786
11. Han, R., Ke, Y., Du, L., Qin, F., Guo, J.: Exploring the location of
object deleted by seam-carving. Expert Syst. Appl. 95, 162–171
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.11.023
12. Patel, D., Raman, S.: Accelerated seam carving for image retar-
geting. IET Image Proc. 13(6), 885–895 (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1049/iet-ipr.2018.5283
13. Kiess, J., Kopf, S., Guthier, B., Effelsberg, W.: Seam carving with
improved edge preservation. multimedia on mobile devices. Int.
Soc. Opt. Photon. 7542, 75420 (2010)
14. Yang, Y., Cheng, Z., Yu, H., et al.: MSE-Net: generative image
inpainting with multi-scale encoder. Vis. Computer. 65, 1–13
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-021-02143-0
15. Simakov, D., Caspi, Y., Shechtman, E., Irani, M.: Summarizing
visual data using bidirectional similarity. In: IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–8, 2008 doi: https://
doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587842
16. Bolduc, F., Lejeune, A., Magnenat-Thalmann, N.: Image synthe-
sis and 3-D computer animation: a new approach for strategic
analysis. Vis. Comput. 3(1), 51–56 (1987). https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02153650
17. Nie, Y., Zhang, Q., Wang, R., Xiao, C.: Video retargeting combin-
ing warping and summarizing optimization. Vis. Comput. 29(6),
785–794 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-013-0830-4
18. Su, Z., Luo, X., Artusi, A.: A novel image decomposition approach
and its applications. Vis. Comput. 29(10), 1011–1023 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-012-0753-5
19. Banerjee, A., Das, N., Santosh, K.C.: Weber local descriptor for
image analysis and recognition: a survey. Vis. Computer. 68, 1–23
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-020-02017-x
20. Hashemzadeh, M., Asheghi, B., Farajzadeh, N.: Content-aware
image resizing: an improved and shadow-preserving seam carv-
ing method. Signal Process. 155, 233–246 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.sigpro.2018.09.037
21. Abhayadev, M., and T. Santha.: Efﬁcient retargeting of shadow
images using improved CRIST. In: International conference on
intelligent computing and control (I2C2), pp. 1–5, 2017
22. Senturk, Z.K. and Akgun, D.: Seam carving based image retar-
geting: A survey. In: 1st international informatics and software
engineering conference (UBMYK), pp. 1–6, 2019
23. Chen, L., Fu, G.: Structure-preserving image smoothing with
semantic cues. Vis. Comput. 36(10), 2017–2027 (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00371-020-01950-1
24. Lin, W., Zhang, F., Lian, R., et al.: Seam Carving Algo-
rithm Based on Saliency. In: International Conference on Smart
Vehicular Technology, Transactions, Communication and Applica-
tions, pp. 282–291, 2017 doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
70730-3_34
25. Patel, D., Shanmuganathan, S., Raman, S.: Adaptive multiple-
pixel wide seam carving. National conference on communications
(NCC), pp. 1–6, 2019 doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/NCC.2019.
8732245
26. Xu, J., Kang, H., Chen, F.: Content-aware image resizing using
quasi-conformal mapping. Vis. Comput. 34(3), 431–442 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-017-1350-4
27. Guo, Z. and Zhang, J.: Seam Carving Algorithm for Maintaining
the Shape Structure of Signiﬁcant Objects. In: 2nd International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Engineering Application
123

A. Garg, A. K. Singh
(AIEA), pp. 651–658, 2017 doi: https://doi.org/10.12783/dtcse/
aiea2017/14995
28. Zhang, L., Li, K., Ou, Z., Wang, F.: Seam warping: a new approach
for image retargeting for small displays. Soft. Comput. 21(2),
447–457 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-015-1795-1
29. Shaﬁeyan, F., Karimi, N., Mirmahboub, B., et al.: Image retar-
geting using depth assisted saliency map. Signal Process.: Image
Commun. 50, 34–43 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.image.2016.
10.006
30. Solanki, P., Bhatnagar, C., Jalal, A.S., et al.: Content Aware Image
Size Reduction Using Low Energy Maps for Reduced Distortion.
In: Proceeding of International Conference on Computer Visual
and Image Proceeding, pp. 467–474, 2017 doi: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-10-2104-6_42
31. Guo, Y., Liang, Y., Yu, M., et al.: An improved seam carving algo-
rithm based on image blocking and optimized cumulative energy
map. J. Elect. Info. Tech. 40(2), 331–337 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.11999/JEIT170501
32. Alavi Gharahbagh, A., Yaghmaee, F.: Improved content aware
image retargeting using strip partitioning. Int. J. Eng. 31(5),
684–692 (2018)
33. Patel, D., Nagar, R., Raman, S.: Reﬂection symmetry aware image
retargeting. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 125, 179–186 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.patrec.2019.04.013
34. Arai, K.: Modiﬁed seam carving by changing resizing depending
on the object size in time and space domains. Int. J. Adv. Comput.
Sci. Appl. 10(9), 143–150 (2019)
35. Choi, B., Lee, M., Jung, S.W. and Lu, Y.: Distortion-aware
Panoramic Image Resizing Using Seam Carving. In: 2021 Interna-
tional Conference on Electrical, Information, and Communication
(ICEIC), pp. 1–2, 2021 doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEIC51217.
2021.9369775
36. Rubinstein, M., Shamir, A., Avidan, S.: Multi-operator media retar-
geting. ACM Trans. Gr. (TOG). 28(3), 1–11 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1145/1531326.1531329
37. Dong, W.M., Bao, G.B., Zhang, X.P., et al.: Fast multi-operator
image resizing and evaluation. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 27(1),
121–134 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11390-012-1211-6
38. Kiess, J., Guthier, B., Kopf, S., et al.: SeamCrop for image retarget-
ing. Multimedia on Mobile Devices 2012; and Multimedia Content
Access: Algorithms and Systems VI. 8304, 83040K (2012) doi:
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.906386
39. Zhou, Y., Chen, Z., Li, W.: Weakly supervised reinforced multi-
operator image retargeting. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol. 31(1), 126–139 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.
2020.2977943
40. Valdez-Balderas, D., Muraveynyk, O. and Smith, T.: Fast Hybrid
Image Retargeting. In: 2021 IEEE International conference on
image processing (ICIP), pp. 1849–1853, 2021 doi: https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICIP42928.2021.9506584
41. Mei, Y., Guo, X., Sun, D., Pan, G. and Zhang, J.: Deep Super-
vised Image Retargeting. In: 2021 IEEE international conference
on multimedia and expo (ICME), pp. 1–6, 2021 doi: https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICME51207.2021.9428129
42. Patel, D., and Raman, S.: Object proposals-based signiﬁcance map
for image retargeting. in: proceedings of 2nd international confer-
ence on computer vision and image Processing, pp. 89–101, 2018
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7898-9_8
43. Tsai, Y.J., Lin, H.J., Li, Y.S.: A straight line preserving seam carv-
ing technique. Appl. Mech. Mater. 385, 1453–1456 (2013). https://
doi.org/10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/AMM.385-386.1453
44. Conge, D.D., Kumar, M., Miller, R.L., et al.: Improved seam
carving for image resizing. IEEE workshop on signal process-
ing systems, pp. 345–349, 2010 doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/SIPS.
2010.5624813
45. Kumar, M., Conger, D.D., Miller, R.L., et al.: A distortion-sensitive
seam carving algorithm for content-aware image resizing. J. Sig-
nal Process. Syst. 65(2), 159–169 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11265-011-0613-y
46. Kim, H.K., Lee, K.W., Jung, J.Y., et al.: A content-aware image
stitching algorithm for mobile multimedia devices. IEEE Trans.
Cons. Elect. 57(4), 1875–1882 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCE.2011.6131166
47. Zhang, D., Yin, T., Yang, G., Xia, M., Li, L., Sun, X.: Detecting
image seam carving with low scaling ratio using multi-scale spa-
tial and spectral entropies. J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 48,
281–291 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2017.07.006
48. Song, E., Lee, M., Lee, S.: CarvingNet: content-guided seam
carving using deep convolution neural network. IEEE Access. 7,
284–292 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2885347
49. Guo, T., Xu, X.: Salient object detection from low contrast images
based on local contrast enhancing and non-local feature learning.
Vis. Computer. 45, 1–13 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-
020-01964-9
50. Koo, H.I., Kuk, J.G. and Cho, N.I.: Eliminating structure misalign-
ments using robust matching and image editing based on seam
carving. In: 2009 16th IEEE international conference on image
processing (ICIP), pp. 209–212, 2009 doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICIP.2009.5414470
51. Vaquero, D., Turk, M., Pulli, K., Tico, M., Gelfand, N.: A survey of
imageretargetingtechniques.Appl.DigitalImageProcessXXXIII.
7798, 779814 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1117/12.862419
52. Kiess, J., Kopf, S., Guthier, B., Effelsberg, W.: A survey on content-
aware image and video retargeting. Acm Trans. Multim. Comput.,
Commun., Appl. (TOMM). 14(3), 1–28 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1145/3231598
53. Chen, Y., Pan, Y., Song, M., Wang, M.: Improved seam carving
combining with 3D saliency for image retargeting. Neurocomput-
ing 151, 645–653 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.
05.089
54. Frankovich, M., Wong, A.: Enhanced seam carving via integration
of energy gradient functionals. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 18(6),
375–378 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/LSP.2011.2140396
55. Lin, H., Hosu, V., and Saupe, D.: KADID-10k: A large-scale artiﬁ-
cially distorted IQA database. In: 2019 Eleventh International Con-
ference on Quality of Multimedia Experiment (QoMEX), pp. 1–3,
2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/QoMEX.2019.8743252
56. Wang, Z., Zhang, W., Zhou, H.: Perception-guided multi-channel
visual feature fusion for image retargeting. Signal Process.: Image
Commun. 79, 63–70 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.image.2019.
08.015
57. Fang, Y., Zeng, K., Wang, Z., Lin, W., Fang, Z., Lin, C.W.: Objec-
tive quality assessment for image retargeting based on structural
similarity. IEEE J. Emerg. Selec. Topics Circuits Syst. 4(1), 95–105
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/JETCAS.2014.2298919
58. Chen, Y., Liu, L., Tao, J., et al.: The improved image inpainting
algorithm via encoder and similarity constraint. Vis. Computer.
36, 1–15 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-020-01932-3
59. Xin, Z., Fu, S.: User-centric QoE model of visual perception for
mobile videos. Vis. Computer 35(9), 1245–1254 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00371-018-1590-y
60. Senturk, Z.K., Akgun, D., Senturk, A.: A performance analysis for
seam carving algorithm. Int. J. Adv. Stud. Computers, Sci. Eng.
3(12), 5–11 (2014)
61. Venkataramanan, A.K., Wu, C., Bovik, A.C., Katsavounidis, I.,
Shahid, Z.: A Hitchhiker’s guide to structural similarity. IEEE
Access. 9, 28872–28896 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2021.3056504
62. Wei, Y., Xu, M.: Detection of lane line based on Robert operator. J.
Measure. Eng 9(3), 156–166 (2021). https://doi.org/10.21595/jme.
2021.22023
123

Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements…
63. Zhai, G., Min, X.: Perceptual image quality assessment: a survey.
Sci. China Inf. Sci. 63(11), 211301 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11432-019-2757-1
64. Zhang,Y.,Lai,Y.K.,Zhang,F.L.:Stereoscopicimagestitchingwith
rectangular boundaries. Vis. Computer 35(6), 823–835 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-019-01694-7
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Ankit Garg is working as Assis-
tant Professor in Department of
Computer Science & Engineering
at
Amity
University
Haryana,
Gurugram, India. He has more
than 12 years of teaching expe-
rience
in
technical
education.
He holds a Ph.D degree in the
ﬁeld of computer science from
Uttarakhand
Technical
Uni-
versity,
Dehradun,
India.
He
passed
M.Tech
degree
from
Uttarakhand
Technical
Univer-
sity, Dehradun, India and MCA
degree from HNB, Garhwal Uni-
versity, Chauras Campus, Srinagar, India. In addition to these, he has
published more than 30 research papers in international journals and
conferences including SCIE and Scopus. His areas of specialization
include Image Processing, Computer Graphics, and Computer Vision.
Anuj Kumar Singh is working as
Assistant Professor in Department
of Computer Science & Engineer-
ing at Amity University Haryana,
Gurugram, India. He has more
than 17 years of teaching expe-
rience in technical education. He
holds a Ph.D degree in the ﬁeld of
computer science and engineering
from Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam
Technical University, Lucknow,
India. He passed M.Tech degree
with ﬁrst distinction from Panjab
University, Chandigarh, India and
B.Tech degree with ﬁrst honours
from U.P.T.U Lucknow, India in computer science and engineering. In
addition to these, he has also qualiﬁed UGC NET. Having published
more than 30 research papers in international journals and conferences
including SCIE and Scopus, he has also authored one book and edited
two. His areas of specialization include Cryptography, Network and
Information Security, Blockchain Technology, Intelligent Systems,
and Algorithm Design.
123

