REVIEW
The vascular plants: open system of growth
Alice Basile1 & Marco Fambrini2 & Claudio Pugliesi2
Received: 13 July 2016 /Accepted: 22 December 2016 /Published online: 18 February 2017
# Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2017
Abstract What is fascinating in plants (true also in sessile
animals such as corals and hydroids) is definitely their open
and indeterminate growth, as a result of meristematic activity.
Plants as well as animals are characterized by a multicellular
organization, with which they share a common set of genes
inherited from a common eukaryotic ancestor; nevertheless,
circa 1.5 billion years of evolutionary history made the two
kingdoms very different in their own developmental biology.
Flowering plants, also known as angiosperms, arose during
the Cretaceous Period (145–65 million years ago), and up to
date, they count around 235,000 species, representing the larg-
est and most diverse group within the plant kingdom. One of
the foundations of their success relies on the plant–pollinator
relationship, essentially unique to angiosperms that pushed
large speciation in both plants and insects and on the presence
of the carpel, the structure devoted to seed enclosure. A seed
represents the main organ preserving the genetic information
of a plant; during embryogenesis, the primary axis of devel-
opment is established by two groups of pluripotent cells: the
shoot apical meristem (SAM), responsible for gene rating all
aboveground organs, and the root apical meristem (RAM),
responsible for producing all underground organs. During
postembryonic shoot development, axillary meristem (AM)
initiation and outgrowth are responsible for producing all sec-
ondary axes of growth including inflorescence branches or
flowers. The production of AMs is tightly linked to the pro-
duction of leaves and their separation from SAM. As leaf
primordia are formed on the flanks of the SAM, a region
between the apex and the developing organ is established
and referred to as boundary zone. Interaction between hor-
mones and the gene network in the boundary zone is funda-
mental for AM initiation. AMs only develop at the adaxial
base of the leaf; thus, AM initiation is also strictly associated
with leaf polarity. AMs function as new SAMs: form axillary
buds with a few leaves and then the buds can either stay
dormant or develop into shoot branches to define a plant ar-
chitecture, which in turn affects assimilate production and
reproductive efficiency. Therefore, the radiation of angio-
sperms was accompanied by a huge diversification in growth
forms that determine an enormous morphological plasticity
helping plants to environmental changes. In this review, we
focused on the developmental processes of AM initiation and
outgrowth. In particular, we summarized the primary growth
of SAM, the key role of positional signals for AM initiation,
and the dissection of molecular players involved in AM initi-
ation and outgrowth. Finally, the interaction between phyto-
hormone signals and gene regulatory network controlling AM
development was discussed.
Keywords Axillary meristems . Hormones . Mutants . Plant
architecture . Shoot apical meristem . Stem cells . Sugar .
Transcription factors
Communicated by Sureshkumar Balasubramanian
“In opposition to animals, vascular plants form an open system in which
growth is localized in embryonic areas, the meristems, which all along
individual life form new tissues and organs which are added to those
formed during embryogenesis (D’Amato 1964).” For this
developmental characteristic, plants have sometimes been defined as
organisms with continued embryogenesis (Bower 1930) or recurrent on-
togenesis (Chiarugi 1952). The shoot apical meristem acts as a reservoir
of the genetic information of the plant which is directly delivered to the
mega- and microsporogeneous tissues (germline) at time of change of the
apical meristem from the vegetative to the reproductive phase (D’Amato
1977, 1997).
* Claudio Pugliesi
claudio.pugliesi@unipi.it
1
Institute of Biology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
2
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Ambientali e Agro-alimentari,
Università degli Studi di Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
DOI 10.1007/s00427-016-0572-1

Primary growth of shoots
Plants are plastic organisms with recurrent organogenesis that
adapt their developmental program to mutable environmental
factors. This is possible thanks to areas where rapidly divid-
ing, undifferentiated cells are retained throughout the entire
life span of a plant. These areas are named meristems and
are found at the two tips of a plant: one is the shoot apical
meristem (SAM) and the other one is the root apical meristem
(RAM) (Arber 1950; Steeves and Sussex 1989; McConnell
and Barton 1998; Sussex and Kerk 2001; Agusti and Greb
2013; Fambrini and Pugliesi 2013; Žádníková and Simon
2014; Gaillochet and Lohmann 2015).
The apical meristem is a dome-shaped mass of dividing
cells that encloses a reservoir of pluripotent stem cells (SCs),
≈35 in Arabidopsis SAM, that represent the renewable and
ultimate source of all new tissues and consequently new or-
gans for a plant. Away to easily describe a SAM is through its
functional organization mainly determined by gene expres-
sion and function: at the top, a small group of slowly dividing
pluripotent cells has SC function and represents the central
zone (CZ) involved in the meristem maintenance; the two
flanking regions are indicated as peripheral zones (PZ), where,
in contrast, the cell proliferation rate is higher and where cells
are recruited into organ primordia (Bowman and Eshed 2000).
A third zone, whose name is rib zone (RZ), lies in the bottom
part of the SAM and provides multipotent cells required for
the differentiating stem (Lyndon 1998). SCs are located in the
CZ and directly underneath the organizing center (OC), which
is required to induce and maintain SC fate. This means that all
cells inside the SAM divide, yet boundaries and patterns are
kept in order to ensure a mechanism of self-perpetuation; a
continuous flow of cells moves basipetally from the distal
portion of the meristem to the flanking regions where lateral
organs are formed. The central zone acts as a reservoir of stem
cells that replenishes the cells of the peripheral zones and the
rib zone, which are lost during the formation of stem and
lateral organs. Decades of research have uncovered conserved
key regulators and networks that operate across species in
SAM function. It appears quite clear that the wiring of the
main pathways intersects and diverges in significant ways
across species, maybe due to adjustments operated by evolu-
tion and domestication. A pivotal role in the organization of
the SAM is played by the transcription factor (TF)
WUSCHEL (WUS). SCs are maintained by the CLAVATA-
WUS (CLV-WUS) negative feedback loop in Arabidopsis
(Mayer et al. 1998; Schoof et al. 2000). Cells in the OC are
marked by the transcription of WUS, a regulator that promotes
stem cell identity (Fig. 1a,b). WUS protein moves from the
OC, where it is expressed, to the stem cell region promoting
the expression of CLV3 that in turn represses WUS expression
and ultimately promotes stem cell identity (Yadav et al. 2011).
The activity of WUS in OC is fine-tuned in order to balance
SC number and proliferation rate, with a parallel action of
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM) and cytokinins (CKs)
(reviewed in Gaillochet et al. 2015; Soyars et al. 2016).
When the WUS activity is lost, defective shoot meristems
are initiated recurrently, but they terminate prematurely in ab-
normal flat structures (Laux et al. 1996). The hierarchic pre-
eminence of WUS in Arabidopsis embryo is demonstrated by
its expression before the activity of the marker gene of SCs,
CLV3 (Mayer et al. 1998; Fletcher et al. 1999). Furthermore, it
is not a simple matter of expression but also of position: the
SC fate depends on the move of WUS TF to the CZ of the
SAM via plasmodesmata (Mayer et al. 1998, Yadav et al.
2011; Daum et al. 2014). WUS accumulates at a higher level
in the RZ and at a lower level in the CZ where it activates its
own negative regulator, CLV3. In Arabidopsis, a recent study
reveals that transcriptional regulatory domains influence nu-
clear levels of WUS through nuclear-cytoplasmic partitioning
and establish the spatial distribution of WUS through DNA
binding and homodimerization. In addition, maintenance of
WUS levels also seems to involve protein destabilization
(Perales et al. 2016).
As mentioned above, the expression of WUS is strictly
limited to the OC SCs through a negative feedback loop by
a ligand-receptor complex made up of a signal peptide CLV3
(Fig. 1b) and the leucine-rich receptor proteins CLV1 and
CLV2 (Clark 1997; Schoof et al. 2000; Barton 2010; Hasson
et al. 2010; Galli and Gallavotti 2016). This pathway, which
coordinates SC proliferation with differentiation, was first
identified in Arabidopsis, but it appears to be conserved in
several higher plant species (reviewed in Somssich et al.
2016). Genetic defects in the pathway, as in clv1 mutant, de-
termine accumulation of undifferentiated cells in enlarged
meristems and the phenotype of mutated plants and show
fasciated or flattened stems and increased floral/fruit organ
number (Leyser and Furner 1992; Clark et al. 1993, 1997;
Schoof et al. 2000).
A specific signal that originates from differentiated cells of
the leaf primordium, and that is involved in fine-tune of WUS
transcription, has been recently identified in maize. In fact,
FASCIATED EAR3 (FEA3) transmembrane receptor compo-
nent is required to determine a cylindrical domain that over-
laps with the OC, where it represses ZmWUS1 transcription in
cells subtending the OC in maize SAM (Je et al. 2016).
Notably, in this monocot model system, the two putative
maize co-orthologs, ZmWUS1 and ZmWUS2, show different
expression patterns relative to Arabidopsis WUS, suggesting
major modifications in the course of mono- and dicot evolu-
tion (Nardmann and Werr 2006; Galli and Gallavotti 2016).
The WUS/CLV3 pathway has a prominent but not exclusive
role as regulator of SCs, and a multifaceted exchange of sig-
nals between OC and CZ is required. For example, the proto-
derm (L1) is a source of the mobile microRNA (miRNA) 394
signal linked to repression of the F-box protein encoded by the
130
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

LEAF CURLING RESPONSIVENESS (LCR) gene and this
effect is necessary to ensure SC maintenance (Knauer et al.
2013). Only daughter cells that are forced out of the CZ due to
meristem cell division activity are fated to differentiate and be
recruited into lateral primordia of organs. Besides its central
function in SC maintenance, the canonical WUS/CLV3 path-
way plays an important role in specifying the boundary be-
tween CZ and PZ, but also non-cell autonomously controls
cell proliferation rate in the PZ (Reddy and Meyerowitz 2005;
Yadav et al. 2010). On the other end, intertwined loops of
communication between the OC, CZ, and PZ require many
players, as summarized in recent reviews (Gaillochet et al.
2015; Hepworth and Pautot 2015).
Once cells have left CZ and pushed toward the PZ flanking
regions, changes in their expression pattern together with hor-
mone fluxes indicate the onset of differentiation; however,
these cells are kept in a relatively undifferentiated state by
the activity of the STM gene in Arabidopsis and
KNOTTED1 (KN1) in maize (Vollbrecht et al. 1991; Long et
al. 1996; Gallois et al. 2002; Lenhard et al. 2002). Notably,
both genes are downregulated in the incipient lateral organ
primordia (Jackson et al. 1994; Long et al. 1996) and, in fact,
the stm mutant develops adventitious shoots and these defec-
tive organs are consumed during primordia formation, prema-
turely terminating in fused ectopic primordia (Endrizzi et al.
1996). STM negatively regulates organ formation through re-
pression of the organ-promoting ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1
(AS1) and AS2 genes (Byrne et al. 2000; Byrne et al. 2002).
What reported up to now gives the essential bases to step into
the main topic of the review, the axillary meristems (AMs).
As plants grow, new growth axes are originated to extend the
plant body in a way compatible with the environment. In the
aerial part, this is achieved by establishing AMs, embryonic
shoots located at the axil of leaves that can produce new axes
of growth harboring the same developmental potential as the
SAM and are therefore structural identical but ontogenetically
different from each other (De Smet et al. 2006; Leyser 2009;
Agusti and Greb 2013; Wang et al. 2016). In AMs, SCs are early
sequestrated and the reduction of divisions in the SC lineage
prevents fixation of somatic mutations, slowing mutational melt-
down (Burian et al. 2016).
Shoot meristems are changing their identity throughout the
various growth phases; this is most conspicuous in the lateral
structures made on the flanks of the SAM. In Arabidopsis,
these structures are leaves during the initial vegetative growth,
leaves and AMs during the transition to flowering, and floral
meristems (FMs) and bracts by the inflorescence meristem
during reproductive growth (Denay et al. 2016). In contrast,
RAMs do not apparently change their identity during devel-
opment. AMs are, therefore, central players in a plant growth
because differences in meristem initiation and development
cause diversity in plant architecture. AMs are initiated in the
boundary zone that separates leaf primordia from the shoot
apex. The cells of the boundary zone, indeed, seem not fully
determinate and competent to AM initiation (Wang et al.
2016). The initiation and development of AMs are, as above
mentioned, pivotal to determine plant architecture and a fine
integration of environmental factors and developmental path-
ways is required to control shoot branching (Wang and Li
2008; Leyser 2009; Žádníková and Simon 2014) making it a
highly plastic process (Agusti and Greb 2013). For example,
shading inhibits branching, while high nutrient availability
promotes it (McSteen 2009). For this developmental charac-
teristic, plants have sometimes been defined as organisms with
“continued embryogenesis” or “recurrent ontogenesis”
(D’Amato 1997). There are now a number of well-
established regulators of AM formation from several model
species. What is still lacking is a coherent model of action for
these factors and their interactions and whether there is con-
servation of these systems among different plant species.
Positional signals in AM initiation
The axillary branching process generally involves two devel-
opmental stages: the formation of AMs and the subsequent
axillary bud outgrowth (Janssen et al. 2014). AM initiation
starts from a group of small and slowly dividing cells in the
Fig. 1 Simplified organization of the shoot apical meristem (SAM) at the
vegetative stage. a The SAM organization is arranged in terms of
functional zones: central zone (CZ), peripheral zone (PZ), rib zone
(RZ), and organizing center (OC). The leaf primordia (P1 and P2) are
also indicated. b The antagonistic relation between WUSCHEL (WUS)
and CLAVATA (CLV) genes is essential to preserve cells in the meristem.
WUS activates CLV3, which further binds with CLV1/2 and in turn
inhibits expression of WUS. Cytokinin (CK) positively controls WUS
expression where ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULATORs (ARRs)
are negative regulators of CK and are inhibited by WUS. (Pointed and
T-shaped arrows indicate positive and negative regulation, respectively)
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
131

axils of leaf primordia. In some species, fragments of the main
meristem, so-called “detached meristems”, remain associated
with each axil. These “detached meristems” become activated
and form buds when the leaf and its associated axil are distant
from the main SAM groups of meristematic cells (Garrison
1955; Steeves and Sussex 1989). In other species, differenti-
ated cells in the leaf axil undergo dedifferentiation and regain
meristematic potential “de novo formation” (Majumdar 1942;
Irish and Sussex 1992; McConnell and Barton 1998). In plants
like Arabidopsis, where the meristem appears at later stages of
development, the meristem is not formed “de novo” but built
as a “detached meristem” (Bennett and Leyser 2006). The fact
that in Arabidopsis the boundary zones at the leaf axils con-
tinue to show expression of STM, a marker gene for cell of
SAM, supports the “detached meristem” hypothesis. Indeed,
experiments of expression analyses conducted with STM,
LATERAL SUPPRESSOR (LAS), and REVOLUTA (REV)
genes in the las mutant of Arabidopsis suggested that the
process of AM formation during vegetative development
shows characteristics of both the “detached meristem” and
the “de novo formation” models (Greb et al. 2003).
Therefore, it is not definitively proven how the origin of com-
petent cells works to initiate AMs.
In vegetative growth, the AMs subsequently produce a few
leaf primordia and grow to become an axillary bud. Axillary
buds are then subjected to an additional level of regulation,
becoming dormant or continuing growth, depending on inter-
nal and external cues. Therefore, the pattern of vegetative
shoot branching is determined not only by the regulation of
AM initiation but also by the regulation of bud outgrowth
(Steeves and Sussex 1989; Agusti and Greb 2013).
During AM formation, leaf abaxial (AB) and adaxial (AD)
identity appears to be one of the key elements in order to
specify the cell fate (Waites and Hudson 1995; McConnell
and Barton 1998; Hudson 2001; McConnell et al. 2001).
Many components of this network are widely conserved
across plant species. The network consists mainly of two
groups of TFs (Fig. 2). One group comprises the class III
HD-ZIP such as PHABULOSA (PHB) (McConnell and
Barton 1998), PHAVOLUTA (PHV) (McConnell et al.
2001), and REV (Talbert et al. 1995; Otsuga et al. 2001) and
promotes AD leaf fates. Additionally, the MYB TFs AS1/AS2
form a complex that promotes AD identity (Byrne et al. 2000;
Guo et al. 2008). In contrast, the other set of TFs involves the
YABBY (YAB) and the KANADI (KAN) family that acts
antagonistically with HD-ZIP IIIs together with miRNA165/
166 and promotes AB leaf fate (Siegfried et al. 1999;
Kerstetter et al. 2001; Eshed et al. 2004). KAN proteins di-
rectly target genes related to auxin signaling through the
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR3/ETTIN (ARF3/ETT) and
ARF4 genes to specify AB fate in Arabidopsis (Pekker et al.
2005). Moreover, both ARF3 and ARF4 are negatively regu-
lated by trans-acting small interfering RNAs (ta-siRNAs)
(Pekker et al. 2005). It has been also showed that low-abun-
dant, conserved ta-siRNAs, termed tasiR-ARFs, move
intercellularly from their defined source of biogenesis on the
AD side of leaves to the AB side to create a gradient of small
RNAs that patterns the abaxial determinant ARF3 (Chitwood
et al. 2009). In dicot species, the AD side of the leaf seems to
provide one of the positional signals needed for AM initiation.
Loss-of-function in REV originates in plants that lack AMs,
and in gain-of-function phb-D mutants, ectopic AMs are
found on the AB side of leaves (Talbert et al. 1995;
McConnell and Barton 1998). Similarly, mutant plants consti-
tutively expressing the KAN gene also show AD to AB trans-
formations and fail to form SAMs (Kerstetter et al. 2001).
PHB, PHV, and REV act redundantly to allow the initiation
of all meristems, as clear from the triple mutant phb;phv;rev,
which lack SAMs (McConnell and Barton 1998; McConnell
et al. 2001). A leaf-meristem-leaf cycle model for branch de-
velopment has been proposed (McConnell and Barton 1998).
The failure in maintaining a functional meristem when lateral
organs are abaxialized is consistent to this proposed model
(Waites and Hudson 1995). Additional evidence suggests that
the AD domain of a leaf possesses a special competence to form
meristems. Class I KNOX family homeodomain TFs as STM of
Arabidopsis or KN1 of maize together with the ARP genes AS1
and its ortholog ROUGH SHEATH2 of maize have key roles in
regulating the balance between SAM maintenance and organo-
genesis (Byrne et al. 2002; Barton 2010). ARP genes are specif-
ically expressed in lateral organ founder cells, and they are mu-
tually antagonistic with respect to KNOX genes. Therefore,
Fig. 2 The SAM at the vegetative stage. The arrowheads indicate leaf
axils. The adaxial (AD) and abaxial (AB) leaf blades are indicated. Note
the tunica layers, L1, L2, and L3. A simplified regulatory network for AD/
AB polarity of leaves is also indicated: class III HOMEODOMAIN-
LEUCINE ZIPPER (HD-ZIP III) TFs, KANADI (KAN), AUXIN
RESPONSE FACTOR3 (ARF3)/4 ETTIN (ARF3/4-ETT), small
interfering RNAs (ta-siRNAs), ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1), microRNAs,
the complex ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 (AS1/AS2), and YABBY.
(Pointed and T-shaped arrows indicate positive and negative regulation,
respectively)
132
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

mutations of ARP genes correlate with loss of determinacy of cell
fate related to ectopic expression of KNOX genes. Ectopic ex-
pression of STM results in the formation of epiphyllous structures
and also induces the expression of cell cycle genes (e.g.,
cycB1;1) in those tissues (Chuck et al. 1996; Lenhard et al.
2002). By contrast, loss of STM function leads to the absence
of vegetative meristems. When KNOX-like genes are
overexpressed, ectopic meristems arise but only on the AD leaf
surface (Sinha et al. 1993; Chiappetta et al. 2006). Consistent
with this, the AM and subtending leaf are clonally related, shar-
ing a common ancestor (Irish and Sussex 1992).
The failure to limit PHB and PHVexpression apically via a
miRNA-dependent pathway prevents an accurate establish-
ment of the embryonic root development program and results
in embryo lethality (Grigg et al. 2009). As such, repression of
a fundamental shoot development pathway is also essential for
correct root development (Grigg et al. 2009). In Arabidopsis,
ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) and ZWILLE/PINHEAD/AGO10
(ZLL) proteins act in the miRNA and small interfering RNA
(siRNA) pathways. The expression pattern of the Arabidopsis
ZWILLE/PINHEAD/AGO10 (ZLL/AGO10/PNH), encoding
for a member of a family of proteins that includes translation
factor eIF2C and ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) genes in the AD
half of the leaf primordium as well as in the SAM, indicates
that the SAM and the AD leaf domain comprise a unit of
common positional identity (Lynn et al. 1999; Kidner and
Martienssen 2004). These findings suggest the partial redun-
dancy of ZLL and AGO gene products and that these proteins
may be components of a hypothetical meristem forming com-
petence factor (Lynn et al. 1999). Also, pnh and ago1 mutants
showed a common phenotype and failed to specify correctly
AD/meristematic domains, and the result was the deficiency
in the organization of all meristems. Additionally, analysis of
ago1 mutants with partially compromised AGO1 activity re-
vealed that loss of ZLL/AGO10/PNH function reestablishes
both siRNA and miRNA pathways for a subset of AGO1
target genes (Mallory et al. 2009). Loss of ZLL/AGO10/
PNH function in ago1 mutants led to increased AGO1 protein
levels, whereas AGO1 mRNA levels were unchanged, impli-
cating ZLL/AGO10/PNH as a negative regulator of AGO1 at
the protein level (Mallory et al. 2009). AGO genes are recog-
nized by carboxy-terminal PAZ and PIWI domains and are
common in eukaryotes (Carmell et al. 2002). AGO genes are
needed for posttranscriptional gene silencing and RNA inter-
ference, and AGO1-like proteins are fraction of the RNA in-
terference silencing complex (RISC), which targets mRNA
for degradation using miRNA as a guide (Caudy et al.
2002). Therefore, mutations in AGO1 are related to typical
developmental deficiencies that suggest a role for miRNA in
organ polarity. It was also demonstrated that miRNA acts as a
signal to specify leaf polarity regulating PHB and PHV
(Kidner and Martienssen 2004, 2005). Additionally, it was
recently reported that maintenance of SAM SCs by AGO10
involves negative regulation of auxin signaling and, via REV-
mediated downregulation of ARF2 expression, auxin response
(Roodbarkelary et al. 2015).
Mutants for AM initiation and outgrowth:
the dissection of molecular players
Genes with a role in AM initiation
Despite the diversity in both vegetative and reproductive
growth habits (Figs. 3 and 4), AM initiation and bud out-
growth among herbaceous dicot and monocot species are mul-
tifactorial processes determined largely by the same factors
(Table 1). Mutants characterized by defects in AMs initiation
have been useful to identify key genes involved in branching.
Here, we reviewed the most important studies in dicots and
monocots species, especially in model plants such as
Arabidopsis and maize. Frequently, genes that affect AM ini-
tiation also are involved in boundary formation, but it is not
necessarily true the contrary (Yang and Jiao 2016). Indeed, it
is not always easy to distinguish between genes involved ex-
clusively in the initiation or in the outgrowth of AMs.
In the GRAS gene family, mutation in lateral suppressor
(Ls) of tomato (Schumacher et al. 1999) and its homologous
LAS of Arabidopsis (Greb et al. 2003) causes strong defects in
AM formation, leading to loss of side shoots during vegetative
development (Schumacher et al. 1999; Greb et al. 2003). In
tomato, the ls mutation has pleiotropic effects, mainly related
to the control of meristematic activity and organ floral devel-
opment (Brown 1955; Williams 1960; Groot et al. 1994). In
Arabidopsis, LAS is expressed in a band-shaped domain at the
AD boundary of all SAM-derived primordia (Greb et al.
2003). The gene STM is co-expressed with LAS in leaf axils
from emergence until the formation of the new AM, which is
indicated by a peak of STM expression. Notably, this expres-
sion pattern was absent in las-4 mutants, which demonstrated
the key role of LAS in the early step of AM formation ensuring
that the meristematic competence of leaf axil cells is preserved
and suggesting that the focusing of STM expression, indicative
of the onset of meristem organization, is dependent on LAS
function (Greb et al. 2003; Schmitz and Theres 2005).
A live-cell imaging technique of leaf axil cells has been re-
cently adopted to show that the initiation of AMs requires a
meristematic cell population continuously expressing STM; fur-
thermore, a threshold model for AM initiation suggested that low
levels of STM maintain meristematic competence while high
levels of STM lead to meristem initiation (Shi et al. 2016).
The analysis of LAS transcription in the rev-5 mutants of
Arabidopsis also revealed that during vegetative development,
REVexpression in developing AMs is dependent on LAS func-
tion (Greb et al. 2003). Complex, specific gene expression
patterns, like that of LAS, are thought to be generated by
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
133

multi-unit promoters, consisting of a core promoter, and prox-
imal and distal promoter elements. In fact, analysis of deletion
constructs showed that an essential enhancer was located
about 3.2 kb downstream of the LAS open reading frame
(ORF). It was suggested that the LAS 3′ enhancer was the main
regulatory component conferring the boundary-specific expres-
sion of LAS (Raatz et al. 2011). The analysis of the LAS locus
suggested that the LAS gene was also regulated epigenetically. In
particular, histone methylation marks were not only found at the
ORF but also in the specificity-conferring regions positioned
5 kb downstream of the transcription start site (TSS) and in a
region 1.5–2 kb upstream TSS (Raatz et al. 2011).
Within the GRAS family, other members seem involved in
the AM development. For example, in chrysanthemum
(Dendranthema grandiflorum Kitamura) and sunflower
(Helianthus annuus L.), SCARECROW4/7 (SCL4/7)-like
genes modulate hormonal content and AM outgrowth (Yang
et al. 2005; Jiang et al. 2010; Fambrini et al. 2015). The
mRNA of the Ha-GRASL gene of sunflower, which belongs
to the SCL4/7 subfamily, accumulated at the adaxial bound-
aries from P6/P7 leaf primordial suggesting a role of this gene
in the initiation of median and basal AMs. In fact, when Ha-
GRASL was overexpressed in Arabidopsis wild-type (WT)
plants, the number of lateral bolts increased differently from
untransformed plants (Fambrini et al. 2015). However, Ha-
GRASL slightly affects the las-4 mutation. Likely, Ha-
GRASL and LAS are not functionally equivalent.
Additionally, the overexpression of Ha-GRASL reduced the
metabolic flow of gibberellins (GAs) in Arabidopsis and this
modification could be relevant in AM development.
Phylogenetic analysis included LAS and SCL4/7 TFs in the
same major clade, suggesting a more recent separation of
these genes with respect to other GRAS members. It was
proposed that some features of their ancestor, as well as AM
initiation and outgrowth, are partially retained in both LAS
and SCL4/7 (Fambrini et al. 2015).
The genetic defect of Ls homologs determines different
plant architecture also in monocots such as rice. Loss-of-
function of the MONOCULM 1 (MOC1) gene (Table 1)
in rice results in plants lacking of tillers as well as in
reduction of reproductive rachis branches and spikelets
(Li et al. 2003). Analogously to LAS (Greb et al. 2003),
transcripts of MOC1 (Li et al. 2003) accumulated in
PANICLE
TILLER
primary
branch
secondary
branch
flag
leaf
spikelets
anther
filament
palea
lodicule
lemma
carpel
Oryza sativa
SILK
EAR
TASSEL
STALK
tassel rachis
(central spike) 
tassel branch
tassel
peduncle
spikelets
closed
spikelet
anthers
open
spikelet
male
flower
Female
inflorescence
stigmas
stigma
ovaries
style
longitudinal section
of the inflorescence
Zea mays
bracts
Fig. 4 Pictures of monocot (Zea mays and Oryza sativa) model plants.
Flower organs and/or inflorescence are magnified in circular inserts.
BASAL
BRANCH
FLOWER
CLUSTER
FLOWERS
LATERAL 
BRANCH
sepal
petal
stigma
long
stamen
short
stamen
carpel
Arabidopsis thaliana
AXILLARY 
BRANCH
BASAL
BRANCH
AM
Solanum lycopersicum
sepals (calix)
petals (corolla)
pedicell
ovule
pistil
stamen
ROSETTE
LEAVES
CAULINE 
LEAVES
Fig. 3 Pictures of dicot (Arabidopsis thaliana and Solanum
lycopersicum) model plants. Flower organs are magnified in circular
inserts
134
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Table 1
A selection of mutants and genes involved in axillary meristem (AM) initiation and AM outgrowth in vegetative and/or reproductive phases of dicot (Arabidopsis thaliana and Solanum
lycopersicum) and monocot (Zea mays and Oryza sativa) species
Mutant
Gene
Gene family
Genetic or biochemical defect
Phenotype
Plant
Reference
bushy1-1f
CYP79F1
Cytochrome P450
Transposon insertion. Glucosinolate
biosynthesis and hormonal homeostasis
Small crinkled leaves, early formation of
secondary rosette leaves, semisterility, and an
enhanced number of lateral shoots; increase of
IAA content
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Reintanz et al.
(2001)
supershoot
CYP79F1
Cytochrome P450
The mutation cosegregates with a transposed Ds
element and it is recessive to wild type.
Glucosinolate biosynthesis and hormonal
homeostasis
Multiple axillary meristems and enhanced
number of axillary branches; raise of CKs
levels
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Tantikanjana et al.
(2001)
rox
REGULATOR OF
AXILLARY
MERISTEM
FORMATION
(ROX)
bHLH transcription
factors. Ortholog
of LAX1 and BA1
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a bHLH
transcription factor
Compromised axillary bud formation during
vegetative shoot development
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Yang et al. (2012)
branched1
BRANCHED1 (BRC1)
TCP transcription
factor. Ortholog of
TB1
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a TCP
transcription factor
Higher number of rosette branches
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Aguilar-Martínez
et al. (2007)
las
LATERAL
SUPPRESSOR
(LAS)
GRAS transcription
factors. Ortholog
of MOC1
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a GRAS
transcription factor
Axillary meristem initiation is blocked during
vegetative development
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Greb et al. (2003)
revoluta
REVOLUTA (REV)
HD-ZIP transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a HD-ZIP
transcription factor
Reduction in lateral shoot meristems and flower
meristem initiation, as well as exhibition of
leaf and flower organ defects
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Talbert et al.
(1995), Otsuga
et al. (2001)
max2
MORE AXILLARY
GROWTH2 (MAX2)
F-box LRR proteins
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a F-box
LRR protein
Enhanced shoot branching
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Stirnberg et al.
(2002)
trifoliate
LATERAL ORGAN
FUSION 1 ortholog
R2R3 MYB
transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a R2R3
MYB transcription factor
Reduction of shoot branching and leaf dissection Solanum
lycopersi-
cum
Naz et al. (2013)
blind
BLIND
R2R3 MYB
transcription
factor. Ortholog of
RAX
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a R2R3
MYB transcription factor
Initiation of lateral meristems is blocked during
shoot and inflorescence development
Solanum
lycopersi-
cum
Schmitz et al.
(2002)
rax1, rax2 and
rax3
REGULATOR OF
AXILLARY
MERISTEMS1
(RAX1), RAX2 and
RAX3
R2R3 MYB
transcription
factors
Loss-of-function of genes encode for R2R3
MYB transcription factors
rax mutants are characterized by defects in lateral
bud formation in overlapping zones along the
shoot axis. RAX genes are partially redundant
in function and allow a fine-tuning of
secondary axis formation
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Keller et al.
(2006), Müller
et al. (2006)
self-pruning
SELF-PRUNING (SP)
CETS transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a CETS
transcription factor
Switch from indeterminate to determinate plant
architecture
Solanum
lycopersi-
cum
Pnueli et al. (1998)
gob
GOBLET (GOB)
NAC-domain
transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
NAC-domain transcription factor
Primary leaflets are often fused, secondary
leaflets and marginal serrations are absent, and
SAM often terminate precociously
Solanum
lycopersi-
cum
Berger et al.
(2009),
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
135

Table 1 (continued)
Mutant
Gene
Gene family
Genetic or biochemical defect
Phenotype
Plant
Reference
pin1
PIN-FORMED 1
PIN-FORMED
family
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
PIN-FORMED protein with auxin-efflux
function
Drastic reduction of basipetal auxin transport in
the inflorescence axes that originates a
characteristic pin-like inflorescence
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Gälweiler et al.
(1998), Petrášek
et al. (2006)
pid
PINOID
Serine-threonine
protein kinase
family
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a PID
protein that affects downstream events in
auxin signaling
A limited number of flower primordia arise on
the main inflorescence stem and then they
production ceases. Pleiotropic defects also in
cotyledons and leaves
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Christensen et al.
(2000),
Benjamins et al.
(2001), Lee and
Cho (2006)
tb1
teosinte branched1
TCP transcription
factor
Reduced expression of the gene
Highly branched phenotype with presence of
secondary and tertiary axillary branching;
long lateral branches tipped by tassels at
some upper nodes of the main culm and
tillers at the basal nodes
Zea mays
Doebley et al.
(2006), Studer
et al. (2011)
Bif1
(semidomin-
ant)
BARREN
INFLORESCENC-
E1 (BIF1)
AUXIN/INDOL
E-3-ACETIC
ACID protein
Single-amino acid substitutions in the degron
domain of GRMZM2G130953/IAA27. The
degron domain is a highly conserved amino
acid sequence found in Aux/IAA proteins
that confers auxin-induced degradation
Tassels with reduced numbers of branches
and spikelets. Short ears that display
disorganized rows of kernels, as well as
areas completely devoid of kernels
Zea mays
Wu and McSteen
(2007),
Barazesh and
McSteen
(2008), Galli et
al. (2015)
bif2
barren inflorescence2
Serine-threonine
protein kinase
family. Ortholog
of PID
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a BIF2
protein that reduces auxin transport in
inflorescence stems
bif2 mutants make fewer ear shoots,
branches, spikelets, florets, and floral
organs
Zea mays
McSteen et al.
(2007)
ba1
BARREN STALK1
(BA1)
bHLH
transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
bHLH –domain transcription factor
Inability to produce vegetative branches
(tillers), female inflorescences (ears) and a
normal apical male inflorescence (tassel);
the tassel is unbranched, shortened and
predominantly sterile
Zea mays
Gallavotti et al.
(2004)
baf1
BARREN STALK
FASTIGIATE1
(BAF1)
Transcriptional
regulator with
AT-hook DNA
binding motif
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
transcriptional regulator with AT-hook
DNA binding motif
Ears absent or partially fused to the main
stalk
Zea mays
Gallavotti et al.
(2011)
ts4
Tasselseed4 (TS4)
miRNA
TS4 encodes for a mir172 microRNA that
targets APETALA2 a floral homeotic
transcription factors
Ectopic carpel development in the tassel and
concomitant increase of meristem
branching
Zea mays
Chuck et al.
(2007a)
ids1
indeterminate
spikelet1 (IDS1)
APETALA2
transcription
factors
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
AP2-like transcription factor
The spikelet meristem becomes indeterminate
and produces additional florets
Zea mays
Chuck et al.
(1998)
Cg1 (dominant) Corngrass1 (CG1)
miRNA156
Two tandem miR156 genes are overexpressed
in the meristem and lateral organs
Phenotypes that may be present in the
grass-like ancestors of maize
Zea mays
Chuck et al.
(2007b)
ra1
ramosa1 (RA1)
cys2-his2
zinc-finger EPF
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
plant-specific C2H2, EPF-subclass zinc
finger transcription factor
Indeterminacy of spikelet pair meristems,
resulting in an outgrowth of long branches
that leads to a highly disorganized ear
Zea mays
Vollbrecht et al.
(2005)
136
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Table 1 (continued)
Mutant
Gene
Gene family
Genetic or biochemical defect
Phenotype
Plant
Reference
gt1-1
(semidomin-
ant)
grassy tillers1 (GT1)
Homeodomain
leucin zipper
class I
A frameshift within the conserved
homeodomain
Derepression of carpel growth in the male
inflorescence; increased tiller growth
during vegetative development; increased
ear number, and elongation of ear branches
Zea mays
Whipple et al.
(2011)
moc1
MONOCULM 1
(MOC1)
GRAS
transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
GRAS gene
Severe defects in the formation of tiller buds
Oryza sativa
Li et al. (2003)
lax-1
LAX PANICLE 1
(LAX1)
bHLH
transcription
factor
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
bHLH transcription factor
Defects in the maintenance of the AM during
the vegetative and reproductive stages
Oryza sativa
Komatsu et al.
(2003), Oikawa
and Kyozuka
(2009)
lax-2
LAX PANICLE 2
(LAX2)
LAX2 is a nuclear
protein that acts
as a cofactor of
LAX1
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for LAX2
Initiation of lateral spikelets is completely
suppressed, and panicle branches are also
severely reduced. Reduction of tillers
during vegetative development
Oryza sativa
Tabuchi et al.
(2011)
dwarf14
DWARF14 (D14)
α/β-fold hydrolase
Loss-of-function of a gene encodes for a
protein that functions downstream of
strigolactone synthesis, as a component of
hormone signaling or as an enzyme that
participates in the conversion of
strigolactones to the bioactive form
Increased shoot branching with reduced plant
height
Oryza sativa
Arite et al. (2009)
tab1
TILLER ABSENT 1
(TAB1) or OsWUS
TAB1 is ortholog of
WUS from
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Loss-of-function for gene encodes a WOX
transcription factor
No tiller formation in the vegetative phase and
partial defects in branching of the panicle
in the reproductive phase
Oryza sativa
Tanaka et al.
(2015)
fine culm1
FINE CULM1 (FC1)
FC1 encodes a
protein that is a
member of the
TCP family of
transcription
factors
Loss-of-function for gene encodes a TCP
transcription factor. FC1 functions as a
regulator of tiller outgrowth downstream of
the strigolactone signal
Reduction of plant height and increase in tiller
number
Oryza sativa
Minacuchi et al.
(2010)
Dicot and monocot species are presented in italic and bold, respectively
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
137

regions in the axils of leaves from which new AMs
differentiated.
Within the largest MYB TF R2R3-MYB family, the
genes REGULATOR OF AXILLARY MERISTEMS1
(RAX1), RAX2, and RAX3 are partially redundant in func-
tion and control early steps in AM initiation and develop-
ment (Keller et al. 2006; Müller et al. 2006). In
Arabidopsis, the triple mutant rax1;rax2;rax3 fails to ini-
tiate AMs. RAX1 was expressed transiently in the axil of
the leaves in a small region at the center of the boundary
between the SAM and developing leaf primordia.
Analogously, in sunflower, the transcription of Ha-
R2R3-MYB2, a homolog of RAX-like genes, was strongly
restricted to a small domain within the boundary zone
separating the SAM and the leaf primordia, also suggest-
ing that Ha-R2R3-MYB2 could play a key role in estab-
lishing and (or) maintaining a leaf axil SC niche for AM
formation (Pugliesi et al. 2013). However, RT-PCR
analysis showed substantial accumulation of Ha-R2R3-
MYB2 transcripts in several organs at later stages of de-
velopment. It is likely that the role of the Ha-R2R3-MYB2
gene is not restricted to AM initiation. Therefore, if the
gene expression profile was globally evaluated, the results
obtained for the Ha-R2R3-MYB2 gene were consistent
with the expression pattern of RAX3 (Pugliesi et al. 2013).
RAX genes are transcriptionally regulated by EXCESSIVE
BRANCHES1 (EXB1), a gene encoding the WRKY TF
WRKY71 (Guo et al. 2015) (Fig. 5). Overexpression of
EXB1 in the gain-of-function mutant exb1-D leads to extreme
bushy and dwarf phenotypes, which result from massive AM
initiation and elevated bud activities. Additionally, EXB1
plays a key role in axillary shoot development regulating aux-
in biosynthesis (Guo et al. 2015). RAX1 also affects the timing
of phase transitions by negatively regulating gibberellic acid
(GA) levels in the shoot apex (Keller et al. 2006). The dom-
inant mutant rax1-1D is dwarfed with an extended vegetative
phase (Fig. 5); however, some of the analyzed plants were able
to produce vegetative basal branches and produced inflores-
cences with fertile flowers (Keller et al. 2006). Experiments
performed with single and double mutants suggested that the
endogenous level of GAs was lower in rax1-1D mutant with
respect to WT. Additionally, analyses conducted in different
developmental stages indicated that RAX1 antagonized the
accumulation of GA4, the biologically active GA required
for flowering in Arabidopsis.
In turn, RAX genes are homologs to BLIND, which also
controls AM formation in Solanum lycopersicum (Schmitz
et al. 2002). In tomato, the blind-1 (bl-1) and torosa-1 (to-1)
mutants are characterized, in the vegetative phase, by the ab-
sence of axillary buds at 40–90 % of the nodes (Stubbe 1963;
Mapelli and Lombardi 1982; Mapelli and Kinet 1992), al-
though they develop AMs two nodes below the inflorescence
(Stubbe 1959; Tucker 1976). In addition, the inflorescences
produce fewer flowers than the WT and the organs are often
fused and fasciated (Schmitz et al. 2002). Double mutant anal-
yses in tomato and Arabidopsis suggest that GRAS and MYB
proteins control AM formation by separate genetic pathways
(Schmitz et al. 2002; Müller et al. 2006).
In tomato, other mutants affected in the process of AM for-
mation have been described (Rick and Butler 1956; Williams
1960; Stubbe 1959, 1964). For example, the self-pruning (sp)
mutant (Table 1) shows a premature conversion of the sympo-
dial vegetative apex (typical of tomato) into a terminal determi-
nate inflorescence shoot (Yeager 1927; Pnueli et al. 1998,
2001). The determinate habit of the main shoot of tomato is
repeated in side shoots resulting in a limited growth of each
shoot, a bushy compact appearance, and nearly uniform fruit
setting (Pnueli et al. 1998). Determinate sp plants also display
various pleiotropic effects: shorter internodes, production of
more flowers per inflorescence, drastic reduction of apical dom-
inance, acceleration of seed germination, and increased
Fig. 5 Genetic network and hormones [auxin (IAA), gibberellins (GAs),
cytokinins (CKs), strigolactones (SLs), and brassinosteroids (BRs)],
involved in the control of axillary meristem (AM) initiation in the
boundary zone (BZ). Arrows and arrowheads indicate an interaction
and/or activation effect; lines with terminal bars indicate a repressive
effect. The BZ is indicated with a circle proximal to the insertion of the
leaf with the shoot apical meristem. A larger circle is depicted to show
hormones and gene products acronyms as well as their interactions in the
BZ
138
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

susceptibility to auxin treatments. The SELF-PRUNING (SP)
gene is a component of the CETS family of regulatory genes
that includes CENTRORADIALIS (CEN), TERMINAL
FLOWER (TFL1), and FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) and is
related to a gene known to encode a phosphatidylethanolamine
binding protein that may be a component of membrane com-
plexes involved in signal transduction (Bradley et al. 1996,
1997; Kardailsky et al. 1999). These CETS genes have been
suggested as key regulators of plant body pattern maintaining
the indeterminate state of inflorescence apices in Antirrhinum
and Arabidopsis. Pnueli et al. (2001) identified several proteins
that interact with SP: a NIMA-like kinase (SPAK), a bZIP fac-
tor, a novel 10-kD protein, and 14-3-3 isoforms. Surprisingly,
overexpression of 14-3-3 proteins partially improves the effect
of the sp mutation. It was suggested that the associations with
other proteins are required for the biological function of SP
(Pnueli et al. 2001).
In rice, the lax panicle1 (lax1) mutant (Table 1) displays a
strong reduction in the number of panicle branches and spike-
lets (Komatsu et al. 2003) and also fails to form AMs during
vegetative development (Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009). LAX1
expression is observed along with AM formation throughout
the lifetime of a plant. However, LAX1 expression is not per-
ceptible in the SAM during embryogenesis, suggesting that
LAX1 may be involved in a process that is specific to AM
formation (Komatsu et al. 2003). The absence of the axillary
bud in the axils of the leaves of lax1-2 and moc1-3 mutants
suggested that the decrease of tiller numbers was the result of a
failure in the axillary bud formation rather than bud outgrowth
(Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009). Nevertheless, the expression
pattern of OSH1, a KNOX gene, in lax1-2 mutant showed that
in spite of the complete loss of LAX1 function in the first step
of AM formation, the accumulation of meristematic cells in
the axils of leaves was initiated in mutant plants. However,
proliferation of meristematic cells was not maintained, leading
to the failure of new AM formation. Therefore, LAX1 activity
is required for the continuous development, but not for the
initiation, of AM formation (Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009).
Moreover, the additive effects observed in the lax1-1;moc1-
3 double mutant and the distinct patterns in the loss of axillary
bud formation suggest that the regulatory pathway in which
LAX1 functions is likely to be independent from that of MOC1
(Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009). The difference in sites of LAX1
mRNA expression and its action suggests non-cell-
autonomous characteristics of LAX1 function. It was demon-
strated that LAX1 protein movement is required for the full
function of LAX1 (Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009). The rice
LAX2 gene, which encodes a novel nuclear protein that phys-
ically interacts with LAX1, was also shown to promote AM
formation. The analysis of lax1;lax2 double mutant that syn-
ergistically enhanced the reduced-branching phenotype sug-
gested the presence in rice of several pathways for branching
(Tabuchi et al. 2011).
The maize barren stalk1 (ba1) mutants (Table 1) fail to
initiate AMs during all stages of the life cycle (Gallavotti
et al. 2004). There are regular protrusions along the main spike
of the ba1 tassel. These regular bulges are bract primordia
whose outgrowth is usually inhibited during normal tassel
development (Ritter et al. 2002; Gallavotti et al. 2004). Ears
are always missing in the ba1 mutant. LAX1 and BA1 tran-
scripts accumulate at the adaxial boundary of developing AMs
and encode orthologous bHLH proteins (Komatsu et al. 2003;
Gallavotti et al. 2004).
In Arabidopsis, REGULATOR OFAXILLARY MERISTEM
FORMATION (ROX) is the ortholog of LAX1 and BA1 (Yang
et al. 2012). However, mutation in ROX (Table 1) showed a
weakly phenotype in comparison to monocot mutants, ba1
and lax1. In fact, rox mutants showed compromised axillary
bud formation during vegetative shoot development, but in
contrast to lax1 and ba1, flower development was unaffected.
It has been suggested that flower formation in rice and maize
may be sensitive to loss of LAX1 and BA1 function, respec-
tively, because several orders of branching, producing inflo-
rescence branches, are required in both species (McSteen and
Leyser 2005), whereas flowers in Arabidopsis are formed af-
ter a single branching step (Long and Barton 2000). In addi-
tion, the branching defect is only observed when plants are
grown under short photoperiods (Yang et al. 2012). This
might also reflect the dissimilar regulation of AM formation
in different species. On the other hand, in Arabidopsis, also
the las phenotype was evident exclusively under short day-
light (Greb et al. 2003). Nevertheless, accumulation of ROX
mRNA at the adaxial boundaries of leaf and flower primordia
was reminiscent of the expression domains of LAX1 (Komatsu
et al. 2003; Oikawa and Kyozuka 2009) and BA1 (Gallavotti
et al. 2004) during vegetative and reproductive development
(Yang et al. 2012). In situ hybridization demonstrated com-
plex regulatory interactions between ROX, RAX1, and LAS
(Fig. 5). Additionally, the enhancement of branching defects
detected in double and triple mutants of Arabidopsis as well as
rox;rax1;las suggested that the three gene functions are par-
tially redundant. However, it is important to note that flower
development is unaffected even in the triple mutants; it is
suggested that an unidentified regulator acts redundantly with
ROX, RAX1, and LAS (Yang et al. 2012). Additionally, a col-
lective expression analysis performed with RAX1 and ROX1
indicated that both genes likely promoted AM formation by
influencing the competence of axillary cells that will later
began a new meristem (Yang et al. 2012).
In maize, the BARREN STALK FASTIGIATE1 (BAF1) gene
encodes a putative TF containing an AT-hook DNA binding
motif and a conserved Plant and Prokaryote Conserved (PPC)
domain (Gallavotti et al. 2011). It has been shown that BAF1
can form homo- and hetero-dimers with other putative AT-
hook DNA binding proteins. Mutations in BAF1 (Table 1)
produce plants with fusion defects between the newly
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
139

developing AMs and the leaf or bract axils. However, baf1
mutants are distinct from other barren mutants in that they are
still able to differentiate tassels with most branches, spikelets,
and florets, whereas they often fail to produce ears. This phe-
notype suggested that other genes may act redundantly with
BAF1 or that the role of BAF1 is restricted mainly to vegeta-
tive AMs and branch meristems (Gallavotti et al. 2011). It is
likely that BAF1 functions in the early steps of AM initiation
as a boundary determinant for the AM primordium.
Additionally, genetic and expression analyses demonstrated
that BAF1 is required for a threshold level of BA1 expression
(Gallavotti et al. 2011).
In rice, TILLERS ABSENT1 (TAB1; also known as
OsWUS), an ortholog of Arabidopsis WUS, is required to ini-
tiate AM development (Tanaka et al. 2015). This is not sur-
prising, because apart from maintenance of the SAM, WOX
genes play diverse roles in plant development, such as em-
bryogenesis, vascular differentiation, lateral organ patterning,
and maintenance of the RAM (Hirakawa et al. 2011; Lau et al.
2012; Nakata and Okada 2013), in both Arabidopsis and rice.
However, mutation in WUS of Arabidopsis did not cause AM
defects; therefore, WUS function in rice seems to be different
from that in dicots. In fact, plants with loss-of-function of
TAB1 exhibited no tiller formation in the vegetative phase
and partial defects in branching of the panicle in the reproduc-
tive phase (Table 1). Although TAB1 was expressed in the
premeristem zone, its expression disappeared in the AM after
its establishment. It has been proposed that TAB1 maintained
the premeristem zone and promoted the formation of the AM
by activating the expression of OSH1, a rice homolog to STM
(Tanaka et al. 2015). It has been hypothesized that, in the
premeristem zone, a small group of cells might be specified
as SCs, which are initials of the AM. Bearing in mind that
WUS is required for SC maintenance in the SAM in
Arabidopsis (Mayer et al. 1998), TAB1 may be involved in
maintaining putative SCs in the premeristem zone.
Additionally, expression studies in tab mutants suggested that
TAB1 acts downstream of MOC1 and LAX1 or in an indepen-
dent pathway (Tanaka et al. 2015).
The gene regulatory network (GRN) underlying AM initi-
ation is only partially known, but genetic studies and genome-
scale analyses have begun to obtain exciting results reviewed
by Yang and Jiao (2016).
Genes with a role in AM development and outgrowth
Alteration in shoot branching is a morphological adaptation to
environmental changes (Domagalska and Leyser 2011), but
from men perspective, it is a desirable trait that has been se-
lected through domestication since it is directly translated into
higher a yield (Doebley et al. 2006; Teichmann and Muhr
2015). The role of genes involved at various levels in
branching has been dissected through the studies on mutants
that specifically lack the control growth of some or all of their
AMs as well as mutants that show highly “bushy” (branched)
phenotypes (Table 1). For example, the characterization of the
Arabidopsis supershoot/bushy mutants, which branch pro-
fusely and initiate multiple axillary shoots per node, identified
a member of the cytochrome P450 gene family as a common
element of control over both AM initiation and growth
(Reintanz et al. 2001; Tantikanjana et al. 2001). In the null
mutant bushy1-1f (bus1-1f), short-chain glucosinolates de-
rived from methionine were completely lacking. In addition,
in bus1-1f plants, the concentrations of indole-3-ylmethyl-
glucosinolate and the content of the auxin indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA) and its precursor indole-3-acetonitrile were increased
(Reintanz et al. 2001). The quantification of hormone levels in
supershoot (sps) plants indicated that both auxins and CKs
were higher in the mutant with respect to WT, but the pheno-
types of the sps plants were consistent with higher levels of
CKs rather than auxins as the key factor responsible for the
difference in branching pattern (Tantikanjana et al. 2001).
The best well known example of a gene that is repressing
AM development is TB1; teosinte branched1 (tb1) loss-of-
function maize mutants produce elongated branches ending
in tassels (Table 1), whilst WT axillary shoots are short and
terminate in ears (Doebley et al. 1995). Therefore, loss-of-
function mutations at the tb1 locus affect axillary shoot growth
but not initiation. In addition, tb1 is ipostatic to ba1. The ba1;-
tb1 double mutant failed to generate tillers (Gallavotti et al.
2004). The TB1 gene, which acts on branch size and inflores-
cence sex determination, has represented the major contribu-
tor to the architectural conversion of the wild ancestor teosinte
(Zea mays spp. parviglumis) into maize (Z. mays spp. mays)
(Doebley et al. 1997; Pääbo 1999; Iltis 2000). Probably,
single-eared maize was selected because it was easy to harvest
manually (Mock and Pearce 1975) and a profound increase in
apical dominance, compared with the wild ancestor, was gen-
erated. A similar reduction of tillering accompanied the do-
mestication of foxtail millet (Setaria italica) (Doust et al.
2004). In maize, the TB1 QTL represents a major contributor
to this evolutionary change accounting for about 40 % of the
phenotypic variance (Doebley et al. 1995). More recently, it
was demonstrated that a transposable element (Hopscotch),
inserted in a regulatory region of tb1, acts as an enhancer of
gene expression and partially explains the increased apical
dominance in maize compared to its progenitor (Studer et al.
2011). TB1 is a member of the plant-specific TF TCP
family characterized by a non-canonical basic helix-
loop-helix (bHLH) domain of circa 60 residues (Cubas
et al. 1999; Aggarwal et al. 2010; Martín-Trillo and
Cubas 2010) basically involved in cell cycling and growth
(Martín-Trillo and Cubas 2010; Uberti Monassero et al.
2013). The TCP acronym stands for the first three identi-
fied members: TB1 in Z. mays, CYCLOIDEA (CYC) in
Antirrhinum majus, and PROLIFERATING CELL
140
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

FACTOR (PCF) 1 and 2 in Oryza sativa (Cubas et al.
1999). Notably, the expression of sorghum (Sorghum
bicolor) tb1 ortholog, SbTb1, was higher in shade condi-
tions, suggesting that tb1 could mediate the branching
component of the shade avoidance response (Kebrom
et al. 2006).
In maize, there are several mutants characterized by an
increase of AMs and/or increase in ramification of ear and
tassel. In a revision of maize mutants, Veit et al. (1993) de-
scribed many mutations affecting both male and female inflo-
rescences. For example, dominant mutations in TEOPOD1, 2,
3 (TP1, 2, 3) and TILLERED1 (TLR1) increased the numbers
of tillers (Table 1 in Veit et al. 1993). By contrast, some mu-
tants as well unbranched (ub1), tasselless (tl1), or Barren
sterile (Bs1) were characterized by defects in inflorescence
ramification and fertility. Many mutants displayed defects in
inflorescence development and AM initiation and/or out-
growth [e.g., Barren inflorescence1 (Bif1)], while other mu-
tants appeared to perturb the pattern of floral development in
more complex ways [e.g., Tasselseed (Ts) (Veit et al. 1993)].
However, despite the plethora of genetic loci that have been
defined, until 1993 very little progress made toward isolating
and characterizing the genes that control inflorescence devel-
opment and AM initiation in maize (Veit et al. 1993).
Nevertheless, in the successive years, some methods like
transposon tagging and chromosome walking allowed to iso-
late several genes involved in these developmental processes,
making the maize, with its large mutant collection, a model
species to analyze plant architecture and inflorescence devel-
opment (Table 1).
For example, several molecular aspects of the
Tasselseed mutant have been cleared. The Ts6 and ts4
mutations permit carpel development in the tassel and
increase meristem branching, underlying that sex determi-
nation and acquisition of meristem fate shared a common
pathway (Chuck et al. 2007a). ts4 encodes miRNA172 that
targets an APETALA2 gene, indeterminate spikelet1
(ids1), required for spikelet meristem determinacy. It has
been suggested that sexual identity in maize is acquired
by limiting floral growth through negative regulation of
the floral homeotic pathway (Chuck et al. 2007a).
The dominant Corngrass1 (Cg1) mutant of maize
was originated by a heterocronic mutation, and the phe-
notype resembled some traits of the grass-like ancestors
of maize (Chuck et al. 2007b). The overexpression of
Cg1, which encodes two tandem miRNA156 genes
expressed in the meristem and lateral organs, triggered
the differentiation of multiple tillers (Table 1). A target
of Cg1 is teosinte glume architecture1 (tga1), a key
gene in maize domestication (Dorweiler et al. 1993).
Mutations in tga1 underlie a reduction of hardened
fruitcases, typical of teosinte, yielding mais kernels that
are easier to harvest.
The TF RAMOSA1 (RA1) regulates the fate of most AMs
during the early development of maize inflorescences, the
tassel, and the ear (Vollbrecht et al. 2005). Mutations in RA1
(Table 1) or other members of the ramosa pathway, as well as
RA2 and RA3, generate highly branched inflorescences
(Vollbrecht et al. 2005; Bortiri et al. 2006; Satoh-Nagasawa
et al. 2006). RA1 encodes a Cys2-His2 zinc-finger protein be-
longing to the plant-specific EPF subclass (Takatsuji 1999).
RA2 encodes a LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARY domain
TF (Bortiri et al. 2006). Expression analyses performed in
different mutant backgrounds placed RA2 upstream of other
genes that regulate branch formation (Vollbrecht et al. 2005;
Bortiri et al. 2006). The RA3 gene encodes a trehalose-6-
phosphate phosphatase expressed in specific domains
subtending axillary inflorescence meristems. It has been
showed that RA3 regulated inflorescence branching by modi-
fication of a sugar signal that moves into AMs (Satoh-
Nagasawa et al. 2006), without involving any hormonal signal
as in Arabidopsis. Additionally, RA3 acts upstream of RA1
and supports the hypothesis that RA3 itself may have a tran-
scriptional regulatory function. The RAMOSA1 ENHANCER
LOCUS2 (REL2) gene encodes a transcriptional co-repressor
with a CTLH domain homologous to TOPLESS (TPL) of
Arabidopsis (Long et al. 2006). The tpl mutation is an uncom-
mon temperature-sensitive mutation that changes apical cell
fate. TPL mediates auxin-dependent transcriptional repression
during Arabidopsis embryogenesis (Szemenyei et al. 2008). It
was demonstrated that REL2 physically interacts with RA1,
indicating that the REL2/RA1 transcriptional repressor com-
plex antagonized the establishment of indeterminate branches
during maize inflorescence development (Gallavotti et al.
2010). It was also proposed a model for maize spikelet-pair
meristem determinacy in which RA1 recruited REL2 to the
promoter of its target genes via an interaction involving two
EAR repressor motifs and the CTLH domain of the REL2
protein (Gallavotti et al. 2010).
The transition of the SAM from vegetative to reproductive
development causes a change of the branching pattern that
leads to the generation of a more complex structure, the inflo-
rescence. In many species, the FM develops with a subtending
leaf-like bract, suggesting that it is a modified AM (Grbic
2005; Bennett and Leyser 2006). This is unlooked because
flowers have long been considered as floral branches, which
are serially homologous with the axillary shoot branches.
Additionally, the early stages of development of these two
meristem types are similar, as the expression patterns of key
genes (Long and Barton 2000), and many mutants with defect
in AM initiation or outgrowth also displayed abnormal devel-
opment of inflorescence and floral organs (Grbic 2005). In
sunflower (H. annuus), the mutant missing flowers (mf) shows
defects in both AM and FM initiation (Fambrini et al. 2003).
Decapitation experiments and histological analysis suggested
that the MF gene is essential to provide or perceive an
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
141

appropriate signal to the initiation of axillary primordia during
both vegetative and reproductive phases (Fig. 6).
In Arabidopsis, the FT gene encodes a protein with ho-
mology to the mammalian phosphatidylethanolamine bind-
ing protein (PEBP) or Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP)
that acts as a long-distance flowering signal (Kardailsky
et al. 1999; Tamaki et al. 2007; Notaguchi et al. 2008),
promoting the phase transition of AM. In particular, using
a micrografting technique and a transient induction system,
Notaguchi et al. (2008) showed that the activity of FT to
promote flowering was transmissible through a graft junc-
tion and that FT protein was transported from the donor
scion to the apical region of the recipient stock plants. By
contrast, BRANCHED1 (BRC1), ortholog to TB1 (Aguilar-
Martínez et al. 2007), suppresses flowering through inter-
action with FT and its paralog TWIN SYSTER OF FT
(TSF) protein (Niwa et al. 2013). BRC1 is expressed
throughout axillary bud development in different regions
of the bud, where it seems to enhance growth arrest. In
fact, the brc1 mutant had a significantly higher number of
rosette branches than WT plants (Table 1) and occasionally
developed ectopic AMs at cotyledonary axils (Aguilar-
Martínez et al. 2007). BRC1 also controls early stages of
bud leaf development, a function reminiscent of that of
CINCINNATA-like genes closely related to it (Nath et al.
2003). Additionally, las and rev mutations are epistatic to
brc1 suggesting that LAS and REV are necessary during
AM initiation upstream BRC1. It was also suggested that
BRC1 suppresses the elongation of axillary shoots
(Aguilar-Martínez et al. 2007; Finlayson 2007). These
pleiotropic effects reflect multiple roles of BRC1 in axil-
lary bud development (Niwa et al. 2013). Mutant and ex-
pression analyses also showed that BRC1 is strongly down-
regulated in more axillary growth (max) mutants, suggest-
ing that BRC1 may be downstream of the MAX signaling
pathway, and that it is required for auxin-induced apical
dominance (Aguilar-Martínez et al. 2007). A further func-
tional characterization of the maize mutant grassy tillers1
(gt1) allowed the identification of the class I homeodomain
leucine zipper gt1 gene (Table 1), which suppresses bud
outgrowth (Whipple et al. 2011). Expression of gt1 was
upregulated by shading. It was hypothesized that shading
(perceived by the plant as low R/FR light ratio) induced a
signal in the mature leaves and that this signal moved to the
axillary bud, where it induced GT1 expression (Whipple
et al. 2011). Using a phytochrome mutant (phyB-1) of sor-
ghum, Kebrom et al. (2006) showed that the inhibition of
axillary bud outgrowth by FR light, perceived by phyB,
was correlated with increased expression of tb1, suggest-
ing a molecular link between the shade avoidance pathway
and a known regulator of bud dormancy. Whipple et al.
(2011) showed that the inhibition of bud outgrowth by
FR light was also associated with enhanced expression of
gt1. Additionally, expression analyses on mutant and WT
plants suggested that gt1 and tb1 operate in a common
pathway to control bud outgrowth and that gt1 expression
is tb1-dependent (Whipple et al. 2011).
Both in model and in crop plants, many other gene families
controlling AM initiation and outgrowth have been identified
(Bennett and Leyser 2006; Leyser 2009; Žádníková and
Simon 2014). Mutations at three DECREASED APICAL
DOMINANCE (DAD) loci in petunia and at five RAMOSUS
(RMS) loci in pea resulted in lack of axillary shoot repression
without affecting their morphology (Napoli 1996; Napoli et al.
1999). The DAD1 and RMS1 genes encode a putative carot-
enoid cleavage dioxygenase (CCD) protein (Sorefan et al.
2003; Snowden et al. 2005) and belong to a family of CCD
genes as well as MAX3 and RMS5 (Booker et al. 2004;
Johnson et al. 2006). By contrast, the DAD2 gene is an
ortholog of the rice and Arabidopsis DWARF14 (D14) genes
(Table 1), which showed a role in strigolactones (SL) percep-
tion and signaling (Hamiaux et al. 2012) (see below).
Fig. 6 Phenotype of the missing flowers (mf) mutation of sunflower
(Helianthus annuus L). a Wild-type plant 20 days after removal of
primary SAM. The arrows indicate developed axillary shoots, while the
arrowhead indicates an axillary bud. b Homozygous mf/mf plant 20 days
after removal of primary SAM. The axils of leaves are devoid of AMs. c
Inflorescence of a homozygous mf/mf plant, which has developed only a
single disc flower (arrowhead)
142
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

The boundary zones define competent cells for AM
and FM initiation
It is well-defined that most genes (e.g., LAS, LAX, RAX,
BAF1) identified through the analysis of mutants with
defects in AM and/or FM initiation act on limited zones
marking the boundary between the SAM and leaves
and/or the boundary between inflorescence/FMs and
modified leaves (e.g., bracts). These genes have key
roles in many aspects of embryo and post-embryo de-
velopment as well as the establishment of the spatial
and temporal regulation of meristematic activity to de-
sign the cell fate for AM and FM initiation (Fig. 5).
The expression patterns of these genes are reminiscent of
those for CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC) genes
encoding NAC-domain TFs (Aida et al. 1997; Vroemen
et al. 2003; Raman et al. 2008) and mostly active in the initial
phase of plant development. The no apical meristem (nam)
gene of Petunia, ortholog of CUC1/CUC2, is required for
SAM organization during embryogenesis (Souer et al.
1996). Mature plants that occasionally develop from nam
seedlings show that nam also participates in the arrangement
of organ primordia in the FM. Analogously, cuc1 and cuc2
single mutants occasionally show cotyledon fusion on one
side and display weak fusions of sepals and stamens. The
phenotype of the cuc mutants suggests a common
mechanism that regulates separation of organs during
embryo and flower development. The most striking feature
of the nam expression pattern in the inflorescence is that it
marks the boundaries between different primordia before the
separation between primordia and meristem has become
visibly evident. Souer et al. (1996) suggested that nam influ-
ence the rate or the direction, or both, of cell division and
expansion in the regions between primordia. The regulation
of the organ separation may be crucial for plants to reach their
final form (Aida et al. 1997). cuc1;cuc2 double mutant seed-
lings have cotyledons fused on both sides and completely lack
a SAM and also partly inhibited adventitious SAM formation
during in vitro shoot regeneration from calli (Aida et al. 1997).
In addition to regulating embryonic SAM formation and spec-
ifying lateral organ boundaries, CUC1, CUC2, and CUC3
also play partially redundant roles in initiation of AMs (Aida
et al. 1997; Takada et al. 2001; Vroemen et al. 2003; Hibara
et al. 2006; Raman et al. 2008). The fusion phenotypes in the
cuc mutants might result from both organ–organ and organ–
meristem fusions (Aida and Tasaka 2006). Organ–organ fu-
sions may give rise to cup-shaped cotyledons, whereas organ–
meristem fusions may generate cotyledon petiole fusions and
could also affect meristem maintenance or initiation by the
alteration of KNOX gene expression (Aida et al. 1999).
CUC1 and CUC2 are redundantly involved in the initiation
of the SAM through the regulation of STM expression and in
the establishment of cotyledon and floral organ boundaries
(Aida et al. 1999; Long et al. 1996). The phenotype of cuc3
mutant plants, the expression pattern of the gene in WT plants,
and in a series of SAM mutants and transgenes, suggested a
primary role for CUC3 in the establishment of boundaries that
contain cells with low proliferation and/or differentiation rates
(Vroemen et al. 2003). In particular, CUC3 is expressed earlier
than both CUC1 and CUC2: in the embryo, CUC3 expression
starts at the octant stage, whereas expression of the CUC1 and
CUC2 genes was detected only from the globular stage
(Vroemen et al. 2003).
Schwab et al. (2005) have showed that six NAC-
domain TFs containing binding sites for miR164, which
is encoded by the genes MIR164A, MIR164B, and
MIR164C. However, only CUC1 and CUC2 transcripts
are targeted for degradation by miRNA164. CUC3 that
is expressed in the shoot tip does not carry a recogni-
tion site for miR164. A phenotypic analysis performed
in the triple mutant mir164a-4;mir164b-1;mir164c-1 re-
vealed that these plants developed accessory buds in
most of its leaf axils. Raman et al. (2008) suggested
that the three genes encoding miR164 differentially reg-
ulate CUC1 and CUC2 transcripts in overlapping re-
gions along the shoot axis. The branching pattern in
cuc3-2 was similar to the patterns of shoot branching
observed in the Arabidopsis las-4 and rax1-3 mutants
(Greb et al. 2003; Müller et al. 2006; Raman et al.
2008). Transcripts of the CUC1, CUC2, CUC3, RAX1,
and LAS genes accumulate in overlapping domains in
the axils of developing leaf primordia (Greb et al.
2003; Vroemen et al. 2003; Müller et al. 2006; Raman
et al. 2008) and raise the possibility of an interaction of
these genes (Fig. 5). CUC2 transcription was absent at
the position of future AM initials in the rax1-2 back-
ground suggesting that RAX1 is needed to promote
CUC2 expression in a central domain of boundary cells
in leaf axils (Keller et al. 2006). Additionally, overpro-
duction of CK by expressing one of the CK synthase
gene ISOPENTENYLTRANSFERASE8 (IPT8) in the leaf
axil region largely rescued the lack of AM initiation in rax
mutants, suggesting that both CUC2 and CK signaling may be
positively regulated by RAX proteins (Y. Wang et al. 2014).
Hibara et al. (2006) showed that LAS and CUC3 have
overlapping roles in various aspects of boundary forma-
tion, including the establishment of AMs. Although
lacking AMs, the cuc3-2 mutant accumulated LAS
mRNA analogously to WT plants, suggesting that
CUC3 regulates AM development in a LAS-independent
way (Raman et al. 2008). Overexpression of miRNA164
in the cuc3-2 mutant, impaired in AM initiation, caused
an almost complete block of AM formation. In addition,
the LAS mRNA level is strongly upregulated in shoot
apices of the mir164 triple mutant. Therefore, Raman
et al. (2008) suggested that miR164 indirectly regulates
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
143

LAS function, through CUC1 and CUC2 (Fig. 5). LAS
expression was also shown to be downregulated in
cuc1;cuc2 mutants (Hibara et al. 2006), supporting the
conclusion that CUC1 and CUC2 are regulators of LAS
activity (Raman et al. 2008).
In tomato, GOBLET (GOB) was identified as an ortholog
of the CUC genes (Berger et al. 2009). gob mutants (Table 1)
have severe defects in leaflet initiation and completely fail to
initiate vegetative AMs (Berger et al. 2009). GOB is expressed
in narrow stripes at the leaf margins, flanking the distal side of
future leaflet primordia, and at the boundaries between the
SAM and leaf primordia. This result implied a conserved but
plastic role for GOB in boundary specification and suggested a
homology between the leaflet and the AM initiation. This
noteworthy hypothesis was reinforced, demonstrating that in
tomato the regulation by GOB and two homologous MYB
proteins [i.e., Blind (Bl) and Potato leaf (C)] was essential
for side-shoot development as well as complex leaf develop-
ment (Bush et al. 2011).
In A. majus, single mutations in the CUPULIFORMIS
(CUP) gene, an ortholog of CUC1 and CUC2, resulted in
severe lateral organs fusion at different developmental stages,
including cotyledons, leaves, stems, floral organs, and ovules,
indicating a role for this gene in a wide range of shoot organ
boundaries (Weir et al. 2004). The embryonic and floral phe-
notype of cuc1;cuc2 and cup were similar, but only cup plants
showed an outstanding vegetative defect, which include
prominent initiation of cup-tipped shoots from the hypocotyls,
fusion of leaves, fasciation and loss of AMs (Weir et al. 2004).
Other genes mark specifically the organ boundaries; for
example, LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES (LOB) en-
codes a member of the plant-specific LOB-domain TF
family and is expressed specifically in organ boundaries
of Arabidopsis (Shuai et al. 2002). LOB is expressed in a
band of cells at the adaxial base of all lateral organs formed
from the SAM and at the base of lateral roots. Analysis of
cauline leaf axils, a region where LOB is expressed, re-
vealed that WT axillary and accessory branches were well
separated from the subtending cauline leaf, whereas these
structures were fused in loss-of-function lob mutants (Bell
et al. 2012). Additionally, in cross sections of cauline leaf
axils, axillary stem and cauline leaf tissues appeared as a
single structure in lob mutants. Bell et al. (2012) suggested
that lob mutants have an extension or overgrowth of the
boundary that generates defects in organ separation.
Symmetrical growth is among the important feature of pat-
terning in leaves and flowers; in Arabidopsis, BLADE-ON-
PETIOLE1 and BLADE-ON-PETIOLE2 (BOP1 BOP2) genes,
that encode for a NPR1 (NONEXPRESSOR OF PR GENES1)
(Ha et al. 2003, 2004), function redundantly to control asym-
metry. During vegetative development, BOP1 is expressed in
leaf primordia and at the base of the rosette leaves on the
adaxial side. During reproductive development, BOP1
transcripts are detected, instead, in young floral buds and at
the base of the sepals and petals (Ha et al. 2004). The most
evident phenotype of the bop1-1 mutant was the ectopic de-
velopment of outgrowths along the leaf petioles due to defec-
tive cell differentiation and seen as cluster of young cells with
continuous meristematic activity that never further develop
into shoot meristem. A leaflet-like structure appeared, instead,
in the early developmental stages of the mutant cotyledons (Ha
et al. 2003). In addition, analysis of double mutants showed
that BOP1 has a synergistic genetic relationship with AS1 and
AS2 that regulate the meristematic activity and class I KNOX
gene expression in leaves (Ha et al. 2003). However, bop1-1
plants have some cotyledon and leaf phenotypes that are not
observed in as1 or as2 plants, suggesting that BOP1 is exerting
functions that are not completely overlapping with these two
genes (Ha et al. 2004). Another potential BOP1-interacting
protein is the product of the LOB gene, whose expression pat-
tern is similar to BOP1 (Shuai et al. 2002; see also above).
Thus, BOP1 might interact with LOB or some of the related
LBD proteins (Shuai et al. 2002). Ha et al. (2004) also sug-
gested that the BOP1 protein should modulate the meristematic
activity at discrete locations in developing lateral organs.
In Arabidopsis, LATERAL ORGAN FUSION 1 (LOF1) and
LATERAL ORGAN FUSION 2 (LOF2), which encode MYB
TFs function in both lateral organ separation and AM forma-
tion, in part through interaction with CUC2, CUC3, and STM
(Lee et al. 2009). The domains of LOF1 and LOF2 expression
overlap in boundaries between the inflorescence meristem and
young floral primordia, between the axillary stem and cauline
leaves, and at the base of floral organs. Notably, LOF2 tran-
scripts are reduced in lof1 mutants, indicating that LOF1 con-
tributes to LOF2 expression. In addition, LOF1 has a role in
meristem initiation or maintenance (Fig. 5), as lof1 mutants
failed to produce accessory meristems had no detectable ex-
pression of STM in the paraclade junction (Lee et al. 2009). In
addition, the ability of lof1 to increase the weak stm-10 phe-
notype suggested a role for LOF1 in meristem initiation or
maintenance, likely acting in the boundary to regulate the
activity of meristem genes (Lee et al. 2009). In tomato, the
orthologous trifoliate (tf) mutants have been shown to have
reduced leaf complexity as well as loss of axillary branching
(Naz et al. 2013).
Together, the above-reported results suggest that the proper
activity of these genes, which encode several different classes
of TFs, acts largely redundantly to control boundary formation
during embryogenesis and postembryonic development.
Hormonal homeostasis in the control of AM
initiation and outgrowth
The formation of AMs and their further dormancy or devel-
opment into lateral shoots require a certain amount of
144
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

resources that have to be translocated from sources to new
sinks. This implies a communication inside the plant that is
usually occurring through hormonal signals. The growth of
AMs is inhibited in single-stemmed plants by the main shoot,
a morphological process generally known as apical domi-
nance (Cline 1991). It has long been known that the main
SAM suppresses the outgrowth of AMs (Snow 1929), and
thus, apical dominance is relevant in delineation of plant ar-
chitecture. Auxin flux is essential for apical dominance. Auxin
synthesized in the shoot apex moves basipetally in the PAT
stream and indirectly inhibits outgrowth of axillary buds
(Snow 1929; Thimann and Skoog 1933). A recent and alter-
native theory puts sugars as main players in the determination
of apical dominance (Mason et al. 2014). The general mech-
anism that is supported by the experimental procedures of
Mason’s group is that an increase in sugar supply is necessary
and sufficient to release dormant buds from apical dominance.
This is because the shoot tip has a strong demand for sugars
that in turn inhibits axillary bud outgrowth by limiting the
amount of sugar translocated to those buds. Apparently, the
initiation of bud growth after decapitation cannot be depen-
dent on apical auxin supply because bud release started up to
24 h before changes in auxin content in the adjacent stem.
After the loss of the shoot tip, sugars are instead rapidly
redistributed over large distances, faster than auxins, and ac-
cumulate in axillary buds within a timeframe that correlates
with bud release. To strengthen the role of sugars through
translocation on bud development, it was demonstrated that
artificially increasing sucrose levels in plants represses the
expression of BRC1 and effect a rapid bud release (Mason
et al. 2014).
However, a widespread role of auxin in organogenesis is
revealed by the phenotype of plants with mutations in genes
required for auxin biosynthesis, transport, or signaling (Okada
et al. 1991; Bennett et al. 1995; Przemeck et al. 1996;
Reinhardt et al. 2000, 2003; Vernoux et al. 2000; Cheng
et al. 2007; Durbak et al. 2012). The analysis of these plants
has showed that auxin is required for leaf initiation during
vegetative development, AM initiation and bud outgrowth,
and flower initiation during reproductive development
(Benková et al. 2003; Scanlon 2003; Heisler et al. 2005;
Cheng and Zhao 2007; Wu and McSteen 2007; Yamaguchi
et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2015; Taylor-Teeples et al. 2016).
Notably, mutations that affect the initial steps in reproduc-
tive AM formation often result in the formation of character-
istic pin-like inflorescences (Table 1), from which the name
pin-formed (pin) (Okada et al. 1991; Gälweiler et al. 1998).
Most of the PIN proteins have been characterized in
Arabidopsis and are located in the plasma membrane; they
can therefore mediate directional auxin fluxes within tissues
and generate auxin maxima and gradients that influence the
development of lateral organs (Petrášek et al. 2006; Vieten
et al. 2007; see also below). Analogously, the Arabidopsis
pinoid (pid) mutants show a strong phenotypic resemblance
to the pin-formed mutant (Table 1). PINOID (PID) encodes a
serine/threonine protein kinase, and it is involved in the fine-
tuning of polar auxin transport (PAT) during organ formation
in response to local auxin concentrations (Christensen et al.
2000; Benjamins et al. 2001; Lee and Cho 2006; Petrášek
et al. 2006). In particular, PID positively regulates cellular
auxin efflux, most likely by modulating the trafficking of
PIN and/or some other molecular partners involved in auxin
efflux (Lee and Cho 2006).
Characterization of the barren inflorescence class of mu-
tants of maize has also led to the discovery of genes that
interacting with auxin regulates AM initiation in the inflores-
cence. The barren inflorescence2 (bif2) mutant differentiates
fewer branches, spikelets, florets, and floral organs in the tas-
sel (Table 1), indicating that bif2 functions in AM initiation
and reproductive development (McSteen and Hake 2001;
McSteen et al. 2007; Skirpan et al. 2009). BIF2 gene, which
is co-orthologous to PID, functions in the nucleus by
interacting with BA1 to promote AM initiation. Additionally,
analysis of the double mutant bif2;ba1 demonstrates that the
roles of these genes overlap to establish a correct development
of maize inflorescences (Skirpan et al. 2008). The analysis of
bif2;tb1 double mutants that produce fewer tillers than the tb1
demonstrated that bif2 plays also a role in vegetative AM
development (McSteen et al. 2007).
The semidominant mutant Bif1 also showed defects
in the initiation of AMs in the inflorescence (Neuffer
et al. 1997; Barazesh and McSteen 2008). The analyses
of double mutants demonstrated that Bif1 exhibits an
epistatic interaction with ba1 and a synergistic interac-
tion with bif2 that implies overlap functions of Bif1 and
bif2 (Barazesh and McSteen 2008). Characterization of
the developing inflorescence by SEM analysis, histolo-
gy, and Kn1 expression showed that there was a specific
defect in AM initiation in Bif1 mutants. In addition, the
significant enhancement of phenotype in the double mu-
tant Bif1;bif2 suggested that Bif1 may also play a re-
dundant role with bif2 in leaf initiation (Barazesh and
McSteen 2008). It was proposed that the defects in Bif1
mutants are caused by a reduction in auxin transport
and that the function of Bif1 is to regulate PAT. In fact,
many characteristics observed in Bif1 mutants are also
showed by plants treated with auxin transport inhibitors
(Wu and McSteen 2007). More recently, it was demon-
strated that BIF1 as well as BIF4 encode AUXIN/
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA) proteins (Galli
et al. 2015) that are key components of the auxin hor-
mone signaling pathway.
In the auxin signaling mutant auxin resistant1 (axr1), axil-
lary buds are partially resistant to the inhibitory effect of aux-
in, resulting in an enhanced outgrowth during both vegetative
and reproductive development (Lincoln et al. 1990; Leyser
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
145

et al. 1993; Stirnberg et al. 1999). Auxins, polarly transported
to the site of primordia initiation, are perceived by auxin re-
ceptors: AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1 (ABP1), S-PHASE
KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2A (SKP2A), and the
nuclear SCFTIR1/AFBs-Aux/IAA (SKP-Cullin-F-box [SCF],
TIR1/AFB [TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESISTANT1/
AUXIN SIGNALING F-BOX], AUXIN/INDOLE ACETIC
ACID) auxin coreceptors (Salehin et al. 2015). Auxin regu-
lates transcription of auxin-responsive genes through the ac-
tion of the TIR1/AFB F-box proteins, the Aux/IAA transcrip-
tional repressors, and the ARFs (Li et al. 2016). At low auxin
levels, Aux/IAA proteins form dimers with ARFs to inhibit
ARF activity by recruiting the co-repressor TPL, which gen-
erates the repression of auxin-responsive genes (Szemenyei
et al. 2008). At higher auxin levels, Aux/IAAs bind to the
SCFTIR1 AFB complex and then become ubiquitinated and de-
graded by the 26S proteasome (Salehin et al. 2015). The ARF
is next released and can regulate the transcription of its target
auxin response genes (Wang and Estelle 2014). Apart from the
negative regulatory loop involving the Aux/IAAs, members
of the auxin efflux carrier PIN family were also shown to be
under control of the Aux/IAAs and ARFs (Vieten et al. 2007).
As cellular auxin levels rise, PIN gene expression increases,
resulting in more auxin efflux and a reduction in auxin levels
(Adamowski and Friml 2015). Thus, this regulatory circuit
contributes to auxin homeostasis.
Modifications in the mechanical properties of cells are nec-
essary to control morphogenesis at shoot tips (Murray et al.
2012). It has been demonstrated that the slow-growing area in
the SAM is strain-stiffened with respect to surrounding fast
growing tissue (Kierzkowski et al. 2012). The strain stiffening
is fundamental to restrict organ bulging and, more in general,
for the functional zonation in the SAM. The early signal of
leaf initiation is the bulging of a protrusion in the flank of the
SAM. The bulge represents a new axis of anisotropic growth
with a correlated loosening of cell wall. A key event in leaf
initiation is the local changes in cell wall extensibility induced
by expansion activation or pectin methylesterification. Auxin
activates cell wall loosening (Rayle and Cleland 1992), and
polar distribution of PIN1 protein correlates with the direction
of mechanical stress in the SAM (Heisler et al. 2010).
Recently published data suggests that shape changes
are source of mechanical signals that further channel mor-
phogenesis via the control of gene expression. In fact,
Landrein et al. (2015) reported that the expression of
STM at the boundary of the SAM is correlated with tissue
folding and is increased by mechanical stress. This pro-
vides a scenario in which biochemical factors, such as
auxin, promote differential growth and shape changes in
the meristem, which in turn generate mechanical signals
that can impact the expression of some of these regula-
tors. Furthermore, mechanical perturbations affect the pro-
moter activity of CUC3 with key roles for boundary
formation (Fal et al. 2016). Analogously, also during re-
productive stage, mechanical stress can influence several
aspects of AM initiation as demonstrated by Hernández
and Green (1993) with constraint experiments on capitu-
lum development in sunflower.
In A. thaliana, auxin patterning and cellular growth are
linked through alignment between PIN1 polarity and cortical
microtubule orientation (Heisler et al. 2010). Experiments per-
formed in vegetative SAMs of tomato supported the hypoth-
esis that plasma membrane translates the cell wall strain into
cellular responses such as protein localization (Nakayama
et al. 2012). Moreover, growth-mediated mechanical strain
upregulates PIN1 function. The transmembrane protein
encoded by PIN1 (Gälweiler et al. 1998) is highly expressed
in the L1 layer of the SAM and in the vascular system
(Reinhardt et al. 2003; Bayer et al. 2009). PIN1 protein local-
ization within a cell directs the auxin flow to convergence
points resulting in auxin accumulation and response maxima
with the promotion of further growth in a positive feedback
loop (Nakayama et al. 2012), which are required for leaf pri-
mordium initiation (Reinhardt et al. 2003). As the leaf de-
velops, the auxins in the boundary region between the SAM
and the leaf primordium are reduced by the reversed orienta-
tion of PIN1 toward the SAM to form an auxin minimum for
AM initiation (Q. Wang et al. 2014; Y. Wang et al. 2014; see
also below).
In addition to auxin, the chemical signal needs to specify the
cell fate placed in the boundaries region competent for AM
initiation is a complex hormonal homeostasis involving CKs,
SLs, brassinosteroids (BRs), and GAs (Shimizu-Sato and Mori
2001; Beveridge and Kyozuka 2010; Jiang et al. 2010; Waldie
et al. 2010; Domagalska and Leyser 2011; Cheng et al. 2013;
Sassi and Vernoux 2013; Janssen et al. 2014; Q.Wang et al.
2014; Y.Wang et al. 2014; Yang and Jiao, 2016). For example,
it is clearly documented that auxin and CK interact antagonis-
tically to control branching development (Müller and Leyser
2011). It has been observed that CK-overproducing tobacco
had lower levels of IAA and that overproduction of IAA in
tobacco leads to a reduced pool size of CKs (Eklöf et al.
2000). CK biosynthesis is downregulated by auxins because
the IAA inhibits the expression of IPT genes (Nordstrom et al.
2004). Additionally, auxin upregulates expression of
CYTOKININ OXIDASE2 (CKX2) that is involved in the degra-
dation of CK (Shimizu-Sato et al. 2009). It has been demon-
strated that accurate endogenous auxin and CK levels are
sustained by a homeostatic feedback loop in the region of AM
initiation. After the establishment of an auxin minimum in the
boundary zone (Fig. 5), the activation of CK perception and
signaling is required for AM initiation (Y. Wang et al. 2014).
Therefore, depletion of auxin from leaf axils is a prerequisite for
AM formation during vegetative development (Y. Wang et al.
2014; Q. Wang et al. 2014). Three CK receptors, i.e.,
ARABIDOPSIS HISTIDINE KINASE2 (AHK2), AHK3,
146
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

and AHK4/CRE1/WOL (Fig. 5), perceive the CK signal to
activate the type-B ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE
REGULATOR (ARR) TFs (Hwang et al. 2012). These comple-
mentary results show the importance of heterogeneous hormone
allocation in AM formation (Hofmann 2014; Rameau et al.
2015).
It has been also suggested that both SLs and CK can coop-
eratively act to control bud outgrowth. CKs promote bud
growth (Wickson and Thimann 1958), while SLs inhibit AM
outgrowth, and both are regulated conversely by auxin (Dun
et al. 2009). SLs are carotenoid-derived compounds that were
already known for their roles in symbiotic and parasitic inter-
actions in the rhizosphere (Akiyama et al. 2005; López-Ráez
et al. 2008; Cheng et al. 2013). Afterword, SLs were found to
play a key role in shoot branching inhibition and thus were
recognized as a new class of plant hormones (Gomez-Roldan
et al. 2008; Umehara et al. 2008; de Saint et al. 2013). Dun
et al. (2012) demonstrated that SL-deficient plants are more
sensitive to stimulation of bud growth by low concentrations
of locally applied CK than WT plants. Furthermore, in con-
trast with SL mutant plants, buds of WT plants are almost
completely resistant to stimulation by CK supplied to the vas-
culature. CKs and SLs may converge at a common target in
the bud outgrowth regulatory pathway, likely BRC1 (Dun
et al. 2012).
Mutant-based approaches have allowed the identifica-
tion of several genes related to SL biosynthesis and signal-
ing pathways (Beveridge and Kyozuka 2010; Borghi et al.
2016). SLs are synthesized by a combined gene action:
DWARF27, first characterized in rice, encodes an isomerase
that acts at the initial steps of this pathway by transforming
trans-β-carotene to 9-cis-β-carotene (Lin et al. 2009;
Waters et al. 2012), the CCD7 (HTD1/D17/DAD3/RMS5/
MAX3), and CCD8 (D10/DAD1/RMS1/MAX4), expressed
in roots and shoots, produce carlactone, a putative interme-
diate compound in the pathway (Sorefan et al. 2003;
Booker et al. 2005; Snowden et al. 2005; Johnson et al.
2006; Arite et al. 2009; Drummond et al. 2009; Pasare
et al. 2013) and from a plant species-specific number of
cytochrome P450 monoxygenases (More Axillary Growth:
MAX1 and MAX1-like), expressed in root and shoot vascu-
latures that act downstream of CCD7 and CCD8 (Challis
et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2014). All max mutants (Table 1)
exhibit a dwarf phenotype with increased shoot branching,
but only max2 is SL insensitive, suggesting that MAX2 is
involved in SL downstream perception and signaling
(Stirnberg et al. 2002; Waters et al. 2012). MAX2 encodes
for a member of the F-box LRR protein family (Stirnberg
et al. 2002; Ishikawa et al. 2005; Johnson et al. 2006).
Members of this family act as subunits of the multiprotein
complex SCF-type (for Skp1, Cullin, RBX1, F-box protein)
E3 ligases that polyubiquitinate proteins and thus target them
for degradation by the 26S proteasome (Patton et al. 1998;
Jackson et al. 2000; Cardozo and Pagano 2004; Willems
et al. 2004). MAX1 and MAX2 likely control axillary growth
rate after AM initiation, by regulating the rate of axillary leaf
primordium formation and development. Root-shoot grafting
demonstrates that MAX2 is required in the shoot to repress
branching (Booker et al. 2005). However, the highest level of
MAX2 transcription is detected in developing vasculature.
This pattern of expression and the pleiotropic phenotypes that
result from mutation of this gene designate MAX2 putatively
involved in multiple roles, in different phases of plant devel-
opment (Stirnberg et al. 2007). The study of the mutants
dwarf14 (d14) or high-tillering dwarf (htd) in rice
(O. sativa), and decreased apical dominance (dad) in petunia
(Petunia hybrida), consented to isolate the hortolog D14/
DECREASED APICAL DOMINANCE2/HTD2 (D14/DAD2/
HTD2) genes encoding for α/β-fold hydrolases that bind and
hydrolyse SLs in vitro (Gao et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2009; Gaiji
et al. 2012; Hamiaux et al. 2012; Waters et al. 2012; Kagiyama
et al. 2013; Nakamura et al. 2013). D14 hydrolyses the SL
molecule at the enol-ether bond, between the SL tricyclic lac-
tone (ABC ring) and the butenolide moiety (D ring). The
analysis of rice dominant mutant dwarf53 (d53), which is
insensitive to exogenous SL treatments and displayed a dwarf
and high-tillering phenotype, suggested that the SL signal
transduction is then carried on by the D14-D ring complex
(Fig. 5). This complex promoted the ubiquitination and then
DWARF53 (D53) degradation by the proteasome and
abolished its activity in promoting axillary bud outgrowth
(Zhou et al. 2013), suggesting that D53 was a repressor of
SL signaling (Zhou et al. 2013). D53 interacts in vitro with
the TPL co-repressor, which likely regulates downstream
FINECULM1 (FC1)/BRC1 (Borghi et al. 2016). SLs could
preclude shoot branching via its regulation on PAT. In
Arabidopsis, max mutants showed increased transcript levels
of the PIN1/3/4/6 genes and an increased PAT capacity when
compared to WT plants (Bennett et al. 2006). A computer
modelling study, in which different processes affecting PAT,
was simulated. The results from this study suggested that
SLs might modulate PIN cycling between the plasma
membrane and endosomes (Prusinkiewicz et al. 2009).
More recently, the relationship between PIN1 accumula-
tion, PAT, and shoot branching was explored in three
Arabidopsis mutants that show massive shoot branching:
max2, gnom (gn), and transport inhibitor resistant3
(tir3) (Shinohara et al. 2013). It has been showed that
SLs can influence bud outgrowth by downregulating
PIN1 in the plasma membrane, thus inhibiting auxin
canalization out of dormant buds (Shinohara et al.
2013). An argument in opposition to the canalization
model is the fact that in Arabidopsis and pea both
WT and SL biosynthetic mutants rapidly transport exog-
enously applied auxin, suggesting that their PAT capac-
ity is not saturated (Brewer et al. 2009).
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
147

A second model suggests local action of SLs as second
messengers of auxin transported into buds, where they induce
the expression of BRC1 inhibiting bud outgrowth (Braun et al.
2012; Dun et al. 2013; Lauressergues et al. 2015). This hy-
pothesis is connected to previous results that showed as TB1-
like genes act downstream of SL signaling to suppress devel-
opment of axillary shoots in Arabidopsis and pea (Aguilar-
Martínez et al. 2007; Finlayson 2007; Brewer et al. 2009).
Additionally, it has been hypothesized that both SLs and CK
can interact directly in buds to control bud outgrowth, con-
verging at a common target in the bud, probably BRC1 in pea
and Arabidopsis (Aguilar-Martínez et al. 2007; Finlayson
2007; Braun et al. 2012; Dun et al. 2012) and FC1 in rice
(Minakuchi et al. 2010). The analysis of a petunia mutant,
characterized by increased branching, pleiotropic drug
resistance1 (pdr1), has led to insights into SL transport. The
PDR1 gene encodes a putative SL exporter mainly localized
in the vasculature and nodal tissues near the axillary buds
(Kretzschmar et al. 2012), coherent with the fact that cellular
transport of SLs is likely needed in this region for bud growth
inhibition (Brewer et al. 2013).
BRs represent a major class of plant steroid hormones pro-
moting growth in a variety of developmental processes (Arnaud
and Laufs 2013) throughout a control of cell division and cell
expansion (Gendron et al. 2012). The levels BRs are downreg-
ulated in the leaf axils, resulting in a low differentiation of
boundary cells. This feature seems to be also essential for the
initiation and growth of an AM (Arnaud and Laufs 2013; Wang
et al. 2016). In the leaf axils, BR accumulation is negatively
regulated by LOB (Fig. 5). LOB directly upregulates PHYB
ACTIVATION TAGGED SUPPRESSOR1 (BAS1), a gene
encoding a cytochrome P450 enzyme that inactivates BRs by
C-26 hydroxylation, thus forming a low BR concentration to
reduce cell division and expansion in the boundary zone (Bell
et al. 2012; Gendron et al. 2012). In addition, BRs bind to the
plasma membrane receptor kinase BRI1 and act via the BIN2
kinase and the BSU1 phosphatase to modulate the DNA bind-
ing activities of BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 (BZR1) and
BZR2/BES1 TFs on their target genes (He et al. 2002; Vert and
Chory 2006). Functional studies on selected target genes of
BZR1 demonstrated a key role in BR promotion of cell elon-
gation (Sun et al. 2010). It was showed that exogenous BR
application, overexpression of the BR biosynthetic gene
DWF4, or expression of a dominant BR-hypersensitive form
of the BZR1 TF lead to organ separation defects (Gendron et al.
2012). Additionally, BRs repress the expression of CUC1,
CUC2, CUC3, and LOF1 (Fig. 5), leading to the hypothesis
that the specific expression of these genes may result from their
local derepression due to lower BR signaling (Gendron et al.
2012). Therefore, the low BR content achieved by the LOB-
dependent activation of BAS1 in the boundary zones leads to a
decrease of BZR1 and facilitates the increase of CUC and
LOF1 transcripts and thus AM initiation (Gendron et al.
2012). Bell et al. (2012) showed that expressing BAS1 under
the control of the LOB promoter was sufficient to suppress the
organ fusion defect of the lob mutant, showing that reducing
BR locally is sufficient for development of a functional bound-
ary region. The results suggested a model for a role of BRs for
establish in the boundary zone a competent environment for
AM initiation. Expression of the LOB gene leads to the repres-
sion of BR signaling, partly through the activation of the BAS1
BR-inactivating enzyme. Reduced BR signaling in turn limits
cell growth of the boundary region for proper organ separation
while promoting the expression of the other boundary genes
such as CUC and LOF genes, establishing a competent zone
for AM initiation (Bell et al. 2012; Arnaud and Laufs, 2013).
GAs are well known for their role in several aspects of
plant development and reproductive phase change; however,
their role in shoot branching has barely been characterized
(Daviere and Achard, 2013; Rameau et al. 2015). In
Arabidopsis, rice, pea, and sunflower GA-deficient mutants
showed increase of branching proliferation with respect to
WT (Murfet and Reid, 1993; Silverstone et al. 1997; Lo
et al. 2008; Fambrini et al. 2011). Nevertheless, recessive mu-
tants characterized by defects in repressors of GA signaling
(i.e., DELLA proteins) reduced shoot branching and/or altered
branching patterns (Bassel et al. 2008). Additionally, ectopic
expression of class I KNOX-like genes is involved in the
switch of a differentiate cell toward organogenic competence
(Tamaoki et al. 1997; Rupp et al. 1999; Hewelt et al. 2000;
Sakamoto et al. 2001; Hamant et al. 2002; Hay et al. 2002;
Rosin et al. 2003; Chiappetta et al. 2006). This process is
mediated by an interaction between KNOX activity and levels
of CK/GA ratio (Shani et al. 2006; Veit B 2009). In
Arabidopsis, CK levels in the SAM are directly controlled
by STM with positive stimulation of the CK biosynthesis gene
IPT7 and activation of ARR5 a CK response factor (Jasinski
et al. 2005; Yanai et al. 2005; Fig. 5). CK production activates
a prompt rise in transcript levels of the KNOX genes with a
consequent positive feedback loop between STM and CK sig-
naling (Rupp et al. 1999; Wolters and Jürgens 2009).
Simultaneously, KNOX TFs reduce GA levels in the central
zone with repression of GA biosynthesis genes and promotion
of GA catabolism genes (Sakamoto et al. 2001; Hay et al.
2002; Chen et al. 2004; Bolduc and Hake 2009; Hay and
Tsiantis 2010; Fig. 5). Therefore, a high CK/GA ratio is
thought to be important to prevent cell differentiation and thus
maintaining SC fate (Su et al. 2011). Therefore, the lack of
KNOX expression at initial organ sites correlates with a mod-
ification in the CK/GA ratio that induces cell differentiation.
The repression of KNOX genes involves the ARP genes AS1 of
A. thaliana, ROUGH SHEATH2 of maize, and PHAN of
A. majus in promotion of growth and differentiation (see also
above). Recently, GA were also reported to interact with SL
signaling and to regulate shoot branching in rice and Jatropha
curcas (Nakamura et al. 2013; Ni et al. 2015). Nakamura et al.
148
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

(2013) report that rice D14 exhibits SL-dependent interaction
with SLENDER1 (SLR1, a DELLA protein), suggesting a
mechanism for the coordination of SL and GA signaling.
Therefore, interactions between hormone classes in regulating
initiation and outgrowth of AMs are rather common.
bri1-EMS-suppressor 1 (BES1), a positive regulator in BR
signaling pathway, acts as a downstream TF to directly regu-
late BR-responsive gene expression (Yin et al. 2002), and
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of BES1 are a major
way to regulate its activity (Yin et al. 2002; Vert and Chory
2006; Jiang et al. 2015). In addition, BES1 interacts with
MAX2, and BES1 protein functions as a substrate of MAX2
for degradation (Wang et al. 2013). In fact, the reduced ex-
pression of BES1 suppressed the excessive branching pheno-
type in max2 mutant and suggested that BES1 functioned as a
direct target of MAX2 inhibiting the SL signaling pathway to
promote shoot branching (Wang et al. 2013). Therefore, a
mechanism controlling AM development, by which BR and
SL signaling pathways share common TF BES1, has been
supposed.
Concluding remark
AMs contribute significantly to the architecture of a plant,
allowing the iteration of shoot development in a way that is
constantly adapting to the environmental cues. Therefore, they
can be considered as a direct parameter to evaluate the success
of a plant. Once formed, an axillary bud might lie dormant or
express its potential of producing vegetative or reproductive
shoots. This is mainly controlled by shoot apical dominance, a
field of study itself that we can visualize in the most simplified
way as a flow of auxins that are modulated to allow bud
outgrowth. This plasticity is possible thanks to the intrinsic
nature of the AM that is exactly organized and behaving as a
SAM, where the SC niche is of central importance; despite
that, the molecular signatures associated with SCs have not
been fully revealed. The crucial question that led major studies
on meristematic activity is how the organization is stably
maintained while there is a constant change at the level of
the resident cells. What is known so far is that there are two
levels of organization required for the control of meristem
development and proper function: first of all, the spatial de-
limitation of distinct cell subpopulations and second different
developmental programs that send signals among these cell
subpopulations. At the interface between genetical, hormonal,
and environmental influence of meristem formation and de-
velopment there are HD-ZIP IIIs, which contain three distinct
modules (i.e., a HD-ZIP region, a START/HD-SAD region,
and the MEKHLA domain) that represent a distinct functional
unit (Mukherjee and Bürglin 2006). In particular, the
MEKHLA domain shares significant similarity with PAS do-
mains that have been shown to be internal sensors of oxygen,
redox potential, and light in many different proteins, both in
bacteria and in animals (Mukherjee and Bürglin 2006; Vogt
and Schippers 2015). This is broading up further the possible
field of research in understanding the circuits sensing an ex-
ternal cue and translating it into a genetical response.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Università degli
Studi di Pisa.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they do not have conflict
of interest.
References
Adamowski M, Friml J (2015) PIN-dependent auxin transport: action,
regulation, and evolution. Plant Cell 27:20–32
Aggarwal P, Gupta MD, Joseph AP, Chatterjee N, Srinivasan N, Nath U
(2010) Identification of specific DNA binding residues in the TCP
family of transcription factors in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 22:1174–
1189
Aguilar-Martínez JA, Poza-Carrión C, Cubas P (2007) Arabidopsis
BRANCHED1 acts as an integrator of branching signals within
axillary buds. Plant Cell 19:458–472
Agusti J, Greb T (2013) Going with the wind—adaptive dynamics of
plant secondary meristems. Mech Dev 130:34–44
Aida M, Tasaka M (2006) Morphogenesis and patterning at the
organ boundaries in the higher plant shoot apex. Plant Mol
Biol 60:915–928
Aida M, Ishida T, Fukaki H, Fujisawa H, Tasaka M (1997) Genes in-
volved in organ separation in Arabidopsis: an analysis of the cup-
shaped cotyledon mutant. Plant Cell 9:841–857
Aida M, Ishida T, Tasaka M (1999) Shoot apical meristem and cotyledon
formation during Arabidopsis embryogenesis: interaction among the
CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON and SHOOT MERISTEMLESS
genes. Development 126:1563–1570
Akiyama K, Matsuzaki K, Hayashi H (2005) Plant sesquiterpenes
induce hyphal branching in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.
Nature 435:824–827
Arber A (1950) The natural philosophy of plant form. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Arite T, Umehara M, Ishikawa S, Hanada A, Maekawa M, Yamaguchi S,
Kyozuka J (2009) D14, a strigolactone insensitive mutant of rice,
shows an accelerated outgrowth of tillers. Plant Cell Physiol 50:
1416–1424
Arnaud N, Laufs P (2013) Plant development: brassinosteroids go out of
bounds. Curr Biol 23:R152–R154
Barazesh S, McSteen P (2008) Barren inflorescence1 functions in organ-
ogenesis during vegetative and inflorescence development in maize.
Genetics 179:389–401
Barton MK (2010) Twenty years on: the inner workings of the shoot
apical meristem, a developmental dynamo. Dev Biol 341:95–113
Bassel GW, Mullen RT, Bewley JD (2008) Procera is a putative DELLA
mutant in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum): effects on the seed and
vegetative plant. J Exp Bot 59:585–593
Bayer EM, Smith RS, Mandel T, Nakayama N, Sauer M, Prusinkiewicz P,
Kuhlemeier C (2009) Integration of transport-based models for
phyllotaxis and midvein formation. Genes Dev 23:373–384
Bell EM, Lin WC, Husbands AY, Yu L, Jaganatha V, Jablonska B,
Mangeon A, Neff MM, Girke T, Springer PS (2012) Arabidopsis
lateral organ boundaries negatively regulates brassinosteroid
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
149

accumulation to limit growth in organ boundaries. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 109:21146–21151
Benjamins R, Quint A, Weijers D, Hooykaas P, Offringa R (2001) The
PINOID protein kinase regulates organ development in Arabidopsis
by enhancing polar auxin transport. Development 128:4057–4067
Benková E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertová D,
Jürgens G, Friml J (2003) Local, efflux dependent auxin gradients
as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell 115:591–602
Bennett T, Leyser O (2006) Something on the side: axillary meristems
and plant development. Plant Mol Biol 60:843–854
Bennett SRM, Alvarez J, Bossinger G, Smyth DR (1995) Morphogenesis
in pinoid mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 8:505–520
Bennett T, Sieberer T, Willett B, Booker J, Luschnig C, Leyser O (2006)
The Arabidopsis MAX pathway controls shoot branching by regu-
lating auxin transport. Curr Biol 16:553–563
Berger Y, Harpaz-Saad S, Brand A, Melnik H, Sirding N, Alvarez JP,
Zinder M, Samach A, Eshed Y, Ori N (2009) The NAC domain
transcription factor GOBLET specifies leaflet boundaries in com-
pound tomato leaves. Development 136:823–832
Beveridge CA, Kyozuka J (2010) New genes in the strigolactone-related
shoot branching pathway. Curr Opin Plant Biol 13:34–39
Bolduc N, Hake S (2009) The maize transcription factor KNOTTED1
directly regulates the gibberellin catabolism gene ga2ox1. Plant Cell
21:1647–1658
Booker J, Auldridge M, Wills S, McCarty D, Klee H, Leyser O
(2004) MAX3/CCD7 is a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase
required for the synthesis of a novel plant signaling mole-
cule. Curr Biol 14:1232–1238
Booker J, Sieberer T, Wright W, Williamson L, Willett B, Stirnberg P,
Turnbull C, Srinivasan M, Goddard P, Leyser O (2005) MAX1
encodes a cytochrome P450 family member that acts downstream
of MAX3/4 to produce a carotenoid-derived branch-inhibiting hor-
mone. Dev Cell 8:443–449
Borghi L, Liu GW, Emonet A, Kretzschmar T, Martinoia E (2016) The
importance of strigolactone transport regulation for symbiotic sig-
naling and shoot branching. Planta 243:1351–1360
Bortiri E, Chuck G, Vollbrecht E, Rocheford T, Martienssen R, Hake S
(2006) ramosa2 encodes a LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARY do-
main protein that determines the fate of stem cells in branch meri-
stems of maize. Plant Cell 18:574–585
Bower FO (1930) Size and form in land plants. McMillan and Co.,
London
Bowman JL, Eshed Y (2000) Formation and maintenance of the shoot
apical meristem. Trends Plant Sci 5:110–115
Bradley D, Carpenter R, Copsey L, Vincent C, Rothstein S, Coen ES
(1996) Control of inflorescence architecture in Antirrhinum.
Nature 379:791–797
Bradley D, Ratcliffe O, Vincent C, Carpenter R, Coen E (1997)
Inflorescence commitment and architecture in Arabidopsis.
Science 275:80–83
Braun N, de Saint GA, Pillot JP, Boutet-Mercey S, Dalmais M, Antoniadi
I, Li X, Maia-Grondard A, Le Signor C, Bouteiller N, Luo D,
Bendahmane A, Turnbull C, Rameau C (2012) The pea TCP tran-
scription factor PsBRC1 acts downstream of strigolactones to con-
trol shoot branching. Plant Physiol 158:225–238
Brewer PB, Dun EA, Ferguson BJ, Rameau C, Beveridge CA (2009)
Strigolactone acts downstream of auxin to regulate bud outgrowth
in pea and Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 150:482–493
Brewer PB, Koltai H, Beveridge CA (2013) Diverse roles of
strigolactones in plant development. Mol Plant 6:18–28
Brown AG (1955) A mutant with suppressed lateral shoots. Tomato
Genet Coop 5:6–7
Burian A, Barbier de Reuille P, Kuhlemeier C (2016) Patterns of stem cell
divisions contribute to plant longevity. Curr Biol 26:1385–1394
Bush BL, Schmitz G, Rossmann S, Piron F, Ding J, Bendahmane A,
Theres K (2011) Shoot branching and leaf dissection in tomato are
regulated by homologous gene modules. Plant Cell 23:3595–3609
Byrne ME, Barley R, Curtis M, Arroyo JM, Dunham M, Hudson A,
Martienssen RA (2000) Asymmetric leaves1 mediates leaf pattern-
ing and stem cell function in Arabidopsis. Nature 408:967–971
Byrne ME, Simorowski J, Martienssen RA (2002) ASYMMETRIC
LEAVES1 reveals knox gene redundancy in Arabidopsis.
Development 129:1957–1965
Cardozo T, Pagano M (2004) The SCF ubiquitin ligase: insights into a
molecular machine. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5:739–751
Carmell MA, Xuan Z, Zhang MQ, Hannon GJ (2002) The Argonaute
family: tentacles that reach into RNAi, developmental control, stem
cell maintenance, and tumorigenesis. Genes Dev 16:2733–2742
Caudy AA, Myers M, Hannon GJ, Hammond SM (2002) Fragile X-
related protein and VIG associate with the RNA interference ma-
chinery. Genes Dev 16:2491–2496
Challis RJ, Hepworth J, Mouchel C, Waites R, Leyser O (2013) A role for
MORE AXILLARY GROWTH1 (MAX1) in evolutionary diversity in
strigolactone signaling upstream of MAX2. Plant Physiol 161:
1885–1902
Chen H, Banerjee AK, Hannapel DJ (2004) The tandem complex of BEL
and KNOX partners is required for transcriptional repression of
ga20ox1. Plant J 38:276–284
Cheng Y, Zhao Y (2007) A role for auxin in flower development. J Integ
Plant Biol 49:99–104
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) Auxin synthesized by the YUCCA flavin
monooxygenases is essential for embryogenesis and leaf formation
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:2430–2439
Cheng X, Ruyter-Spira C, Bouwmeester H (2013) The interaction be-
tween strigolactones and other hormones in the regulation of plant
development. Front Plant Sci 4:199
Chiappetta A, Michelotti V, Fambrini M, Bruno L, Salvini M, Petrarulo
M, Azmi A, Van Onckelen H, Pugliesi C, Bitonti MB (2006) Zeatin
accumulation and misexpression of a class I knox gene are intimately
linked in the epiphyllous response of the interspecific hybrid EMB-2
(Helianthus annuus × H. tuberosus). Planta 223:917–931
Chiarugi A (1952) Fondamento anatomico dell’accrescimento nei
metafiti. Accad Naz Lincei Quad N° 28: Accrescimento negli
organismi 172–252
Chitwood DH, Nogueira FTS, Howell MD, Montgomery TA, Carrington
JC, Timmermans MCP (2009) Pattern formation via small RNA
mobility. Genes Dev 23:549–554
Christensen SK, Dagenais N, Chory J, Weigel D (2000) Regulation of
auxin response by the protein kinase PINOID. Cell 100:469–478
Chuck G, Lincoln C, Hake S (1996) KNAT1 induces lobed leaves with
ectopic meristems when overexpressed in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 8:
1277–1289
Chuck G, Meeley R, Irish E, Sakai H, Hake S (2007a) The maize
tasselseed4 microRNA controls sex determination and meristem cell
fate by targeting Tasselseed6/indeterminate spikelet1. Nat Genet 39:
1517–1521
Chuck G, Cigan AM, Saeteurn K, Hake S (2007b) The heterochronic
maize mutant Corngrass1 results from overexpression of a tandem
microRNA. Nat Gen 39:544–549
Chuck G, Meeley RB, Hake S (1998) The control of maize spikelet
meristem fate by the APETALA2-like gene indeterminate spikelet1.
Genes Dev 12:1145–1154
Clark SE (1997) Organ formation at the vegetative shoot meristem. Plant
Cell 9:1067–1076
Clark SE, Running MP, Meyerowitz EM (1993) CLAVATA1, a regulator
of meristem and flower development in Arabidopsis. Development
119:397–418
Clark SE, Williams RW, Meyerowitz EM (1997) The CLAVATA1 gene
encodes a putative receptor kinase that controls shoot and meristem
size in Arabidopsis. Cell 89:575–585
150
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Cline MG (1991) Apical dominance. Bot Rev 57:318–358
Cubas P, Lauter N, Doebley J, Coen E (1999) The TCP domain: a motif
found in proteins regulating plant growth and development. Plant J
18:215–222
D’Amato F (1964) Nuclear change and their relationships to histological
differentiation. Caryologia 17:317–325
D’Amato F (1977) Nuclear cytology in relation to development.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
D’Amato F (1997) Role of somatic mutations in the evolution of higher
plants. Caryologia 50:1–15
Daum G, Medzihradszky A, Suzaki T, Lohmann JU (2014) A mechanis-
tic framework for noncell autonomous stem cell induction in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:14619–14624
Daviere JM, Achard P (2013) Gibberellin signaling in plants.
Development 140:1147–1151
de Saint GA, Bonhomme S, Boyer FD, Rameau C (2013) Novel insights
into strigolactone distribution and signalling. Curr Opin Plant Biol
16:583–589
De Smet I, Vanneste S, Inzé D, Beeckman T (2006) Lateral root initiation
or the birth of a new meristem. Plant Mol Biol 60:871–887
Denay G, Chahtane H, Tichtinsky G, Parcy F (2016) A flower is born: an
update on Arabidopsis floral meristem formation. Curr Opin Plant
Biol 35:15–22
Doebley J, Stec A, Gustus C (1995) teosinte branched1 and the origin of
maize: evidence for epistasis and the evolution of dominance.
Genetics 141:333–346
Doebley J, Stec A, Hubbard L (1997) The evolution of apical dominance
in maize. Nature 386:485–488
Doebley JF, Gaut BS, Smith BD (2006) The molecular genetics of crop
domestication. Cell 127:1309–1321
Domagalska MA, Leyser O (2011) Signal integration in the control of
shoot branching. Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol 12:211–221
Dorweiler J, Stec A, Kermicle J, Doebley J (1993) Teosinte glume archi-
tecture 1: a genetic locus controlling a key step in maize evolution.
Science 262:233–235
Doust AN, Devos KM, Gadberry MD, Gale MD, Kellogg EA (2004)
Genetic control of branching in foxtail millet. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 101:9045–9050
Drummond RSM, Martinez-Sanchez M, Janssen BJ, Templeton KR,
Simons JL, Quinn BD, Karunairetnam S, Snowden KC (2009)
Petunia hybrida CAROTENOID CLEAVAGE DIOXYGENASE7 is
involved in the production of negative and positive branching sig-
nals in petunia. Plant Physiol 151:1867–1877
Dun EA, Brewer PB, Beveridge CA (2009) Strigolactones: discovery of
the elusive shoot branching hormone. Trends Plant Sci 14:364–372
Dun EA, de Saint GA, Rameau C, Beveridge CA (2012) Antagonistic
action of strigolactone and cytokinin in bud outgrowth control. Plant
Physiol 158:487–498
Dun EA, de Saint GA, Rameau C, Beveridge CA (2013) Dynamics of
strigolactone function and shoot branching responses in Pisum
sativum. Mol Plant 6:128–140
Durbak A, Yao H, McSteen P (2012) Hormone signaling in plant devel-
opment. Curr Opin Plant Biol 15:92–96
Eklöf S, Åstot C, Sitbon F, Moritz T, Olsson O, Sandberg G (2000)
Transgenic tobacco plants co-expressing Agrobacterium iaa and
ipt genes have wild-type hormone levels but display both auxin-
and cytokinin-overproducing phenotypes. Plant J 23:279–284
Endrizzi K, Moussian B, Haecker A, Levin J, Laux T (1996) The
SHOOTMERISTEMLESS gene is required for maintenance of un-
differentiated cells in Arabidopsis shoot and floral meristems and
acts at a different regulatory level than the meristem genes
WUSCHEL and ZWILLE. Plant J 10:967–979
Eshed Y, Izhaki A, Baum SF, Floyd SK, Bowman JL (2004) Asymmetric
leaf development and blade expansion in Arabidopsis are mediated
by KANADI and YABBY activities. Development 131:2997–3006
Fal K, Landrein B, Hamant O (2016) Interplay between miRNA regula-
tion and mechanical stress for CUC gene expression at the shoot
apical meristem. Plant Signal Behav 11:e1127497
Fambrini M, Pugliesi C (2013) Usual and unusual development of the
dicot leaf: involvement of transcription factors and hormones. Plant
Cell Rep 32:899–922
Fambrini M, Cionini G, Bertini D, Michelotti V, Conti A, Pugliesi C
(2003) MISSING FLOWERS gene controls axillary meristems initi-
ation in sunflower. genesis 36:25–33
Fambrini M, Mariotti L, Parlanti S, Picciarelli P, Salvini M, Ceccarelli N,
Pugliesi C (2011) The extreme dwarf phenotype of the GA-sensitive
mutant of sunflower, dwarf2, is generated by a deletion in the ent-
kaurenoic acid oxidase1 (HaKAO1) gene sequence. Plant Mol Biol
75:431–450
Fambrini M, Mariotti L, Parlanti S, Salvini M, Pugliesi C (2015) A
GRAS-like gene of sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) alters the gib-
berellin content and axillary meristem outgrowth in transgenic
Arabidopsis plants. Plant Biol 17:1123–1134
Finlayson SA (2007) Arabidopsis TEOSINTE BRANCHED1-LIKE 1
regulates axillary bud outgrowth and is homologous to monocot
TEOSINTE BRANCHED1. Plant Cell Physiol 48:667–677
Fletcher JC, Brand U, Running MP, Simon R, Meyerowitz EM (1999)
Signaling of cell fate decisions by CLAVATA3 in Arabidopsis shoot
meristems. Science 283:1911–1914
Gaiji N, Cardinale F, Prandi C, Bonfante P, Ranghino G (2012) The
computational-based structure of Dwarf14 provides evidence for
its role as potential strigolactone receptor in plants. BMC Res
Notes 5:307
Gaillochet C, Lohmann JU (2015) The never-ending story: from
pluripotency to plant developmental plasticity. Development 142:
2237–2249
Gaillochet C, Daum G, Lohmann JU (2015) O cell, where art thou? The
mechanisms of shoot meristem patterning. Curr Opin Plant Biol 23:
91–97
Gallavotti A, Zhao Q, Kyozuka J, Meeley RB, Ritter MK, Doebley JF, Pe
ME, Schmidt RJ (2004) The role of barren stalk1 in the architecture
of maize. Nature 432:630–635
Gallavotti A, Long JF, Stanfield S, Yang X, Jackson D, Vollbrecht E,
Schmidt RJ (2010) The control of axillary meristem fate in the maize
ramose pathway. Development 137:2849–2856
Gallavotti A, Malcomber S, Gaines C, Stanfield S, Whipple C, Kellogg E,
Schmidt RJ (2011) BARREN STALK FASTIGIATE1 is an AT-
hook protein required for the formation of maize ears. Plant Cell
23:1756–1771
Galli M, Gallavotti A (2016) Expanding the regulatory network for mer-
istem size in plants. Trends Genet 32:372–383
Galli M, Liu Q, Moss BL, Malcomber S, Li W, Gaines C, Federici S,
Roshkovan J, Meeley R, Nemhauser JL, Gallavotti A (2015) Auxin
signaling modules regulate maize inflorescence architecture. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:13372–13377
Gallois JL, Woodward C, Reddy GV, Sablowski R (2002) Combined
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS and WUSCHEL trigger ectopic organ-
ogenesis in Arabidopsis. Development 129:3207–3217
Gälweiler L, Guan CH, Muller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A,
Palme K (1998) Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in
Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science 282:2226–2230
Gao Z, Qian Q, Liu X, Yan M, Feng Q, Dong G, Liu J, Han B (2009)
Dwarf 88, a novel putative esterase gene affecting architecture of
rice plant. Plant Mol Biol 71:265–276
Garrison R (1955) Studies in the development of axillary buds. Am J Bot
42:257–266
Gendron JM, Liu JS, Fan M, Bai MY, Wenkel S, Springer PS, Barton
MK, Wang ZY (2012) Brassinosteroids regulate organ boundary
formation in the shoot apical meristem of Arabidopsis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 109:21152–21157
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
151

Gomez-Roldan V, Fermas S, Brewer PB, Peuch-Pagés V, Dun EA, Pillot
J-P, Letisse F, Matusova R, Danoun S, Portais J-C, Boumeester H,
Bécard G, Beveridge CA, Rameau C, Rochange SF (2008)
Strigolactone inhibition of shoot branching. Nature 455:189–194
Grbic V (2005) Comparative analysis of axillary and floral meristem
development. Can J Bot 83:343–349
Greb T, Clarenz O, Schäfer E, Muller D, Herrero R, Schmitz G, Theres K
(2003) Molecular analysis of the LATERAL SUPPRESSOR gene in
Arabidopsis reveals a conserved control mechanism for axillary
meristem formation. Genes Dev 17:1175–1187
Grigg SP, Galinha C, Kornet N, Canales C, Scheres B, Tsiantis M (2009)
Repression of apical homeobox genes is required for embryonic root
development in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 19:1485–1490
Groot SPC, Keizer LCP, de Ruiter W, Dons JJM (1994) Seed and fruit set
of the lateral suppressor mutant of tomato. Scientia Hort 59:157–162
Guo M, Thomas J, Collins G, Timmermans MCP (2008) Direct repres-
sion of KNOX loci by the ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 complex of
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 20:48–58
Guo D, Zhang J, Wang X, Han X, Wei B, Wang J, Li B, Yu H, Huang Q,
Gu H, Qu L-J, Qin G (2015) The WRKY transcription factor
WRKY71/EXB1 controls shoot branching by trascriptionally regu-
lating RAX genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 27:3112–3127
Ha CM, Kim G-T, Kim BC, Jun JH, Soh SM, Ueno Y, Machida Y,
Tsukaya H, Nam HG (2003) The BLADE-ON-PETIOLE1 gene con-
trols leaf pattern formation through the modulation of meristematic
activity in Arabidopsis. Development 130:161–172
Ha CM, Jun HJ, Nam HG, Fletcher JC (2004) BLADE-ON-PETIOLE1
encodes a BTP/POZ domain protein required for leaf morphogene-
sis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol 45:1361–1370
Hamant O, Nogué F, Belles-Boix E, Jublot D, Grandjean O, Traas J,
Pautot V (2002) The KNAT2 homeodomain protein interacts with
ethylene and cytokinin signaling. Plant Physiol 130:657–665
Hamiaux C, Drummond RS, Janssen BJ, Ledger SE, Cooney JM,
Newcomb RD, Snowden KC (2012) DAD2 is an alpha/beta hydro-
lase likely to be involved in the perception of the plant branching
hormone, strigolactone. Curr Biol 22:2032–2036
Hasson A, Blein T, Laufs P (2010) Leaving the meristem behind: the
genetic and molecular control of leaf patterning and morphogenesis.
CR Biol 4:350–360
Hay A, Tsiantis M (2010) KNOX genes: versatile regulators of plant
development and diversity. Development 137:3153–3165
Hay A, Kaur H, Phillips A, Hedden P, Hake S, Tsiantis M (2002) The
gibberellin pathway mediates KNOTTED1-type homeobox func-
tion in plants with different body plans. Curr Biol 12:1557–1565
He JX, Gendron JM, Yang Y, Li J, Wang ZY (2002) The GSK3-like
kinase BIN2 phosphorylates and destabilizes BZR1, a positive reg-
ulator of the brassinosteroid signaling pathway in Arabidopsis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:10185–10190
Heisler MG, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy GV, Long JA, Meyerowitz
EM (2005) Patterns of auxin transport and gene expression during
primordium development revealed by live imaging of the
Arabidopsis inflorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15:1899–1911
Heisler MG, Hamant O, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Ohno C, Jonsson H,
Traas J, Meyerowitz EM (2010) Alignment between PIN1 polarity
and microtubule orientation in the shoot apical meristem reveals a
tight coupling between morphogenesis and auxin transport. PLoS
Biol 8:e1000516
Hepworth SR, Pautot VA (2015) Beyond the divide boundaries for pat-
terning and stem cell regulation in plants. Front Plant Sci 6:1052
Hernández LF, Green PB (1993) Transductions for the expression of
structural pattern: analysis in sunflower. Plant Cell 5:1725–1738
Hewelt A, Prinsen E, Thomas M, Van Onckelen H, Meins FJ (2000)
Ectopic expression of maize knotted1 results in the cytokinin-auto-
trophic growth of cultured tobacco tissues. Planta 210:884–889
Hibara K-i, Karim MR, Taoki K-i, Furutami M, Aida M, Tasaka M (2006)
Arabidopsis CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON3 regulates
postembryonic shoot meristem and organ boundary formation.
Plant Cell 18:2946–2957
Hirakawa Y, Kondo Y, Fukuda H (2011) Establishment and maintenance
of vascular cell communities through local signaling. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 14:17–23
Hofmann NR (2014) The importance of being absent: auxin minima are
required for axillary meristem formation. Plant Cell 26:1836
Hudson A (2001) Plant development: two sides to organ asymmetry. Curr
Biol 18:R756–R758
Hwang I, Sheen J, Müller B (2012) Cytokinin signaling networks. Annu
Rev Plant Biol 63:353–380
Iltis HH (2000) Homeotic sexual translocations and the origin of
maize (Zea mays, Poaceae). A new look at an old problem.
Econ Bot 54:7–42
Irish V, Sussex IM (1992) A fate map of the Arabidopsis embryonic shoot
apical meristem. Development 115:745–753
Ishikawa S, Maekawa M, Arite T, Onishi K, Takamure I, Kyozuka J
(2005) Suppression of tiller bud activity in tillering dwarf mutants
of rice. Plant Cell Physiol 46:79–86
Jackson D, Veit B, Hake S (1994) Expression of maize KNOTTED1
related homeobox genes in the shoot apical meristem predicts pat-
terns of morphogenesis in the vegetative shoot. Development 120:
405–413
Jackson PK, Eldridge AG, Freed E, Furstenthal L, Hsu JY, Kaiser BK,
Reimann JD (2000) The lore of the RINGs: substrate recognition
and catalysis by ubiquitin ligases. Trends Cell Biol 10:429–439
Janssen BJ, Drummond RSM, Snowden KC (2014) Regulation of axil-
lary shoot development. Curr Opin Plant Biol 17:28–35
Jasinski S, Piazza P, Craft J, Hay A, Woolley L, Rieu I, Phillips A,
Hedden P, Tsiantis M (2005) KNOX action in Arabidopsis is medi-
ated by coordinate regulation of cytokinin and gibberellin activities.
Curr Biol 15:1560–1565
Je BI, Gruel J, Lee YK, Bommert P, Arevalo ED, Eveland AL, Wu Q,
Goldshmidt A, Meeley R, Bartlett M, Komatsu M, Sakai H, Jönsson
H, Jackson D (2016) Signaling from maize organ primordia via
FASCIATED EAR3 regulates stem cell proliferation and yield traits.
Nat Genet 48:785–791
Jiang B, Miao H, Chen S, Zhang S, Chen F, Fang W (2010) The lateral
suppressor-like gene, DgLsL, alternated the axillary branching in
transgenic chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum × morifolium) by
modulating IAA and GA content. Plant Mol Biol Rep 28:144–151
Jiang J, Zhang C, Wang X (2015) A recently evolved isoform of the
transcription factor BES1 promotes brassinosteroid signaling and
development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 27:361–374
Johnson X, Brcich T, Dun EA, Goussot M, Haurogné K, Beveridge CA,
Rameau C (2006) Branching genes are conserved across species:
genes controlling a novel signal in pea are coregulated by other long-
distance signals. Plant Physiol 142:1014–1026
Kagiyama M, Hirano Y, Mori T, Kim SY, Kyozuka J, Seto Y, Yamaguchi
S, Hakoshima T (2013) Structures of D14 and D14L in the
strigolactone and karrikin signaling pathways. Genes Cells 18:
147–160
Kardailsky I, Shukla V, Ahn JH, Dagenais N, Christensen SK, Nguyen
JT, Chory J, Harrison MJ, Weigel D (1999) Activation tagging of the
floral inducer FT. Science 286:1962–1965
Kebrom TH, Burson BL, Finlayson SA (2006) Phytochrome B represses
Teosinte Branched1 expression and induces sorghum axillary bud
outgrowth in response to light signals. Plant Physiol 140:1109–1117
Keller T, Abbott J, Moritz T, Doerner P (2006) Arabidopsis
REGULATOR OF AXILLARY MERISTEMS1 controls a leaf axil
stem cell niche and modulates vegetative development. Plant Cell
18:598–611
Kerstetter RA, Bollman K, Taylor RA, Bomblies K, Poethig RS
(2001) KANADI regulates organ polarity in Arabidopsis.
Nature 411:706–709
152
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Kidner CA, Martienssen RA (2004) Spatially restricted microRNA di-
rects leaf polarity through ARGONAUTE1. Nature 428:81–84
Kidner CA, Martienssen RA (2005) The role of ARGONAUTE1
(AGO1) in meristem formation and identity. Dev Biol 280:504–517
Kierzkowski D, Nakayama N, Routier-Kierkowska A-L, Weber A, Bayer
E, Schorderet M, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Smith RS (2012)
Elastic domains regulate growth and organogenesis in the plant
shoot apical meristem. Science 335:1096–1099
Knauer S, Holt AL, Rubio-Somoza I, Tucker EJ, Ninze A, Pisch M,
Javelle M, Timmermans MC, Tucker MR, Laux T (2013) A
protodermal miR394 signal defines a region of stem cell competence
in the Arabidopsis shoot meristem. Dev Cell 24:125–132
Komatsu K, Maekawa M, Ujiie S, Satake Y, Furutani I, Okamoto H,
Shimamoto K, Kyozuka J (2003) LAX and SPA: major regulators
of shoot branching in rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:11765–
11770
Kretzschmar T, Kohlen W, Sasse J, Borghi L, Schlegel M, Bachelier JB,
Reinhardt D, Bours R, Bouwmeester HJ, Martinoia E (2012) A
petunia ABC protein controls strigolactone-dependent symbiotic
signalling and branching. Nature 483:341–344
Landrein B, Kiss A, Sassi M, Chauvet A, Das P, Cortizo M, Laufs P,
Takeda S, Aida M, Traas J, Vernoux T, Boudaoud A, Hamant O
(2015) Mechanical stress contributes to the expression of the STM
homeobox gene in Arabidopsis shoot meristems. eLife 4:e07811
Lau S, Slane D, Herud O, Kong J, Jürgens G (2012) Early embryogenesis
in flowering plants: setting up the basic body pattern. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 63:483–506
Lauressergues D, Andre O, Peng J, Wen J, Chen R, Ratet P, Tadege M,
Mysore KS, Rochange SF (2015) Strigolactones contribute to shoot
elongation and to the formation of leaf margin serrations in
Medicago truncatula R108. J Exp Bot 66:1237–1244
Laux T, Mayer KFX, Berger J, Jürgens G (1996) The WUSCHEL gene is
required for shoot and floral meristem integrity in Arabidopsis.
Development 122:87–96
Lee SO, Cho H-T (2006) PINOID positively regulate auxin efflux
in Arabidopsis root hair cells and tobacco cells. Plant Cell
18:1604–1616
Lee D-K, Geisler M, Springer PS (2009) LATERAL ORGAN FUSION1
and LATERAL ORGAN FUSION2 function in lateral organ separa-
tion and axillary meristem formation in Arabidopsis. Development
136:2423–2432
Lenhard M, Jürgens G, Laux T (2002) The WUSCHEL and
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS genes fulfil complementary roles
in Arabidopsis shoot meristem regulation. Development 129:
3195–3206
Leyser O (2009) The control of shoot branching: an example of plant
information processing. Plant Cell Env 32:694–703
Leyser HMO, Furner IJ (1992) Characterisation of three shoot
apical meristem mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Development 116:397–403
Leyser HMO, Lincoln CA, Timpte C, Lammer D, Turner J, Estelle
M (1993) Arabidopsis auxin-resistance gene AXR1 encodes a
protein related to ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1. Nature 364:
161–164
Li X, Qian Q, Fu Z, Xiong G, Zeng D, Wang X, Liu X, Teng S, Hiroshi F,
Yuan M, Luo D, Han B, Li J (2003) Control of tillering in rice.
Nature 422:618–621
Li S-B, Xie Z-Z, Hu C-G, Zhang J-Z (2016) A review of auxin response
factors (ARFs) in plants. Front Plant Sci 7:47
Lin H, Wang R, Qian Q, Yan M, Meng X, Fu Z, Yan C, Jiang B, Su Z, Li
J, Wang Y (2009) DWARF27, an iron-containing protein required
for the biosynthesis of strigolactones, regulates rice tiller bud out-
growth. Plant Cell 21:1512–1525
Lincoln C, Britton JH, Estelle M (1990) Growth and development of the
axr1 mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2:1071–1080
Liu W, Wu C, Fu Y, Hu G, Si H, Zhu L, Luan W, He Z, Sun Z (2009)
Identification and characterization of HTD2: a novel gene negatively
regulating tiller bud outgrowth in rice. Planta 230:649–658
Lo S-F, Yang S-Y, Chen K-T, Yl H, Zeewaart JAD, Chen L-J, Yu S-M
(2008) A novel class of gibberellins 2-oxidases control
semidwarfism, tillering and root development in rice. Plant Cell
20:2603–2618
Long J, Barton MK (2000) Initiation of axillary and floral meristems in
Arabidopsis. Dev Biol 218:341–353
Long JA, Ohno C, Smith ZR, Meyerowitz EM (2006) TOPLESS regu-
lates apical embryonic fate in Arabidopsis. Science 312:1520–1523
López-Ráez JA, Charnikhova T, Gómez-Roldán V, Matusova R, Kohlen W,
De Vos R, Verstappen F, Puech-Pages V, Bécard G, Mulder P,
Bouwmeester H (2008) Tomato strigolactones are derived from carot-
enoids and their biosynthesis is promoted by phosphate starvation.
New Phytol 178:863–874
Lyndon RF (1998) The shoot apical meristem: its growth and develop-
ment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Lynn K, Fernandez A, Aida M, Sedbrook J, Tasaka M, Masson P, Barton
MK (1999) The PINHEAD/ZWILLE gene acts pleiotropically in
Arabidopsis development and has overlapping functions with the
ARGONAUTE1 gene. Development 126:469–481
Majumdar GP (1942) The organization of the shoot of Heracleum in the
light of development. Ann Bot 6:49–81
Mallory AC, Hinze A, Tucker MR, Bouché N, Gascioli V, Elmayan T,
Lauresserques D, Jauvion V, Vaucheret H, Laux T (2009)
Redundant and specific roles of the ARGONAUTE proteins
AGO1 and ZLL in development and small RNA-directed gene si-
lencing. PLoS Genet 5:e1000646
Mapelli S, Kinet JM (1992) Plant growth regulator and graft control of
axillary bud formation and development in the TO-2 mutant tomato.
Plant Growth Regul 11:385–390
Mapelli S, Lombardi L (1982) A comparative auxin and cytokinin
study in normal and to-2 mutant tomato plants. Plant Cell
Physiol 23:751–757
Martín-Trillo M, Cubas P (2010) TCP genes: a family snapshot ten years
later. Trends Plant Sci 15:31–39
Mason MG, Ross JJ, Babst BA, Wienclaw BN, Beveridge CA (2014)
Sugar demand, not auxin, is the initial regulator of apical domi-
nance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:6092–6097
Mayer KF, Schoof H, Haecker A, Lenhard M, Jürgens G, Laux T (1998)
Role of WUSCHEL in regulating stem cell fate in the Arabidopsis
shoot meristem. Cell 95:805–815
McConnell JR, Barton MK (1998) Leaf polarity and meristem formation
in Arabidopsis. Development 125:2935–2942
McConnell JR, Emery J, Eshed Y, Bao N, Bowman J, Barton MK (2001)
Role of PHABULOSA and PHAVOLUTA in determining radial pat-
terning in shoots. Nature 411:709–713
McSteen P (2009) Hormonal regulation of branching in grasses. Plant
Physiol 149:46–55
McSteen P, Hake S (2001) Barren inflorescence2 regulates axillary mer-
istem development in the maize inflorescence. Development 128:
2881–2891
McSteen P, Leyser O (2005) Shoot branching. Annu Rev Plant Biol 56:
353–374
McSteen P, Malcomber S, Skirpan A, Lunde C, Wu X, Kellogg E, Hake S
(2007) Barren inflorescence2 encodes a co-ortholog of the PINOID
serine/threonine kinase and is required for organogenesis during
inflorescence and vegetative development in maize. Plant Physiol
144:1000–1011
Minakuchi K, Kameoka H, Yasuno N, Umehara M, Luo L, Kobayashi K,
Hanada A, Ueno K, Asami T, Yamaguchi S, Kyozuka J (2010) FINE
CULM1 (FC1) works downstream of strigolactones to inhibit the
outgrowth of axillary buds in rice. Plant Cell Physiol 51:1127–1135
Mock JJ, Pearce RB (1975) An ideotype of maize. Euphytica 24:613–623
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
153

Mukherjee K, Bürglin TR (2006) MEKHLA, a novel domain with sim-
ilarity to PAS domains, is fused to plant homeodomain-leucine zip-
per III proteins. Plant Physiol 140:1142–1150
Müller D, Leyser O (2011) Auxin, cytokinin and the control of shoot
branching. Ann Bot 107:1203–1212
Müller D, Schmitz G, Theres K (2006) Blind homologous R2R3 Myb
genes control pattern of lateral meristem initiation in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 18:586–597
Murfet IC, Reid JB (1993) Developmental mutants. In: Casey R, Davies
DR (eds) Peas: genetics, molecular biology and biotechnology.
CAB INTERNATIONAL, Wallingford, pp 165–216
Murray JA, Jones A, Godin C, Traas J (2012) System analysis of shoot
apical meristem growth and development: integrating hormonal and
mechanical signalling. Plant Cell 24:3907–3919
Nakamura H, Xue YL, Miyakawa T, Hou F, Qin HM, Fukui K, Shi X, Ito
E, Ito S, Park SH, Miyauchi Y, Asano A, Totsuka N, Ueda T,
Tanokura M, Asami T (2013) Molecular mechanism of strigolactone
perception by DWARF14. Nat Commun 4:2613
Nakata M, Okada K (2013) The leaf adaxial-abaxial boundary and lamina
growth. Plants 2:174–202
Nakayama N, Smith RS, Mandel T, Robinson S, Kimura S, Boudaoud A,
Kuhlemeier C (2012) Mechanical regulation of auxin mediated
growth. Curr Biol 22:1468–1476
Napoli C (1996) Highly branched phenotype of the petunia dad1-1 mu-
tant is reversed by grafting. Plant Physiol 111:27–37
Napoli CA, Beveridge CA, Snowden KC (1999) Reevaluating concepts
of apical dominance and the control of axillary bud outgrowth. Curr
Top Dev Biol 44:127–169
Nardmann J, Werr W (2006) The shoot stem cell niche in angiosperms:
expression patterns of WUS orthologues in rice and maize imply
major modifications in the course of mono- and dicot evolution.
Mol Biol Evol 12:2492–2504
Nath U, Crawford B, Carpenter R, Coen E (2003) Genetic control of
surface curvature. Science 299:1404–1407
Naz AA, Raman S, Martinez CC, Sinha NR, Schmitz G, Theres K (2013)
Trifoliate encodes an MYB transcription factor that modulates leaf
and shoot architecture in tomato. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:
2401–2406
Neuffer MG, Coe EH, Wessler SR (1997) The mutants of maize. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Plainview
Ni J, Gao C, Chen M-S, Pan B-Z, Ye K, Xu Z-F (2015) Gibberellins
promotes shoot branching in the perennial woody plant Jatropha
curcas. Plant Cell Physiol 56:1655–1666
Niwa M, Daimon Y, K-i K, Higo A, Pruneda-Paz JL, Breton G, Mitsuda
N, Kay SA, Ohme-Takagi M, Endo M, Araki T (2013)
BRANCHED1 interact with FLOWERING LOCUS T to repress
the floral transition of the axillary meristems in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 25:1228–1242
Nordstrom A, Tarkowski P, Tarkowska D, Norbaek R, Astot C, Dolezal
K, Sandberg G (2004) Auxin regulation of cytokinin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis thaliana: a factor of potential importance for auxin-
cytokinin-regulated development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:
8039–8044
Notaguchi M, Abe M, Kimura T, Daimon Y, Kobayashi T, Yamaguchi A,
Tomita Y, Dohi K, Mori S, Araki T (2008) Long-distance, graft-
transmissible action of Arabidopsis FLOWERING LOCUS T pro-
tein to promote flowering. Plant Cell Physiol 49:1645–1658
Oikawa T, Kyozuka J (2009) Two-step regulation of LAXPANICLE1
protein accumulation in axillary meristem formation in rice. Plant
Cell 21:1095–1108
Okada K, Ueda J, Komaki MK, Bell CJ, Shimura Y (1991) Requirement
of the auxin polar transport system in early stages of Arabidopsis
floral bud formation. Plant Cell 3:677–684
Otsuga D, DeGuzman B, Prigge MJ, Drews GN, Clark SE (2001)
REVOLUTA regulates meristem initiation at lateral position. Plant
J 25:223–236
Pääbo S (1999) Neolithic genetic engineering. Nature 398:194–195
Pasare SA, Ducreux LJ, Morris WL, Campbell R, Sharma SK,
Roumeliotis E, Kohlen W, van der Krol S, Bramley PM, Roberts
AG, Fraser PD, Taylor MA (2013) The role of the potato (Solanum
tuberosum) CCD8 gene in stolon and tuber development. New
Phytol 198:1108–1120
Patton EE, Willems AR, Tyers M (1998) Combinatorial control in ubiq-
uitin-dependent proteolysis: don’t Skp the F-box hypothesis. Trends
Genet 14:236–243
Pekker I, Alvarez JP, Eshed Y (2005) Auxin response factors mediate
Arabidopsis organ asymmetry via modulation of KANADI activity.
Plant Cell 17:2899–2910
Perales M, Rodriguez K, Snipes S, Yadav RK, Diaz-Mendoza M, Reddy
GV (2016) Threshold-dependent transcriptional discrimination un-
derlies stem cell homeostasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:
E6298–E6306
Petrášek J, Mravec J, Boouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova D,
Wiśniewska J, Tadele Z, Kubeś M, Čovanova M, Dhonukshe P,
Skůpa P, Benková E, Perry L, Křeček P, Lee OR, Fink GR,
Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C, Zažimalová E, Friml J
(2006) PIN proteins perform a rate-limiting function in cellular aux-
in efflux. Science 312:914–918
Pnueli L, Carmel-Goren L, Hareven D, Gutfinger T, Alvarez J, Ganal M,
Zamir D, Lifschitz E (1998) The SELFPRUNING gene of tomato
regulates vegetative to reproductive switching of sympodial meri-
stems and is the ortholog of CEN and TFL1. Development 125:
1979–1989
Pnueli L, Gutfinger T, Hareven D, Ben-Naim O, Ron N, Adir N, Lifschitz
E (2001) Tomato SP-interacting proteins define a conserved signal-
ing system that regulates shoot architecture and flowering. Plant Cell
13:2687–2702
Prusinkiewicz P, Crawford S, Smith RS, Ljung K, Bennett T, Ongaro V,
Leyser O (2009) Control of bud activation by an auxin transport
switch. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:17431–17436
Przemeck GKH, Mattsson J, Hardtke CS, Sung ZR, Berleth T (1996)
Studies on the role of the Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS in
vascular development and plant cell axialization. Planta 200:229–
237
Pugliesi C, Salvini M, Fambrini M (2013) Isolation and molecular anal-
ysis of two R2R3-MYB genes from the sunflower (Helianthus
annuus). Botany 91:731–738
Raatz B, Eicker A, Schmitz G, Fuss E, Müller D, Rossmann S, Theres K
(2011) Specific expression of LATERAL SUPPRESSOR is con-
trolled by an evolutionarily conserved 3′ enhancer. Plant J 68:400–
412
Raman S, Greb T, Peaucelle A, Blein T, Laufs P, Theres K (2008)
Interplay of miR164, CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON genes and
LATERAL SUPPRESSOR controls axillary meristem formation in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 55:65–76
Rameau C, Bertheloot J, Leduc N, Andrieu B, Foucher F, Sakr S (2015)
Multiple pathways regulate shoot branching. Front Plant Sci 5:741
Rayle DL, Cleland RE (1992) The acid growth theory of auxin-induced
cell elongation is alive and well. Plant Physiol 99:1271–1274
Reddy GV, Meyerowitz EM (2005) Stem-cell homeostasis and growth
dynamics can be uncoupled in the Arabidopsis shoot apex. Science
310:663–667
Reinhardt D, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2000) Auxin regulates the
initiation and radial position of plant lateral organs. Plant
Cell 12:507–518
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M,
Traas J, Friml J, Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by
polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260
Reintanz B, Lehnen M, Reichelt M, Gershenzon J, Kowalczyk M,
Sandberg G, Godde M, Uhl R, Palme K (2001) bus, a bushy
Arabidopsis CYP79F1 knockout mutant with abolished synthesis
of short-chain aliphatic glucosinolates. Plant Cell 13:351–367
154
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Rick CM, Butler L (1956) Phytogenetics of the tomato. Adv Genet 8:
267–382
Ritter MK, Padilla CM, Schmidt RJ (2002) The maize mutant barren
stalk1 is defective in axillary meristem development. Am J Bot 89:
203–210
Roodbarkelary F, Du F, Truernit E, Laux T (2015) ZLL/AGO10
maintains shoot meristem stem cells during Arabidopsis em-
bryogenesis by down-regulating ARF2-mediated auxin re-
sponse. BMC Biol 13:74
Rosin FM, Hart JK, Horner HT, Davies PJ, Hannapel DJ (2003)
Overexpression of a Knotted-like homeobox gene of potato alters
vegetative development by decreasing gibberellin accumulation.
Plant Physiol 132:106–117
Rupp HM, Frank M, Werner T, Strand M, Schmülling T (1999) Increased
steady state mRNA levels of the STM and KNAT1 homeobox genes
in cytokinin overproducing Arabidopsis thaliana indicate a role for
cytokinins in the shoot apical meristem. Plant J 18:557–563
Sakamoto T, Kamiya N, Ueguchi-Tanaka M, Iwahori S, Matsuoka M
(2001) KNOX homeodomain protein directly suppresses the expres-
sion of a gibberellin biosynthetic gene in the tobacco shoot apical
meristem. Genes Dev 15:581–590
Salehin M, Bagchi R, Estelle M (2015) SCFTIR1/AFB-based auxin per-
ception: mechanism and role in plant growth and development.
Plant Cell 27:9–19
Sassi M, Vernoux T (2013) Auxin and self-organization at the shoot
apical meristem. J Exp Bot 64:2579–2592
Satoh-Nagasawa N, Nagasawa N, Malcomber S, Sakai H, Jackson D
(2006) A trehalose metabolic enzyme controls inflorescence archi-
tecture in maize. Nature 441:227–230
Scanlon MJ (2003) The polar auxin transport inhibitor N-1-
naphthylphthalamic acid disrupts leaf initiation, KNOX protein reg-
ulation, and formation of leaf margins in maize. Plant Physiol 133:
597–605
Schmitz G, Theres K (2005) Shoot and inflorescence branching. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 8:506–511
Schmitz G, Tillmann E, Carriero F, Fiore C, Cellini F, Theres K (2002)
The tomato Blind gene encodes a MYB transcription factor that
controls the formation of lateral meristems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 99:1064–1069
Schoof H, Lenhard M, Haecker A, Mayer KF, Jürgens G, Laux T (2000)
The stem cell population of Arabidopsis shoot meristems in main-
tained by a regulatory loop between the CLAVATA and WUSCHEL
genes. Cell 100:635–644
Schumacher K, Schmitt T, Rossberg M, Schmitz G, Theres K (1999) The
lateral suppressor (Ls) gene of tomato encodes a new member of the
VHIID protein family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:290–295
Schwab R, Palatnik JF, Riester M, Schommer C, Schmid M, Weigel D
(2005) Specific effects of microRNAs on the plant transcriptome.
Dev Cell 8:517–527
Shani E, Yanai O, Ori N (2006) The role of hormones in shoot apical
meristem function. Curr Opin Plant Biol 9:484–489
Shani E, Burko Y, Ben-Yaakov L, Berger Y, Amsellem Z, Goldshmidt A,
Sharon E, Ori N (2009) Stage-specific regulation of Solanum
lycopersicum leaf maturation by class 1 KNOTTED1-LIKE
HOMEOBOX proteins. Plant Cell 21:3078–3092
Shi B, Zhang C, Tian C, Wang J, Wang Q, Xu T, Xu Y, Ohno C,
Sablowski R, Heisler MG, Theres K, Wang Y, Jiao Y (2016) Two-
step regulation of a meristematic cell population acting in shoot
branching in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genet 12:e1006168
Shimizu-Sato S, Mori H (2001) Control of outgrowth and dormancy in
axillary buds. Plant Physiol 127:1405–1413
Shimizu-Sato S, Tanaka M, Mori H (2009) Auxin–cytokinin interactions
in the control of shoot branching. Plant Mol Biol 69:429–435
Shinohara N, Taylor C, Leyser O (2013) Strigolactone can promote or
inhibit shoot branching by triggering rapid depletion of the auxin
efflux protein PIN1 from the plasma membrane. PLoS Biol 11:
e1001474
Shuai B, Reynaga-Peña CG, Springer PS (2002) The LATERAL ORGAN
BOUNDARIES gene defines a novel, plant-specific gene family.
Plant Physiol 129:747–761
Siegfried KR, Eshed Y, Baum S, Otsuga D, Drews GN, Bowman JL
(1999) Members of the YABBY gene family specify abaxial cell fate
in Arabidopsis. Development 126:4117–4128
Silverstone AL, Mak PY, Martinez EC, Sun TP (1997) The new RGA
locus encodes a negative regulator of gibberellin response in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 146:1087–1099
Sinha NR, Williams RE, Hake S (1993) Overexpression of the maize
homeo box gene, KNOTTED-1, causes a switch from determinate
to indeterminate cell fates. Genes Dev 7:787–795
Skirpan A, Culler AH, Gallavotti A, Jackson D, Cohen JD, McSteen P
(2009) BARREN INFLORESCENCE2 interaction with ZmPIN1a
suggests a role in auxin transport during maize inflorescence devel-
opment. Plant Cell Physiol 50:652–657
Skirpan A, Wu X, McSteen P (2008) Genetic and physical interaction suggest
that BARREN STALK1 is a target of BARREN INFLORESCENCE2
in maize inflorescence development. Plant J 55:787–797
Snow R (1929) The young leaf as the inhibiting organ. New Phytol 28:
345–358
Snowden K, Simkin A, Janssen B, Templeton K, Loucas H, Simons J,
Karunairetnam S, Gleave A, Clark D, Klee H (2005) The decreased
apical dominance1/Petunia hybrida CAROTENOID CLEAVAGE
DIOXYGENASE8 gene affects branch production and plays a role
in leaf senescence, root growth, and flower development. Plant Cell
17:746–759
Somssich M, Je BI, Simon R, Jackson D (2016) CLAVATA-WUSCHEL
signaling in the shoot meristem. Development 143:3238–3248
Sorefan K, Booker J, Haurogne K, Goussot M, Bainbridge K, Foo
E, Chatfield S, Ward S, Beveridge C, Rameau C, Leyser O
(2003) MAX4 and RMS1 are orthologous dioxygenase-like
genes that regulate shoot branching in Arabidopsis and pea.
Genes Dev 17:1469–1474
Souer E, van Houwelingen A, Kloo D, Mol J, Koes R (1996) The no
apical meristem gene of petunia is required for pattern formation in
embryo and flowers and I expressed at meristem and primordial
boundaries. Cell 85:159–170
Soyars CL, James SR, Nimchuk ZL (2016) Ready, aim, shoot:
stem cell regulation of the shoot apical meristem. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 29:163–168
Steeves TA, Sussex IM (1989) Pattern in plant development, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Stirnberg P, Chatfield SP, Leyser HM (1999) AXR1 acts after lateral bud
formation to inhibit lateral bud growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol
121:839–847
Stirnberg P, van De Sande K, Leyser HM (2002) MAX1 and MAX2 con-
trol shoot lateral branching in Arabidopsis. Development 129:1131–
1141
Stirnberg P, Furner IJ, Leyser HMO (2007) MAX2 participates in a SCF
complex which acts locally at the node to suppress shoot branching.
Plant J 50:80–94
Stubbe H (1959) Mutanten der kulturtomate Lycopersicon esculentum
Miller III. Die Kulturpflanzen 7:82–112
Stubbe H (1963) Mutanten der kulturtomate Lycopersicon esculentum
Miller IV. Die Kulturpflanzen 11:603–644
Stubbe H (1964) Mutanten der kulturtomate Lycopersicon esculentum
Miller V. Die Kulturpflanzen 12:121–152
Studer A, Zhao Q, Ross-Ibarra J, Doebley (2011) Identification of a
functional tranposon insertion in the maize domestication gene
tb1. Nat Genet 43:1160–1163
Su H-Y, Liu Y-B, Zhang X-S (2011) Auxin-cytokinin interaction regu-
lates meristem development. Mol Plant 4:616–625
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
155

Sun Y, Fan X-Y, Cao D-M, Tang W, He K, Zhu J-Y, He J-X, Bai MY, Zhu
S, Oh E, Patil S, Kim T-W, Ji H, Wong WH, Rhee Y, Wang Z-Y
(2010) Integration of brassinosteroid signal transduction with the
transcription network for plant growth regulation in Arabidopsis.
Dev Cell 19:765–777
Sussex IM, Kerk NM (2001) The evolution of plant architecture. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 4:33–37
Szemenyei H, Hannon M, Long JA (2008) TOPLESS mediates auxin-
dependent transcriptional repression during Arabidopsis embryo-
genesis. Science 319:1384–1386
Tabuchi H, Zhang Y, Hattori S, Omae M, Shimizu-Sato S, Oikawa T,
Qian Q, Nishimura M, Kitano H, Xie H, Fang X, Yoshida H,
Kyozuka J, Chen F, Sato Y (2011) LAX PANICLE2 of rice encodes
a novel nuclear protein and regulates the formation of axillary mer-
istems. Plant Cell 23:3276–3287
Takada S, Hibara K, Ishida T, Tasaka M (2001) The CUP-SHAPED
COTYLEDON1 gene of Arabidopsis regulates shoot apical meri-
stem formation. Development 128:1127–1135
Takatsuji H (1999) Zinc-finger proteins: the classical zinc finger emerges
in contemporary plant science. Plant Mol Biol 39:1073–1078
Talbert P, Adler H-T, Parks DW, Comai L (1995) The REVOLUTA gene is
necessary for apical meristem development and for limiting cell
divisions in the leaves and stems of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Development 121:2723–2735
Tamaki S, Matsuo S, Wong H, Yokoi S, Shimamoto K (2007) Hd3a
protein is a mobile flowering signal in rice. Science 316:1033–1036
Tamaoki M, Kusaba S, Kano-Murakami Y, Matsuoka M (1997) Ectopic
expression of a tobacco homeobox gene, NTH15, dramatically alters
leaf morphology and hormone levels in transgenic tobacco. Plant
Cell Physiol 38:917–927
Tanaka W, Ohmori Y, Ushijima T, Matsusaka H, Matushita T, Kamamaru
T, Kawano S, Hirano H-Y (2015) Axillary meristem formation in
rice requires the WUSCHEL ortholog TILLER ABSENT1. Plant Cell
27:1173–1184
Tantikanjana T, Yong JWH, Letham DS, Griffith M, Hussain M, Ljung K,
Sandberg G, Sundaresan V (2001) Control of axillary bud initiation
and shoot architecture in Arabidopsis through the SUPERSHOOT
gene. Genes Dev 15:1577–1588
Taylor-Teeples M, Lanctot A, Nemhauser JL (2016) As above, so below:
auxin’s role in lateral organ development. Dev Biol 419:156-164
Teichmann T, Muhr M (2015) Shaping plant architecture. Front Plant Sci
6:233
Thimann KV, Skoog F (1933) Studies on the growth hormone of plants:
III. The inhibiting action of the growth substance on bud develop-
ment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 19:714–716
Tucker DJ (1976) Endogenous growth regulators in relation to side shoot
development in the tomato. New Phytol 77:561–568
Uberti Monassero NG, Viola IL, Welchen E, Gonzalez DH (2013) TCP
transcription factors: architectures of plant form. Biomol Concepts
4:111–127
Umehara M, Hanada A, Yoshida S, Akiyama K, Arite T, Takeda-Kamiya
N, Magome H, Kamiya Y, Shirasu K, Yoneyama K, Yamaguchi S
(2008) Inhibition of shoot branching by new terpenoid plant hor-
mones. Nature 455:195–200
Veit B (2009) Hormone mediated regulation of the shoot apical meristem.
Plant Mol Biol 69:397–408
Veit B, Schmidt RJ, Hake S, Yanofsky MF (1993) Maize floral develop-
ment: new genes and old mutants. Plant Cell 5:1205–1215
Vernoux T, Kronenberger J, Grandjean O, Laufs P, Traas J (2000) PIN-
FORMED 1 regulates cell fate at the periphery of the shoot apical
meristem. Development 127:5157–5165
Vert G, Chory J (2006) Downstream nuclear events in brassinosteroid
signaling. Nature 441:96–100
Vieten A, Sauer M, Brewer PB, Friml J (2007) Molecular and cellular
aspects of auxin-transport-mediated development. Trends Plant Sci
12:160–168
Vogt JHM, Schippers JHM (2015) Setting the PAS, the role of circadian
PAS domain proteins during environmental adaptation in plants.
Front Plant Sci 6:513
Vollbrecht E, Veit B, Sinha N, Hake S (1991) The developmental gene
Knotted-1 is a member of a maize homeobox gene family. Nature
350:241–243
Vollbrecht E, Springer PS, Goh L, Buckler ES IV, Martienssen R (2005)
Architecture of floral branch systems in maize and related grasses.
Nature 436:1119–1126
Vroemen CW, Mordhorst AP, Albrecht C, Kwaaitaal MACJ, de Vries S
(2003) The CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON3 gene is required for
boundary and shoot meristem formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
15:1563–1577
Waites R, Hudson A (1995) Phantastica: a gene required for dorsoven-
trality of leaves in Antirrhinum majus. Development 121:2143–
2154
Waldie T, Hayward A, Beveridge CA (2010) Axillary bud outgrowth in
herbaceous shoots: how do strigolactones fit into the picture? Plant
Mol Biol 73:27–36
Wang R, Estelle M (2014) Diversity and specificity: auxin perception and
signaling through the TIR1/AFB pathway. Curr Opin Plant Biol 21:
51–58
Wang Y, Li J (2008) Molecular basis of plant architecture. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 59:253–279
Wang Y, Sun S, Zhu W, Jia K, Yang H, Wang X (2013) Strigolactone/
MAX2-induced degradation of brassinosteroid transcriptional effec-
tor BES1 regulates shoot branching. Dev Cell 27:681–688
Wang Q, Kohlen W, Rossmann S, Vernoux T, Theres K (2014)
Auxin depletion from the leaf axil conditions competence for
axillary meristem formation in Arabidopsis and tomato. Plant
Cell 26:2068–2079
Wang Y, Wang J, Shi B, Yu T, Qi J, Meyerowitz EM, Jiao Y (2014) The
stem cell niche in leaf axils is established by auxin and cytokinin in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26:2055–2067
Wang Q, Hasson A, Rossmann S, Theres K (2016) Divide et impera:
boundaries shape the plant body and initiate new meristems. New
Phytol 209:485–498
Waters MT, Nelson DC, Scaffidi A, Flematti GR, Sun YK, Dixon KW,
Smith SM (2012) Specialisation within the DWARF14 protein fam-
ily confers distinct responses to karrikins and strigolactones in
Arabidopsis. Development 139:1285–1295
Weir I, Lu J, Cook H, Causier B, Schwarz-Sommer Z, Davies B (2004)
CUPULIFORMIS establishes lateral organ boundaries in
Antirrhinum. Development 131:915–922
Whipple CJ, Kebrom TH, Weber AL, Yang F, Hall D, Meeley R, Schmidt
R, Doebley J, Brutnell TP, Jackson DP (2011) grassy tillers1 pro-
motes apical dominance in maize and responds to shade signals in
the grasses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:E506–E512
Wickson M, Thimann KV (1958) The antagonism of auxin and kinetin in
apical dominance. Physiol Plant 11:62–74
Willems AR, Schwab M, Tyers M (2004) A hitchikr’s guide to the cullin
ubiquitin ligases: SCF and its kin. Bioch Biophys Acta (BBA) - Mol
Cell Res 1695:133–170
Williams W (1960) The effect of selection on the manifold expression of
the “suppressed lateral” gene in the tomato. Heredity 14:285–296
Wolters H, Jürgens G (2009) Survival of the flexibile: hormonal growth
control and adaptation in plant development. Nut Rev Genet 10:
305–317
Wu X, McSteen P (2007) The role of auxin transport during
inflorescence development in maize, Zea mays (Poaceae).
Am J Bot 11:1745–1755
Wu MF, Yamaguchi N, Xiao J, Bargmann B, Estelle M, Sang Y, Wagner
D (2015) Auxin-regulated chromatin switch directs acquisition of
flower primordium founder fate. Elife 4:e09269
156
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157

Yadav RK, Perales M, Gruel J, Girke T, Jönsson H, Reddy GV (2011)
WUSCHEL protein movement mediates stem cell homeostasis in
the Arabidopsis shoot apex. Genes Dev 25:2025–2030
Yadav RK, Tavakkoli M, Reddy GV (2010) WUSCHEL mediates stem
cell homeostasis by regulating stem cell number and patterns of cell
division and differentiation of stem cell progenitors. Development
137:3581–3589
Yamaguchi N, Wu MF, Winter CM, Berns MC, Nole-Wilson S,
Yamaguchi A, Coupland G, Krizek BA, Wagner D (2013) A mo-
lecular framework for auxin-mediated initiation of flower primordia.
Dev Cell 24:271–282
Yanai O, Shani E, Dolezal K, Tarkowski P, Sablowski R, Sandberg G,
Samach A, Ori N (2005) Arabidopsis KNOX1 proteins activate
cytokinin biosynthesis. Curr Biol 15:1566–1571
Yang M, Jiao Y (2016) Regulation of axillary meristem initiation by
transcription factors and plant hormones. Front Plant Sci 2016:
00183
Yang DH, Yun PY, Park SY, Plaha P, Lee DS, Lee IS, Hwang YS, Kim
YA, Lee J, Han BH, Lee SY, Shu EJ, Lim YP (2005) Cloning,
characterization and expression of a lateral suppressor-like gene
from chrysanthemum (Dendranthema grandiflorum Kitamura).
Plant Physiol Biochem 43:1044–1051
Yang F, Wang Q, Schmitz G, Müller D, Theres K (2012) The bHLH
protein ROX acts in concert with RAX1 and LAS to modulate
axillary meristem formation in Arabidopsis. Plant J 71:61–70
Yeager AF (1927) Determinate growth in the tomato. J Heredity 18:263–
265
Yin Y, Wang ZY, Mora-Garcia S, Li J, Yoshida S, Asami T, Chory J
(2002) BES1 accumulates in the nucleus in response to
brassinosteroids to regulate gene expression and promote stem elon-
gation. Cell 109:181–191
Žádníková P, Simon R (2014) How boundaries control plant develop-
ment. Curr Opin Biol 17:116–125
Zhang Y, van Dijk AD, Scaffidi A, Flematti GR, Hofmann M, Charnikhova
T, Verstappen F, Hepworth J, van der Krol S, Leyser O, Smith SM,
Zwanenburg B, Al-Babili S, Ruyter-Spira C, Bouwmeester HJ (2014)
Rice cytochrome P450 MAX1 homologs catalyze distinct steps in
strigolactone biosynthesis. Nat Chem Biol 10:1028–1033
Zhou F, Lin Q, Zhu L, Ren Y, Zhou K, Shabek N, Wu F, Mao H, Dong W,
Gan L, Ma W, Gao H, Chen J, Yang C, Wang D, Tan J, Zhang X,
Guo X, Wang J, Jiang L, Liu X, Chen W, Chu J, Yan C, Ueno K, Ito
S, Asami T, Cheng Z, Lei C, Zhai H, Wu C, Wang H, Zheng N, Wan
J (2013) D14-SCF(D3)-dependent degradation of D53 regulates
strigolactone signalling. Nature 504:406–410
Dev Genes Evol (2017) 227:129–157
157

