Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Primates 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10329-023-01056-x
NEWS AND PERSPECTIVES
Great apes reach momentary altered mental states by spinning
Adriano R. Lameira1   · Marcus Perlman2 
Received: 21 August 2022 / Accepted: 2 February 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Among animals, humans stand out in their consummate propensity to self-induce altered states of mind. Archaeology, history 
and ethnography show these activities have taken place since the beginnings of civilization, yet their role in the emergence and 
evolution of the human mind itself remains debatable. The means through which modern humans actively alter their experi-
ence of self and reality frequently depend on psychoactive substances, but it is uncertain whether psychedelics or other drugs 
were part of the ecology or culture of pre-human ancestors. Moreover, (nonhuman) great apes in captivity are currently being 
retired from medical research, rendering comparative approaches thus far impracticable. Here, we circumvent this limitation 
by harnessing the breadth of publicly available YouTube data to show that apes engage in rope spinning during solitary play. 
When spinning, the apes achieved speeds sufficient to alter self-perception and situational awareness that were comparable 
to those tapped for transcendent experiences in humans (e.g. Sufi whirling), and the number of revolutions spun predicted 
behavioural evidence for dizziness. Thus, spinning serves as a self-sufficient means of changing body-mind responsiveness 
in hominids. A proclivity for such experiences is shared between humans and great apes, and provides an entry point for the 
comparative study of the mechanisms, functions, and adaptive value of altered states of mind in human evolution.
Keywords  Altered mental states · Consciousness · Great apes · Human evolution · Origins of the mind · Spinning
Introduction
Seeking altered mental states is seemingly a human uni-
versal, historically and culturally (Slingerland 2021; Biwer 
et al. 2022). The biological and behavioural precursors of 
such experiences are, however, unclear (MacKenna 1992; 
Pollan 2019), notably because it is challenging to confidently 
confirm if substance use was viable within the highly diver-
sified ecological and cultural human paleobackdrop (Berg-
ström et al. 2021). Whether altered state experiences within 
the hominid family shaped the emergence and evolution of 
the modern human mind remains one of the major and most 
thought-provoking unknowns in cognitive science.
Wild primates consume fermented foods with alcoholic 
content (reviewed in Hockings et al. 2015; Amato et al. 
2021). Consumption of these foods typically depends on nat-
ural availability and the opportunistic use of scarce resources 
(Hockings et al. 2015). Though consumption of fermented 
foods by primates suggests that they may indeed experience 
“drunkenness”, consumption may be primarily driven by 
the high caloric content of alcohol, and thus a side-effect 
and “unavoidable consequence of frugivory” (Hockings 
et al. 2015). Medical research has also focused on drug- and 
alcohol-related behaviours in primates (Grant and Bennett 
2003; Wakeford et al. 2018), but has primarily focused on 
substance abuse and addiction, where subjects are externally 
administered these substances. Evolutionary interpretation 
is, thus, tenuous at best. Here, we propose and explore the 
use of a new comparative behavioural model for the study of 
proactive divergence from normal waking states in human 
evolution: the act of spinning.
Apart from sensing sound (Ghazanfar and Hauser 2001), 
the vertebrate inner ear monitors and senses changes in 
body motion, orientation, position, and velocity (Lowen-
stein 1948). Spinning, i.e. rapidly rotating around one’s body 
axis, mechanically disrupts inner ear homeostasis and sends 
 *	 Adriano R. Lameira 
	
adriano.lameira@warwick.ac.uk
 *	 Marcus Perlman 
	
m.perlman@bham.ac.uk
1	
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, 
Coventry, UK
2	
Department of English Language and Linguistics, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

	
Primates
1 3
nerve signals to the brain that conflict with those from auto-
matic eye movements (Nigmatullina et al. 2015). In humans, 
this neuronal cross-signalling prompts the perception of a 
whirling world, along with dizziness, light-headedness, head 
rushes, vertigo, elation, and other altered states of percep-
tion, mood, and consciousness. Averting these symptoms 
when spinning at high or sustained speeds requires extensive 
dedicated training (e.g. professional dancers, circus perform-
ers, astronauts). More generally, in untrained neurotypical 
humans, spinning is proactively tapped for rapture (e.g. by 
means of playground spinner bowls, merry-go-rounds, car-
ousels) and collective or spiritual experiences (e.g. by Sufi 
whirling dervishes). In autistic children and adults, spinning 
is also used as a self-stimulating behaviour to control sen-
sory input or intentionally block out external input (British 
National Autistic Society). Homology in inner ear anatomy 
among hominids (Quam et al. 2015; Braga et al. 2017) and 
relatively similar body size (among primates) suggest that 
similar spinning behaviours may engender similar neuro-
physiological effects in nonhuman great apes (hereafter, 
‘great apes’) and humans. Thus, ancestral individuals, irre-
spective of whether they had access to psychotropic drugs, 
may have had the ability to self-induce altered states of pro-
prioception and awareness by spinning.
Methods
To test and provide a proof of concept for the assumption 
that spinning induces altered mental states in great apes, and 
potentially did so as well in human ancestors, we searched 
YouTube (Alphabet Inc.) for publicly posted and publicly 
available videos of great apes spinning. We used image-
based measures to quantify rotational speeds and rotational 
duration (see Supplementary Methods). We focused on rope 
spinning (Byrne et al. 2017), which in our sample mainly 
occurred as solitary play without evident causes or goals 
beyond the act itself. Ropes—or rope-like items like vines—
likely enable apes to achieve faster free rotations and longer 
rotation lengths, allowing us to explore the physiological and 
motoric limits that great apes can experience autonomously. 
Because the ear and eye anatomy underlying the neurophysi-
ology of spinning are fundamentally the same across body 
sizes of the same species, we had no prior expectations 
about differences in rotational speed, rotational length or 
their respective effects between, for instance, adolescents 
and adults or males and females.
We then compared ape spinning speeds with expert 
human spinning in different dance and traditional styles, 
namely, self-revolving pirouettes performed by professional 
ballet and Ukrainian hopak dancers, Sufi whirling dervishes, 
and suspended spinning rope acts by circus artists. These 
acts require extensive training and dedicated practice to 
suppress the neurophysiological effects associated with 
rapid and/or prolonged spinning that untrained individuals 
would normally suffer. In the case of Sufi whirling, spinning 
is deliberately used to induce states of mystic experience 
and spiritual trance. We used these cultural traditions from 
around the world as baselines for rotational speeds that can 
be confidently assumed to significantly disrupt the normal 
waking state in humans and, due to biological and behav-
ioural homology and similar body size, in great apes.
Results
We uncovered 40 videos containing footage of great apes 
engaged in 132 bouts of rope spinning, for a total of 709 
revolutions (Fig. 1A, B; see videos in Supplementary Meth-
ods). These videos included footage of orangutans from at 
least seven different identified sites (plus four unidentified 
sites); gorillas from at least seven identified sites, including 
two identified sites in the wild (plus three unidentified sites); 
chimpanzees from two identified sites; and bonobos from 
four identified sites. Great apes spun, on average, 5.4 revo-
lutions per bout, for an average of 3.3 consecutive spinning 
bouts, at an average rotational velocity of 1.43 revolutions/
second (rps). The longest bout was 28 revolutions; the fastest 
sustained rotational speed (for five spins) was 3.3 rps; and 
the fastest single revolution was 5 rps; all of which clearly 
indicated that spinning is not an “erratic” behaviour.
Linear mixed modelling (see Supplementary Methods) 
indicated that rotational velocity was proportional to revo-
lution count [linear mixed model (LMM) analysis of vari-
ance, F(1, 102.34) = 31.101, P < 0.001], with higher speeds 
being achieved with more revolutions (Fig. 1D). There 
were differences in rotational speed depending on con-
tact with the ground [F(2, 133.65) = 4.003, P = 0.02] and the 
number of grip holds during spinning [F(1, 136.62) = 4.783, 
P = 0.03], with specific types of grip allowing longer spins 
(Fig. 1D), tentatively because certain positions may afford 
different moments of inertia. There was a significant effect 
of genus [F(2, 38.92) = 7.761, P = 0.001], with orangutans spin-
ning at significantly faster speeds than gorillas (t =  – 3.082, 
P = 0.004; Fig. 1C).
For comparison, an LMM that included data on humans 
(revolutions, n = 1157, nbouts = 152, nvideos = 48) did not indi-
cate differences in rotational speed, either between great apes 
and humans [F(1, 41.30) = 3.355, P = 0.074] or between great 
apes and each specific traditional style [F(4, 36.69) = 1.949, 
P = 0.123] (Fig. 1C).
Total number of revolutions in the great apes was influ-
enced by their contact with the ground [F(2, 700.57) = 23.516, 
P < 0.001], with more  support leveraging more revo-
lutions (Fig.  1E). There was a strong trend for genus 
[F(2, 37.99) = 3.163, P = 0.054], with orangutans spinning for 

Primates	
1 3
more revolutions per bout than gorillas [t = 2.312, P = 0.026; 
Fig. 1E]. Crucially, when apes spun for a higher number 
of revolutions, they were more likely to let go of the rope 
or let it go slack at the end of the bout [F(1, 693.25) = 81.733, 
P < 0.001], suggesting that they experienced dizziness. 
Closer inspection of the 43 cases when individuals released 
the rope revealed further evidence of dizziness: in 30 of the 
bouts, the animal immediately sat or laid down; in seven of 
the bouts, the animal moved a short distance and then sat 
or laid down; and in only six bouts did the animal keep its 
balance and remain on its feet.
Discussion
Our findings show that great apes spin at speeds that induce 
physiological “highs” in humans. In untrained humans, spin-
ning at similar rates inescapably produces severe dizziness 
(we invite the reader to try the observed average rotational 
speed, length or number of bouts performed by great apes 
reported here for instant validation). Notably, by comparing 
“recreational” spinning behaviour of apes to professional 
spinning in humans, our analyses were inherently conserva-
tive. Our findings, while exploratory, provide a proof of 
Fig. 1A–E   Great ape spinning compared. A and B: Exemplar cases of 
rope spinning by an orangutan and a gorilla, respectively. C: Com-
parison of rotational speed between great ape genera, between apes 
and humans, and between apes and traditional human styles. D: 
Behavioural correlates of rotational speed between great apes. E: 
Number of revolutions between great apes and their behavioural cor-
relates. Box plots represent the median (thick horizontal line) and 
25–75% interquartile range (upper and lower horizontal lines); whisk-
ers represent lowest/highest value within 1.5 times the interquartile 
range; dots represent outliers. Graphic representations based on raw 
data; denoted differences based on model estimates. * P < 0.05, ** 
P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, zero no statistically significant difference

	
Primates
1 3
concept and a new charter for the study and comparison 
of spinning and altered mental states between humans and 
great apes.
Our preliminary findings point to several directions for 
the future study of spinning behaviour in apes and other spe-
cies. One is to investigate questions related to evo-ecological 
constraints on spinning. For example, differences in spinning 
between orangutans (which are mostly arboreal) and gorillas 
(which are mostly ground-dwelling) could suggest neuro-
logical adaptation against motion sickness or vertigo (with 
faster speeds/more revolutions required for arboreal species 
to reach dizziness), similar to the reduction of the vestibular 
cerebellum observed in ballerinas and figure skaters (Nig-
matullina et al. 2015). Differences in certain anatomical fea-
tures between species may also help them leverage more or 
fewer revolutions when spinning (e.g. the gorillas never used 
foot grips, while the orangutans often did).
Our findings also raise interesting questions concerning 
whether this behaviour is performed more frequently by a 
particular age class or sex, for example, as part of play by 
juveniles or as part of male display. Because this behaviour 
in great apes appears to be idiosyncratic, performed by cer-
tain individuals rather than occurring across populations, 
we anticipate that answering these questions will pose an 
empirical challenge. If attainable, such effort could help pro-
vide new insight into the motivation for spinning behaviour 
and its ontogeny.
More conclusive comparisons between species, as well as 
between age classes and sexes, could be made possible by 
controlling for the proportions in which the relevant groups 
occur in captivity. For example, our findings suggest that 
bonobos—who are relatively scarce in captivity compared 
to chimpanzees, but were conversely well represented in our 
dataset—may more frequently engage in rope spinning than 
their sister species. Unexpectedly high rates of occurrence in 
a species with relatively small population sizes in captivity 
could suggest a higher predisposition to engaging in behav-
iour that leads to altered states.
Comparisons of captive and wild populations based on 
more data could also inform whether this behaviour is more 
likely to occur in animals in captivity, where they might 
engage in spinning and experience the ensuing state of dizzi-
ness as a way of overcoming low environmental stimulation 
or boredom. However, comparisons using data on wild indi-
viduals will probably be limited because recordings of them 
are rare and idiosyncratic (e.g. footage of wild mountain 
gorillas was present in our data, though this was the result 
of video coverage of some gorilla groups as a consequence 
of tourists filming them).
Although beyond the scope of analysis here, we have also 
observed videos of rope spinning by other primate species, 
including gibbons and monkeys. Future research may seek to 
determine whether other primates spin as frequently as great 
apes and in such a way that elicits dizziness and altered men-
tal states. Increasing phylogenetic distance will, however, 
reduce interpretative power based on the physiological and 
cognitive homology of these species with humans.
To establish clear comparative benchmarks for future ape-
human comparisons, it would be relevant to determine the 
minimum spinning speeds and lengths of time engaged in 
spinning necessary to induce altered states in humans, and 
how training affects and extends these limits. Ethnographic 
and anthropological studies of how children and adults use 
spinning and other non-pharmacological means to deliber-
ately disrupt body and situational awareness (e.g. swings, 
slides, rollercoasters, bungee jumping) could provide com-
plementary information about the role that these experiences 
play in our lives and, by extension, those of our ancestors 
over evolutionary time. Interestingly, some accredited zoos 
are reported to have re-used equipment from children’s play-
grounds as enclosure enrichment for apes (R. Shumaker, 
personal communication). Widespread adoption of devices 
that make up typical children’s playgrounds for use in great 
ape facilities could provide dynamic stimulation and motoric 
challenge to individuals, while potentially helping to reveal 
more comprehensively, and in a controlled fashion, how and 
why great apes engage in mind-altering behaviours.
Concluding remarks
The findings reported here show that, like humans, great 
apes voluntarily seek and engage in altered experiences 
of self-perception and situational awareness. In our last 
common ancestors, these behaviours probably enhanced 
the nervous system and musculature (Byrne 2015), which 
helped to expand the range of action patterns, but also 
momentarily altered the inner world, range and patterns of 
perception, emotions, and (self- and other-) awareness of 
these individuals. The empirical evidence presented here 
provides some grounding for the intriguing possibility that 
the self-induced altered mental states of our ancestors could 
have shaped aspects of modern human behaviour and cogni-
tion, as well as mood manipulation and mental wellbeing.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10329-​023-​01056-x.
Acknowledgements  We thank associate editor Cat Hobaiter and two 
anonymous reviewers for feedback on an earlier version of this paper.
Data availability  All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the 
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

Primates	
1 3
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Amato KR, Chaves ÓM, Mallott EK et al (2021) Fermented food con-
sumption in wild nonhuman primates and its ecological drivers. 
Am J Phys Anthropol 175:513–530. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ajpa.​
24257
Bergström A, Stringer C, Hajdinjak M et al (2021) Origins of modern 
human ancestry. Nature 590:229–237. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41586-​021-​03244-5
Biwer ME, Álvarez WY, Bautista SL, Jennings J (2022) Hallucinogens, 
alcohol and shifting leadership strategies in the ancient Peruvian 
Andes. Antiquity. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15184/​aqy.​2021.​177
Braga J, Bouvier P, Dherbey J et al (2017) Echoes from the past: new 
insights into the early hominin cochlea from a phylo-morpho-
metric approach. CR Palevol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​crpv.​2017.​
02.​003
Byrne RW (2015) The what as well as the why of animal fun. Curr Biol 
25:R2-4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cub.​2014.​09.​008
Byrne R, Cartmill E, Genty E et al (2017) Great ape gestures: inten-
tional communication with a rich set of innate signals. Anim Cogn 
20:755–769. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10071-​017-​1096-4
Ghazanfar AA, Hauser MD (2001) The auditory behaviour of primates: 
a neuroethological perspective. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:712–720
Grant KA, Bennett AJ (2003) Advances in nonhuman primate alcohol 
abuse and alcoholism research. Pharmacol Ther 100:235–255. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pharm​thera.​2003.​08.​004
Hockings KJ, Nicola B-M, Carvalho S et al (2015) Tools to tipple: 
ethanol ingestion by wild chimpanzees using leaf-sponges. Royal 
Soc Open Sci 2:150150. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsos.​150150
Lowenstein O (1948) Oscillographic analysis of the non-acoustic func-
tions of the vertebrate ear. Nature 161:652–654. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​16165​2a0
MacKenna T (1992) Food of the gods: the search for the original tree 
of knowledge: a radical history of plants, drugs, and human evolu-
tion. Rider, London
Nigmatullina Y, Hellyer PJ, Nachev P et al (2015) The neuroanatomi-
cal correlates of training-related perceptuo-reflex uncoupling in 
dancers. Cereb Cortex 25:554–562. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​cer-
cor/​bht266
Pollan M (2019) How to change your mind: the new science of psych-
edelics. Penguin, London
Quam R, Martínez I, Rosa M et al (2015) Early hominin auditory 
capacities. Sci Adv 1:e1500355. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​
15003​55
Slingerland E (2021) Drunk: how we sipped, danced, and stumbled 
our way to civilization, 1st edn. Little, Brown Spark, New York
Wakeford AGP, Morin EL, Bramlett SN et al (2018) A review of non-
human primate models of early life stress and adolescent drug 
abuse. Neurobiol Stress 9:188–198. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
ynstr.​2018.​09.​005
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

