The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
Douglas Walton • Nanning Zhang
Published online: 12 October 2012
 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2012
Abstract
In place of the traditional epistemological view of knowledge as justiﬁed
true belief we argue that artiﬁcial intelligence and law needs an evidence-based epis-
temology according to which scientiﬁc knowledge is based on critical analysis of evi-
dence using argumentation. This new epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence (ESE) models
scientiﬁc knowledge as achieved through a process of marshaling evidence in a scientiﬁc
inquiry that results in a convergence of scientiﬁc theories and research results. We show
how a dialogue interface of argument from expert opinion, along with its set of critical
questions, provides the argumentation component of the ESE. It enables internal sci-
entiﬁc knowledge to be translated over into a wider arena in which individual nonexpert
citizens and groups can make use of it. The external component shows how evidence is
presented and used in a legal procedural setting that includes fact-ﬁnding, weighing the
credibility of expert witnesses, and critical questioning of arguments. The paper critically
reviews the standards of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence using the ESE.
Keywords
Scientiﬁc evidence  Evidentialist epistemology  Argumentation 
Expert opinion testimony  Standards of admissibility
D. Walton (&)
Assumption University Chair in Argumentation Studies, Centre for Research in Reasoning,
Argumentation and Rhetoric (CRRAR), University of Windsor, 2500 University Ave. W., Windsor,
ON N9B 3Y1, Canada
e-mail: dwalton@uwindsor.ca
URL: www.dougwalton.ca
N. Zhang
The Institute of Evidence Law and Forensic Science, Hunan Tiandiren Law Firm, China University
of Political Science and Law, 15/F, Wenhua Building, No. 139, Shaoshan Northern Road, Changsha
410011, Hunan Province, China
e-mail: nanningzhang@126.com; naningzhang@126.com; naningzhang@hotmail.com
URL: http://zhangnanning.960law.com/; www.titanlaw.com
123
Artif Intell Law (2013) 21:173–219
DOI 10.1007/s10506-012-9132-9

1 Introduction
Laudan (2006, 20) tells us that although theorists of knowledge routinely examined
truth-seeking practices in science and mathematics, legal epistemology scarcely
exists as a recognized area of inquiry. He underscores this point by entitling his
book Truth, Error and Criminal Law: an Essay in Legal Epistemology. On the other
hand, issues of legal epistemology are coming more and more to the forefront in
artiﬁcial intelligence and law, with the advent of argumentation models of evidential
reasoning in law. Argumentation systematically adopts what would be called from
the viewpoint of traditional epistemology a skeptical point of view, holding that
knowledge of the truth is hard to come by under conditions of uncertainty,
inconsistency and employment of defeasible arguments of the kind typically used in
a trial setting, like argument from expert opinion and argument from witness
testimony.
According to Allen (1994, 633), ‘‘the deﬁning trait of litigation is decision under
uncertainty’’. A second trait is that the decision is reached by an uninvolved third
party that has to evaluate reported events rather than by having direct access to the
events themselves as they happen. These traits suggest that an epistemology
requiring true belief is inapplicable in a realistic way to the evaluation of evidence
that takes place at trial. As Allen (1994, 633) put it, ‘‘there is often a considerable
distance between the actual event and the decision about that event’’. To deal with
evaluation of evidence in this kind of situation, an epistemology based on justiﬁable
acceptance is much more appropriate than one based on justiﬁed true belief. What is
required is an epistemology based on evidence rather than one requiring a ﬁnding to
be a true belief. Stein (2005, 119) reinforces this view in his contention that fact-
ﬁnders make their ﬁndings under uncertainty by determining probabilities of the
relevant facts, probabilities not based on the notion of Pascalian probability, but on
a different notion of probability called Baconian probability by Cohen (1977).
Baconian probability is evidence-based, and therefore has different rules for
combining propositions evidentially than those used in the Bayesian calculus with
its rules for negation and conjunction.
According to the traditional epistemological theory, knowledge is deﬁned as
justiﬁed true belief. According to the new view of evidence-based epistemology
proposed by Cohen, Allen and Stein, because of the defeasible nature of evidential
reasoning, both in science and in law, knowledge is evidence-based but inherently
prone to the possibility of error. On this view, even in science we can never say with
complete certainty that a scientiﬁc hypothesis has been proven beyond all doubt
(Walton 2011). Hence the propositions supported by evidence, or proved to be true
according to standards of proof, are accepted as true, rather than being believed to
be true. The matter of which philosophical framework to adopt, the traditional view
of knowledge as justiﬁed true belief or the more recent view of knowledge as
evidence-based argumentation, has great signiﬁcant implications for the ﬁeld of
artiﬁcial intelligence and law. This is especially the case since argumentation has
become a central model for evidential reasoning in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence
and law (Bench-Capon 1997). Argumentation as a model of rational thinking works
by examining the pro and contra evidence-based arguments on both sides of an
174
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

issue, under conditions of uncertainty and lack of knowledge insufﬁcient to prove
the disputed claim beyond all doubt. The new technologies being developed in
artiﬁcial intelligence and law, based on the argumentation model, ﬁt well with new
evidence-based view of epistemology. As will be shown in this paper, artiﬁcial
intelligence and law can both make contributions to, and proﬁt from, such an
acceptance-based and evidence-based theory of knowledge.
The scholars who dominated evidence scholarship in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century, for example John H. Wigmore, were the architects of the modern law of
evidence. They were examining the foundations of knowledge, but they were primarily
practitioners whose primary work and interests were not in building epistemological
theories for philosophy (Tillers 1989, 1226). On these foundations, the grounds of fact-
ﬁnding can be divided into two parts: epistemic grounds and non-epistemic grounds.
The non-epistemic grounds comprises non-epistemic policy values, including the
efﬁcient use of resources, the protection of the rights of those accused of a crime, and
various other social goods, such as the sanctity of marriage (spouses cannot be made to
testify against one another) or preserving good relations with other nations (diplomats
cannot generally be convicted of crimes, however inculpatory the evidence) (Laudan
2006, 2). We will show in this paper, however, that the trial is fundamentally an
epistemological event (Pardo 2005, 853) in which scientiﬁc knowledge, itself based on
evidence, is re-used as legal evidence. But there are some scholars who take different
viewpoints. For example, Redmayne argues that ‘‘questions about inquiry are not really
epistemological at all’’ (Redmayne 2003, 853). Because the factual truths in dispute
often go beyond what the fact-ﬁnders can be expected to know, tribunals have come to
increasingly depend upon scientiﬁc evidence for determining the facts in the cases. In
the January 22, 1995 issue of New Law Journal, William T. Pizzi remarked that in the
United States trial by jury is becoming trial by expert (Pizzi 1995, 82). We could go so
far as to say without hyperbole that seeking truth by using scientiﬁc evidence is
becoming the main way to determine the facts in dispute in modern litigation. The
problem of the epistemological structure of scientiﬁc evidence is posed by these
observations (Kesan 1995, 2006).
We provide an epistemological model of scientiﬁc evidence that is different from
the traditional approach that has dominated analytical philosophy in the second half
of the twentieth century, and still does. Our approach is different from the
traditional justiﬁed-belief-plus approach in that it looks at how a proposition is
proved as knowledge in two settings, science and law, and how knowledge is
transferred as evidence from the one truth-ﬁnding procedural setting to the other.
Instead of taking epistemology to be a purely theoretical philosophical subject, we
take it to be a practical multidisciplinary subject that deﬁnes knowledge in the
context of an established procedural setting that purports to be able to prove or
disprove hypotheses and claims. If the study of how scientiﬁc evidence should be
evaluated becomes a multidisciplinary subject (Beecher-Monas 2007) then the area
of study we call the epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence (ESE) should become an
interdisciplinary ﬁeld of research concerned with science, law, philosophy of
science, artiﬁcial intelligence, logic and epistemology. Based on this presumption,
the theoretical background of the ESE is introduced in Sect. 2. Section 3 analyzes
the structure of the ESE.
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
175
123

2 The theoretical background of the ESE
2.1 Science and law: two types of epistemic models for truth-seeking
In current litigation in which fact-ﬁnding is more and more dependent on ever-
changing scientiﬁc evidence, people are more likely to commit epistemological
questions to the scientiﬁc community’s care. But, in fact, there are discernible
differences between the epistemological principles that scientists use during their
scientiﬁc research and discovery and principles that fact-ﬁnders use when they
evaluate scientiﬁc evidence during the fact-ﬁnding process. It can be said that both the
legal system and science aim at seeking truth, but they do so in very different ways:
truths are determined by advocacy in the legal system and discovered by inquiry in
science. An inquiry is a very different enterprise from advocacy: a scientiﬁc inquiry
represents an attempt to discover the truth of some questions. The obligation of a
scientist is to seek out all the evidence he can, to assess its worth as impartially as
possible, and to draw conclusions only if the evidence warrants doing so. Advocacy is
an attempt to make a case for the truth of some claim and the obligation of an attorney is
to seek out evidence favoring the proposition in question, while the obligation of trier
is to judge which side has met its burden of persuasion (Haack 2003, 207). But it should
be noted that the course of fact-ﬁnding based on scientiﬁc evidence never ends, even
though it can end in knowledge once scientiﬁc acceptance has converged, whereas the
truth in legal process has to be proved within relatively short time frame.
2.1.1 The carrier of scientiﬁc truth: scientiﬁc knowledge
As a starting point, the term ‘science’ can be used as meaning ‘‘systematized
knowledge derived from observation, study and experimentation carried on in order
to determine the nature or principles of what is being studied’’.1 Science is
methodology, a practical way of ﬁnding reliable answers to questions we may ask
about the world around us. It is also deﬁned as ‘‘the use of evidence to construct
testable explanations and predictions of natural phenomena, as well as the
knowledge generated through this process’’ (NASIM 2007, 10). In other words,
science is a particular way of knowing about the world. In science, explanations are
restricted to those that can be inferred from conﬁrmable data—the results obtained
through observations and experiments that can be substantiated by other scientists.
Anything that can be observed or measured is amenable to scientiﬁc investigation.
Explanations that cannot be based on empirical evidence are not a part of science.2
Scientiﬁc activity derives from observation, but observation alone could not result
in scientiﬁc knowledge. To some extent scientiﬁc knowledge is not established by
constructing but by discovering scientiﬁc facts. And scientiﬁc discovery that mostly
begins from inspiration and intuition works as a logical process of putting forward
hypotheses, collecting explanation and testing hypotheses. The skeptical method of
1 Webster’s New World Dictionary 1305.
2 Working Group on Teaching Evolution, National Academy of Sciences, Teaching About Evolution and
the Nature of Science 27 (1998).
176
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

science plays a very important role in scientiﬁc discovery. One of the great strengths
of scientiﬁc practice is what can be called the ‘‘withering skepticism’’ that is usually
applied to theoretical ideas, especially in physics. Scientists subject hypotheses to
observational tests and reject those that fail. Good experimenters are irredeemable
skeptics who thoroughly enjoy refuting the more speculative ideas of their
theoretical colleagues. Through experience, they know how to reduce bias and make
valid judgments that withstand the tests of time. Hypotheses that run this harrowing
gauntlet and survive acquire a certain hardness or reality that mere fashions never
achieve. This quality is what distinguishes science from the arts (Riordan 2003, 51).
In scientiﬁc practice, the boundary between fact and conjecture is not so clear.
Pierce has pointed out ‘‘when a man desires ardently to know the truth, his ﬁrst
effort will be to imagine what that truth can be…there is, after all, nothing but
imagination that can ever supply him an inkling of truth’’ (Peirce 1932, 46).
The traditional scientiﬁc viewpoint that had been almost generally accepted by
contemporary scientists claims that the aim of science is to pursue and discover the
truth behind nature and formulate a theory which tells us how everything is governed.
There are scholars who think that science aims at a careful, descriptive, and
explanatory account of experience (Shreves 1919, 566–572).3 Then, what is truth?
Aristotle said ‘‘to say of what is that it is, and to say of what is not that it is not, is true’’
(Aristotle 1831, 7).4 The Enlightenment view is that truth can be discovered by using
scientiﬁc methods to assess facts obtained by empirical evidence.
Traditional epistemology in western analytical philosophy has long accepted the
principle that knowledge implies truth. This can be called the veracity principle, the
statement that knowledge bases contain only truths: if p is known then p is true. The
veracity principle is so widely accepted in epistemology that many epistemologists
feel that rejecting it would be unthinkable. Nicholas Rescher wrote that holding the
linkage between knowledge and truth is merely contingent ‘‘inﬂicts violence on the
concept of knowledge as it actually operates in discourse’’ (Rescher 2003, 10). He
describes the sentence ‘an agent knows that proposition p but p is not true’ as
‘‘senseless’’. However, the veracity principle is a problem for modeling the kind of
reasoning used in scientiﬁc inquiry. The reason is that knowledge in a scientiﬁc inquiry
always has to be regarded as defeasible. This consequence follows from Popper’s
principle of falsiﬁability, which tells us that any genuine scientiﬁc hypothesis should
be subject to continued testing, and if it is falsiﬁed by such testing, it must be given up
as part of scientiﬁc knowledge. For these reasons, Popper held that the best a successful
scientiﬁc inquiry can do is to approximate the truth. Although he held that scientiﬁc
knowledge is objective, he viewed scientiﬁc inquiry as a process of critical
examination during a procedure that uses evidence to move forward to tentative
acceptance of a scientiﬁc theory. Popper held that the procedure of conjecture and
refutation begins with the formulation of a problem, goes through a process of
marshaling evidence, then goes through a process of ‘‘severe critical examination’’ of
the conjecture in a critical discussion that compares competing hypotheses (Popper
1972, 164). This inquiry procedure (Popper 1963, 312) is seen as a trial and error
3 These scholars think that science aims at a descriptive and explanatory account of experience.
4 Aristotle (1831, 7, 1011b26–8).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
177
123

process that goes through degrees of improvement. At its closing stage it reaches an
outcome that is provisionally acceptable as proved, once the discussion is settled by
the scientiﬁc community.
Peirce also took a realistic view of scientiﬁc inquiry holding that it takes place in
a ﬁnite amount of time with limited resources for collecting evidence. Hence the
aim should not be that of actually reaching the truth, and thereby establishing
knowledge of the kind that is ﬁxed, but only that of a ﬁrm settling of opinion that is
still open to revision. Peirce wrote (1984, 354) that the ‘‘only legitimate aim of
reasoning is to ascertain what decision would be agreed upon if the question were
sufﬁciently ventilated’’. Taking the opposed view, that truth should be the result of a
successful inquiry, Peirce believed would ‘‘block the path of inquiry because our
minds would be closed, and hence, we would never be motivated enough to inquire’’
(1931, 135). Clearly acceptance of the veracity axiom that knowledge requires truth
is not consistent with Peirce’s view of the inquiry. He warned us not to infer from
the premise that we can be substantially certain about many things to the conclusion
that we ‘‘perfectly know when we know’’ (Misak 1987, 260). It is a corollary that
the iteration axiom does not work in the Peirce an inquiry either. Maintaining the
veracity condition is at odds with the important role that defeasible reasoning plays
in the process of evaluating claims to knowledge in an inquiry.
Peirce’s view of scientiﬁc knowledge and inquiry strongly appears to be
inconsistent with the principle that knowledge deductively implies truth. He held
the view that scientiﬁc inquiry is based on epistemological fallibilism of a kind that
admits the susceptibility of scientiﬁc proof of a hypothesis to error. On this view, even
the most careful scientiﬁc inquiry can produce an outcome which could change later,
as further testing is carried out and new evidence comes in (Peirce 1931). Peirce wrote
that many scientiﬁc ﬁndings can be accepted as ‘‘substantially certain’’ knowledge but
he denied that this kind of scientiﬁc knowledge should be held with absolute certainty
of a kind that implies truth (Peirce 1931).On his view, the motive of ﬁnding the truth is
an important aim for scientiﬁc research. However, he maintained that any real
scientiﬁc investigation is bound by costs and other limitations and that the kind of truth
that is beyond all doubt can only be arrived at over an inﬁnite duration of time. He also
held that ﬁxing belief too ﬁrmly by ‘‘tenacity’’ or ‘‘authority’’ is an obstruction in the
way of an inquiry because it implies that no further inquiry is necessary (Cooke 2006,
34). This fallibilistic approach to the epistemology of scientiﬁc inquiry has recently led
to a different way of modeling the notion of knowledge in epistemology by seeing it as
a defeasible concept.
Walton proposed a defeasible conception of knowledge that is characterized by
three principles (2005, 42, 59–69). The ﬁrst is that knowledge is collected during a
process of inquiry that admits of retraction, so that what is accepted as knowledge may
later be rejected as not being part of knowledge. The second is that not only can a
knowledge-base be incomplete, it can be closed off to further investigation for various
reasons, including costs and other practical factors of continuing an investigation.
Third, a knowledge-base can be fallible, and even if a proposition is accepted as
knowledge and the inquiry is closed, it may later be reopened as new evidential facts
need to be considered. On this view knowledge is defeasible, meaning that a
proposition now known may later be refuted (defeated as knowledge), so that the same
178
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

proposition can later properly be classiﬁed as not knowledge, by reason of the need for
retraction in the process of inquiry (Walton 2005, 59–60).
Based on these epistemological principles, a bounded rationality model of
scientiﬁc inquiry views an inquiry as a procedure made up of three stages: (1) an
opening stage, (2) an argumentation stage in which hypotheses are put forward and
tested, and (3) a closing stage where a conclusion is arrived at on whether to accept
a proposition as knowledge or not (Walton 2011, 131–155). In this model, the
attainment of truth is not necessary for the procedure to reasonably arrive at a
conclusion on whether or not a proposition may properly be classiﬁed as knowledge.
The model is based on an evidential epistemology that determines whether or not a
proposition is knowledge by the weighing of the evidence for and against it during
the argumentation stage. It is also a social epistemology because the process of
presenting and criticizing the evidence collected at any given point in the sequence
of argumentation requires an exchange of views between pro and contra sides. The
degree of strength required for an argument should be determined by the standard of
proof set at the opening stage of the inquiry (Prakken and Sartor 2009). This model
is the basis of the component of scientiﬁc evidence we call its internal epistemology.
Another concept closely related to scientiﬁc knowledge is common knowledge.
Einstein once said that inquiry in the sciences is ‘‘nothing but a reﬁnement of our
everyday thinking’’ (Einstein 1954, 290).5 Popper afﬁrmed that scientiﬁc knowledge
is continuous with common sense knowledge. He said ‘‘scientiﬁc knowledge can be
more easily studied than common sense knowledge’’. For it is common sense
knowledge writ large, as it were. Its very problems are enlargements of the problems
of common sense knowledge. For example, ‘‘it replaces the Humean problem of
reasonable belief with the problem of the reasons for accepting or rejecting
scientiﬁc theories’’ (Popper 1959, 18–22). Each scientist’s knowledge consists of
two parts: one is his or her non-professional daily life knowledge, and the other is
scientiﬁc knowledge which can be obtained by scientiﬁc methods, tested and
extended by systematic methods. On the one hand, science is developed from
common sense and derives from questions that cannot be solved in ordinary
experience and thinking. On the other hand, scientiﬁc knowledge is not only held by
scientists, because once it is generalized it becomes common knowledge. Most
current common sense is the result of scientiﬁc researches in the past. Although
there is a relation between science and common sense, and to some extent science
beneﬁts from common sense, science is not common sense. It should be noted that
the thoughts produced from science and the way of science employs them are not
always intuitive. Science itself is not bound or restricted by traditional thought or
common sense. The most important distinction between science and common sense
is that science is well-trained common sense. Common sense is limited objectivity
because it is too closely connected with perception and actions.
In determining whether a thing offered in court belongs to real scientiﬁc
knowledge or not, the key question must be asked ‘‘whether it can be (and has been)
tested’’ (Popper 1989, 37). It is said that the scientiﬁc method is one of the ways to
obtain objectivity. But the scientiﬁc method is not the warrant to objectivity because
5 Einstein (1954).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
179
123

there exists no single method or rule used to identify true or reliable scientiﬁc
knowledge. The scientiﬁc method doesn’t give us objectivity, but rather, provides us
with methodology to ensure we are investigating objectively. Nor is there any
guarantee that all scientiﬁc claims accepted as true at any time are true. Almost
certainly, some will eventually turn out to have been not truths (Haack 2008a, 998).
John Ziman argues that we have ‘‘cast off the naı¨ve doctrine that all science is
necessarily true and that all true knowledge is necessarily scientiﬁc….’’ (Ziman
1978, 2).To many scientists, all knowledge is fallible. Moreover, disagreement in
science also shows the truth in science is relative and partial (French and da Costa
2003, 84–106).6 But disagreement about causality in science may not always be a
problem for science because it can pave the way for scientiﬁc progress. For
example, reasonable error-seeking resolution of scientiﬁc disagreements can
stimulate progress at the ‘‘micro’’ level (when disagreements with the conclusions
of a study give rise to a belief that a different, presumably better, study is
warranted), and at the ‘‘meta’’ level (when disagreement with an assessment of the
causal signiﬁcance of a body of evidence gives rise to a belief that a new research
program is needed to reveal the underlying mechanism) (Weed 2007, 158).7
Scientiﬁc disagreement is reasonable, in other words, and can be resolved—or,
more precisely, potentially resolved—with better studies, including improvements
in the methods for interpreting the studies, the so-called methods of research
synthesis (Weed 2006, 639).
2.1.2 Legal truth and science
As precise complex scientiﬁc methods and techniques have been applied to all ﬁelds
of society, the law has followed this dominant epistemological inclination. Accurate
fact-ﬁnding is important because the legitimacy of the justice system depends on it
(Twining 2006, 77–78).8 The dominant judicial test has been to admit the ﬁndings
of scientiﬁc research if they have won general acceptance in the appropriate
discipline. Because of this stringent test, many newer truth-revealing techniques that
have not yet won admittance to the courthouse are continually storming its steps
(Botein and Gordon 2002, 394).
In modern life, any human act can be transformed into a legal act. In fact-ﬁnding,
the judge or jury does not have a higher competence than the ordinary person, and
courts inevitably depend on expert evidence to seek truth. As a result of scientiﬁc
and technological progress, the growing complexity of evidence has placed strains
on a system that relies on lay people (and judges are lay people in this domain) to
determine facts (Posner 1999, 1545). In the wake of stupendous scientiﬁc and
technological advances made over the past 50 years, new methods of establishing
6 For details about inconsistency in science, see French and da Costa (2003).
7 But at the ‘‘macro’’ (paradigmatic) level, where the proponents of a new—even, revolutionary—theory
do battle with those protecting the status quo, more research may not be the key to resolution. See Weed
(2007).
8 See Twining (2006) (explaining that one of the assumptions of the rationalist tradition of evidence and
proof is that ‘‘[e]stablishing the truth about particular past events in issue in a case (the facts in issue) is a
necessary condition for achieving justice in adjudication; incorrect results are one form of injustice’’).
180
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

facts have begun to compete with traditional ways of fact-ﬁnding in vast social
spheres—including the administration of justice. An ever-increasing number of
facts can now be established only by sophisticated technical instruments. And as the
gulf widens between reality as perceived by our natural sensory apparatus and
reality as revealed by prosthetic devices designed to discover the world beyond the
reach of this apparatus, the importance of the human senses for factual inquiries has
begun to decline (Damasˇka 1997, 153).9 What is more, as a result of the
development of modern science and especially computer technology, crime is
becoming more technical and intellectual.
The epistemological value of the natural sciences is not simply the vast body of
knowledge accumulated about the world and how it works, but also the way this has
expanded and reﬁned human cognitive capacities, overcome human cognitive
limitations, and ampliﬁed our capacity to inquire effectively. The knowledge
produced by the sciences has reﬁned judgments of evidence by means of statistical
techniques, controlled and double-blinded experiments, etc. (Haack 2007a, 300,
302). The epistemological presumption of a judicial trial is that its goal is to ﬁnd the
truth. However, the ultimate target of judicial trial is to solve a particular dispute. It
could be said that ﬁnding the truth provides a foundation for reaching the ultimate
target, but the achievement of the ultimate target is not solely dependent on ﬁnding
out the truth. Truth is surely relevant to legal proceedings, for we want, not simply
resolutions, but just resolutions; and substantial justice requires factual truth. In its
efforts to arrive at factually correct verdicts, the legal system has come to rely a
good deal on scientiﬁc experts (Haack 2008a, 986). Courts are eager to get the help
provided by scientists in determining the factual truth. The phenomenon of science
entering legal context is called the third culture (Brocknan 1996, 17). There are four
basic contexts in which scientiﬁc research enters legal/political decision making: (1)
trial and appellate courts in non-constitutional cases, (2) constitutional cases and
especially Supreme Court decisions, (3) legislatures and (4) administrative agencies
(Faigman 1999, 50).
The way the science assists courts is realized through expert witnesses testifying.
In the early stages experts were members of the jury. The modern role of expert
witnesses began in the 18th century. In Folkes v. Chadd, a famous engineer,
Smeaton was allowed to give his opinion on whether an embankment had caused the
silting of a harbor (Folkes v. Chadd).10
Erica Beecher-Monas suggests there are ﬁve basic requirements a judge should take
into account in making a decision whether to let an expert testify. First, the judge must
come to grips with the underlying theory and hypothesis. The second requirement is
that the judge must examine all the available information—human studies, animal
studies, cellular, and chemical structure—in concert. In this vein, it is useless—and
unscientiﬁc—to expect a single study to uphold an entire explanation. Third, where
there are information gaps (which are inevitable), they should be ﬁlled with
9 See Damasˇka (1997). Damasˇka suggests that the conventional jury courtroom will probably be conﬁned
to a very narrow category of causes and blue-ribbon juries, or special expert panels will ﬁnd acceptance in
many types of civil proceedings. Id. at 148.
10 Folkes v. Chadd, 3 Dong KB 157,159, per Lord Mansﬁeld (1782).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
181
123

scientiﬁcally justiﬁable default assumptions. Fourth, an inquiry into the methodology
(including the laboratory or observational methods as well as statistical methodology)
and whether it conforms to generally acceptable practices in the ﬁeld is imperative.
Finally, the judge must be able to put all this information together in such a way as to
make a decision about how well the four previous steps mesh with the conclusion the
expert infers (Beecher-Monas 2007, 46). As Dwyer argues, however, this approach is
limited because it only attempts to separate off the most unreliable expert evidence, as
opposed to ﬁnding the right answer. It does not actually tell us whether to accept
seemingly reliable expert evidence (Dwyer 2008, 134).
The disagreements between scientists at trials pose many problems for fact-
ﬁnders. The tribunal cannot solve scientiﬁc disagreements by the way used in
science because of the differences between the two epistemological models for
truth-seeking in the two ﬁelds. The legal process has to seek truth through
adversarial argumentation where each side has the goal of persuading the trier
following the procedural rules of the trial setting. The model here is not that of an
inquiry of the scientiﬁc type that converges toward knowledge by an amassing and
evaluation of evidence using scientiﬁc methods. Instead it is a persuasion social
epistemology that is highly adversarial in nature, even though it is governed by
procedural rules, most notably for our purposes here, rules for admissibility of
evidence (discussed in Sect. 6). The basic point is that a legal system is not well-
modeled, as science is, as a kind of inquiry. It is better described as a set of rules and
machinery for resolving disputes and making it possible for people to live together
in some kind of order. Moreover, legal determinations are constrained not only by
the desire to arrive at factually correct verdicts, but also by other, non-truth-related
desiderata such as respecting values, for example fairness (justice) and protecting
citizens’ constitutional rights (Haack 2004, 49–50).
Most of the current literature sets up law as opposed to science and discusses the
relationship between law and science by putting scientiﬁc evidence under scientiﬁc
research, regardless of the fact that scientiﬁc evidence is the product created by both
science and law. Although there is a great difference between two ways of seeking
truth in the courtroom and laboratory, scientiﬁc evidence ﬁrst ﬁts the internal
framework of a scientiﬁc inquiry that draws conclusions that are transmitted as
evidence in a legal setting where the results produced by the internal scientiﬁc
inquiry are re-used to draw legal conclusions (Pardo and Allen 2007).
As the transmission of knowledge is visualized in Fig. 1, scientiﬁc evidence has
both an internal scientiﬁc component and an external component that bridges
scientiﬁc evidence to legal evidence. The left half of Fig. 1 shows the internal
component of the sequence of evidence. To this point, p is proved as a ﬁnding of
scientiﬁc knowledge. The right half shows how scientiﬁc knowledge is transmitted
externally (outside science). After being accepted by a scientiﬁc expert as
knowledge, the proposition moves through testimony to an external audience.
Generally speaking, the person who puts forward claims of knowledge in court is
not regarded as a scientist or member of some academic or professional community,
but an expert witness who should be trusted to carry out a speciﬁc scientiﬁc test as
well as testifying to support his or her conclusion in the court. This kind of use of
science is sometimes called litigation-driven science or litigation-generated science
182
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

(Haack 2008b, 1054; Boden and Ozonoff 2008, 117–122; Henry and Conrad 2008,
136–141). Although scientiﬁc evidence is provided by scientists, it is still used by
attorneys for the proof of ultimate probanda in adversarial proceedings. Thus, it is
more like a legal concept. The difference between the internal and the external
components is that trials attempt to seek the truth about contested events, and
science attempts to seek the truth about observable phenomena. When the events
that are the subject of legal disputes can be determined, at least in part, by virtue of
scientiﬁc discovery, we might expect the law to embrace science as a means for
ensuring that legal procedures get it right (Berger and Solan 2008, 847).
2.2 The epistemological sources of scientiﬁc evidence
The word ‘epistemology’ is derived from the Greek words e´piste´me´ and logos, the
ﬁrst meaning ‘knowledge’ and the second signifying a theoretical and critical study
of something (Virieux-Reymond 1972, 7–8). Epistemology overlaps with the branch
of cognitive science that investigates good reasoning, logic (Bishop and Trout 2005,
11). The core topics of epistemology are concerned with questions like what we
know, how we know, belief, doubt and certainty. Foundationalism, coherentism and
reliabilism are three versions of traditional epistemology. The basic approaches to
epistemology require an account of epistemic justiﬁcation (Bishop and Trout 2005,
16–17). Although epistemology has not so far provided a new method for factual
inquiry, it does not mean factual inquiry does not need epistemology. For example,
the U.S. Supreme Court now imposes on the federal district courts the epistemo-
logical responsibility to decide when an expert can reliably say that she ‘‘knows
something’’ (Malone and Zwier 2001, 103–104). The relationship between
epistemology and factual inquiry based on evidence is that epistemology, as a
kind of basic theory and method, provides an analytic framework for factual inquiry.
This paper does not focus on purely theoretical epistemology, but attempts to take
into account theories in epistemology that have signiﬁcant implications for the
project of understanding scientiﬁc evidence.
Is scientiﬁc evidence related to epistemology? Haack remarks:
By now, scientiﬁc evidence of just about every kind (from DNA ﬁngerprinting
to battered-wife syndrome, from studies of mice injected with potentially
carcinogenic chemicals to recovered memories) plays a large and apparently
ever-growing role in both criminal and civil cases. The long and tortuous
history of efforts to ensure that when the legal system relies on scientiﬁc
Scientific inquiry 
proves p.
Scientific expert 
testifies to p. 
p is scientific 
knowledge.
p is accepted as 
scientific evidence 
by the court.
p has not been 
falsified by new 
evidence.
p is accepted by a 
scientific expert as 
knowledge.
p survives 
examination 
in the trial.
p is admissible 
as evidence.
Fig. 1 Transmission of evidence from scientiﬁc inquiry to a legal setting
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
183
123

evidence it is not ﬂimsy speculation but decent work, suggests that this
interaction of science and the law raises some very tricky problems. And to
judge by how often, in that long and tortuous history, explicit or implicit
assumptions about the nature of scientiﬁc knowledge and the character of
scientiﬁc inquiry are crucial, those problems are in part epistemological
(Haack 1999, 218).
Epistemology is closely connected to science if, as scholars suggest, epistemological
theory aims to uncover the normative assumptions of a branch of science (Bishop and
Trout 2005, 8). Therefore, it could be said that the ﬁrst epistemological source of scientiﬁc
evidence is scientiﬁc epistemology. Goldman holds that one task of epistemology is to
elucidate our epistemic folkways and the task of describing or elucidating folk
epistemology is a scientiﬁc task, at least a task that should be informed by relevant
scientiﬁc research. The second mission of epistemology, as suggested by the view above,
istheformulationofamoreadequate,sound,orsystematicsetofepistemicnorms,insome
way(s) transcending our naive epistemic repertoire. Goldman suggests that scientiﬁc
epistemology has two branches: descriptive and normative. While descriptive scientiﬁc
epistemology aims to describe our ordinary epistemic assessments, normative scientiﬁc
epistemology continues the practice of making epistemic judgments, or formulating
systematic principles for such judgments (Goldman 1993, 272–273).
Corbı´ revised Goldman’s scientiﬁc epistemology as a normative scientiﬁc
epistemology resting on the assumption that epistemic practices are rule-governed.
Some basic features of a normative scientiﬁc epistemology include: (i) Normative
scientiﬁc epistemology is bound to be continuous with our folk epistemic practice;
(ii) Normative scientiﬁc epistemology not only can be, but must be normative; and
(iii) Normative scientiﬁc epistemology needs to be scientiﬁcally informed in two
ways. Scientiﬁc epistemology must, (a) take into consideration the constraints that
our knowledge at a neural and a functional level impose on what can be true at an
intentional level; and (b) be viewed as a discipline that, relying on several
intentional sciences, focuses on epistemic practices both from an individualistic and
a social perspective, while encouraging reforms for our epistemic capacities and
practices (Corbı´ 1993, 304–305).
A recent way of reconﬁguring the relation between scientiﬁc evidence and epistemology
is evidentialism. Evidentialism is a philosophical approach that provides a way of analyzing
knowledge using formal explanations for scientiﬁc activities as a whole. Evidentialism in
epistemologyemphasizestheroleofevidenceinknowledge,interpretsknowledgeexplicitly
as a relationship between belief and evidence, and claims the following thesis about
epistemic justiﬁcation: person S is justiﬁed in believing proposition p at time t iff S’s
evidence for p at t supports believing p (Conee and Feldman 2004, 296).
The naturalistic turn in epistemology of the past 30 years provides the most
appropriate theoretical framework for understanding scientiﬁc evidence. Naturalized
epistemology is a new direction in the research of epistemology since the 1960s. The
reason for its emergence is to solve the problems traditional epistemology encountered
in answering questions about the nature of science. Its core intention is to build closer
relations between natural science and epistemology, and to bridge the gap between
science and philosophy. It is difﬁcult to give a simple and clear deﬁnition for naturalized
184
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

epistemology, because naturalism is not so much a system or scholarship as a kind of
attitude and method. Most of the views can be traced back to the article Epistemology
Naturalized written by Quine in 1969, based on criticizing empiricism that claims all
meaning and knowledge had its origin in experience and rejecting a distinction between
analytic and synthetic statements. Quine argued in his article that ‘‘Epistemology, or
something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural
science. It studied a natural phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject. This human
subject had accorded a certain experimentally controlled input—certain patterns of
irradiation in assorted frequencies, for instance—and in the fullness of time the subject
delivers as output a description of the three-dimensional external world and its history’’
(Quine 1969, 82–83). We make no attempt to discuss all types of programs of
naturalized epistemology here, but from either Quine’s illustration or the debate
between his successors and opponents, we can note one of the principal features of
naturalized epistemology. This is the feature that epistemology accounts for the
reasonability of scientiﬁc cognition by using the discoveries and methods of natural
science not from the exterior but the interior. Most evidence scholars follow the general
approach of modern naturalized epistemology, whether or not they are aware of that fact
(Nance 2001, 1552). We take this observation to support our view that naturalized
epistemology is a good way to understand scientiﬁc evidence epistemologically, and to
provide theoretical foundations for the epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence.
However, because human cognitive behavior cannot escape from the social
environment, a social epistemology that focuses on the cooperation and interaction
among epistemic individuals made its advent after epistemology was naturalized.
This brings out the fourth source of an epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence.
Applying the perspective of veritistic social epistemology to forensic science could
produce new institutional designs that would lower forensic error rates (Koppl et al.
2008, 141). Some scholars suggest that social epistemology is simply the branch of
naturalized epistemology concerned not with individual knowers but with the social
processes and practices that inculcate belief. While naturalized individual episte-
mology depends primarily on the empirical sciences of the human cognitive
apparatus, naturalized social epistemology must consider the range of empirical
sciences that examine the social mechanisms of belief-inculcation (Allen and Leiter
2001, 1497). We suggest that naturalized epistemology and social epistemology are
two levels of epistemology or two stages of human cognitive activities. They reﬂect
different epistemic laws from different aspects in the same way that macro and
micro economics express different economic operation rules. Naturalized episte-
mology provides a way for us to understand scientiﬁc evidence from the interior,
and social epistemology provides us with an epistemological method to analyze the
course of fact-ﬁnding based on scientiﬁc evidence from the exterior. This view of
scientiﬁc evidence will be further explained in the following sections.
3 The structure of the ESE
Scientiﬁc evidence simply means ‘the evidence with respect to scientiﬁc claims and
theories’. Scientiﬁc evidence, in this sense, comparable to the evidence with respect
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
185
123

to empirical claims generally but is complex, and more dependent on instruments of
observation and on the pooling of evidential resources (Haack 2007a, 57). Scientists
continually observe, test, and modify the body of knowledge. Rather than claiming
absolute truth, science approaches truth either through breakthrough discoveries or
incrementally by testing theories repeatedly. Evidence is obtained through
observations and measurements conducted in the natural setting or in the laboratory
(NAS 2009, 81). In scientiﬁc inquiry, scientists use scientiﬁc evidence: they
discover or reﬁne scientiﬁc theories or knowledge by using empirical evidence and
scientiﬁc method through observation.
The term ‘scientiﬁc evidence’ as herewith deﬁned in this article refers to a
scientiﬁc conclusion which is obtained by scientiﬁc method or scientiﬁc instruments
based on scientiﬁc theories and used to prove a speciﬁc scientiﬁc claim in a case in
the ﬁeld of application of science. In this ﬁeld, scientists make use of the scientiﬁc
theories derived from scientiﬁc research, analyze the evidential data scientiﬁcally in
a speciﬁc case, and come up to an opinion or conclusion in the end (see Fig. 2). The
opinion or the conclusion is regarded as the main form of scientiﬁc evidence.
According to this deﬁnition there are four characteristics of scientiﬁc evidence.
First, scientiﬁc evidence is falsiﬁable, that is, based on defeasible reasoning
concluding to acceptance of a hypothesis that is subject to retraction as new
evidence comes in. Second, all scientiﬁc evidence must be based on accepted
scientiﬁc principles and consistent with scientiﬁc knowledge. Third, it must relate to
some speciﬁc data or objects. Fourth, during the analysis, scientiﬁc method must be
put to use (NAS 2009, 15).11 The ﬁrst question that the fact-ﬁnder must answer is
‘‘do I believe this scientiﬁc evidence?’’ She or he has to consider two more
questions in answering this question: one is ‘‘do I believe the expert who proffers
Scientific 
method
Scientists
Observation,
Empirical 
evidence
Scientific 
theory or
knowledge 
      (1)
Fields of scientific inquiry
Observation, 
evidential 
data 2
Fields of scientific application
(Form of scientific 
evidence)
Internal epistemology
Scientific method
3
naturalized epistemology
social epistemology
Opinion or 
conclusion
4
Probanda
Scientific epistemology
(Conclusion 
supported by 
scientific 
id)
External epistemology
Fig. 2 Structure of the ESE
11
This means that it must be applied to solve a problem.
186
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

the evidence?’’ and ‘‘is the evidence itself genuine?’’ In answer to the question of
whether the evidence itself is genuine, she or he has to consider the validity,
provenance and reliability of the evidence. Thus, according to the characteristics of
scientiﬁc evidence formulated above, two levels of the ESE can be explicitly
sketched: internal and external epistemology.
It should be noted that internal and external epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
are very different from internalism and externalism in contemporary epistemology.
Internalism about justiﬁcation holds that everything necessary to provide justiﬁca-
tion for a belief is immediately available in consciousness, or that a person either
does or can have a form of access to the basis for knowledge or justiﬁed belief.
Externalism, by contrast, denies that one always can have this sort of access to the
basis for one’s knowledge and justiﬁed belief, and holds the view that there are
factors other than those which are internal to the believer which can affect the
justiﬁcatory status of a belief.
While internal and external epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence is classiﬁed by its
structure, they work together as two essential components of knowledge. In interior
epistemology, the truth of scientiﬁc evidence itself belongs to the category of
scientiﬁc truth in nature. Thus the internal epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence is
dependent on the properties of science itself such as scientiﬁc principles and
methods. This is a naturalized way, and the difference between it and other theories
of epistemology is that it is closely concerned with scientiﬁc method, or in other
words, scientiﬁc method is its principal component. Scientists have to depend on
scientists to recognize scientiﬁc evidence. Thus, the internal epistemology should
include the cognition of scientists about scientiﬁc evidence itself. The degree to
which an opinion or conclusion is warranted, at a time, for a scientist or group of
people, depends on how good the scientiﬁc theory is which this person or group
depended on, at that time and with respect to the method used. In exterior
epistemology, on the other hand, the cognition of scientiﬁc evidence is concerned
with the credibility of scientists and the conclusions or opinions about the facts in
issue drawn by scientists. It represents the social dimensions of scientiﬁc evidence.
4 The ESE: internal component
Naturalized epistemology seeks to uncover the relationship between observation
and theory and holds that human reasoning in pursuing epistemological questions
requires appealing to natural facts. Naturalized epistemology provides a philosoph-
ical foundation for the internal epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence. In answering the
question of whether scientiﬁc evidence carries probative weight in court, the fact-
ﬁnder has to consider the validity and reliability of evidence itself from the interior.
Then what do validity and reliability mean? In Daubert, Justice Blackmun writes:
We note that scientists typically distinguish between ‘‘validity’’ (does the
principle support what it purports to show?) and ‘‘reliability’’ (does application
of the principle produce consistent results?). Although ‘‘the difference
between accuracy, validity, and reliability may be such that each is distinct
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
187
123

from the other by no more than a hen’s kick,’’ our reference here is to
evidentiary reliability—that is, trustworthiness. In a case involving scientiﬁc
evidence, evidentiary reliability will be based upon scientiﬁc validity (Nance
2003, 194).
Validity is a degree of judging the signiﬁcance of a measurement. It reﬂects the
accuracy of scientiﬁc reasoning, but reliability means repeatability of a result of
scientiﬁc research. Although an investigation can be invalid but still reliable, it
cannot be unreliable and valid. If it is unreliable then it will be invalid all the time
because the measurements cannot be trusted and therefore the interpretation of the
results and conclusion cannot be trusted (Gott and Duggan 2003, 3). The internal
epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence aims at recognizing the validity of scientiﬁc
evidence from scientiﬁc principles and methods, and distinguishing reliability from
reproducibility, causality, uncertainty and error rate.
4.1 Scientiﬁc validity: scientiﬁc principles and methods
The word ‘‘validity’’ has different meanings in different disciplines, and it is very
difﬁcult to reach a stable consensus about it even within the same discipline. When
scientists and philosophers cannot hold an identical view on the implication of
‘‘scientiﬁc validity’’, or when to use it, or how to apply it to a concrete instance of
research, what rules could guide judges?
The use of expert witnesses and the necessity of judicial screening for validity of
the expert’s science before permitting experts to testify is one of the hotly debated
areas in the bifurcation of decision-making duties between judge and jury. For
scientiﬁc evidence, the question is whether the testimony has met the standards and
methods of science. Even in state courts that have eschewed the Daubert standard in
favor of the old general acceptance rule, there is increased concern with scientiﬁc
validity (Beecher-Monas 2007, 18). The amended FRE enhances the obligation of
the judge in assessing scientiﬁc validity. Based on the rationalist tradition in
evidence scholarship and its main epistemological assumptions, Beecher-Monas
discusses the question of assessing imperfect scientiﬁc studies—that is, the scientiﬁc
validity of conclusions drawn from imperfect knowledge. She argues that the U.S.
Supreme Court has done little to guide judges during the necessary assessment.
Because most scientiﬁc studies and the conclusions culled from them are imperfect,
the assessment process needs to include more than a knowledge of optimal
experimental design. No study is perfect, no matter how well it has been designed.
What judges and lawyers—and anyone attempting to understand the validity of
scientiﬁc information—need to know is not how to design the best scientiﬁc study,
but how to assess an imperfect one (Beecher-Monas 2007, 2). Scientiﬁc validity
aims at answering ‘‘does the truth of evidence provide an answer to the question?’’
People need to examine the design of experiment, investigation, measurement, the
way of providing a result, the explanation of the result and the conclusion when they
consider the validity.
One has to answer the question about the claim of truth in science with the aid of
the scientiﬁc method. The scientiﬁc method refers to the body of techniques for
188
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

investigating phenomena, acquiring new knowledge, or correcting and integrating
previous knowledge. It is based on gathering observable, empirical and measurable
evidence subject to speciﬁc principles of reasoning (Newton).12 The scientiﬁc
method presumes that events occur in consistent patterns that can be understood
through careful comparison and systematic study. Knowledge is produced through a
series of steps during which data is accumulated methodically, strengths and
weaknesses of information are assessed, and knowledge about causal relationships
is inferred (NAS 2009, 81). Simply, the scientiﬁc method is the ‘‘tool’’ that scientists
use to ﬁnd answers. The role of judge as a gatekeeper is to determine whether the
testimony proffered by scientiﬁc experts is a kind of valid scientiﬁc knowledge,
which Daubert explained as knowledge that is based on scientiﬁc method (Daubert
v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 1993).13 The scientiﬁc method is closely
connected with scientiﬁc principle, but the scientiﬁc method emphasizes the way of
obtaining scientiﬁc evidence. Generally speaking, the scientiﬁc method implies how
things work in a testable hypothesis, testing whether the hypothesis is true, and
expressing the measurement and data with mathematical terms. Scientiﬁc method-
ology is usually based on generating hypotheses and testing them to see if they can
be falsiﬁed; indeed, this methodology is what distinguishes science from other ﬁelds
of human inquiry (Green 1992, 643).14 For scientists, the scientiﬁc method is the
logic by which the observations are made. To scientists ﬁnding facts is only as good
as the methods used to ﬁnd it. Well-designed methods permit observations that lead
to valid, useful, informative answers to the questions which had been framed by the
researcher. For scientists, the way to ﬁgure out which one of several contradictory
studies is most likely correct is to scrutinize the methodology. The methodology—
the logic of research design, measures, and procedures—is the engine that generates
knowledge that is scientiﬁc (Faigman et al. 2002, 117). As commonly understood,
the scientiﬁc method means taking an idea about how things work, framing it in a
testable hypothesis, and testing the hypothesis to see if it holds true, measured and
expressed in mathematical (i.e., probabilistic) terms. But there is no monolithic
scientiﬁc method, no all-inclusive set of rules that can be applied to science to
determine its validity (Beecher-Monas 2007, 36). Moreover, there is no mode of
inference used by all and only scientists; there is no syntactically characterizable
inductive logic; and, since neither a proposition nor its negation may be warranted
to any degree, degrees of warrant don’t satisfy the axioms of the calculus of
probabilities (Haack 2003, 213). Scientists in different disciplines often use
different methods; even scientists in the same discipline may use different methods.
The goal of the scientiﬁc method is to ascertain whether a scientiﬁc hypothesis is a
valid representation of a natural phenomenon, object, or process. Therefore, we
should not exaggerate this difference within methodology because, to some extent,
that there is a methodological model—such as the dialectics and abduction which
12 Isaac Newton (1687, 1713, 1726). ‘‘Rules for the study of natural philosophy’’, Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica, Third edition. The General Scholium containing the 4 rules follows Book 3, The
System of the World. Reprinted on pages 794–796 of I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman’s 1999
translation, University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-08817-4, 974 pp.
13 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 589 (1993).
14 Green (1992), cited in Daubert amici curiae brief of Nicolaas Bloembergen et al.
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
189
123

has been commonly used in science—in scientiﬁc research. Moreover, epistemol-
ogy also can provide a general explanation for scientiﬁc inquiry. Therefore, a
scientiﬁc method consists of the collection of data through observation and
experimentation, and the formulation and testing of hypotheses. We can summarize
a general scientiﬁc methodology about science and discuss its general structure,
developmental trend or direction. Besides the philosophical method, there are many
speciﬁc methods which can be used in scientiﬁc research such as cybernetic,
informative and systematic methods.
4.2 The reliability of scientiﬁc evidence
To scientists, reliability involves the competence of applying the same method to
the same thing and obtaining the same result each time. Giannelli and Imwinkelried
argue that the reliability of evidence derived from a scientiﬁc theory or principle
depends upon three factors: (l) the validity of the underlying theory; (2) the validity
of the technique applying that theory; and (3) the proper application of the technique
on a particular occasion (Giannelli and Imwinkelried 1999, 2). Systematically, there
are many factors that are able to account for the reliability of scientiﬁc evidence:
reproducibility, causality, uncertainty and error rate.
4.2.1 Reproducibility
One of the standards to judge whether an experiment is successful is to examine its
reproducibility. Reproducibility in science means anyone can get the same result
when measuring the same objects by using the same method under the same
conditions. Popper once said: ‘‘only when certain events recur in accordance with
rules of regularities, as is the case with repeatable experiments, can our observations
be tested—in principle—by anyone…Indeed the scientiﬁcally signiﬁcant physical
effect may be deﬁned as that which can be regularly reproduced by anyone who
carries out the appropriate experiment in the way prescribed’’ (Popper 2002, 23–24).
However, the reproducibility of the result does not mean it is right. A reliable test
can be repeated under identical circumstances and yield the same results. The results
may be consistently wrong, but that is an issue of validity, not reliability (Foster and
Huber 1999, 111). On the other hand, if the result is irreproducible, it means there is
something wrong with the method. Reproducibility in scientiﬁc experiment usually
relies on a presumption that the natural law is general and perpetual. However, this
presumption behind the reproducibility is a metaphysical one, because it is very
difﬁcult to establish some fully identical experiments in practice. It means that the
principle of reproducibility related to reliability of scientiﬁc evidence is a weak one.
4.2.2 Causality
It is well known that there is an apparent distinction between science and law in
dealing with the question of what evidence is actually concerned with assessing
causality. The scope of assessment in science is broader than it in courts. While the
admissibility of facts is governed by the rules of evidence in the law, science too has
190
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

rules regarding the inclusion and exclusion of facts for consideration as well as rules
covering which studies to include, a process that has been evolving from around the
mid-1980s to the present (Weed 2008, 953).
In some cases, proof of causality is still a big challenge to scientists, because it
needs judgment in determining causality, and on this point, the current science often
cannot provide a certain explicit answer. What is more, the claim about causality
cannot be obtained solely by calculating numbers. Determining causation neces-
sarily requires that we think counterfactually, and draw inferences that can be
tricky. If we want to know whether the emission of a chemical by a factory has led
to the increase in endocrine disease in the immediate area, solid proof of causation
can only come from comparing the actual world in which a population has
experienced an increase in the disease, with an imaginary world in which the very
same population has had precisely the same experiences except for exposure to the
chemical. If the occurrence of disease does not increase in this possible world, then
we can conclude that the chemical has caused the disease, since exposure to the
chemical is the only difference between the real world and the possible world
(Berger and Solan 2008, 849–850). There are many kinds of causality between each
speciﬁc scientiﬁc evidence and fact. There may be, for example, direct, basic,
auxiliary, and incentive causes in the analysis of cause of death.
The problem that underlies the indeterminacy of causation, philosopher Richard
Scheines explains, is that determining causation necessarily requires that we think
counterfactually, and drawing inferences from what has never occurred can be a tricky
business (Scheines 2008, 959). Hill suggests the causal inference based on scientiﬁc
evidence includes nine standards: strength, consistency, dose response, biological
plausibility, temporality, speciﬁcity, coherence, experimentation, and analogy (Hill
1965, 295). Weed (2008) regards them as qualitative values, and suggests other
important scientiﬁc values are the concepts of relevance, reliability, validity, and
statistical signiﬁcance. Surprisingly, Hill’s criteria do not include any of the
aforementioned concepts, nor do they include predictability or testability. That simple
fact points out the complexity of the process. All these concepts/criteria/guidelines/
values (or whatever else you want to call them) are important when making causal
claims: relevance, reliability, validity, and statistical signiﬁcance, predictability,
testability, consistency, strength, dose response, plausibility, temporality, experimen-
tation, speciﬁcity, coherence, and analogy (Weed 2008, 956–957). Currently, however,
we still can not determine which of them is more important than others.
4.2.3 The uncertainty of science
Historically, in case after case, the lack of certainty in science has led to failure to
act because of the demand for conclusive proof of causation. ‘‘Scientiﬁc
uncertainty’’ usually means any area of science where there are gaps in knowledge
or the lack of conclusive, cause and effect proof (Harremoe¨s et al. 2001, 170).15 The
15 The European Environmental Agency deﬁnes three classiﬁcations of scientiﬁc uncertainty: risk
(known impacts and known probabilities), uncertainty (known impacts and unknown probabilities), and
ignorance (unknown impacts and unknown probabilities). See Harremoe¨s et al. (2001).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
191
123

available scientiﬁc evidence cannot once-and-for-all determine which hypothesis is
the true hypothesis among all those involved in a particular situation, and this is
called underdetermination in science (McMullin 1995, 233, 241).16 Whatever the
cases, when it comes to individual statements of fact, the best that scientists can do
is to speak in terms of probabilities and statistics (Faigman 2008, 1072). Gillies
divides probabilities into logical probability, subjective probability, frequency
probability and propensity probability; and logical probability and subjective
probability are collectively called epistemological probability (Gillies 2000, 1).
Objective or physical probabilities are features of the world, and epistemological
probabilities are features of belief about the world. The subjective theory treats
probability as the degree of actual belief held by a particular person, whereas the
logical or epistemic theory analyses probability as the degree of rational belief in a
hypothesis that is justiﬁed by the evidence (Ho 2008, 113). It is concluded that
epistemological probability means the extent to which a body of evidence conﬁrms
or disconﬁrms a hypothesis and expresses the relation between a hypothesis and the
evidence which supports or undermines it. Based on standards of proof in different
situations, the 11-point scale is used to express the degree of certainty or uncertainty
in science analogous to the Richter scale for the strength of earthquakes. They are
fundamental, rigorously proven, substantially proven, very probable, probable, more
likely than not, attractive but unproven, plausible, possible, unlikely, and
impossible. They allow a source of scientiﬁc information to express the subjective
level of certainty or uncertainty that it associates with a particular assertion of
scientiﬁc fact and can also be used to represent the range of expert opinion
regarding that certainty or uncertainty (Weiss 2003, 26).
The uncertainty of scientiﬁc evidence comes from the limits of science. First, it
comes from scientiﬁc principle or methods themselves. The polygraph, for example,
is based on a principle that when lying, one will become nervous and have an
increased pulse and need for air, and using said machine, which measures the
changes in a person’s body, such as blood pressure, pulse, respiration, breathing
rhythms, body temperature and skin conductivity while the subject is asked to
answer a series of questions to detect whether he or she is lying. Apparently, this
principle is very limited. Secondly, it comes from scientists themselves, because
scientists are fallible human beings; and though some are stolid and unemotional,
some are passionate—about their scientiﬁc problem, about a promising theory,
about how often they are cited, and so on (Haack 2006, 50). Thirdly, it is conﬁned
by the objective conditions such as the instruments, thus, uncertainty is inevitable.
4.2.4 Error rates
Scientiﬁc aids are fallible and imperfect: a metaphor may lead in what turns out to
be a fruitless direction; an observation may turn out to be an artifact of the
instrumentation; an experimental design may fail to take potential interfering factors
into account (Haack 2006, 51).‘‘Error rates’’ are deﬁned as proportions of cases in
16 Under determination implies that there is always room for questioning the validity and reliability of
any scientiﬁc test of any scientiﬁc hypothesis. See McMullin (1995).
192
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

which the analysis led to a false conclusion (NAS 2009, 87–88). Several studies of
ﬁngerprint proﬁciency tests illustrate problems of error rates in forensic science
tests. One study suggests a false positive rate for ﬁngerprints of at least 2 %
(Peterson and Markham 1995, 994–1029). A more recent test produced a 20 % rate
of false positives (Grieve 1996). A third study considered a larger set of test results
having an overall false positive error rate of 0.8 % (Cole 2005, 1030, 1034).
Although those results are very different, the accuracy or error rate in ﬁngerprint
proﬁciency tests has caused wide attention. The current institutional structure of
forensics typically grants an individual lab a kind of monopoly on the analysis of
any evidence sent to it: once a given lab has received and analyzed a body of
evidence, it is unlikely that the evidence will be examined by any other lab.
Periodically and randomly sending evidence to more than one lab might help break
this monopoly. This is the theory of ‘‘democratic epistemics’’ in forensic
experiments (Koppl et al. 2008, 142).
The existence of several types of potential error rates makes it absolutely critical
for all involved in the analysis to be explicit and precise in the particular rate or
rates referenced in a speciﬁc setting. The estimation of such error rates requires
rigorously developed and conducted scientiﬁc studies. Additional factors may play a
role in analyses involving human interpretation, such as the experience, training,
and inherent ability of the interpreter, the protocol for conducting the interpretation,
and biases from a variety of sources (NAS 2009, 89). There are many ways to
calculate the error rate in science. One of the main ways is standard error that
usually calculated by following formula:
SE ¼ sﬃﬃﬃn
p
where s is the standard deviation of the sample, and n is the size (number of
observations) of the sample. And the standard deviation is calculated by following
formula:
s ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Rðx  xÞ2
n
s
x is a single measurement. From these formulas, it is concluded that the error rate
could be reduced by increasing the frequencies of measurement. But most of the
error in a forensic test is caused by an incorrect test procedure produced by mis-
conduct of scientists, bad condition of instruments and inappropriate materials.
Before concluding that a particular enzyme-probe combination produces accurate
proﬁles as applied to crime-scene samples at a particular laboratory, for example,
courts may wish to consider studies concerning the effects of environmental con-
ditions and contaminants on VNTR proﬁling as well as the laboratory’s general
experience and proﬁciency with these probes. The nature of the sample and other
considerations in a particular case can affect the certainty of the proﬁling (Allen
et al. 2002, 806).
On February 18, 2009, the National Academy of Sciences released their long
anticipated report entitled ‘‘Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
193
123

Path Forward’’. The report aims at reaching the two most important goals of
improving standardization and resources in forensic science. It also lists many
elements that can make for errors in forensic tests. For example, it found too many
scientists and other practitioners in the forensic science community lack adequate
resources, sound policies, and national support. The forensic science community is
plagued by fragmentation and inconsistent practices in federal, state, and local law
enforcement jurisdictions and agencies. It also found that the quality of practice in
forensic science disciplines varies greatly and the quality of practice often suffers
because of ﬁve factors: (1) the absence of adequate training and continuing
education, (2) the absence of rigorous, mandatory certiﬁcation requirements for
practitioners, (3) the absence of mandatory accreditation programs for laboratories,
(4) failures to adhere to robust performance standards, and (5) the lack of effective
oversight (NAS 2009, 5).
5 The ESE: external component
5.1 The credibility of expert witness
In a trial, if the evidence in the case involves certain kinds of expertise, then the
courts need experts from that ﬁeld to help them to make a judgment of admissibility.
For example, in criminal courts, forensic scientists are presented to explain the facts
in a burglary or car theft. In civil courts, experts are often individual professionals
such as medical doctors or psychologists testifying on matters such as personal
injury or child welfare. As Haack mentions:
So successful have the natural sciences been that the words ‘‘science,’’
‘‘scientiﬁc,’’ and their cognates, are often used as all-purpose terms of
epistemological praise, meaning, vaguely, ‘‘strong, reliable, good.’’ This
honoriﬁc usage has encouraged the idea that scientiﬁc evidence must be
evidence of a peculiar, and peculiarly reliable, kind; that the sciences must
owe their remarkable successes to the uniquely reliable mode of inference or
procedure of inquiry that scientists use and that scientists must be unemotional
and even stolid types, ‘‘objective’’ in a stereotypical sense. But this is all a
serious misunderstanding (Haack 2006, 50).
Although it is easy for scientists to set up and maintain a good reputation for
veracity and competence by virtue of professional status, it is possible that any
critique of a specialist could harm his or her professional career as an expert and
lower his or her academic reputation, and sometimes this injury is fatal. But this is
no guarantee that all experts are truthful. We can think of no reason, however, why
this problem is likely to be any greater with purported specialists than with other
witnesses (Allen et al. 2002, 738). A special problem in forensic evidence is over-
claiming—by expert testimony that exaggerates its own probative value (Cole 2007,
819). Moreover, there are still instances of intentional misconduct in science. For
example, in West Virginia, the former head serologist of the State Police crime
194
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

laboratory, Trooper Fred Zain, falsiﬁed test results in as many as 134 cases from
1979 to 1989.17
An important thing to realize from the point of view of the external epistemology
of expert opinion evidence is that when the expert’s opinion is presented as evidence
in an external setting like that of a legal trial, the form of argument used is different
from the kinds of arguments used in an internal scientiﬁc inquiry. The most
important external form of argument is the argument from expert opinion. In the
version presented below this type of argument has eight premises (Walton 2007,
134).
Competence Premise (Ordinary Premise): E is an expert in knowledge domain
D.
Statement Premise (Ordinary Premise): E said the sentence S*.
Interpretation Premise (Ordinary Premise): S is a reasonable interpretation of
S*.
Domain Premise (Assumption): S is in D.
Depth of Knowledge Premise (Assumption): The knowledge of E about D is
deep enough to know about S.
Careful Analysis Premise (Assumption 3): E’s testimony S* is based on his own
careful analysis of evidence in this case.
Other Experts Premise (Exception): S is inconsistent with what other experts in
D say.
Credibility Premise (Exception): E is not credible.
Conclusion: S may plausibly be taken to be true.
The defeasible nature of this form of argument is made more easily appreciable if
we realize that its method of evaluation is a form of critical questioning of the kind
that might take place in legal cross-examination at trial.
There are six main critical questions for argument from expert opinion, but under
each of the main critical questions is a set of subquestions which has been
recognized through studies of argument from expert opinion in conversational
argumentation (Godden and Walton 2006, 278–279).18
1.
Expertise Question: How credible is E as an expert source?
What is E’s name, job or ofﬁcial capacity, location, and employer?
What degrees, professional qualiﬁcations or certiﬁcation by licensing
agencies does E hold?
17 The acts of misconduct on the part of Zain included (l) overstating the strength of results; (2)
overstating the frequency of genetic matches on individual pieces of evidence; (3)misreporting the
frequency of genetic matches on multiple pieces of evidence; (4) reporting that multiple items [of
evidence] had been tested, when only a single item had been tested; (5) reporting inconclusive results as
conclusive; (6) repeatedly altering laboratory records; (7) grouping results to create the erroneous
impression that genetic markers had been obtained from all samples tested; (8) failing to report conﬂicting
results; (9) failing to conduct or to report conducting additional testing to resolve conﬂicting results; (10)
implying a match with a suspect when testing supported only a match with the victim; and (11) reporting
scientiﬁcally impossible or improbable results. See re Investigation of the W. Va. State Police Crime
Lab., Serology Div., 438 S.E.2dW. Va. 501, 503 (1993).
18 The list below is taken from the summary in Godden and Walton (2006), 261–286.
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
195
123

Can testimony of peer experts in the same ﬁeld be given to support E’s
competence?
What is E’s record of experience, or other indications of practiced skill in S?
What is E’s record of peer-reviewed publications or contributions to
knowledge in S?
2.
Field Question: Is E an expert in the ﬁeld that A is in?
Is the ﬁeld of expertise cited in the appeal a genuine area of knowledge, or
area of technical skill that supports a claim to knowledge?
If E is an expert in a ﬁeld closely related to the ﬁeld cited in the appeal, how
close is the relationship between the expertise in the two ﬁelds?
Is the issue one where expert knowledge in any ﬁeld is directly relevant to
deciding the issue?
Is the ﬁeld of expertise cited an area where there are changes in techniques or
rapid developments in new knowledge, and if so, is the expert up-to-date in
these developments?
3.
Opinion Question: What did E assert that implies A?
Was E quoted in asserting A? Was a reference to the source of the quote
given, and can it be veriﬁed that E actually said A?
If E did not say A exactly, then what did E assert, and how was A inferred?
If the inference to A was based on more than one premise, could one premise
have come from E and the other from a different expert?
If so, is there evidence of disagreement between what the two experts
(separately) asserted?
Is what E asserted clear? If not, was the process of interpretation of what
E said by the respondent who used E’s opinion justiﬁed?
Are other interpretations plausible?
Could important qualiﬁcations be left out?
4.
Trustworthiness Question: Is E personally reliable as a source?
Is E biased?
Is E honest?
Is E conscientious?
5.
Consistency Question: Is A consistent with what other experts assert?
Does A have general acceptance in S?
If not, can E explain why not, and give reasons why there is good evidence
for A?
6.
Backup Evidence Question: Is E’s assertion based on evidence?
What is the internal evidence the expert used herself to arrive at this opinion
as her conclusion?
If there is external evidence, e.g. physical evidence reported independently of
the expert, can the expert deal with this adequately?
196
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

Can it be shown that the opinion given is not one that is scientiﬁcally
veriﬁable?
One can see by looking back at the form of the argument from expert opinion
presented above that each of the premises is related to one of the six categories of
critical question. There are two kinds of premises, called assumptions and
exceptions. The burden of proof is different for each. If an assumption is
questioned, that is enough to defeat the argument until its proponent brings forward
evidence to support the premise, making the burden of proof shift to the side of the
questioner. With an exception, the situation is different. When an exception is
questioned, the mere asking of the question is not enough by itself to defeat the
original argument from expert opinion until evidence to support the exception is
brought forward. What is important to notice here is that there is a way of externally
testing a claim made on the basis of expert scientiﬁc opinion that has been put
forward in an external setting. This way of evaluating a claim is different from the
way the same claim would be evaluated internally as a scientiﬁc hypothesis by the
experts themselves in a scientiﬁc inquiry.
The argumentation-based approach works well as a method directed towards the
epistemological goal of avoiding errors by process of critical questioning, in
contrast to an epistemological theory that sees the goal of an inquiry as arriving at
true belief. On the ESE model the procedure is seen as having a dialogue structure in
which the pro arguments and con arguments are tested against each other, including
critically probing procedures like cross-examination of expert testimony, that
subject arguments to critical scrutiny. This procedure is designed to identify errors,
including fallacies as well as weak arguments, and is therefore well adapted to the
task of evaluating evidence like expert opinion testimony. The model has a dialogue
structure, where burden of persuasion is set at the opening stage, and the process of
testing arguments against opposed arguments is carried out during the argumen-
tation stage. At the closing stage, a decision is made by a third-party which side had
the stronger argument, based on proof standards and burdens of proof appropriate
for the procedure.
In the Carneades Argumentation System, a dialogue is deﬁned as an ordered
3-tuple\O, A, C[where O is the opening stage, A is the argumentation stage, and
C is the closing stage (Gordon and Walton 2009, 5). Protocols regulate what types
of speech acts are allowed as moves to be made by both parties in the sequence of
argumentation. These protocols set pre-conditions and post-conditions for each type
of move (Gordon 2012). For example any party who puts forward a claim is obliged
to back up that claim with some relevant evidence or else retract the claim.
Commitment rules determine how propositions are accepted or rejected at each
move, and how retractions can take place. It is important to note that the Carneades
Argumentation System is based on acceptability of statements, burdens of proof,
and proof standards (Gordon 2010, 145–156). For these reasons it ﬁts extremely
well with the ESE epistemological model. It is speciﬁcally designed for the
avoidance or minimization of error, and it is acceptance-based rather than being
based on the notion of true belief. It is a ﬂexible model for dealing with defeasible
reasoning in a setting where what is accepted as scientiﬁc knowledge varies with the
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
197
123

criteria that should be used to give for it to be considered to be relevant evidence in
that ﬁeld (Gordon and Walton 2009, 239).
Whether a proposition is accepted as knowledge in Carneades depends on the
standards of proof and the burdens of proof appropriate for the dialogue setting
(Gordon et al. 2007, 875–896). Four standards are used in the Carneades
Argumentation System (Gordon and Walton 2009, 239) in increasing order of the
strictness.
•
Scintilla of Evidence
•
There is at least one applicable argument
•
Preponderance of Evidence
•
The scintilla of evidence standard is satisﬁed, and
•
The maximum weight assigned to an applicable pro argument is greater than
the maximum weight of an applicable con argument.
•
Clear and Convincing Evidence
•
The preponderance of evidence standard is satisﬁed
•
the maximum weight of applicable pro arguments exceeds some threshold a,
and
•
the difference between the maximum weight of the applicable pro arguments
and the maximum weight of the applicable con arguments exceeds some
threshold b.
•
Beyond Reasonable Doubt
•
The clear and convincing evidence standard is satisﬁed and
•
the maximum weight of the applicable con arguments is less than some
threshold c.
Notice that on this way of deﬁning the standards of proof, the thresholds a, b and
c are left open, and not given a ﬁxed numerical value. Whether a proposition can
properly be determined to be knowledge or not depends on the evidence supporting
its acceptance, weighed against the evidence supporting its rejection, at a given
point in a dialogue. The Carneades Argumentation System incorporates defeasible
argumentation schemes with matching sets of critical questions, for example it
includes a scheme for argument from expert opinion. Having these features makes it
a much better ﬁt for the way evidence is actually processed and evaluated in a legal
setting like that of a trial in the common law system.
In the process of generating scientiﬁc evidence, scientists do not undertake their
epistemic activities only according to their own abstract thinking based on scientiﬁc
law or principle. Inevitably, subjective factors of the scientist themselves will have
some impact on testing results. These factors include their subjective prejudices,
interest with the case, personality, character and the systemic and human cultural
environment that a scientists lives in. In some cases, expert authentication cares
more about the social interests involved and less about the scientiﬁc facts. For
example, in psychiatry, it ought to be clear that, except for the diagnoses of
198
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

neurological diseases (treated by neurologists), no psychiatric diagnosis is, or can
be, pathology-driven. Instead, all such diagnoses are driven by non-medical, that is,
economic, personal, legal, political, or social considerations and incentives. Hence,
psychiatric diagnoses point neither to anatomical or physiological lesions, nor to
disease-causative agents, but allude to human behaviors and human problems (Szasz
1994, 37). Scientists are only human, and usually under the constant pressures,
internal and external, that can disturb the delicate incentive structure of the scientiﬁc
enterprise, they may be less thorough in seeking out evidence, or less scrupulously
honest in assessing its worth, than they would otherwise be (Haack 2006, 52). The
goal of law enforcement actions in criminal cases is to identify those who have
committed crimes and to prevent the criminal justice system from erroneously
convicting the innocent. So it matters a great deal whether an expert is credited to
testify about scientiﬁc evidence and whether the evidence is sufﬁciently reliable to
merit a fact ﬁnder’s reliance on the truth that it purports to support.
5.2 The belief and justiﬁcation about scientiﬁc evidence
5.2.1 Belief versus knowledge: the ﬂaws of traditional deﬁnition for knowledge
Belief and knowledge are taken to be the two basic concepts of epistemology, with
justiﬁcation arguably being a third one. Belief is an attitude of propositional
acceptance or assent (Sayre 1997, 33), usually expressed in a form of proposition ‘‘I
believe…’’. When we believe something, we will tend to act according to these
beliefs. In other words, belief is a kind of ground to act, but it is not a type of act or
activity, only a disposition for acting. There are ﬁve leading characteristics of belief
(Tuomela 2000, 122): (1) beliefs are involuntary, and are not normally subject to
direct voluntary control; (2) beliefs aim at truth; (3) beliefs are evidence-related in
that they are shaped by evidence for what is believed; (4) beliefs are subject to an
ideal of integration or agglomeration; and (5) beliefs come in degrees.
The primary problem in epistemology is to understand exactly what is needed in
order to have knowledge. In a notion derived from Plato’s dialogue Theaetetus,
philosophy has traditionally deﬁned knowledge as justiﬁed true belief (Ayer 1956,
34). According to traditional epistemology, the relationship between belief and
knowledge is that a belief is knowledge if the belief is true, and if the believer has a
justiﬁcation for believing it is true. One difference between belief and knowledge is
that the belief includes inward acceptance of what one knows. It is possible to know
that something is true but still not accept it inwardly.
There have been three modern attempts to determine whether a belief is a ‘‘true’’
belief. These are described as ‘‘reliability,’’ ‘‘internal consistency,’’ and ‘‘coher-
ence’’. Philosophers have shown that not one of these attempts is sufﬁcient to
determine that a belief is reasonable (Malone and Zwier 2001, 109–117). The reason
lies in the mainstream viewpoint of philosophy that classiﬁes belief as true belief
and false belief, i.e. believing a true proposition is a true belief and believing a false
proposition is a false belief. We argue that both ‘‘true belief’’ and ‘‘false belief’’ are
wrong concepts. Because one believes a true proposition does not mean his or her
belief is true, and when one believes a false proposition does not mean his or her
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
199
123

belief is false. There is no true or false for a belief because no matter what the
proposition that one believes is true or false, there always exists a belief objectively
in one’s mind. But the belief might be strong or weak. In other words, belief is not
of a true-or-false characteristic, rather, it is a matter of degree. The higher degree of
belief we hold on an item of evidence means the more conﬁdence we have in
holding this belief in a static state, and the more difﬁcult it is to change it to a
dynamic state. Moreover, Quine discriminates between disbelief and nonbelief—
between believing a sentence false and merely not believing it true. In his view,
disbelief is a case of belief; to believe a sentence false is to believe the negation of
the sentence true; and nonbelief is the state of suspended judgment: neither
believing the sentence true nor believing it false (Quine and Ullian 1978, 12).
Only when we have beliefs can we obtain knowledge, although we may still
accept things we do not believe. When knowledge cannot be obtained, belief
provides a direction for further actions. Knowledge reﬂects the result of objective
existing, belief not only rests on reﬂection, but also on psychology. Generally
speaking, knowledge is something that has been proved by objective evidence, or
can be proved by logic or other ways. The traditional deﬁnition of knowledge,
which regards knowledge as justiﬁed true beliefs, was subjected to the challenge of
‘‘Gettier problem’’ in the 1960s (Gettier 1963, 121–123).19 The Gettier problem
challenges the philosophical tradition of deﬁning knowledge of a proposition as
justiﬁed true belief. Although most contemporary epistemologists accept Gettier’s
conclusion, the Gettier problem did not hit the key point of traditional knowledge
theory. The main ﬂaw in traditional knowledge theory is that the knowledge was
established on the basis of a false concept—true belief. As we have mentioned
above, belief is not something that possesses true-or-false characteristic, but is a
matter of degree.
5.2.2 The updating of belief about scientiﬁc evidence
People hold different beliefs in different times or contexts. Some beliefs we shall
probably retain while we live, some we will abandon tomorrow in the face of
adverse evidence (Quine and Ullian 1978, 10). The beliefs accepted sometimes have
a strong inﬂuence upon our minds, but as soon as we get new evidence, these beliefs
may change. Then they tend to gain strength to a great extent, to modify our ideas
and actions, and even in some instances to become very well accepted and ﬁxed.
The traditional deﬁnition of knowledge is a kind of pure speculation and only
accounts for the source of knowledge abstractly. There needs to be new
epistemological methods to explain how knowledge is obtained and updated in
empirical science. From an epistemological perspective, an agent holds an epistemic
state or belief status at a time, but when new cognitive information is added, he or
she will adjust current belief status in order to maintain a reasonable and coherent
belief system. In a system of what is believed, some things stand unshakeable and
19 The Gettier problem is considered a problem in modern epistemology issuing from counter-examples
to the deﬁnition of knowledge as justiﬁed true belief. The problem owes its name to a three-page paper
published in 1963, by Edmund Gettier, called ‘‘Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?’’, in which Gettier
argues that this deﬁnition is not necessarily the case. See Gettier (1963).
200
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

some are more or less liable to shift. What stands fast does so, not because it is
intrinsically obvious or convincing. It is rather held fast by what lies around it
(Wittgenstein 1972, 40). If we believe some observations are consistent with our
prior belief, then our belief will be enhanced, and we can say we are more certain
now. On the other hand, if evidence is regarded as inconsistent with our prior belief
or property, then our adherence to this property will become more uncertain.
The updating of belief is a dynamic process. Bayes’ theorem is a mathematical
method that can describe the dynamic updating process of belief scientiﬁcally.
However, Bayes’ theorem needs conditions to express updating a belief. For
example, its prior probability cannot be zero. That is to say, when an item of
evidence is given a prior impossibility but the evidence is actually true, Bayesian
conditional probability cannot solve the problem.
After the 1970s, theories about belief update made progress in computer science,
artiﬁcial intelligence, and psychology, and became a subject of controversy in these
areas. One of the most inﬂuential belief update theories is AGM developed by
Alchourro´n et al. (1985). The AGM framework is characterized by three ways of
changing the belief state: expansion, contraction and revision. Each of these
operations models an idealized rational choice of beliefs in the light of new
information which may or may not be consistent with current beliefs.
The AGM theory is based on certain assumptions that make it applicable to
formally encoding common intuitions about the properties that a rational belief
change operator should satisfy. But the results of AGM cannot be directly applied to
many interesting contexts. The contraction of beliefs in the AGM is undertaken by
removing inconsistent beliefs from the original belief sets. This pure contraction of
beliefs seldom appears in the course of belief updates for fact-ﬁnders.
What is more, the AGM theory regards new beliefs as propositions and adds
them into original belief sets, but then does not consider the change in the degree of
beliefs. As a matter of fact, if the evidence that is consistent with a prior belief is
added, then the prior belief will be enhanced in degree, and it will not form another
new belief unless the evidence can produce a new belief for the agent. Similarly, if
the evidence that is inconsistent with a prior belief is added, then the prior belief
will be weakened in degree.
Thus, we suggest, during fact-ﬁnding based on scientiﬁc evidence, there are two
ways of updating fact-ﬁnders’ beliefs: expansion and contraction. In the external
quantity of belief, on the one hand, when the new evidence which fact-ﬁnders
received is consistent with the prior belief set, the belief set will be expanded, and
results in the quantity of elements in belief set will be increased. Conversely, when
the new evidence which fact-ﬁnder received contradicts the prior belief set, the
belief set will be contracted, and this results in the quantity of elements in belief set
that will be decreased. In the internal degree of belief, on the other hand, when the
new evidence which the fact-ﬁnder received supports the proposition that a prior
belief depends on, the belief set will be expanded, and this results in an enhanced
degree of belief. Similarly, when the new evidence which the fact-ﬁnder received is
against the proposition on which the prior belief depends, the belief set will be
contracted.
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
201
123

5.2.3 The justiﬁcation for beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence
Because beliefs do not have the properties ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’, and reasonable beliefs
are what we pursue, we can replace the concept of true belief with that of reasonable
belief. Therefore, if scientiﬁc evidence supports a proposition and it is properly
regarded as a kind of knowledge, the knowledge in the epistemology of scientiﬁc
evidence is justiﬁed reasonable belief. Justiﬁcation is the reason why someone
(properly) holds the belief as expressed by the argumentation supporting it. There
are two philosophical theories held to justify belief: foundationalism and
coherentism. Foundationalism holds that all knowledge and justiﬁed beliefs rest
ultimately on what are called basic beliefs (also commonly called foundational
beliefs). Basic beliefs are beliefs that give justiﬁcatory support to other beliefs, and
more derivative beliefs are based on those more basic beliefs. The basic beliefs are
said to be self-justifying or self-evident, that is, they enjoy a non-inferential warrant
(or justiﬁcation), i.e. they are not justiﬁed by other beliefs. Coherentism claims there
are no beliefs that are foundational or basic and every justiﬁed belief is justiﬁed in
virtue of its relations to other beliefs, i.e. someone’s belief is true if and only if it is
coherent with all or most of his or her other beliefs. The main criticism facing
coherentism is that there is no obvious way in which a coherent system relates to
anything that might exist outside of it.
Neither foundationalism nor coherentism can solely account for the justiﬁcation
of an agent’s belief (Haack 1994, 222).20 The justiﬁcation of a belief is based on
internal considerations concerning the qualities of the function producing the belief.
A belief is ‘‘justiﬁed’’ if and only if the input to the function is accurately
represented in the output. In order to reach this justiﬁcation, there are three factors
that should be take into consideration: evidence, belief and standard. Evidence
provides the factual foundation for belief and standard provides the judgmental root
for justiﬁcation. The status of justiﬁcation for belief depends on an argumentation
process in which the reasons for a belief are weighed evidentially against the
reasons against it. How warranted an empirical claim is dependent on how well it is
supported by experiential evidence and background beliefs, how reasonable of those
background beliefs are, independent of the belief in question, and how much the
relevant evidence the evidence includes. How well evidence supports a claim
depends on how well the claim is explanatorily integrated with the evidence (Haack
1999, 224).
Reasoning from an epistemic basis, we become justiﬁed in believing some new
propositions, and become justiﬁed in rejecting some propositions which we were
originally justiﬁed in believing. A concrete epistemological theory will consist of an
account, ﬁrst, of the nature of the epistemic basis, and second, of the reasoning
involved in extending and modifying the basis (Pollock 1983, 232). Regardless
whether it is direct justiﬁcation or inferential justiﬁcation, both use intrapersonal
induction. The intrapersonal inductive method derives from a mental model theory
of psychology. The idea that people rely on mental models can be traced back to
20 Based on the ﬂaws of both foundationalism and coherentism, Haack set up a foundherentist criteria.
See Haack (1994). It is not sure whether this new theory is helpful for the justiﬁcation for beliefs.
202
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

Kenneth Craik’s suggestion in 1943 that the mind constructs ‘‘small-scale models’’
of reality that it uses to anticipate events (Craik 1943, 51).
Mental models comprise what may be one of the most controversial and powerful
theories of human cognition yet formulated. The basic idea is that thinking consists
of the construction and use of models in the mind/brain that are structurally
isomorphic to the situations they represent. Thus, mental models can be constructed
from perception, imagination, or the comprehension of discourse. Johnson-Laird
and Byrne present a theory of conditional inference based upon the manipulation of
mental models. According to them, human reasoning relies on the construction and
manipulation of mental models and can be characterized as a three-step procedure.
First, individuals construct a model of the state of affairs described in the premises,
second they come up with a putative conclusion compatible with this model, and
third they try to falsify this conclusion by constructing alternative models of the
premises (Byrne and Johnson-Laird 1989, 564–575).21
The process of interpersonal induction could be classiﬁed into three stages which
are different from mental model theory in content. They are understanding, describing
and validity testing. In the stage of understanding, the agent understands the
implications of premises based on his or her background knowledge, and sets up an
internal model for the status of things the premises described according to his or her
perception. In the stage of describing, the agent manages to describe the model and
points out the contents that have not been disclosed in the premises. The correctness of
a conclusion relies on the quantity of mental models which the agent can set up: the
more models he or she sets up, the more difﬁculty there is in drawing correct
conclusions. In the validity testing stage, the agent will seek other possible models that
can falsify the conclusion. If there is no such a model, then it proves the conclusion is
valid; if there are some models of this kind, and then the agent will go back to the
second stage and conﬁrm whether there is any other true conclusion in all models
established. In this stage, the agent has to ﬁnd out counter-examples until he or she
have searched all possible models. If the agent could not conﬁrm whether there is any
other model based on the premises, then the conclusion will be drawn in a form of
uncertainty or probability. Through intrapersonal induction, the agent establishes one
or more mental characterizations for the factual conclusions that will be proved by
scientiﬁc evidence and use them to judge whether the conclusion is true or false.
6 An epistemological critique of the standards of admissibility for scientiﬁc
evidence
Human beings have a long intellectual history in ﬁnding facts by using scientiﬁc
evidence. But the ﬁrst formal admissibility standard for scientiﬁc evidence had not
been established until 1923 in Frye v. United States (Frye v. United States 1923),22
21 Byrne and Johnson-Laird (1989). Each mental model represents a possibility: people deduce that a
conclusion is necessary—it must be true—if it holds in all of their models of the premises; they infer that
it is probable—it is likely to be true—if it holds in most of their models of the premises, and they infer
that it is possible—it may be true—if it holds in at least one of their models of the premises.
22 Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1014 (D.C. Cir. 1923).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
203
123

and the subsequent Daubert trilogy of cases extended this standard (The trilogy of
cases began with Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., General Electric
Co. v. Joiner, and Kumho Tire co. v. Carmichael).23
6.1 Questioning to the standards of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence:
from Frye to post-Daubert
Before the twentieth century, courts did not pay attention to scientiﬁc validity in
assessing the admissibility of expert evidence. A practical standard called the
‘‘commercial marketplace test’’ at that time was that if a person could make a living
selling his knowledge in the marketplace, then presumably expertise existed
(Faigman et al. 1994). In 1923, in Frye v. United States, the court announced that a
novel scientiﬁc technique ‘‘must be sufﬁciently established to have gained general
acceptance in the particular ﬁeld in which it belongs’’ (Frye v. United States
1923).24 The Frye test had set the ﬁrst standard for admissibility of scientiﬁc
evidence. However, it did not specify how a court was to ﬁnd general acceptance
and it was difﬁcult to decide the deﬁnition of a relevant scientiﬁc community. For
example, in forensic computing, there is no leading professional body and the
boundaries of the community are hard to deﬁne (Strong 1970, 14).25 In practice,
judges usually rely on the testimony of the proffered expert about that issue. Three
assumptions lie behind the Frye test: (1) that there is a deﬁnite point at which
scientiﬁc claims or techniques cease to be ‘‘experimental’’ and become ‘‘demon-
strable’’, (2) that a claim or technique has not achieved this ‘‘demonstrable’’ status
unless it is generally accepted in the relevant community, and (3) that only
‘‘demonstrable’’ claims and techniques should be admitted. Haack argues that these
epistemological assumptions behind the Frye test are quite crude, because the Frye
test had the judge rely obliquely on the verdict of the appropriate scientiﬁc
subcommunity (Haack 1999, 28).
23 The trilogy of cases began with Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., General Electric Co.v.
Joiner, and Kumho Tire co. v. Carmichael.
24 The Frye case involved a murder trial in which the defendant sought to demonstrate his innocence
through the admission of a lie detector test that measured systolic blood pressure. The court rejected the
evidence, stating:
Just when a scientiﬁc principle or discovery crosses the line between the experimental and
demonstrable stages is difﬁcult to deﬁne. Somewhere in this twilight zone the evidential force of
the principle must be recognized, and while courts will go a long way in admitting expert
testimony deduced from a well-recognized scientiﬁc principle or discovery, the thing from which
the deduction is made must be sufﬁciently established to have gained general acceptance in the
particular ﬁeld in which it belongs. [See Frye v. United States, 54 App. D.C. 46, 293 F. 1014
(1923)].
25 Over time, a number of courts and commentators found the ‘‘general acceptance’’ test seriously
wanting. See Strong (1970) (‘‘The Frye standard, however, tends to obscure these proper considerations
by asserting an undeﬁnable general acceptance as the principal if not sole determinative factor’’);
(Giannelli 1980) (‘‘[T]he problems Frye has engendered—the difﬁculties in applying the test and the
anomolous results it creates—so far outweigh [its] advantages that the argument for adopting a different
test has become overwhelming’’); McCormick (1982) (Frye’s ‘‘main drawbacks are its inﬂexibility,
confusion of issues, and superﬂuity’’).
204
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

FRE displaced the Frye test in 1975. Even so, in the 70 years since its
formulation in the Frye case, the ‘‘general acceptance’’ test has been the dominant
standard for determining the admissibility of novel scientiﬁc evidence at trial. Until
1993, in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the Supreme Court
explained that in order for expert testimony to be considered reliable, the expert
must have derived his or her conclusions from the scientiﬁc method. In explaining
this evidentiary standard, the Daubert Court pointed to ﬁve factors that might be
considered by a trial judge: (1) whether a theory or technique can be (and has been)
tested; (2) whether the theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and
publication; (3) the known or potential rate of error of a particular scientiﬁc
technique; (4) the existence and maintenance of standards controlling the
technique’s operation; and (5) a scientiﬁc technique’s degree of acceptance within
a relevant scientiﬁc community (Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
1999).26 A critical difference between Daubert and Frye is the shift from proxy
criteria for assessing scientiﬁc evidence to a direct judicial inquiry into scientiﬁc
validity (Black et al. 1994, 715). Frye, on its face, does not ask the judge to decide
whether the evidence is reliable, but rather, whether the expert community deems it
reliable, while Daubert requires the judge to personally assess the reliability of the
evidence (Mnookin 2007, 764). Daubert is not supposed to be a methodological
handbook for good science; it is supposed to set out a standard for good adjudication
(Leiter 1997, 817). Giannelli summarized ﬁve important effects from Daubert. First,
some federal courts have read the Daubert trilogy as inviting a ‘‘reexamination even
of ‘generally accepted’ venerable, technical ﬁelds’’. Next, Daubert closed a major
loophole in the Frye rule; many Frye courts recognize an exception for non-novel
evidence, which exempts certain techniques from the general acceptance require-
ment. Daubert’s effect on the Frye test has also been noteworthy. Daubert forced
state courts to reexamine their admissibility standards for scientiﬁc evidence.
Daubert’s effect on the third approach to scientiﬁc evidence may have been the
most profound one. Finally, the 2000 amendment to Federal Rule of Evidence 702
can be traced to Daubert (Giannelli 2003, 7–12).27 However, the ‘‘standard of
reliability’’ set up in Daubert was subjected to many critiques.
26 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 509 U.S. 592–594 (1993).
27 Giannelli (2003, 7–12). The commentary accompanying the revised rule recites the ‘‘Daubert factors’’
and then goes on to explain that: Courts both before and after Daubert have found other factors relevant in
determining whether expert testimony is sufﬁciently reliable to be considered by the trier of fact. These
factors include: (1) whether experts are proposing to testify about matters growing naturally and directly
out of research they have conducted independent of the litigation, or whether they have developed their
opinions expressly for purposes of testifying; (2) Whether the expert has unjustiﬁably extrapolated from
an accepted premise to an unfounded conclusion; (3) Whether the expert has adequately accounted for
obvious alternative explanations; (4) Whether the expert is being as careful as he would be in his regular
professional work outside his paid litigation consulting; and (5) Whether the ﬁeld of expertise claimed by
the expert is known to reach reliable results for the type of opinion the expert would give. …The
amendment [to Rule 702] does not distinguish between scientiﬁc and other forms of expert testimony.
The trial court’s gatekeeping function applies to testimony by any expert. While the relevant factors for
determining reliability will vary from expertise to expertise, the amendment rejects the premise that an
expert’s testimony should be treated more permissively simply because it is outside the realm of science.
See FED. R. EVID. 702 Advisory Committee’s Note (2000 Amendments).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
205
123

As far as philosophical foundations are concerned, ﬁrstly, Daubert equates
scientiﬁc with validity and reliability, and confuses Karl Popper’s and Carl
Hempel’s incompatible philosophies of science by running ‘‘reliable’’ together with
‘‘scientiﬁc,’’ and ‘‘genuinely scientiﬁc’’ with ‘‘conducted in accordance with the
scientiﬁc method’’ (Haack 2008a, 989). The epistemological problems became
acute when, with Daubert, the Supreme Court interpreted the Federal Rules as
requiring the trial judge to make determinations about reliability, and to make an
appraisal of scientiﬁc methodology, not by appeal to the scientiﬁc community, but
on his own (Haack 2007a, 251). Haack thinks that the epistemological assumptions
on which the Daubert ruling rests are badly confused. Unlike the Frye test, the
Federal Rules as interpreted in Daubert require the trial judge to make
determinations about scientiﬁc methodology on his own. But what the Daubert
Court has to offer by way of advice about how to make such determinations is
difﬁcult to implement (Haack 1999, 231). It could be said that since Daubert, trial
judges must now weigh a complex set of philosophical and methodological factors
in deciding upon the admissibility of proffered scientiﬁc evidence, rather than
falling back on the simple proxy of ‘‘general acceptance’’ (Leiter 1997, 804).
Applying the Daubert rule, secondly, the judges demanded a level of certainty
that was virtually impossible to provide. It is not so easy to apply the Daubert
standard in practice because it set up an unrealistic requirement in epistemic
competence for assessing scientiﬁc evidence. Blackmun explicitly stated that
‘‘arguably, there are no certainties’’, and Judge Kozinski wrote ‘‘Daubert puts
federal judges in an uncomfortable position’’.28 Academics, practitioners, and trial
judges have complained that the standard is unclear, difﬁcult to interpret, leads to
inconsistent results, and requires hearings that cost time and money, or are too
confusing to the jury (Browne et al. 1998, 5). For example, Mason critiqued the
current approaches to the scientiﬁc evidence problem, particularly the standard set
in the Daubert case. He argued that any admissibility standard of scientiﬁc evidence
ought to consider the potential of a piece of evidence to acquaint the trier of fact
with the truth, but the Daubert standard is inappropriate because it does not aid in
the search for truth, and thus justice is not served. A scientiﬁc admissibility standard
ought to take into account truth, knowledge and justice, but the uncertainty model
contained in the Daubert standard only takes into account a particular theory of
knowledge, making Daubert’s shortcomings call for an alternative (Mason 2001,
900, 902). Mason concluded that there is no solution, per se, to the scientiﬁc
evidence problem because the presumption that scientiﬁc evidence might be ‘‘more
true’’ or ‘‘less true’’ is erroneous (Mason 2001, 888). The Supreme Court’s Daubert
decision or, more appropriately, some judges’ interpretation of Daubert, encourages
an anti-scientiﬁc method for evaluating scientiﬁc evidence requiring that each piece
of scientiﬁc data be evaluated independently for relevance and reliability (Michaels
2005, 40). Some scholars, for example Friedman, argue that reliability is an
inappropriate, misleading standard for testing the admissibility of expert evidence. It
does not reﬂect the way we should think about admissibility issues, and it ought to
be discarded, In his opinion, the model created by Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm,
28 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm, Inc., 43 F.3d 1311, 1315 (9th Cir.).
206
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

Inc. and General Electric Co. v. Joiner, and extended by Kumho Tire co. v.
Carmichael, in which trial courts, reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard,
act as gatekeepers to prevent jurors from being bamboozled by unreliable evidence,
is not a useful one (Friedman 2003, 1047–1048). What needs to be taken into
account are the characteristics of scientiﬁc evidence that make it different from
other kinds of evidence.
In Kumho Tire co. v. Carmichael, the Supreme Court shifted the question
‘‘whether an expert testimony is scientiﬁc’’ to ‘‘whether an expert testimony is
reliable’’ (Kumho Tire co. v. Carmichael 1999).29 In the post-Daubert era, as the
new FRE 702 is written, the key term is ‘‘knowledge’’, not ‘‘scientiﬁc’’. Therefore,
the judge is required not only to make a legal judgment, but one of relevance and
reliability of scientiﬁc evidence as well. Incorporating the new Federal Rule of
Evidence 702, the threefold epistemological criterion of sufﬁciency, reliability, and
reliable applicability to the case at hand seems to require a federal district judge to
perform a logician’s analysis on each expert’s testimony (Malone and Zwier 2001,
103–104). According to Malone and Zwier, the Supreme Court’s epistemological
confusion is a natural result of the ongoing debate between philosophy and science
(Malone and Zwier 2001, 107).
6.2 The standard of reliability as an evidence rule
There are three key concepts concerned with the evaluation of scientiﬁc evidence in
the legal context: admissibility, reliability, and validity. There were three important
developments in the 1990s that affected the admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence. The
ﬁrst was the advent of DNA proﬁling and the ‘‘wars’’ that surrounded admissibility.
The second involved so-called ‘‘scientiﬁc evidence abuse cases’’. The third
development is the Daubert trilogy: the Supreme Court’s decisions in Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., General Electric Co. v. Joiner, and Kumho Tire
Co. v. Carmichael. Daubert and its progeny have dramatically altered the
admissibility issue (Giannelli 2003, 1–3). FRE 702 sets up a standard of reliability
for scientiﬁc evidence, it says:
If scientiﬁc, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of
fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness
qualiﬁed as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education,
may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) the testimony
is based upon sufﬁcient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of
reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles
and methods reliably to the facts of the case.30
The reliability of scientiﬁc evidence, however, is not free of difﬁculties, for several
reasons.
First, the limits of peer review and publication make it is very difﬁcult to apply in a
trial. Peer review is described as: ‘‘an organized method for evaluating scientiﬁc work
29 Kumho Tire co. v. Carmichael. 526 U.S. 137 (1999).
30 FED. R. EVID, 702 (2009).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
207
123

which is used by scientists to certify the correctness of procedures, establish the
plausibility of results, and allocate scarce resources (such as journal space, research
funds, recognition, and special honor)’’ (Chubin and Hackett 1990, 2). Peer review
seems to operate more effectively where scientists share backgrounds and theoretical
commitments. Where there are substantial differences of approach, or in adversarial
contexts, peer review may become a less reliable mechanism (Edmond 2000, 231). It is
impossible to ask a forensic test result to be peer-reviewed because of the limited time in
litigation. Publication (which is but one element of peer review) is not a sine qua non of
admissibility; it does not necessarily correlate with reliability (Jasanoff 1990, 61–76).
Haack argues that Justice Blackmun’s observation about peer review and publication in
Daubert isneither necessary nor sufﬁcient for evidentiary reliability. Nor is his adviceto
courts that peer-reviewed publication may be relevant, but is not a dispositive
consideration in determining admissibility of much practical help (Haack 2007b,
791–792).31 With more and more papers submitted to more and more journals, the
quality of reviewers and the time and attention they can give to their task is likely to
decline. And as pressures on journals and their staffs increase, the hope of prestige and
proﬁt causes further distortions. Some journals suspend the peer-review process when
they publish symposia sponsored by pharmaceutical companies. Some reap large sums
from the sale of large numbers of reprints to the companies concerned. Some put
pressure on authors to cite other papers in the same journal, thus raising its ‘‘impact
factor’’ and boosting library orders (Haack 2007b, 801–802). In short, peer review is
expensive, slow, prone to bias, open to abuse, possibly anti-innovatory, and unable to
detect fraud (Smith 1997, 759). Work that has passed pre-publication peer review is no
guarantee that it is not ﬂawed or even fraudulent, and the factthat work has been rejected
by reviewers is no guarantee that it is not an important advance (Haack 2007b, 808).
Second, there is a matter of ‘‘error rates’’. How precisely must we know the error
rate of a particular technique? And what does one make of a technique with a
known, very high error rate? The rate may be known with some precision, but that
does not mean the technique gets a ‘‘yes’’ answer to this component of the reliability
inquiry (Nance 2003, 200). The error rates are very difﬁcult to calculate in deciding
admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence, so it is unrealistic to regard it as one of the
conditions of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence. And the error rates which people
can accept depend on the mission or the questions that must be answered. It should
be noted that error rate in scientiﬁc research is only a crude estimate.
Third, gaining general acceptance in the particular ﬁeld in which it belongs can
be problematic. The Daubert standard equates the question of whether expert
testimony is reliable with the question of whether it is genuinely scientiﬁc. That
something has been generally accepted in a ﬁeld does not mean it is scientiﬁc. What
is more, many scientiﬁc techniques do not fall within the domain of a single
academic discipline or professional ﬁeld, especially in the current interdisciplinary
era. For example, DNA involves several disciplines such as molecular biology,
genetics, environmental biology, physical anthropology, evolutionary biology,
population genetics, and statistics. General acceptance of RFLP (DNA) does not
31 But she thinks that surviving the long-term process of review by the scientiﬁc community is a much
better indicator of scientiﬁc validity. See Haack (2007b).
208
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

mean that PCR (DNA), or even a particular type of PCR such as DQalpha, is
necessarily admissible.
Frye, Daubert or Kumho Tire had attempted to set a standard for the admissibility
of scientiﬁc evidence in legal proceedings. Law manages to establish a standard of
admissibility for scientiﬁc evidence that is different from lay witnesses. It mainly
subjects the expert witness to different requirements from the lay witness. But
expert testimony gets special treatment in Daubertwith regard to the distinction
between sufﬁciency and admissibility, and often trial courts seem to make a
sufﬁciency determination in the guise of an admissibility determination (Allen et al.
2002, 772). On the one hand, what we should pay attention to is that the so-called
Frye and Daubert rules both are made through excluding scientiﬁc evidence. This
means that neither Frye nor Daubert provided a direct source for the admissibility of
scientiﬁc evidence. As a kind of evidence rule, on the other hand, the Daubert
standard was made for civil cases, and whether it is appropriate to criminal cases is
still in question (Beecher-Monas 2009, 1).32 Commentators have noted that on the
whole, at least in civil cases, Daubert has made it harder, not easier, to get scientiﬁc
testimony admitted.33 Kumho Tire extended Daubert to techniques and other
specialized knowledge; it is very difﬁcult for the Daubert standard to provide a
32 Erica Beecher-Monas remarks that over the past decade, courts throughout the common law system
have taken an increasingly antithetical approach to expert testimony. In civil cases, and in criminal DNA
identiﬁcation cases, courts appear to be actively engaged in scrutinizing the scientiﬁc testimony that
comes before them. Defense attorneys appear to have little difﬁculty in challenging questionable scientiﬁc
testimony. Research scientists are brought into the discourse as experts for the parties or the court. Courts
are articulating the bases for their admissibility decisions, and these decisions are being reviewed on
appeal. In the criminal cases, however, where criminal identiﬁcation procedures other than DNA are
concerned, each of the participants in the legal process has failed. Prosecutors repeatedly present experts
whose testimony they have reason to know is (at best) dubious. Defense attorneys fail to bring challenges
to the scientiﬁc validity of even patently ﬂawed expert testimony. Courts, when challenges do arise, fail to
engage in serious gatekeeping. And reviewing courts refuse to ﬁnd shoddy gatekeeping to be an abuse of
discretion. The consequence of this antithetical approach to admissibility is that the rational search for
truth, in which the adversary system is supposedly engaged, is taken seriously only in civil cases. While
the civil courts are busy minutely scrutinizing scientiﬁc studies proffered as the basis for expert
testimony, the criminal courts are admitting into evidence testimony (again, with the exception of DNA)
for which those studies have never been done. See Beecher-Monas (2009, Article 2).
33 See, e.g., Heinzerling (2006). The report on the forensic sciences in the United States released by the
National Academy of Sciences on February 18, 2009, has noted the situation is very different in civil
cases from criminal cases. The party who loses before the trial court in a nonfrivolous civil case always
has the right and incentive to appeal to contest the admission or exclusion of expert testimony. In
addition, plaintiffs and defendants, equally, are more likely to have access to expert witnesses in civil
cases, whereas prosecutors usually have an advantage over most defendants in offering expert testimony
in criminal cases. And, ironically, the appellate courts appear to be more willing to second-guess trial
court judgments on the admissibility of purported scientiﬁc evidence in civil cases than in criminal cases.
See the National Academy of Sciences (2009, 71). See also Faigman et al. (2007–2008) (discussing
studies suggesting that courts ‘‘employ Daubert more lackadaisically in criminal trials—especially in
regard to prosecution evidence—than in civil cases—especially in regard to plaintiff evidence’’);
Risinger, op. cit., supra note 52, p. 100 (‘‘The system shipwreck I fear is that in 10 years we will ﬁnd that
civil cases are subject to strict standards of expertise quality control, while criminal cases are not. The
result would be that the pocketbooks of civil defendants would be protected from plaintiffs’ claims by
exclusion of undependable expert testimony, but that criminal defendants would not be protected from
conviction based on similarly undependable expert testimony. Such a result would seem particularly
unacceptable given the law’s claim that inaccurate criminal convictions are substantially worse than
inaccurate civil judgments, reﬂected in the different applicable standards of proof’’).
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
209
123

useful guide for deciding all evidence’s admissibility in fact-ﬁnding. Although FRE
702 requires admissible expert testimony must be based upon sufﬁcient facts or
data, the product of reliable principles must have applied reliably to the facts of the
case, and we should note that the standard of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence
does not provide a new way for seeking truth (Allen et al. 2002, 759). For this
reason, Edmond suggests federal judges should begin to think about an exit strategy:
They should be systematically downsizing Daubert. They should start winding
back the Daubert era by rejecting simplistic models of science and revising
their anxiety about plaintiffs and civil juries. They should also begin to apply
the Daubert criteria more ﬂexibly and take a more expansive view of science
for litigation that extends to the state and corporate-sponsored science. They
should also reﬂect on the type of litigation and the rights, interests and
responsibilities at stake. Judges should also consider the kinds of evidence and
the resources available to the parties (Edmond 2007, 923).
Friedman has even taken the position that Daubert’s admissibility requirement is
not necessary at all, and that expert evidence should simply be treated like all other
evidence (Friedman 2003, 1047). This remark indicates that an epistemological
reconstruction of admissibility could be of great help for fact-ﬁnders to admit and
assess scientiﬁc evidence.
6.3 An epistemological reconstruction for admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence
As a point of departure, roughly, expert testimony can be divided into scientiﬁc
expert testimony and nonscientiﬁc expert testimony. Although ultimately all types
of expert knowledge are based on inferences from underlying experience, the
epistemology of nonscientiﬁc expert testimony knowledge is different from that of
scientiﬁc propositions. A promising epistemological approach—scrutinizing the
manner in which nonscientiﬁc expert information is generated to develop
admissibility standards ensuring the reliability of nonscientiﬁc expert testimony—
has been formulated in the article ‘‘The Next Step After Daubert: Developing a
Similarly Epistemological Approach to Ensuring the Reliability of Nonscientiﬁc
Expert Testimony’’ (Imwinkelried 1994, 2271). Although the Daubert Court
employed epistemological analysis to develop standards of validating scientiﬁc
testimony, it is necessary to reconstruct the epistemological admissibility of
scientiﬁc evidence based on the above discussion.
It is noteworthy that distinguishing admissible from inadmissible scientiﬁc
evidence is a different problem from distinguishing real science from pseudoscience.
First, as noted above, not all expert evidence is necessarily science. It is well
established that legitimate experts can be technicians or others with ‘‘specialized
knowledge’’. Second, philosophers of science tend to think about knowledge claims
in larger units of analysis than do lawyers and judges. Admissibility determinations
tend to focus on smaller units of analysis. Philosophers are generally thinking about
how one can defend the knowledge claims of a broad approach to knowing the world,
whereas the ‘‘task at hand’’ of judges is thinking about how one can defend one very
speciﬁc
knowledge
claim
(Risinger
2000,
767).
Finally,
admissibility
is
210
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

fundamentally a policy determination, whereas Popper was concerned with deﬁning
‘‘science’’ as a particular, and special, form of inquiry (Cole 2007, 809–810). There is
one other factor to take into account in deciding how receptive the law should be to
specialized evidence: a judge’s proclivity to exclude unusual types of specialized
evidence can prevent litigants from taking advantage of innovative, highly probative
information and, as a result, detract from the search for truth (Allen et al. 2002, 738).
The courts have two broad choices in dealing with expert evidence. One option is to
allow all expert evidence into court and rely on that great truth-producing engine,
cross-examination, to sort good evidence from bad. The other is to seek to ‘‘manage’’
expert evidence in some way—that is, to adopt some sort of admissibility procedure,
mechanism, threshold, etc., by which the fact-ﬁnder is not permitted to hear some
expert evidence (Cole 2007, 805). The real problem in trial is that too many trial judges
idealize science. Justice Blackmun asserts: ‘‘Of course, it would be unreasonable to
conclude that the subject of scientiﬁc testimony must be ‘known’ to a certainty;
arguably, there are no certainties in science’’ (Daubert vs. Merrell Dow Pharmaceu-
ticals, 1993).34 The paradoxical consequence of idealizing science is that those judges
are either too harsh or too generous toward scientiﬁc experts in the courtroom. By ‘‘too
harsh’’, we mean that such a trial judge sometimes expects too much from science,
which after all is not a perfect enterprise, even when the relevant areas of science are
relatively solid and respectable. The scientiﬁc issues in litigation tend to turn not on
ﬁrmly-established, well-warranted core scientiﬁc principles, but on still-controversial
scientiﬁc issues where there remains room for reasonable disagreement even among
competent, honest scientists in the ﬁeld (Haack 2008a, 1001). By ‘‘too generous’’, we
mean that such a trial judge sometimes idolizes scientiﬁc authority without critically
evaluating its limitations. In either case, the best science for a particular lawsuit can be
missed (Caudill and Larue 2006, 3–4). In other words, not only does the legal system
quite often seek scientiﬁc answers when no warranted answers are available, it also
quite often fails to adapt, or adapts painfully slowly, as new scientiﬁc answers become
available (Haack 2008a, 1004).
It seems that there is a wide gap between standards of admissibility and
epistemology. Epistemology, however, the study of the nature and grounds of
knowledge, can answer the question of why we need a gatekeeper. From an epistemic
vantage point, the question of whether we need judges to act as gatekeepers depends on
whether gatekeeping actually promotes better, that is, more accurate and more rational,
decision making in the context of a particular social practice such as legal proceedings
(Beecher-Monas 2007, 14). The adversarial character of the legal system may mean
that even solid scientiﬁc information gets distorted. It may suppress or sequester
relevant data. It may demand scientiﬁc answers when none is yet well-warranted
(Haack 2008a, 1000). Thus we have admissibility standards so that those proffered
witnesses who choose to don the mantle of ‘‘expert’’ may be held to a higher standard
than the mere ‘‘relevance’’ required of ordinary witnesses. Under Daubert, ‘‘relevance’’
is neatly paired with an equally succinct R concept: ‘‘reliability’’ (Cole 2007, 805).
Paternalism in any domain of legal regulation supposes that rules should
substitute the rulemaker’s judgment about what is best for the agents’ own
34 Daubert vs. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 1993, p. 2795.
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
211
123

judgments. Epistemic paternalism substitutes the rulemaker’s judgments about what
is epistemically best for agents own judgment. Assuming that the primary epistemic
value is truth, epistemic paternalism entails designing rules of evidence that are
epistemically best for jurors, i.e. that lead them to form true beliefs about disputed
matters of facts (Leiter 1997, 803, 814).
Given the limited amount of relevant empirical scientiﬁc evidence that is
typically available, however, deciding in a legal setting whether such claims are
actually true or false can be extremely difﬁcult. As courts have no choice but to
decide such matters, they need a rational process by which to synthesize the
evidence for or against causal claims—both with respect to our best scientiﬁc guess
about the truth of the claim and with respect to the scientiﬁc uncertainty about such
a guess (Scheines 2008, 960). Scientiﬁc investigation is not an effort to reach
consensus; it is, rather, an effort to answer the questions at issue. Consensus is a
byproduct that arises when enough members of the relevant scientiﬁc community
come to see the evidence as warranting a claim or a theory (Haack 2008a, 997). But
once scientiﬁc evidence enters the court, consensus becomes essential.
The admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence is not free of difﬁculties as a rule, but an
epistemological standard for admissibility is available. Based on the structural
analysis of ESE above, we can set the standard of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence
now from an epistemological perspective as follows. The admissibility of scientiﬁc
evidence should depend ﬁrst on its internal reliability based on scientiﬁc validity.
Second, it should depend on the justiﬁcation for beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence.
Under this condition, evidence law can do more than admitting scientiﬁc evidence in
trials. For example, some potential solutions to admissibility standards of scientiﬁc
evidence are suggested, including using science courts, letting the jury hear all of the
scientiﬁc evidence proffered, or asking trial judges to learn the relevant science.
A new approach put forward by Mason is that judges should consider three
factors: (1) relevance of the evidence; (2) the evidence’s ability to assist the trier of
fact in a determination of legal truth; (3) the judges’ overall conﬁdence in the
science (Mason 2001, 905). Mason’s idea is to let in all evidence that might help the
triers of fact in their quest for truth, and the judge’s role in determining the
admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence is only to make sure it is relevant and legitimate.
This approach respects science as a method of inquiry because it puts more evidence
in front of the ﬁnders of fact and lets them come to a conclusion regarding the
evidence. However, as Mason comments himself, this type of approach makes the
gatekeepers’ role easier in some respects and more difﬁcult in others. They may
have to learn disciplines they have never been exposed to before or employ the help
of special tutors to perform the task (Mason 2001, 906).
Haack argues that legal efforts to winnow decent scientiﬁc evidence from the
chaff have often been based on false assumptions about science and how it works. It
doesn’t follow, unfortunately, that if we had a better understanding of science, all
problems could be easily resolved. She remarks:
A better understanding of scientiﬁc evidence and inquiry will reveal why it has
proven so difﬁcult to ﬁnd a legal form of words that will ensure that only
decent scientiﬁc evidence is admitted, or a simple way to delegate some of the
212
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

responsibility to scientists themselves; but rather than suggesting any easy
solutions it accentuates the need to think hard and carefully about what goals
we should be trying to achieve, and what kinds of imperfection in achieving
them we are more willing, and what we are less willing, to tolerate (Haack
1999, 219).
An empirical study, however, drew a different conclusion. A survey of 400 judges
and a mock jury mtDNA study showed that their educational attainment and
background in science and math were associated with better comprehension of the
scientiﬁc evidence (Hans 2008, 44). It is really difﬁcult to judge the worth of
scientiﬁc evidence without substantive knowledge of the appropriate ﬁeld, but
understanding scientiﬁc evidence in the proceedings of fact-ﬁnding does not
necessarily require judges or jury to learn scientiﬁc knowledge like scientists, but to
know it epistemologically, so to speak. Judicial decision-making is subject to
relevant standard and objective facts, but ﬁnally depends on human judgment.
Although the justiﬁcation for beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence rests on its reliability
and expert’s credibility, evidence law is playing an important role during the course
of justiﬁcation because discovering reliability and credibility relies on legal
techniques such as cross-examination. After an item of scientiﬁc evidence is
admitted, the next job is to judge its worth for proving facts at issue according to
evidence law.
At this time, expert testimony is subject to the rules of evidence law. And the
validity of a scientiﬁc principle and the validity of the technique applying that
principle may be established through judicial notice, legislative recognition,
stipulation, or the presentation of evidence—including expert testimony (Giannelli
2003, 4). The judge does not have to decide whether a given scientiﬁc hypothesis is
actually correct. Rather, what the gatekeeper must determine is whether there are
good grounds for the expert’s testimony. Once this determination has been made, it
remains the jury’s province to decide which set of battling experts has the most
persuasive argument (Beecher-Monas 2007, 19). If deciding a case actually is
reducible to a choice between the hunches of experts that cannot be further
explained, the case most likely does not belong in the courts (Allen et al. 2002, 766).
Truth is hard to come by, but both the legal and scientiﬁc communities have evolved
principles and procedures to minimize bias and integrate declarative truth with
scientiﬁc and judicial realism (Glucksberg 2008, 1113). If there were something that
needs to be reformed, it should be law, not science.
7 Conclusion
There are great differences between the quest for truth in the courtroom and the
quest for truth in the laboratory. Fact-ﬁnding based on scientiﬁc evidence integrates
both models of truth-seeking. Scientiﬁc epistemology, evidential epistemology,
naturalized epistemology and social epistemology provide theoretical resources for
the ESE, which we present as a methodology for understanding and using scientiﬁc
evidence. We have argued that, in line with our epistemological theory, the function
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
213
123

of scientiﬁc evidence in truth-ﬁnding needs to be examined from transmission of
evidence from the internal framework to the external one. Internal epistemology
depends on the properties of scientiﬁc evidence itself and aims at proving the
validity of scientiﬁc evidence using scientiﬁc principles and methods, assessing its
reliability based on the factors of reproducibility, causes, uncertainty and error rate.
External epistemology is constructed by factors outside scientiﬁc evidence itself,
including the credibility of scientiﬁc experts, and the beliefs and justiﬁcation for
beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence by agents.
An important tool for the assessment of scientiﬁc evidence in external
epistemology is the logical argumentation scheme for argument from expert
opinion, along with its accompanying set of critical questions that can be
represented as additional assumptions embedded in the form of an argument. This
tool can be used to judge whether an argument from expert opinion is acceptable or
not, based on critical questions that can be employed to probe into the weak points
of the testimony. In this external setting, belief is not a true-or-false characteristic
but a matter of degree and ﬁxation of acceptance depending on doubts raised by
critical questioning when the evidence is critically examined (Walton 2006,
745–777). Traditional epistemology established knowledge on the basis of a false
concept—true belief. On our theory, scientiﬁc evidence should be based on a
process of justifying the agent’s reasonable acceptance of a hypothesis in an inquiry
that ends in proof. We have shown in section V how this procedure can be modeled
using the Carneades Argumentation System. Any proposition that cannot be proved
in an inquiry to an appropriate standard of proof following this kind of
epistemological procedure is not acceptable as knowledge.
This article concludes what the basic theory and method of the ESE should have
from internal and external components. The internal components are comprised of
the properties of scientiﬁc evidence itself, involving scientiﬁc validity (scientiﬁc
principles and method) and reliability (reproducibility, causes, uncertainty and error
rate). In Part IV, an evidential model of scientiﬁc inquiry is presented that views
knowledge as defeasible. On this model, a proposition is classiﬁed as knowledge in
a scientiﬁc inquiry if it is accepted as supported strongly enough by the evidence to
meet an appropriate standard of proof even though it may have to retracted later,
once new data comes in that proves it to be no longer acceptable as knowledge. In
the model, a proposition p does not have to be true to be included in knowledge, but
falsiﬁability holds. If it is shown to be false, it has to be rejected as part of scientiﬁc
knowledge. In Part V, it was contended that the external epistemology of scientiﬁc
evidence is determined by how the internal elements of scientiﬁc evidence are used
in an external procure for fact-ﬁnding in a legal setting, including the credibility of
expert witnesses, the beliefs fact-ﬁnders place on scientiﬁc evidence, and
justiﬁcation for these beliefs. The ESE plays a fundamental role in decision
making to admit or exclude scientiﬁc evidence by fact-ﬁnders, therefore, in Part VI,
this article critically reviewed the standards of admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence
from an epistemological point of view, and argued that the reliability of scientiﬁc
evidence is not free of difﬁculties as a rule, but an epistemological standard for its
admissibility is available. The admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence should depend (1)
on its internal reliability, based on scientiﬁc validity; (2) on the credibility of expert
214
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

witness testimony; and (3) the standard of admissibility should be decided by the
justiﬁcation for beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence. Part VII drew the conclusions that
(1) truth-ﬁnding based on scientiﬁc evidence is a procedure for justifying fact-
ﬁnders’ reasonable beliefs and (2) justiﬁcation for beliefs about scientiﬁc evidence
maps a belief onto a dichotomous legal choice on admissibility.
In this paper we have taken an approach that is different in four key respects from
the viewpoint of traditional epistemology in analytical philosophy. First, we reject
the principle that knowledge has to imply truth by deductive logic. Our view is
based on the premise that scientiﬁc knowledge is defeasible, a premise we have
argued for. Second, we have adopted an evidence-based epistemology according to
which scientiﬁc knowledge is based on critical analysis of evidence both for and
against a hypothesis. Third, instead of deﬁning scientiﬁc knowledge in terms of
justiﬁed true belief, we deﬁne it as something that is achieved through a process of
marshaling evidence in a scientiﬁc inquiry, and represents a species of ﬁrmly ﬁxed
acceptance set in place by a convergence of scientiﬁc theories and research results.
Fourth, we don’t see scientiﬁc knowledge exclusively in light of this internal
procedure of an inquiry only participated in by the scientists who are specialists in a
particular ﬁeld or area of science. We also see scientiﬁc knowledge as something
that needs to be identiﬁed, evaluated and used in other settings, notably in law and
other settings of public policy decision-making, for example in legislative
assemblies.
It is worth strongly emphasizing that our view of scientiﬁc knowledge should not
be seen as taking it to be an exclusively internal concept. Evaluating scientiﬁc
evidence is a task that needs to be undertaken both internally in science, and
externally in legal and other settings. To support this view we have argued that the
dialogue interface of argument from expert opinion along with its set of critical
questions provides an argumentation framework that shows how the ESE theory is
feasible. It enables internal scientiﬁc knowledge to be translated over into a wider
arena in which individual non-expert citizens and groups can make use of it. They
take a hypothesis as scientiﬁc because they can understand it well enough to base
rational arguments on it, subject to the limitation of not being experts themselves.
Acknowledgments
This paper was supported by grant 70873134, Study on Evidence Management
within the Model of Factual Investigation, from the National Natural Science Foundation of China and by
grant 410-2005-0398, Argumentation in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law, of the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada.
References
Alchourro´n CE, Ga¨rdenfors P, Makinson D (1985) On the logic of theory change: partial meet contraction
and revision functions. J Symb Log 50(2):510–530
Allen RJ (1994) Burdens of proof, uncertainty and ambiguity in modern legal discourse. Harv J Law
Public Policy 17(3):627–646
Allen RJ, Leiter B (2001) Naturalized epistemology and the law of evidence. Va L Rev 87:1491–1497
Allen RJ et al (2002) Evidence: text, problems, and cases. Aspen Publishers, Germantown, pp 738–806
Aristotle (1831) Metaphysics. English translation in Barnes J (ed) The complete works of Aristotle.
Princeton University Press, Cambridge, pp 7–10
Ayer AJ (1956) The problem of knowledge. Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, pp 34–47
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
215
123

Beecher-Monas E (2007) Evaluating scientiﬁc evidence: an interdisciplinary framework for intellectual
due process. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 2–46
Beecher-Monas E (2009) Paradoxical validity determinations: a decade of antithetical approaches to
admissibility of expert evidence. Int Comment Evidence 6(2):1–28
Bench-Capon TJM (1997) Argument in artiﬁcial intelligence and law. Artif Intell Law 5:249–261
Berger MA, Solan LM (2008) The uneasy relationship between science and law: an essay and
introduction. Brooklyn L Rev 73:847–850
Bishop MA, Trout JD (2005) Epistemology and psychology of human judgment. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp 8–17
Black B, Ayala FJ, Saffran-Brinks C (1994) Science and the law in the wake of Daubert: a new search for
scientiﬁc knowledge. Tex Law Rev 72:715–801
Boden LI, Ozonoff D (2008) Litigation-generated science: why should we care? Environ Health Perspect
116:117–122
Botein B, Gordon MA (2002) The trial of the future. In: Bonsignore JJ et al (eds) Before the law: an
introduction to the legal process. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston, pp 394–395
Brocknan J (1996) The third culture: beyond the scientiﬁc revolution. Simon & Schuster, Touchstone,
pp 17–23
Browne MN et al (1998) The epistemological role of expert witnesses and toxic torts. Am Bus L J
36(1):5–72
Byrne RMJ, Johnson-Laird PN (1989) Spatial reasoning. J Mem Lang 28:564–575
Caudill DS, Larue LH (2006) No magic wand: the idealization of science in law. Rowman & Littleﬁeld
Publishers, Inc., Lanham, pp 3–4
Chubin D, Hackett E (1990) Peerless science: peer review and US science policy. State University of New
York Press, Albany, pp 2–14
Cohen LJ (1977) The probable and the provable. Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 43–49
Cole S (2005) More than zero: accounting for error in latent ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation. J Crim Law
Criminol 95(3):1030–1034
Cole SA (2007) Where the rubber meets the road: thinking about expert evidence as expert testimony.
Villanova L Rev 52:805–819
Conee E, Feldman R (2004) Evidentialism: essay in epistemology. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp 296–297
Cooke E (2006) Peirce’s pragmatic theory of inquiry: fallibilism and indeterminacy. Continuum, London,
pp 34–45
Corbı´ JE (1993) In defense of a normative scientiﬁc epistemology, philosophical issues. Sci Knowl
3:304–305
Craik K (1943) The nature of explanation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 51–67
Damasˇka MR (1997) Evidence law adrift. Yale University Press, Yale, pp 143–150
Dwyer D (2008) Some philosophical concerns about the court’s competence to assess expert reports.
Expert en Recht 1:134–135
Edmond G (2000) Judicial representations of scientiﬁc evidence. Mod L Rev 63(2):231–251
Edmond G (2007) Supersizing Daubert science for litigation and its implication for legal practice and
scientiﬁc research. Villanova L Rev 52:923–924
Einstein A (1954) Physics and reality, (1936), in ideas and opinions of Albert Einstein. Crown publisher,
New York, p 290 (trans. Sonja Bargmenn)
Faigman DL (1999) Legal alchemy: the use and misuse of science in the law. W. H. Freeman, San
Francisco, pp 50–67
Faigman DL et al (2007–2008) Modern scientiﬁc evidence: the law and science of expert testimony.
Thomson/West, Eagan, MN, § 1:35, p 105
Faigman DL (2008) Scientiﬁc realism in constitutional law. Brooklyn L Rev 73:1072–1073
Faigman DL et al (1994) Check your crystal ball at the courthouse door, please: exploring the past,
understanding the present, and worrying about the future of scientiﬁc evidence. Cardozo L Rev
15:1799–1805
Faigman DL et al (2002) Science in the law: standards, statistics and research issues. West Group, Eagan,
pp 117–123
Foster KR, Huber PW (1999) Judging science: scientiﬁc knowledge and the federal courts. The MIT
Press, London, pp 111–123
French S, da Costa NCA (2003) Science and partial truth: a unitary approach to models and scientiﬁc
reasoning. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 84–106
216
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

Friedman RD (2003) Squeenzing Daubert out of the picture. Seton Hall L Rev 33:1047–1048
Gettier EL (1963) Is justiﬁed true belief knowledge? Analysis 23:121–123
Giannelli PC (1980) The admissibility of novel scientiﬁc evidence: Frye V. United States, a half-century
later 80. Colum Law Rev 1197:1207–1208
Giannelli PC (2003) Admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence. Okla City Univ Law Rev 28:1–12
Giannelli PC, Imwinkelried EJ (1999) Scientiﬁc evidence. Lexis Law Publishing, Charlottesville, pp 2–24
Gillies D (2000) Philosophical theories of probability. Routledge, London, pp 1–6
Glucksberg S (2008) The discovery of truth in context: comments on Faigman, Katskee, and Keil.
Brooklyn L Rev 73:1113–1117
Godden DM, Walton D (2006) Argument from expert opinion as legal evidence: critical questions and
admissibility criteria of expert testimony in the American legal system. Ratio Juris 19:278–279
Goldman AI (1993) Epistemic folkways and scientiﬁc epistemology. Philosoph Issues Sci Knowl
3:272–273
Gordon TF (2010) The Carneades argumentation support system. In: Reed C, Tindale CW (eds)
Dialectics, dialogue and argumentation: an examination of Douglas Walton’s theories of reasoning
and argument. College Publications, London, pp 145–156
Gordon TF (2012) Remarks on the Carneades model, law probability and risk, to appear
Gordon TF, Walton D (2009) Proof burdens and standards. In: Rahwan I, Simari G (eds) Argumentation
and artiﬁcial intelligence. Springer, Berlin, pp 239–241
Gordon TF, Prakken H, Walton D (2007) The Carneades model of argument and burden of proof. Artif
Intell 171:875–896
Gott R, Duggan S (2003) Understanding and using scientiﬁc evidence. SAGE Publications, Beverly Hills,
pp 8–16
Green MD (1992) Expert witnesses and sufﬁciency of evidence in toxic substances litigation: the Legacy
of Agent Orange and Bendectin Litigation. Nw U L Rev 86:643–645
Grieve D (1996) Possession of truth. J Forensic Identif 46(5):521–528
Haack S (1994) Evidence and inquiry: towards reconstruction in epistemology. Blackwell, New York,
pp 222–226
Haack S (1999) an epistemologist in the Bramble-Bush: at the supreme court with Mr. Joiner. J Health
Polit Policy Law 26:218–231
Haack S (2003) Inquiry and advocacy, fallibilism and ﬁnality: culture and inference in science and the
law. Law Probab Risk 2:207–213
Haack S (2004) Epistemology legalized or, truth, justice, and the American way. Am J Jurisprudence
49:49–50
Haack S (2006) Scientiﬁc secrecy and ‘‘spin’’: the sad, sleazy saga of the trials of Remune. Law Contemp
Prob 69:50–52
Haack S (2007a) Defending science-within reason: between scientism and cynicism. Prometheus Books,
Amherst, pp 57–302
Haack S (2007b) Peer review and publication: lessons for lawyers. Stetson L Rev 36:791–808
Haack S (2008a) Of truth, in science and in law. Brooklyn L Rev 73:986–1004
Haack S (2008b) What’s wrong with litigation-driven science an essay in legal epistemology. Seton Hall
L Rev 38:1054–1083
Hans VP (2008) Judges, juries, and scientiﬁc evidence. J L POL’Y 16:16–44
Harremoe¨s P et al (2001) Late lessons from early warnings: the precautionary principle 1896–2000,
Environmental Issue Report, vol. 22. Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Communities,
pp 170–178
Heinzerling L (2006) Doubting Daubert. J L POL’Y 14:65–68
Henry CJ, Conrad JW Jr (2008) Scientiﬁc and legal perspectives on science generated for regulatory
activities. Environ Health Perspect 116:136–141
Hill AB (1965) The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med 58:295–300
Ho HL (2008) A philosophy of evidence law: justice in the search for truth. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp 113–131
Imwinkelried EJ (1994) The next step after Daubert: developing a similarly epistemological approach to
ensuring the reliability of nonscientiﬁc expert testimony. Cardozo L Rev 15:2271–2276
Jasanoff S (1990) The ﬁfth branch: science advisors as policymakers. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, pp 61–76
Kesan JP (1995) An autopsy of scientiﬁc evidence in a post-Daubert world. Georget L J 84:2006–2039
Koppl RG et al (2008) Epistemics for forensics. Episteme 5:141–154
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
217
123

Laudan L (2006) Truth, error, and criminal law: an essay in legal epistemology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Leiter B (1997) Epistemology of admissibility: why even good philosophy of science would not make for
good philosophy of evidence. Brigham Young Univ L Rev 1:803–817
Malone DM, Zwier PJ (2001) Epistemology after Daubert, Kumho Tire, and the new federal rule of
evidence 702. Temple L Rev 74:103–117
Mason MC (2001) The scientiﬁc evidence problem: a philosophical approach. Ariz State L Rev
33:900–906
McCormick M (1982) Scientiﬁc evidence: deﬁning a new approach to admissibility. IOWAL Rev
67:879–915
McMullin E (1995) Under determination. J Med Philos 20:233–241
Michaels D (2005) Scientiﬁc evidence in the regulatory system: manufacturing uncertainty and the
demise of the formal regulatory system. J Law Policy 13:40–41
Misak C (1987) Peirce, Levi and the aims of inquiry. Philoso Sci 54(2):260–265
Mnookin JF (2007) Idealizing science and demonizing experts: an intellectual history of expert evidence.
Villznova L Rev 52:764–802
Nance DA (2001) Naturalized epistemology and the critique of evidence theory. Va L Rev 87:1552–1618
Nance DA (2003) Reliability and the admissibility of experts. Seton Hall L Rev 34(194):200
National Academy of Sciences and Institute of Medicine (NASIM) (2007). Science, Evolution, and
Creationism. National Academies Press, pp 10–11
Pardo MS (2005) The ﬁeld of evidence and the ﬁeld of knowledge. Law Philos 24:321–853
Pardo MS, Allen RJ (2007) Juridical proof and the best explanation. Law Philos 27:223–268
Peirce CS (1931) In: Hartshorne C, Weiss P (eds) Collected papers. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
pp 135–137 (section 6.3)
Peirce CS (1932) Collected papers: principles of philosophy and elements of logic. Belknap Press,
Cambridge, pp 46–53
Peirce CS (1984) In: Moore EC (ed) Writings of Charles S. Peirce, vol 2. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, pp 354–361
Peterson JL, Markham PN (1995) Crime lab proﬁciency testing results. J Forensic Sci 40(6):994–1029
Pizzi WT (1995) Expert testimony in the US. New Law J (Eng.) 145:82–83
Pollock JL (1983) Epistemology and probability. Synthese 55:232–250
Popper KR (1959) The logic of scientiﬁc discovery. Hutchinson, Preface, London, pp 18–22
Popper KR (1963) Conjectures and refutations: the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge. Routledge, London,
pp 312–319
Popper KR (1972) Objective knowledge: an evolutionary approach. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp 164–172
Popper KR (1989) Conjectures and refutations: the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge. Routledge, London,
pp 37–43
Popper KR (2002) The logic of scientiﬁc discovery. Routledge, NewYork, pp 23–24
Posner RA (1999) An economic approach to the law of evidence. Stanf L Rev 51:1545–1546
Prakken H, Sartor G (2009) A logical analysis of burdens of proof. In: Kaptein H, Prakken H, Verheij B
(eds) Legal evidence and burden of proof. Ashgate, Farnham, pp 223–253
Quine WV (1969) Epistemology naturalized. In: Quine WV, Quine WVO (eds) Ontological relativity and
other essays. Columbia University Press, New York, pp 82–83
Quine WV, Ullian JS (1978) The web of belief. McGraw-Hill, Inc., NY, pp 10–12
Redmayne M (2003) Rationality, naturalism and evidence law. Mich State L Rev 4:853–883
Rescher N (2003) Epistemology: an introduction to the theory of knowledge. Sate University of New
York Press, Albany, pp 10–18
Riordan M (2003) Science fashions and scientiﬁc fact. Phys Today 56(8):50–51
Risinger DM (2000) Deﬁning the ‘‘task at hand’’: non-science forensic science after Kumho Tire Co.
V. Carmichael. Wash Lee L Rev 57:767–778
Sayre KM (1997) Belief and knowledge: mapping the cognitive landscape. Rowman & Littleﬁeld,
Lanham, pp 33–45
Scheines R (2008) Causation, truth, and the law. Brooklyn L Rev 73:959–960
Shreves RM (1919) The aim of science. Education 39:566–572
Smith R (1997) Peer review: reform or revolution? Br Med J 315:759–761
Stein A (2005) Foundations of evidence law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 111–119
Strong JW (1970) Questions affecting the admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence. U ILL L F 1:14–22
218
D. Walton, N. Zhang
123

Szasz T (1994) Mental illness is still a Myth. Society 6:37–39
The National Academy of Sciences (2009) Strengthening forensic science in the United States: a path
forward. The National Academy Press, Washington, pp 5–89
Tillers P (1989) Webs of things in the mind: a new science of evidence. Mich L Rev 87(6):1226–1256
Tuomela R (2000) Belief versus acceptance. Philos Explor 2:122–137
Twining W (2006) Rethinking evidence: exploratory essays. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 77–78
Virieux-Reymond A (1972) Introduction a` l’e´piste´mologie. Presses Universitaires, France, pp 7–8
Walton D (2005) Pragmatic and idealized models of knowledge and ignorance. Am Phil Q 42(1):59–69
Walton D (2006) Examination dialogue: an argumentation framework for critically questioning an expert
opinion. J Pragmat 38:745–777
Walton D (2007) Visualization tools, argumentation schemes and expert opinion evidence in law. Law
Probab Risk 6:134–140
Walton D (2011) Reasoning about knowledge using defeasible logic. Argument Comput 2(2–3):131–155
Weed DL (2006) Evidence synthesis and general causation: key methods and an assessment of reliability.
Drake L Rev 54:639–650
Weed DL (2007) The nature and necessity of scientiﬁc judgment. J Law Policy 15:135–158
Weed DL (2008) Truth, epidemiology, and general causation. Brooklyn L Rev 73:953–957
Weiss C (2003) Expressing scientiﬁc uncertainty. Law Probab Risk 2:26–46
Wittgenstein L (1972) On certainty. Harper Perennial, New York City, pp 40–45
Ziman J (1978) Reliable knowledge: an exploration of the grounds for belief in science. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 2–21
The epistemology of scientiﬁc evidence
219
123

