Vol.:(0123456789)
Biology & Philosophy (2021) 36:41
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-021-09818-x
1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy 
principle in biology
Matteo Colombo1 · Patricia Palacios2
Received: 24 September 2020 / Accepted: 27 July 2021 / Published online: 23 August 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
According to the free energy principle, life is an “inevitable and emergent property 
of any (ergodic) random dynamical system at non-equilibrium steady state that pos-
sesses a Markov blanket” (Friston in J R Soc Interface 10(86):20130475, 2013). 
Formulating a principle for the life sciences in terms of concepts from statistical 
physics, such as random dynamical system, non-equilibrium steady state and ergo-
dicity, places substantial constraints on the theoretical and empirical study of bio-
logical systems. Thus far, however, the physics foundations of the free energy prin-
ciple have received hardly any attention. Here, we start to fill this gap and analyse 
some of the challenges raised by applications of statistical physics for modelling 
biological targets. Based on our analysis, we conclude that model-building grounded 
in the free energy principle exacerbates a trade-off between generality and realism, 
because of a fundamental mismatch between its physics assumptions and the proper-
ties of actual biological targets.
Keywords  Free energy principle · Dynamic equilibrium · Homeostasis · Phase 
space · Ergodicity · Attractor
Introduction
Life scientists use the term “equilibrium” in various ways. Sometimes they use it 
to refer to an inert state of death, where the flow of matter and energy through a 
biological system stops and the system reaches a life-less state of thermodynamic 
equilibrium (Schrödinger 1944/1992, 69–70). More often, they use it to mean home-
ostasis, which is the ability of keeping some variable in a system constant or within 
a specific range of values (Bernard 1865; Cannon 1929, 399–400). Some other time, 
 *	 Matteo Colombo 
	
m.colombo@uvt.nl
1	
Department of Philosophy, Tilburg Center for Logic, Ethics and Philosophy of Science, Tilburg 
University, P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
2	
Department of Philosophy, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 2 of 26
the term “equilibrium” is associated with the concept of robustness, which refers to 
the capacity of systems to dynamically preserve their characteristic structural and 
functional stability amid perturbations due to environmental change, internal noise 
or genetic variation (Kitano 2004).
Over the past twenty years, theoretical neuroscientist Karl Friston and collabora-
tors have developed an account of the conditions of possibility of a certain kind of 
dynamic equilibrium between a biological system and its environment. The core of 
this account is a “free energy principle”, according to which all biological systems 
actively maintain a dynamic equilibrium with their environment by minimizing their 
free energy, which enables them to avoid a rapid decay into an inert state of ther-
modynamic equilibrium (e.g., Friston 2012, 2013; Ramstead et al. 2018; Parr and 
Friston 2019).
The free energy principle has received a lot of attention in philosophy. But its 
foundations in statistical physics and dynamical systems theory have been largely 
neglected. This lack of attention is unfortunate, because the theoretical adequacy of 
the free energy principle, as well as its practical utility for the study of biological 
systems’ properties such as homeostasis and robustness depend on the validity of 
those foundations. Here we begin to fill this gap.
We start, in “Introducing the free energy principle” section, by introducing Fris-
ton and collaborators’ free energy principle (readers familiar with the free energy 
principle may want to skip this section.) In “Biological systems as random dynami-
cal systems” section, we put into better focus the phenomenon that free energy 
theorists intend to account for, noting that it remains somewhat unclear what this 
phenomenon exactly is and whether it is a distinctively biological phenomenon. In 
“Modelling biological active states as random dynamical attractors” section, we crit-
ically examine the validity and role of the concepts of phase space, ergodicity and 
attractor in the free energy principle. On the basis of our discussion, we conclude, 
in “Discussion” section, that, because of a fundamental mismatch between its phys-
ics assumptions and properties of its biological targets, model-building grounded in 
the free energy principle exacerbates a trade-off between generality and biological 
plausibility.1
1  To forestall any confusion, our focus is on free-energy theorists’ core assumptions and their bearing 
on modelling in biology. Andrews (2021, 13) explains that: “[u]nder the FEP [free energy principle], in 
order to be a system, certain mathematical assumptions must hold. In particular, we assume a weakly-
mixing random dynamical system, a Markov blanket, and either ergodicity or (organisation to) nonequi-
librium steady state (NESS). If we take the systems attracting set to be a NESS density, then its exist-
ence will entail a generative model...In selecting to model a system under the FEP, we have presumed its 
dynamics to entail a generative model. This says nothing, however, about any empirically-ascertainable 
properties of living systems.” In the light of this quote, what we aim to show is that assumptions such as 
ergoditicity and NESS are implausible of biological systems. In doing so, we call into question that all 
biological systems at any scale can plausibly and fruitfully be modelled as systems under the FEP, and 
in particular that biological homeostasis or robustness can plausibly be defined and studied in terms of 
dynamical attractors. A property like ergodicity is an empirically-ascertainable property of real-world 
target systems; and scientific representations that assume ergodicity are plausibly applicable for model-
ling and studying only some kinds of systems. While our discussion should suggest that concepts and 
mathematical representations from statistical physics and dynamical systems theory are sometimes 
abused in biology (May 2004), it should not suggest that those concepts and representations have no use 
in the life sciences at all. In fact, dynamical systems theory is incredibly useful and has been fruitfully 
applied to represent, study and explain various biological phenomena, make predictions about cognitive 

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 3 of 26 
41
Introducing the free energy principle
The free energy principle (FEP) says that unless a biological system minimizes its 
surprise, it will rapidly die (Friston 2012, 2013; Ramstead et al. 2018).2 More spe-
cifically, FEP presupposes a view of biological systems as “essentially persisters” 
(Godfrey-Smith 2013; Smith 2017), and foregrounds the conditions of possibility 
for the persistence of biological systems (Colombo and Wright 2021).
Free energy theorists have formalized their principle by relying on concepts and 
mathematical representations from statistical physics and random dynamical sys-
tems. Parr and Friston, for example, write that “[t]he minimisation of free energy 
over time ensures that entropy does not increase, thereby enabling biological sys-
tems to resist the second law of thermodynamics and their implicit dissipation or 
decay” (Parr and Friston 2019, 498). Hohwy (2020) refers to a biological system’s 
periodic, phase attractive dynamics in state space to define what it is for a biological 
system to exist. He writes: “biological inexistence is marked by a tendency to dis-
perse throughout all possible states in state space (e.g., the system ceases to exist as 
it decomposes, decays, dissolves, dissipates or dies). In contrast, to exist is to revisit 
the same states (or their close neighbourhood)” (Hohwy 2020, 3).
Given this definition of biological (in)existence, the problem free energy theorists 
set out to address is specify the conditions under which a system that is far from 
thermodynamic equilibrium attains a non-equilibrium steady state. In Parr and Fris-
ton’s (2019) words: “if a system is alive, then it must show a form of self-organised, 
non-equilibrium steady-state that maintains a low entropy probability distribution 
over its states” (498).3
In order to specify these conditions, free energy theorists relate the notion of 
entropy to the information-theoretic quantity of surprise,4 and suggest that a bio-
logical system’s attaining “homeostasis amounts to the task of keeping the organism 
within the bounds of its attracting set” (Corcoran et al. 2020; Friston 2012, 2107).
This suggestion implicates that life scientists can use the mathematics of ran-
dom dynamical systems to build dynamic models of target biological systems that 
focus attention on some of the core factors responsible for homeostatic processes. 
2  By “biological system”, free energy theorists refer to individual organisms, parts of organisms (e.g., 
their genome or brain) and ensembles of individuals (e.g., species). We use “biological system” in a sim-
ilar, encompassing way.
3  In relation to this idea, it is worth pointing out one of the historical threads of the FEP is W. Ross Ash-
by’s work in cybernetics (Seth 2014), where one leading hypothesis is that a biological system’s survival 
can be adequately explained in terms of the stability of a pertinent dynamical system (e.g., Ashby 1956, 
19; see Froese and Stewart 2010 for a critical evaluation and refinement of this hypothesis).
4  Informally, surprise is a measure of the uncertainty of an outcome. Different states of the environ-
ment—say, an external temperature of 30 ◦ C vs. 2 ◦C—can generate different outcomes—say, rain versus 
snow. Given the state of the environment, some outcomes are more uncertain than others, and so, more 
surprising. The outcome snow is more surprising than the outcome rain, for example, if the external tem-
perature is 30 ◦C.
behaviour, and suggest novel hypotheses and experiments (Brauer and Kribs 2015; Beer 2000; Izhikevich 
2007).
Footnote 1 (continued)

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 4 of 26
By finding a suitable attractor in the dynamic model, life scientists would be able to 
gain understanding of the workings of homeostasis in the system being modelled. 
The details of different random dynamical models will vary, depending on idi-
osyncrasies of particular organisms and the scale at which they are studied. But, in 
each of these different dynamical models, there should be a set of numerical values, 
an attractor, that denotes a homeostatic state in the target system; and finding that 
attractor would depend in all cases on minimizing a free energy functional, which is 
presumed to be one fundamental constraint common to the dynamics of any biologi-
cal system. To better understand what this means, let’s examine how such idealised 
models are developed, and why free energy theorists opt to build their models start-
ing from concepts from physics.
Self‑organizing dissipative systems
The starting point of Friston and collaborators (e.g., Friston and Stephan 2007) is 
that biological systems are kinds of self-organizing dissipative systems. The concept 
of dissipative system can be traced back to another of the historical threads of the 
FEP, that is, the work by Ilya Prigogine and collaborators. Prigogine and Nicolis 
(1967) used the term “dissipative system” to refer to processes that take place under 
far-from-equilibrium conditions and display order through fluctuations. Dissipative 
systems are self-organizing, in the sense that local interactions between their micro-
components can produce new spatial or temporal structures, or new functions. An 
example of self-organizing dissipative (non-biological) systems is convection insta-
bility, which occurs when a fluid—water in some container, for example—is heated 
from the bottom and kept at a fixed temperature at the top. If the temperature differ-
ence (temperature gradient) is small, then the fluid remains unchanged. However, if 
the temperature gradient reaches a critical value, then the fluid starts a macroscopic 
motion with beautiful and well-ordered patterns such as hexagons and rolls (Haken 
1983).
According to Turner (1982, 57; see also Goldbeter 2008; Janson 2012), there are 
three necessary conditions for self-organization in biological systems: 1. the sys-
tem is open to exchange energy and matter with its surroundings; 2. the interac-
tions among the various components of the system are nonlinear, meaning that the 
response of a component receiving inputs from other components or from the envi-
ronment is not equivalent to the sum of its responses to the individual inputs; and 3. 
the system operates in far-from-equilibrium conditions. Because there are several 
non-biological systems that satisfy these conditions and present self-organization—
including turbulent flows, hurricanes and economies, those three conditions do not 
suffice to pick out some distinguishing feature of biological self-organization.
In fact, free energy theorists have emphasised that
biological systems are more than simply dissipative self-organising systems. 
They can negotiate a changing or non-stationary environment in a way that 
allows them to endure over substantial periods of time. This means that they 
avoid phase-transitions that would otherwise change their physical structure. 
(Friston and Stephan 2007, 422)

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 5 of 26 
41
To clarify the idea that biological systems “can negotiate a changing or non-sta-
tionary environment in a way that allows them to endure over substantial periods of 
time”, it will be useful to introduce a toy example discussed in Friston et al. (2006), 
namely the example of a winged snowflake. This toy example will help us put into 
better focus fundamental differences between the domain of physics and biology, 
and how these differences affect model-building grounded in the FEP.
The explanatory scope of the FEP: a winged snowflake
Snowflakes are crystals of ice that grow from droplets of water and water vapour. 
Given the right temperature and air pressure, an initial few water molecules in a 
cloud will freeze together in ringed unit cells. As the frozen droplets accumulate 
water vapour from the surrounding cold air, the molecules of water will get fixed in a 
crystal with increasingly distinct boundaries. Internal to their boundary, snowflakes 
have some degree of structure, meaning that their component molecules and dynam-
ics have a distinct morphology, and spatial and temporal organization. Because ice 
growth is sensitive to the temperature, humidity, pressure and other states in the 
local environment, the growth behaviour and morphology of snowflakes will change 
over time as they are passively dragged around. After some time, snowflakes will 
encounter a phase-boundary, at which the temperature in the environment will cause 
them to lose their boundaries and internal structure, and melt.
Friston et al. (2006, 72; see also Friston and Stephan 2007, 422-3) ask us to imag-
ine a snowflake endowed with wings. This winged snowflake could move, use its 
wings as solar reflectors or fans, and exchange energy with the environment for a 
much longer period than we would expect of an inanimate piece of ice to keep going 
under identical circumstances. Unlike familiar snowflakes, the winged snowflake 
can choose actions, which are the means by which different outcomes are brought 
about in different states of the environment. Its wings allow the snowflake to bring 
about outcomes such as lowering its core temperature in response to an increase in 
air temperature.
If the winged snowflake has the capacity to “regulate itself with respect to the 
boundaries of its own viability” (Di Paolo 2005, 430), that is, has the capacity to 
bring about outcomes that causally contribute to its own survival, then the winged 
snowflake can behave adaptively. But, the winged snowflake can also make choices 
that are detrimental to its existence; for example, if it decides to visit a sauna, this 
choice is likely to cause a rapid loss of its “thermodynamic homeostasis” (Friston 
et al. 2006, 72). But, if we do not distinguish between different kinds of perturba-
tions, then it is plausible that visiting a sauna will produce not only a loss of “ther-
modynamic homeostasis” in the winged snowflake, but also a loss of structural and 
functional integrity, that is, a loss of robustness: its constituent water molecules will 
degenerate into less orderly configurations. And the snowflake will eventually melt, 
losing its own constitutive organization.
In fact, free-energy theorists want to account for both biological homeosta-
sis and biological robustness at the same time, as they often emphasise that to 
the extent an organism minimizes its expected free energy, it will maintain its 

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 6 of 26
structural and functional organization amid change in the environment (Allen and 
Friston 2018, 2473; Kirchhoff 2018).
Both homeostasis and robustness contribute to the dynamic stability of a bio-
logical system. But the networks of causes responsible for robustness and homeo-
stasis are different; and the types of interacting factors in such different networks 
vary, both between different types of biological systems and within the same type 
of system (Bich et al. 2016). If a model-based representation of stability in bio-
logical systems fails to distinguish between self-organizing processes aimed at 
maintaining approximately normal homeostasis and self-organizing processes 
aimed at maintaining robustness, and also fails to capture enough factors of the 
relevant causal structure, but can be applied to many systems in the world, then 
that representation sacrifices biological realism for increased generality.
Models grounded in the FEP exhibit precisely this trade-off. By relying on a 
mathematical formalism and assumptions from physics, these models are applica-
ble to any target system that exists in some sense—whether the system is biologi-
cal or not. But in gaining this generality, their degree of biological plausibility 
is minimal, which compromises their explanatory and/or predictive power with 
respect to actual biological phenomena. Ongoing discussions about the scope of 
the FEP are aware of this trade-off between generality and biological realism, and 
appeal to various properties that might distinguish biological systems from other 
kinds of systems in a principled way, so as to avoid that the FEP generalizes to all 
“existing” systems, risking triviality.
Kirchhoff and Froese (2017), for example, suggest that distinctive biological 
properties such as adaptivity and autopoiesis are not built into the mathematics of 
the FEP, but should be viewed as added, external constraints to better appreciate 
the biological significance of FEP. Kirchhoff et al. (2018) make a different pro-
posal. They introduce the distinction between “mere active inference” and “adap-
tive active inference,” where the “key difference...rests upon selecting among 
different actions based upon deep (temporal) generative models that minimize 
the free energy expected under different courses of action” (5). This distinction 
emphasises that, unlike purely physical systems, biological systems can coordi-
nate their actions with their here-and-now sensorimotor state, anticipate possible 
future states and act to realize these states. Corcoran et al. (2020) make a similar 
suggestion, arguing that biological cognition is distinctively grounded in the abil-
ity to make counterfactual (active) inferences.
This work has helped clarify the intended scope of the FEP. Yet, one prob-
lem is that the recursive, hierarchically organized behaviour of some non-bio-
logical, dissipative systems, such as whirlpools, tornadoes, hurricanes, Benard 
cells, economies and the Earth’s climate, have also been represented as engaged 
in adaptive active inference (e.g., Rubin et al. 2020). And more importantly here, 
existing discussions of the scope of FEP do not explicitly address the reasons 
behind the trade-off between maximal generality and minimal realism. To address 
these reasons, we now turn our attention to the question of how biological sys-
tems can mathematically be represented as random dynamical systems.

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 7 of 26 
41
Biological systems as random dynamical systems
In the previous sections, we pointed out that Friston and collaborators use the 
mathematics of random dynamical systems and statistical physics in order to build 
model-based representations of biological systems aiming to account for the con-
ditions of possibility of biological persistence. We have also alluded to the active 
inference models grounded in the FEP (e.g., Friston et al. 2017, 2020a, b).
Active inference models are phase-space representations of biological systems 
as forming expectations over observable external states and inferring policies (i.e., 
state-action mappings) that minimize the expected free energy of those states under 
a generative model in some pre-defined Markov decision process. By minimizing 
expected free energy, the modelled system would attain a non-equilibrium steady 
state, and so, it would “maintain”, in some sense, a low entropy probability distribu-
tion over its states.5
An assumption made by the active inference models developed by free energy 
theorists is that target biological systems can be represented as random dynamical 
systems. What does this assumption mean exactly?
In physics, random dynamical systems consist of two elements: 1. a model of 
“noise” formalized by a base flow 휃(t)∶휔→휔 , which comprises measure-preserv-
ing measurable functions for each time t ∈ℝ on a probability space (Ω, B, P) , where 
Ω is the sample space, B is a sigma algebra over Ω and P∶B[0, 1] is a probability 
measure; 2. and a model of the dynamics on the phase space X affected by the noise 
formalized as a measurable flow 휑∶ℝ× Ω × X →X , which satisfies the co-cycle 
property: 휑(휏, 휃(휔))◦휑(t, 휔) = 휑(t + 휏, 휔) . This measurable flow can be inter-
preted as solutions to the stochastic differential equations governing the dynamics of 
the system and the noise can be interpreted as the environment in which the system 
is immersed.
In order to motivate and define the FEP, Friston (2012)6 allows for a partition of 
the state space X = R × S , where R ⊂X precludes direct dependency on the base 
flow and, in this sense, constitutes an internal state space. On the other hand, S ⊂X 
constitutes an external state space. This means that there exists a Markov blanket 
5  Active inference modelling evolves rapidly. As Maxwell Ramstead helpfully reminded us in conver-
sation, up to roughly 2012 the dynamics of internal and active states in active inference models were 
determined through gradient descent on variational free energy. From around 2012 up until recently, 
active inference models have been equipped with algorithms for policy selection, which evaluate the 
average free energy expected under each policy. In their latest work, the active inference community have 
endowed their models with a recursive expected free energy functional, which enables the models to rep-
resent target systems’ “higher-order, counterfactual beliefs,” which are “beliefs” a system has about the 
“beliefs” it would have as a consequence of action. Because these modelling advances all seem to make 
assumptions about the ergodicity of biological systems and the biological meaning of dynamical attrac-
tors, the points we make in what follows may help explain why all active inference models thus far tend 
to trade off realism for maximal generality.
6  In what follows, we concentrate on Friston’s (2012, 2013) treatments of the FEP, because of the trans-
parency of their exposition and explicit focus on all biological systems.

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 8 of 26
that separates two other sets in a statistical sense.7 Internal states have a dynamics 
that depends on external states, on their relationships with other internal states and 
on internal noise, while external states have a dynamics that depends on internal 
“active” states, on their causal relationships with other environmental states, and on 
fluctuations in the environment.
According to Friston (2012), this partition applies to all biological systems, in 
which external states can be regarded as causal influences on the sensory recep-
tors, while internal states as effects of sensory input. In a single cell, for instance, 
external states can be identified with the causal influences of, e.g., ambient tem-
perature on the cell’s trans-membrane receptors. External states generate sensory 
samples (aka sensory inputs), which can be identified as energy arrays impinging 
on the cell’s sensory surfaces. These energy arrays influence the state of the cell’s 
transmembrane receptors, and have causal consequences on the internal state of the 
cell, for example on the concentration of intracellular metabolites. Crucially, inter-
nal states include active states denoted by a(t) ∈A ⊂R , which control how environ-
mental fluctuations are sampled by sensory states. An example of an active state in 
a single cell is the motion of flagella, which can change the position of the cell in its 
surrounding environment, and so, how the cell’s environment influences the cell’s 
receptors.
Given this set-up, free energy theorists are interested in finding the active 
states of those systems that are confined to a bounded subset of states and remain 
there indefinitely. Such active internal states in an organism can allegedly be rep-
resented as random dynamical attractors in a dynamical model, which are defined 
as a random compact set A(휔) ∈X that is invariant under the flow map such that 
휙(t, 휔)(A(휔)) = A(휃t(휔)) . If one assumes that the dynamics of the target organism is 
ergodic, then random dynamical attractors can be associated with the ergodic den-
sity p(x|m), which is proportional to the amount of time each state is occupied by the 
organism:
In other words, the ergodic density is an invariant probability measure that can be 
interpreted as the probability of finding the target system m in any state x when 
observed at a random point in time (Friston 2012). The assumption of ergodicity is 
important to get the FEP off the ground, since it ensures that organisms can be mod-
elled as having invariant characteristics over time.
(1)
p(x|m) = lim
T→∞
1
T ∫
T
0
훿(x −x(t))dt.
7  More precisely, take a Bayesian network, which includes a set of random variables and their probabil-
istic conditional (in)dependencies. The Markov blanket of a target random variable X in that network is a 
subset of the network that contains all random variables that screen off X from all the other variables in 
the network. Fixing the values of the variables in the Markov blanket leaves X conditionally independ-
ent of all other random variables. This means the Markov Blanket of X suffices to infer the value of X. 
In philosophy, the notion of a Markov Blanket has generated some discussion. Is there a Markov Blanket 
that picks out the mind? Is the network of autopoietic processes in a biological system identical to the 
Markov Blanket of that system? What’s the metaphysical status of Markov blankets? These debates in the 
metaphysics of the FEP can be left on the side, since we are not interested in metaphysics here.

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 9 of 26 
41
Next, Friston (2012) shows that the entropy H of the ergodic density of a random 
dynamical system m is upper bounded by the Lebesgue measure of its attractor (if it 
exists):
This means that if the measure is small, then the entropy must be smaller.
Friston (2012) then uses this result to give a more precise definition of active 
states: Internal states are said to be active, if they “minimize the entropy of the 
ergodic density over external states” (2108).
The a priori rationale for this definition is that biological systems that do not min-
imize their informational entropy (and therefore their surprisal) would be unlikely 
to exist. After all, if the measure of the random dynamical attractor of a dynamical 
system representing an organism can be arbitrarily large, then the time required to 
achieve asymptotic stable behaviour can be arbitrarily long. And if the asymptotic 
stable behaviour of the dynamical model denotes homeostasis or robustness in the 
biological target, then the target could not feasibly attain homeostasis.
With this definition of active states in hand, Friston (2012) finally formulates the 
principle of least action as follows:
Principle of least action: The internal states of an active system minimize sur-
prisal L, such that the variation 훿S of action S with respect to its internal states 
r(t) ∈R vanishes (2108).
The FEP would suffice to derive the principle of least action, and is defined by Fris-
ton (2012, 2109) as follows:
The free energy principle: Let m = (ℝd, 휙) be an ergodic random dynamical 
system with state space X = R × S ∈ℝd . If the internal states r(t) ∈R mini-
mize free energy, then the system conforms to the principle of least action and 
is an active system.
Bearing out the ambiguity we noted above about the intended explanatory target of 
the FEP (i.e., Is it homeostasis? Is it robustness? Is it biological persistence? Is it 
existence?) Friston (2013) explains that “active states [...] will appear to place a [free 
energy] upper bound on the dispersion [entropy] of biological states. This homoeo-
stasis is informed by internal states, which means that active states will appear to 
maintain the structural and functional integrity of biological states.” (5)
When expressed in these terms, the FEP provides us with an account of biolog-
ical persistence broadly understood, as a generic type of stability attained by tar-
gets modelled as random dynamical systems. To illustrate the FEP at work, Friston 
(2012, 2013) discusses a number of computer simulations. But, as he recognizes: 
“The examples presented above are provided as proof of principle and are as sim-
ple as possible. An interesting challenge now will be to simulate the emergence 
of multicellular structures using more realistic models with a greater (and empiri-
cally grounded) heterogeneity and formal structure” (Friston 2013, 11). Let’s then 
put into better focus some of the difficulties involved in this challenge, and ask: Is 
there any reason to believe that all biological systems, at any scale, can be modelled 
(2)
H(X|m) ≤ln 휆(A(휔))

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 10 of 26
as random dynamical systems? And how does this maximal generality bear on the 
degree of realism of these models?
Modelling biological active states as random dynamical attractors
Free energy theorists’ account of biological systems’ persistence relies on three main 
modelling assumptions: 1. ergodicity, 2. the existence of Markov blankets that imply 
a partition of states into internal and external, 3. the existence of random dynamical 
attractors.8 In this section, we concentrate on assumptions 1 and 3, and on the more 
fundamental challenge of defining phase spaces for target biological systems in the 
life sciences.9
Phase spaces in biology
Dynamical systems theory tracks the behaviour of one or more variables over time 
(occasionally other variables). This framework has proven to be useful in the con-
struction of many mathematical models in biology. A popular example of the suc-
cessful use of dynamical modelling in the life sciences is the Lotka–Volterra model 
usually applied to account for the dynamics of biological systems where two species 
interact: predator and prey (Matsuda et al. 1992).
In order to apply dynamical systems theory and assign probabilities to the dif-
ferent states of a target biological system, one first needs to define a phase space 
for that target. In dynamical system theory, the phase space of a system is a ‘giant’ 
space formed by the relevant degrees of freedom of the target system. A point in 
the phase space of a target system corresponds to a micro-state, which consists in 
a complete determination of the system in terms of the variables and parameters 
required for analyzing its dynamics. The dynamics of the system is determined by 
its equations of motion, which describe the evolution of points, or trajectories, in 
phase space.
In order to assign probabilities to the micro-states of a system, the phase space is 
usually coarse-grained into a set of macro-states of the target system that supervene 
on its fine-grained micro-states. The latter means that any change in the macro-state 
must be accompanied by a change in the fine-grained micro-state, and correspond-
ingly that to any given micro-state there corresponds exactly one macro-state (Frigg 
2008). For example, macro-states of a system of water vapour include its pressure, 
8  Although we mainly focus on Friston’s (2012, 2013) treatments of the FEP, we believe that our 
analysis applies to more recent formulations of the FEP found in Friston (2019) and Parr et al. (2020). 
Although they do not explicitly mention the assumption of ergodicity in those recent papers, they implic-
itly assume ergodicity by appealing to weakly mixing dynamical systems.
9  Recently, Biehl et al. (2021) and Aguilera et al. (2021) have stressed some technical issues associ-
ated to the assumption of the existence of Markov blankets in the FEP’s approach. Friston et al. (2020a, 
b) have replied to these criticisms, in particular to the ones pointed out by Biehl et al. (2021). Since 
our analysis focuses on different assumptions, it should be considered as complementary to the analysis 
developed by Biehl et al. (2021) and Aguilera et al. (2021).

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 11 of 26 
41
volume and temperature. For each of these macro-states, there is some set of micro-
states of the system, for example the velocity and position of its water molecules, 
that fix the macro-state.
In statistical physics, the formulation of a pertinent phase space for a given kind 
of system, the assignment of probabilities to the different micro-states and macro-
states of the system, and the selection of the criteria for the coarse-graining of the 
phase space are non-trivial tasks. They require background knowledge about some 
features of the causal structure of the target system and its laws of motion; they also 
require to choose a relevant set of observables and symmetries, which determine 
what properties of the system being modelled are preserved (or remain invariant) 
under some transformation (Español 2004; Robertson 2020).
In the domain of biology, these challenges are compounded by at least three facts: 
first, usually a biological system has many more degrees of freedom than non-bio-
logical systems; second, the symmetries (or invariant preserving transformations) 
underlying observed regularities in biological phenomena are more unstable than in 
physics; third, the phase space for many real-world biological targets is much less 
stable than that of the kinds of target systems studied in physics.
The degrees of freedom of a target system are the number of independent fac-
tors that define its state at any point in time. Biological systems usually have more 
degrees of freedom than non-biological ones. In some cases, the number of their 
degrees of freedom can be so large that it can be unfeasible to construct a phase 
space that takes account of all those causal features of the system modelled that have 
a genuine influence on the behaviour of interest.10
Kauffman (1993) develops various computer simulations of dynamic, Boolean 
networks of molecules defined in an idealized “protein space”. While this idealized 
protein space trades off biological realism for computational tractability, it allows us 
to evaluate whether or not evolutionary processes of natural selection are required to 
produce auto-catalytic cycles of peptides exhibiting autopoietic, self-producing fea-
tures characteristic of living systems. Kauffman (1993) identifies general molecular 
regimes under which an auto-catalytic system can emerge, showing that it is possible 
that a system of molecules spontaneously becomes to display ordered macroscopic 
behaviour, without the cumulative selection of many, smaller increases in order. By 
constructing and analysing an idealized phase space for some generic biological sys-
tem, and exploring the behaviour of this system with computer simulation, one can 
learn whether or not some causal factors are always necessary to give rise to the 
phenomenon of interest. This model-based representation sacrifices biological real-
ism for tractability and generality. But, given Kauffman’s purpose, the generality of 
10  One might try to construe the a phase space as a genotype space for a type of biological system. 
Behind this approach is the assumption that the phenotype of a biological system corresponds to its 
coarse-grained macroscopic states (e.g., cells, organs, tissues, agent-ecosystem interactions) and the gen-
otype to fine-grained microstates. However, the size of the genotype space Ω for a protein consisting of N 
residues chosen from an alphabet of amino acids of size m is Ω = mN , which can be an enormous num-
ber. To give a better idea of the size of this phase space, in the case of a 100-residue bacterial protein, 
the population size of possible sequences with 20 amino acids to choose at each residue is 20100 ≈10130 
(McLeish 2015, 3; Kauffman 1993, Ch. 2).

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 12 of 26
its models does not result in an oversimplification or distortion of target causal net-
works, and thus preserves some explanatory and predictive power.
A second fact that makes the construction of phase spaces in biology more chal-
lenging than in physics is that biological phenomena are characterised by a con-
tinuous breaking of symmetries (Longo et al. 2012). Typically in physics, the key 
observables, such as energy, momentum and charge, are the invariants of relevant 
mathematical representations. Such invariants allow modellers in the domain phys-
ics to construct phase spaces for “generic objects [that] will follow a specific trajec-
tory determined by its invariants obtained by calculus” (Longo and Montévil 2014, 
128). If the domain of biology does not present sufficiently stable symmetries or 
invariances, then one may not be able to rely on observable biological properties to 
construct and analyse the phase space of a given target system.
Furthermore, typically in statistical physics, symmetries or invariant preserving 
transformations enable modellers to assign probabilities to the different macro-states 
of a system. An important assumption in Boltzmann’s statistical mechanics is the so-
called “combinatorial argument”, which says that in a partition of the phase space 
into cells, the macro-states are determined only by the number of particles in each 
cell and not by the specification of which individual particle is in which cell. This 
means that there is a symmetry or invariant transformation under permutation, and 
so, macro-states with the same number of particles in each cell will correspond to 
the very same macro-state.
In biology, symmetries or invariants are sometimes insufficiently stable to allow 
for an empirically informed attribution of probabilities to the macro-states. One rea-
son is that different levels of biological organization affect each other both in an 
“upward” and “downward” manner at various temporal scales (e.g., Okasha 2012; 
Bechtel 2017). For instance, methylation, i.e. the addition of a methyl group on a 
substrate, can downwards modify the expression of genes (Longo and Montévil 
2014, 198). Furthermore, small changes at the molecular scale may be amplified 
by cell to cell interaction and affect the phenotype, whose changes may downwards 
affect tissues and even entities at the molecular scale itself. This inter-level depend-
ency compounds the challenge of establishing which changes at the genotype (or 
microscopic level) are causally irrelevant or relevant for the phenotype (or mac-
roscopic level). In default of background empirical knowledge of lawful relation-
ships between observables at different levels of biological organization, it can then 
become even more challenging to assign probabilities to the macro-states of large 
and complex target systems.11
A third fact that makes the construction of phase spaces in biology harder than 
in physics is that phase spaces for biological systems can themselves change persis-
tently if they are to capture the continual symmetry changes in these systems. This is 
11  Parr and Friston (2019) argue that any (weakly mixing) random dynamical system that possesses a 
Markov blanket will be equipped with an information geometry, which permits defining a phase space 
and assigning probabilities to the relevant states. However, in order to have an information geometry for 
all biological systems, one should be able to model them as a (random) dynamical systems, which is pre-
cisely what we are calling into doubt in this section.

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 13 of 26 
41
particularly salient in biological processes studied in evolutionary biology. Longo et al. 
(2012) point out, for instance, that while in physics one can “pre-state” the phase space 
for target systems based on stable invariances and symmetries, historical processes 
studied principally in evolutionary and population biology (e.g., processes of mutation, 
migration, developmental plasticity and modification of gene regulatory processes, 
inclusive inheritance, niche construction, and so on) involve symmetry breaking, which 
makes phase spaces structurally unstable, ever-changing and unpredictable.
Because we cannot prestate the ever changing phase space of biological evolu-
tion, we have no settled relations by which we can write down the “equations 
of motion” of the ever new biologically “relevant observables and parameters”, 
but that we cannot prestate. More, we cannot prestate the adaptive “niche” as a 
boundary condition, so could not integrate the equations of motion even were we 
were to have them. (Longo et al. 2012, 1379).
The three challenges just discussed cast doubt on the possibility of modeling most bio-
logical systems in terms of random dynamical attractors, and therefore on the possi-
bility of formulating a principle for the life sciences based on this assumption, that is 
at the same time biologically plausible and general. The generality of the FEP would 
come at the cost of not including enough biological factors to provide plausible repre-
sentations of causal structures responsible for persistence in relevant biological targets.
But let us grant for the moment that this challenge is successfully met regarding 
the feasibility of constructing the phase space of any biological system of interest. 
Let us also assume that we know the equations of motion governing the dynamics of 
all biological systems, which would enable modellers to assign probabilities to dif-
ferent states of an organism of interest. There still remains the question of whether 
this phase space representation has the appropriate properties that allow one to 
define a random dynamical model; and there still remains the question of whether 
the attractors in the model meaningfully correspond to the homeostatic states of 
real-world biological systems. We discuss these two issues next.
Ergodicity
One of the assumptions of the FEP is that all biological systems are ergodic. Ergo-
dicity (or more precisely metric transitivity) in random dynamical systems means 
that there exists a probability measure P on X (phase space), such that for almost 
each x ∈X , the flow 휑(t, 휔) converges weakly to P in the asymptotic limit t →∞ 
(Scheutzow 2007). This means that there is an ergodic density p(x|m) representing 
the probability to find the system (m) in a particular state, which is proportional to 
the amount of time each state is occupied (Friston 2012, 13). Formally, the ergodic 
density can be expressed as follows:
From the previous expression, it is clear that, in order to warrant ergodicity 
assumptions, one has to demonstrate that the infinite time limit ( T →∞ ) exists, 
p(x|m) = lim
T→∞∫
T
0
훿(x −x(t))dt.

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 14 of 26
which means that, for long times, the values of the observables associated with the 
measurable flow 휑 will converge towards the asymptotic (stationary) values.12
Birkhoff (1931) demonstrated that if a dynamical system is ergodic, then the 
infinite time limit exists and coincides with the phase average for almost all initial 
conditions x ∈X . This is called the “ergodic theorem”. Friston (2012, 2018) relies 
on this theorem to prove the “principle of least action” discussed in the previous 
section, which states that the internal states of an active system minimize surprisal. 
“The proof [of the principle of least action] is straightforward and rests on noting 
that action and the entropy of the ergodic density over external states are related via 
the ergodic theorem [Birkhoff 1931]” (Friston 2012, 2108).
However, the application of the ergodic theorem to real systems, whether in phys-
ics or biology, presents several challenges (Earman and Rédei 1996), and there are 
good reasons to think that this theorem cannot realistically be applied in the domain 
of biology. One reason is that, in order to make the theorem meaningful for a target 
system, it does not suffice to prove that the infinite limit exists. One has to show that 
the convergence rate, i.e. time needed to attain the time average, is also plausible for 
that target (Palacios 2018). In situations in which the values of the functions describ-
ing the target’s behaviour are constantly changing, this time can be of the order of 
the recurrence time, which even in simple models, such as a small sample of diluted 
hydrogen gas, can be much larger than the age of the universe (Gallavotti 1999).
Compared to a non-biological system, it is harder, if not unfeasible, to estimate 
a characteristic time needed to attain asymptotic values in most biological sys-
tems, because of non-uniformities in its dynamics. For instance, Mandell and Selz 
(1990) show that the dynamics of a biological system associated with distinct phe-
notypes can a-periodically oscillate between a small number of states in time scales 
that range from minutes, to days, to years. This is referred to as the “production of 
distinct alternative phenotypes” (Mandell and Selz 1990). The dynamics may also 
suddenly escape a parameter region of previous stability and gouge out an equilib-
rium with the emergence of new structural phenomena (e.g. peramorphosis, or spe-
ciation). Furthermore, invasion, disturbance, evolution, species movement and other 
fluctuating resources can all destabilize the values of the observables, and prevent 
asymptotic behaviour. As Drake et al. (2007) put it, “asymptotic behavior is seldom 
realized in the real world because nature happens” (168).
Another reason why ergodicity cannot plausibly be assumed in biology is that the 
ergodic theorem requires the dynamics of the system to be ergodic, which means 
that, eventually, almost every point x ∈X will visit every measurable region in X. 
Proving that ergodic systems exist has been a challenging enterprise in statistical 
physics, and even if there have been some positive results stating the existence of 
concrete examples of ergodic systems (e.g., Sinai 1970), it is widely recognized 
that most of the systems studied in statistical mechanics are most likely non ergodic 
(Wightman 1985; Earman and Rédei 1996; van Lith 2001).
12  The assumption of ergodicity also implies that eventually the system will visit almost every measur-
able region in X.

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 15 of 26 
41
Do we have any positive reason to believe some biological systems are actually 
ergodic? Prima facie, we don’t, especially if we interpret ergodicity in biology as 
the assumption that any (complex) phenotype is the result of a random explora-
tion of all possible molecular combinations along a path that will (eventually) 
explore all molecular possibilities. There are studies suggesting that no biologi-
cal system can be ergodic in this sense. For instance, Kauffman (2013) argues 
that the universe will not make all possible proteins of length 200 amino acids in 
1039 times its lifetime. So, proteins’ organization into a characteristic phenotype 
cannot be the result of the ergodicity of physical dynamics. The same conclusion 
applies to cells, since the presence of a membrane in a cell canalizes the whole 
cellular activities along a very restricted form of possible dynamics. Furthermore, 
the same conclusion applies to any biological system, since any biological system 
is an historical entity, where processes of differential selection and retention, at 
either developmental or evolutionary time scales, exclude most of the paths the 
system might take, which means that the system prevents ergodic exploration.
Friston and collaborators recognize that adaptivity may restrict ergodic explo-
ration in biological systems. However, instead of concluding that biological sys-
tems are not ergodic, they use this restriction to motivate a definition of active 
systems as ergodic random dynamical systems that minimize surprise:
The motivation for Definition 1 [ active systems] is simple: systems that do 
not minimize their entropy [i.e., surprise] are unlikely to exist, in the sense 
that the measure of their random dynamical attractors A(휔) can be arbitrar-
ily large and their recurrence times arbitrarily long. (Friston 2012, 2108)
In subsequent work, Ramstead et al. (2018) talk of “local ergodicity.” They define 
this notion informally, as the idea that “all living systems revisit a bounded set of 
states repeatedly (i.e., they are locally ergodic)” and appeal to intuitive examples 
to illustrate it. The problem here is that this informal notion of “local ergodicity” 
may not suffice to prove the Principle of Least Action, and, in any case, it is con-
troversial if it picks out a genuine property of biological systems being modelled.
A different strategy is to rely on an analogous theorem called “Multiplicative 
Ergodic Theorem,” which can be used in differentiable random dynamical sys-
tems to prove the existence of random dynamical attractors (Engel and Kuehn 
2021). The problem here is that this notion of ergodicity implies that the base 
flow 휃 preserves the probability P, which means that the model of noise (envi-
ronmental fluctuations) is fixed and the probability measure 휇 is invariant (Engel 
and Kuehn 2021). In other words, in ergodic random dynamical systems, there is 
a one-to-one correspondence between invariant random measures (noise) and sta-
tionary measures of the associated stochastic process (dynamics of the system). 
The problem is that the invariance of the probability measure 휇 and the existence 
of stationary measures in biological systems are very hard to prove, because, as 
we explained in “Phase spaces in biology” section, biological systems continu-
ously change, species evolve and interact with other species and with different 
types of environments modifying the dynamics and sometimes the phase space 
itself (Wright 1932; Van Valen 1973; Drake et al. 2007).

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 16 of 26
The assumption of ergodicity to give a definition of equilibrium states is a con-
troversial assumption even in the domain of physics, especially due to existence 
of physical systems in equilibrium that have proven to be non-ergodic (Palacios 
2021). This is the reason why physicists and philosophers have offered alternative 
approaches to equilibrium that do not rely on ergodicity (e.g. Lebowitz 1993; Gold-
stein 2001; Wallace 2016). Even philosophers that defend a “quasi-ergodic approach 
to equilibrium”, recognize that this definition of equilibrium may plausibly apply 
only to a restricted class of systems such as gases. Frigg and Werndl (2011) say, for 
instance:
Two scenarios seem possible. The first is that epsilon-ergodicity will turn out 
to be a special case of a (yet unidentified) more general dynamical property 
that all systems that behave TD-like posses. In this case epsilon-ergodicity 
turns out to be part of a general explanatory scheme. The other scenario is 
that there is no such property and the best we come up with is a (potentially 
long) list with different dynamical properties that explain TD-like behaviour 
in different cases. But nature turning out to be disunified in this way would be 
no reason to declare explanatory bankruptcy: ‘local’ explanations are explana-
tions nonetheless!
In this section, we have argued that there is less reason to believe that ergodicity 
plausibly characterises any biological systems. This does not mean of course that 
ergodicity, or a weaker notion of “local ergodicity”, may sometimes be a reasonable 
assumption to make for some biological systems. Indeed, there are some attempts to 
demonstrate approximate ergodic behaviour in a certain class of biological systems 
and this can even serve to give local explanations of homeostatic states, analogously 
as in physics (McLeish 2015). However, the fact that one cannot plausibly extrapo-
late the assumption of ergodicity to the behaviour of all relevant systems in biology 
casts doubt on the project of formulating a principle that depends on this assump-
tion, and is both maximally general and biologically realistic.
Random dynamical attractors
We have just explained that ergodic assumptions are generally not easy to prove, and 
why they are implausible for biological systems. This is problematic, because free 
energy theorists use ergodicity to define active steady states as random dynamical 
attractors. What makes the application of the FEP to accounting for the behaviour 
of real-world biological systems even more challenging is that one also needs: (1) 
to prove the existence of an attractor in the relevant dynamical model of the target 
(Scheutzow 2007, 331), and (2) justify why certain attractors but not others (if they 
exist) plausibly denote homeostatic states in the target.13
Informally, attractors can be understood as solutions to the dynamics towards 
which the system evolves over time. For instance, the familiar carrying capacity 
13  As Dan Williams pointed out to us in conversation, even if the behaviour of systems at non-equilib-
rium steady state with a Markov blanket could be described as if they minimised surprise to actively 
maintain their homeostasis, it would not follow that this is the only “imperative” of such systems. At 

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 17 of 26 
41
(K) of a population growing logarithmically in continuous time is an attractor of 
the dynamics. The set of all initial conditions flowing towards an attractor is called 
the basin of attraction, which can lead exclusively to a fixed point (like a carrying 
capacity), or to a repeating sequence of states, which may exhibit complicated and 
itinerant behaviour (Ruelle and Takens 1971). Because attractors are invariant to the 
dynamics, they correspond to asymptotic solutions.14
As we mentioned in “Biological systems as random dynamical systems” sec-
tion, random dynamical attractors are specifically defined as a random compact set 
A(휔) ∈X that is invariant under the flow map such that 휙(t, 휔)(A(휔)) = A(휃t(휔)).15
Finding biologically interesting attractors in a dynamic model of a target organ-
ism is distinctively challenging compared to finding attractors in models of non-
biological systems. One reason is that various processes at different spatial and 
temporal scales—including, plasticity, development, invasion, evolution, species 
movement and fluctuating resources—eliminate, reshape, and replace the attractors 
associated with target biological systems altogether (Drake et al. 2007). For instance, 
in the model of population growth proposed by May (1976), if one assumes that two 
systems originally identical interact at different points during the evolution they may 
end up exhibiting different attractors representing phenotypic differences (Drake 
et al. 2007, 170). Differences among replicate source communities may develop sud-
denly, because of sensitive dependence upon small variations in their interactions 
with other systems or with the environment. More generally, the interaction of a sys-
tem with other systems may change the dynamics, and whether or not an interac-
tion develops between systems is contingent on many factors. A small contingent 
event that permits or prohibits colonization by some species may act as a dynamical 
switch, which may prevent the evolution towards an attractor or change the value of 
the attractor. When the result of coupling is a new system, extinctions can occur. As 
Drake et al. (2007) put it: “[a]ttractors can dynamically break, after which may be 
no link, trajectory or solution from the original attractor or parent to the new or child 
attractor” (179).
Another reason is that a biological system can possess several attractors, but only 
a subset of them can plausibly be interpreted in terms of a homeostatic state, or 
some other biologically interesting property. In theoretical models of self-organiza-
tion in biology (e.g., Nicolis and Prigogine 1977), the non-linearity of the equations 
governing the evolution of a system allows for the co-existence of multiple (kinds 
best, homeostasis is instrumental to the biological goal of inclusive fitness maximisation, and in many 
cases it is likely in conflict with it.
Footnote 13 (continued)
14  Kaufmann (2016, 48ff) distinguishes the main types of attractors of nonlinear dynamical systems into 
four types. One type includes stable steady states and unstable steady states. A second type is a “limit 
cycle.” A third type of attractor winds through and around a torus. The fourth main type of attractor 
Kaufmann discusses is “chaotic attractors.”
15  In the ergodic theory, this means that there is a unique and stationary ergodicity densitiy p(x|m), where 
m represents the dynamical system, which is proportional to the amount of time each state is occupied. 
Free energy theorists interpret this density in either of two ways: as a description of the flow of a sys-
tem’s state, or as a joint probability distribution over all the system’s variables and (implicitly) external 
states.

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 18 of 26
of) attractors. While the presence and functional significance of two stable steady 
states has been validated experimentally in various biological systems at molecular 
and cellular scales (Goldbeter 2018, Sec. 2), for most other biological systems at 
higher scales it remains theoretically and empirically unclear whether the co-exist-
ence of two or more attractors should be interpreted as a form of functional organi-
zation where an actual living system can operate in one or more homeostatic states.
For example, building on developmental biologist Conrad Waddington’s ideas of 
“epigenetic landscapes” (Goldberg et al. 2007), gene regulatory networks have been 
represented as far-from-equilibrium dynamical systems (Kauffman 1971; Karlebach 
and Shamir 2008). Depending on their initial conditions, internal constraints, and 
local molecular relationships of inhibition or activation, these regulatory networks 
can evolve into different possible attractors, which are taken to represent distinct 
types of cell phenotypes individuated as arrays of mRNA transcripts (Huang et al. 
2005). As noted by Huang et al. (2009, 871-3), some gene regulatory networks can 
produce complex landscapes with many attractors. Some of these attractors cor-
respond to observed gene expression patterns (i.e., to actual cell types), including 
cancer cells. But, most of them do not correspond to any actual cell type; and it is 
currently unclear which attractors in a complex epigenetic landscape correspond to 
viable gene expression patterns, or more generally, which attractors in a dynamical 
models of a target have biological significance.
Increasing the biological plausibility of attractors in some dynamical model gen-
erally involves reducing the generality of the model. This increase in plausibility 
generally relies on knowledge of the historical and environmental contingencies that 
influence particular target systems and on experimental data about relevant causal 
mechanisms that constrain model-building (Brigandt 2013; Goldbeter 2018). For 
example, studies of the processes of canalization in embryos of the fruit fly Dros-
ophila melanogaster have employed dynamical systems models of a network of 
genes known to be involved in generating the basic body plan of this organism. 
Validated and tested with high-precision empirical data about gene expression in 
Drosophila melanogaster, these dynamical models indicate that coupled chemical 
reactions with multiple attractors can explain two properties of canalized develop-
mental systems, namely: their discrete and buffered responses to external perturba-
tions (Manu et al. 2009a, b).
A type of attractor that can potentially serve to plausibly understand the dynamic 
and homeostatic equilibrium of at least some biological systems is the Milnor 
attractor, which has the peculiar property of being asymptotically unstable (Drake 
et al. 2007). An advantage of Milnor attractors is that they can account for cases in 
which trajectories visit attractor after attractor exhibiting metastable “equilibrium” 
behaviour that is far from stable (thermodynamic) equilibrium. The latter is called 
“switching”, and can plausibly capture phenomena exhibited by biological systems, 
such as binocular rivalry (see, e.g., Friston et al. 2012 for an application grounded in 
the FEP). Another advantage of Milnor attractors is that they allow modellers to take 
small fluctuations into account and they are compatible with situations in which the 
trajectory of the system visits regions of phase space that lay outside of the original 
attractor basin of the system. Finally, Milnor attractors have the advantage of being 
compatible with the itinerant (wandering) dynamics, which is an ubiquitous feature 

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 19 of 26 
41
of self-organizing systems, whether in physics or biology. However, despite these 
attractions, in order to give a more general characterization of homeostatic equilib-
rium in biology in terms of Milnor attractors, considerable theoretical and experi-
mental work remains to be done, which could bridge attractors in abstract dynamical 
systems models and measurable observables in real-world biological systems and it 
is not clear whether this generality can be achieved.
In summary, making a convincing case for the biological relevance of attractors 
found in dynamical models of target biological systems requires taking into account 
enough of the relevant causal factors of particular systems that can account for their 
homeostasis. The greater the number of the causal factors included in a dynamical 
model, the more realistic the model. But this increase in realism decreases the scope 
of the generalizations the model allows.
Discussion
In the previous sections, we have analysed three challenges involved in the formula-
tion, justification and applicability of the FEP, namely: the problem of pre-stating 
phase spaces for most biological systems, the lack of theoretical and empirical war-
rant for making ergodicity assumptions in biology, and the challenge of identifying 
homeostatic states with attractors in the phase space.
Based on our analysis, one conclusion is that, because of a fundamental mismatch 
between its physics assumptions and properties of biological targets, model-building 
grounded in the FEP achieves maximal generality for minimal biological plausibil-
ity. Its foundations in concepts and mathematical representations from physics allow 
free energy theorists to build models that are applicable to theoretically any (bio-
logical) system. But, achieving this generality comes at the cost of minimal biologi-
cal realism, as those models fail to accurately capture any real-world factor for most 
biological systems.
While this conclusion coheres with other analyses of trade-offs in model build-
ing in various fields of biology (Levins 1966; Matthewson 2011; Elliott-Graves 
2018), one initial objection is that, at best, we have shown that the FEP makes false 
idealizing assumptions, such as ergodic assumptions. But idealization is pervasive 
throughout science, and allows free energy theorists to focus attention on only the 
core causal factors responsible for the phenomenon of interest (see, e.g., Batterman 
2001; Weisberg 2013; Potochnik 2017). The FEP, and, more generally, any phys-
ics approach that models biological systems as ergodic far-from-equilibrium random 
dynamical systems possessing a non-equilibrium steady state are nothing special in 
these respects. Like for any other idealized scientific representation, even if the FEP 
involves simplifying distortions, it does not follow that it must be minimally realis-
tic, and have limited explanatory or predictive power.
The problem with this initial objection is that it is actually controversial if models 
grounded in the FEP take account of any of the core causal factors that give rise 
to homeostasis (or robustness) in real-world biological targets. Consider the Ising 
model. This is a mathematical model originally created to explain ferromagnetism 
in statistical mechanics, which represents atoms or other physical particles as points 

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 20 of 26
along a linear lattice, and allows these points to be in one of two states (i.e., + 1 or 
− 1). Although the Ising model is very simple and includes almost no realistic fea-
ture of its target systems, it has been fruitfully used to explain phase transitions in 
a variety of systems, by capturing some of the core interactions that can give rise to 
them. For example, it has been used to generate explanations of how a large number 
of simple components (like neurons) can acquire abilities such as memory (Hop-
field 1982), and even the occurrence of stock market crashes (Sornette 2003). It is 
in virtue of, and not despite, its simplified distortions that the Ising model plays an 
explanatory role in highlighting a minimal set of factors that suffice to explain how a 
system can undergo a phase transition between an ordered and a disordered phase in 
two dimensions. Furthermore, the explanations generated by the Ising model can be 
evaluated for their explanatory adequacy on the basis of relevant empirical data, for 
example on the basis of measurements of the activity of an ensemble of neurons on 
some relevant memory task or to associate the occurrence of stock market crashes 
with the collective interaction between traders (Jhun et al. 2018).
We mentioned the Lotka–Volterra model above. Physicist Vito Volterra used 
his dynamical model of predator-prey interactions to fit observations about the fish 
catches in the Adriatic Sea. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley developed and used 
their model of the action potential, which consists of a set of nonlinear differential 
equations, to fit recordings of action potentials in the squid giant axon. Most relevant 
here, non-equilibrium models of cellular processes are developed and used to fit data 
about the detailed balance within a cell (e.g., Fakhri et al. 2014; Battle et al. 2016).
However, if the FEP or the active inference models it grounds make simplifying, 
distorting assumptions about the phase space of a target system, the ergodicity of 
biological systems and the existence of an attracting set corresponding to homeo-
static states for these systems, then these idealizations should earn their keep. These 
idealizations should allow life scientists to tractably draw some explanation and pre-
diction about relevant biological observables in real-world systems, and assess those 
predictions against measurements relevant to understanding some aspect of homeo-
static processes in actual biological systems (cf., Da Costa et al. 2020, Table 1 for a 
summary of some existing applications of active inference models). Our contention 
is that the idealizations made by free energy theorists do not play these practical and 
epistemic roles.
At this point, the free energy theorists can reply that we are unfair, or misin-
formed. In fact, they may argue that the biological plausibility of the FEP is much 
clearer than what we are suggesting. Maximal generality need not detract from real-
ism. Specifically, they can point out two things to us: first, many researchers rou-
tinely define and manipulate free-energy functionals for estimating coupling param-
eters in models of actual biological systems; second, core assumptions of the FEP, 
such as the assumption that the phase space of any biological system has an underly-
ing non-equilibrium steady state density, are not idealizations but are accurate repre-
sentations warranted by empirical evidence from actual biological systems.
Let us consider the first part of this reply. This part alludes to dynamic causal 
modelling, which is one possible approach to causal inference from neuroimaging 
data (Marinescu et al. 2018). With dynamic causal modelling, researchers work with 
idealized, but well-defined models of the probabilistic dependencies between latent 

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 21 of 26 
41
state variables in neural systems—like synaptic activities—and observed measure-
ments—like blood-oxygen-level-dependent fMRI signals. The relative level of free 
energy (i.e., relative evidence) of different models of the target neural variables and 
their relationships is used to identify which one within a given set of models is the 
best supported given observed BOLD signals. This would demonstrate the epistemic 
and practical utility of defining and manipulating free energy functionals for infer-
ence and estimation.
However, this reply misses the point. The example of dynamic causal model-
ling in neuroscience does not demonstrate that the FEP provides life scientists with 
a plausible account of the behaviour of real-world biological systems. Successful 
applications of dynamic causal modelling do not give us any reason to believe that 
neural systems plausibly minimize free energy, or that they are (ergodic) active 
inference systems. After all, we would not conclude, from successful applications of 
structural equation modelling or Granger-causality to fMRI data, that it is plausible 
neural systems make causal inferences based on structural equation modelling or 
Granger-causality.
Let us now turn to the second part of the reply, which claims that core assump-
tions of the FEP are warranted by empirical evidence. Ramstead et al. (2018, 3), for 
example, say that a conception of a biological system’s “extended phenotype as the 
set of attracting states of a coupled dynamical system is supported by...studies of 
cancer genesis and progression...and by work on early myelopoiesis in real biologi-
cal systems.” Specifically, they refer to two studies—one by Yuan et al. (2017) and 
the other by Su et al. (2017)—which are aimed at understanding cancer as a dynamic 
attractor state in an epigenetic landscape, as providing support to the assumption 
that all biological systems have a non-equilibrium steady state density.
There are three things to say here. First, those two studies provide evidence that 
cancer can fruitfully be modelled and understood as an attractor in a dynamical sys-
tem, as opposed to a breakdown in specific molecular pathways in a causal mecha-
nism (Gross 2011; Green et al. 2018, Sec. 3.2). Those studies do not provide us with 
evidence that all biological systems occupy an attractor or that attractors can plausi-
bly be associated with homeostatic properties, nor do those authors claim otherwise.
Second, this reply does not distinguish between attractors that plausibly corre-
spond to homeostatic states and attractors that have no obvious biological signifi-
cance because they are not observed in actual cells. The dynamical models of molec-
ular endogenous networks described in Yuan et al. (2017) and Su et al. (2017) yield 
several “structurally robust states,” but, as the authors note, their biological signifi-
cance can be interpreted only in relation to known cellular phenotypes. For example, 
those two studies interpret certain states with a relatively large basin of attraction 
as cancer, based on empirical evidence indicating that there is high inter-individual 
variance in the mutations in sequenced tumours for non-hereditary cancers.
Third and finally, claiming that certain stable cancer cell phenotypes are attrac-
tors, and that all attractors in dynamical models of biological systems can plausibly 
be interpreted as homeostatic states risks to conflate two scales of explanation. At 
the cellular scale, cancer cells might be considered homeostatic, functional states, 
because they contribute positively to the persistence of a tumor. At a higher scale, 
however, cancer cells cannot be homeostatic states, since they contribute negatively 

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 22 of 26
to the persistence of their host system, and tumors themselves consist in a homeo-
static failure to regulate the balance between cell growth and cell death.
In summary, some dynamical systems analyses of biological networks play vari-
ous epistemically and practically successful roles in systems biology (Green et al. 
2018, Sec. 3). The success of these analyses depends on (1) the availability of large 
sets of data that could be used to constrain and empirically evaluate the dynami-
cal models, (2) background knowledge about the history of target biological sys-
tems, and (3) the existence of warranted conceptual bridges linking abstract state 
representations and experimentally accessible observables. In particular, as systems 
biologist Hiroaki Kitano (2004, 835) put it,“[t]he greatest challenge [for dynami-
cal systems approaches to biological robustness] will be to formulate theories that 
account for thermodynamics in heterogeneous and structured systems...[and that at 
such a level of abstraction they can] be practically applied to biological systems.” 
The FEP theorists have not handled that challenge yet and have not given us good 
reasons to believe that the FEP serves to explain and predict the behaviour of most 
biological systems.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have argued that free energy theorists have pursued maximally gen-
eral models, by relying on foundational concepts and mathematical representations 
from statistical physics and dynamical systems theory. This pursuit means a sacri-
fice in biological realism with the risk of minimizing the explanatory and predictive 
power of free energy theorists’ account of biological, homeostatic, far-from-equilib-
rium persistence.
The FEP can perhaps be better understood as a maximally general definition of 
any system that persists, viz. “any system that exists must, on average, have a sta-
tionary (non-changing) free energy, which (by the ergodic assumption) corresponds 
to the time integral” (Friston 2019, 184). But, this definition does not seem to pro-
vide us with any new insight into biological systems. To the extent free energy theo-
rists treat all biological systems, at any scale, as pre-specified generic objects with 
fixed (currently unknown) equations of motions, their account risks missing all fea-
tures that make biological systems interesting kinds of thermodynamic systems.
Acknowledgements  We thank Alistair Isaac, Daniel J. Nicholson, Dan Williams, Gregor Greslehner, 
Marcin Miłkowski, Maxwell Ramstead, and two reviewers for this journal for helpful discussion and for 
their comments on previous versions of this paper. Matteo Colombo’s work on this paper was financially 
supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 23 of 26 
41
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​
ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Allen M, Friston KJ (2018) From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computational framework for the 
embodied mind. Synthese 195(6):2459–2482
Aguilera M, Millidge B, Tschantz A, Buckley CL (2021) How particular is the physics of the free energy 
Principle? arXiv preprint arXiv:​2105.​11203
Andrews M (2021) The math is not the territory: navigating the free energy principle. Biol Philos 
36(3):1–19
Ashby WR (1956) An introduction to cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, London
Batterman RW (2001) The devil in the details: asymptotic reasoning in explanation, reduction, and emer-
gence. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Battle C, Broedersz CP, Fakhri N, Geyer VF, Howard J, Schmidt CF, MacKintosh FC (2016) Broken 
detailed balance at mesoscopic scales in active biological systems. Science 352(6285):604–607
Bechtel W (2017) Explicating top-down causation using networks and dynamics. Philos Sci 
84(2):253–274
Beer RD (2000) Dynamical approaches to cognitive science. Trends Cogn Sci 4(3):91–99
Bernard C (1865) Introduction a l’Etude de la Médicine Expérimentale. JB Baillière, Paris
Bich L, Mossio M, Ruiz-Mirazo K, Moreno A (2016) Biological regulation: controlling the system from 
within. Biol Philos 31(2):237–265
Biehl M, Pollock FA, Kanai R (2021) A technical critique of some parts of the Free Energy Principle. 
Entropy 23(3):293
Birkhoff GD (1931) Proof of the ergodic theorem. Proc Natl Acad Sci 17(12):656–660
Brauer F, Kribs C (2015) Dynamical systems for biological modeling: an introduction. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton
Brigandt I (2013) Systems biology and the integration of mechanistic explanation and mathematical 
explanation. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part C Stud His Philos Biol Biomed Sci 44(4):477–492
Cannon WB (1929) Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiol Rev 9:399–431
Chan HS, Dill KA (1991) Polymer principles in protein structure and stability. Annu Rev Biophys Bio-
phys Chem 20(1):447–490
Colombo M, Wright C (2021) First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy principle, organicism, 
and mechanism. Synthese 198(14):3463–3488
Corcoran AW, Pezzulo G, Hohwy J (2020) From allostatic agents to counterfactual cognisers: active 
inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biol Philos 35(3):1–45
Da Costa L, Parr T, Sajid N, Veselic S, Neacsu V, Friston K (2020) Active inference on discrete state-
spaces: a synthesis. arXiv preprint. arXiv:​2001.​07203
Di Paolo EA (2005) Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency. Phenomenol Cognit Sci 4(4):429–452
Drake JA, Fuller M, Zimmerman CR, Gamarra JG (2007) Emergence in ecological systems. In: From 
energetics to ecosystems: the dynamics and structure of ecological systems. Springer, Dordrecht, 
pp 157–183
Earman J, Rédei M (1996) Why ergodic theory does not explain the success of equilibrium statistical 
mechanics. Brit J Philos Sci 47(1):63–78
Engel M, Kuehn C (2021) A random dynamical systems perspective on isochronicity for stochastic oscil-
lations. Commu Math Phys 386:1603–1641
Elliott-Graves A (2018) Generality and causal interdependence in ecology. Philos Sci 85(5):1102–1114
Español P (2004) Statistical mechanics of coarse-graining. In: Karttunen M, Lukkarinen A, Vattulainen I 
(eds) Novel methods in soft matter simulations. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol 640. Springer, Berlin
Evans DJ, Cohen EGD, Morriss GP (1993) Probability of second law violations in shearing steady states. 
Phys Rev Lett 71(15):2401–4
Frigg R (2008) A field guide to recent work on the foundations of statistical mechanics. In: Rickles D 
(ed) The Ashgate companion to contemporary philosophy of physics. Ashgate, London, pp 99–196

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 24 of 26
Fakhri N, Wessel AD, Willms C, Pasquali M, Klopfenstein DR, MacKintosh FC, Schmidt CF 
(2014) High-resolution mapping of intracellular fluctuations using carbon nanotubes. Science 
344(6187):1031–1035
Frigg R, Werndl C (2011) Explaining thermodynamic-like behavior in terms of epsilon-ergodicity. Phil 
Sci 78(4):628–652
Friston K (2013) Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 10(86):20130475
Friston K (2012) A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14(11):2100–2121
Friston K (2019) A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1906.​10184
Friston K, Da Costa L, Hafner D, Hesp C, Parr T (2020) Sophisticated inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:​
2006.​04120
Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Pezzulo G (2017) Active inference: a process theory. 
Neural Comput 29(1):1–49
Friston K, Breakspear M, Deco G (2012) Perception and self-organized instability. Front Comput Neu-
rosci 6:44
Friston K, Stephan KE (2007) Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 159(3):417–458
Friston K, Kilner J, Harrison L (2006) A free energy principle for the brain. J Physiol-Paris 
100(1–3):70–87
Friston K, Da Costa L, Parr T (2020) Some interesting observations on the free energy principle. arXiv 
preprint. arXiv:​2002.​04501
Froese T, Stewart J (2010) Life after Ashby: ultrastability and the autopoietic foundations of biological 
individuality. Cybern Hum Knowing 17(4):83–106
Gallavotti G (1999) Statistical mechanics: a short treatise. Springer, Berlin
Godfrey-Smith P (2013) Darwinian individuals. In: Bouchard F, Huneman P (eds) From groups to indi-
viduals: evolution and emerging individuality. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 17–36
Goldberg AD, Allis CD, Bernstein E (2007) Epigenetics: a landscape takes shape. Cell 128(4):635–638
Goldbeter A (2018) Dissipative structures in biological systems: bistability, oscillations, spatial patterns 
and waves. Philos Trans R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 376(2124):20170376
Goldstein S (2001) Boltzmann’s approach to statistical mechanics. In: Bricmont J, Ghirardi G, Dürr D, 
Petruccione F, Galavotti MC, Zanghi N (eds) Chance in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol 574. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 39–54
Green S, Şerban M, Scholl R, Jones N, Brigandt I, Bechtel W (2018) Network analyses in systems biol-
ogy: new strategies for dealing with biological complexity. Synthese 195(4):1751–1777
Gross F (2011) What systems biology can tell us about disease. Hist Philos Life Sci 33:477–496
Haken H (1983) Synergetics. An introduction. Springer, Berlin
Hopfield JJ (1982) Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational proper-
ties. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 79:2554–2558
Hohwy J (2020) Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle. Synthese 1–25
Huang S, Ernberg I, Kauffman S (2009) Cancer attractors: a systems view of tumors from a gene network 
dynamics and developmental perspective. Semin Cell Dev Biol 20(7):869–876
Huang S, Eichler G, Bar-Yam Y, Ingber DE (2005) Cell fates as high-dimensional attractor states of a 
complex gene regulatory network. Phys Rev Lett 94:128701
Izhikevich EM (2007) Dynamical systems in neuroscience. MIT Press, Cambridge
Janson NB (2012) Non-linear dynamics of biological systems. Contemp Phys 53(2):137–168
Jhun J, Palacios P, Weatherall JO (2018) Market crashes as critical phenomena? Explanation, idealiza-
tion, and universality in econophysics. Synthese 195(10):4477–4505
Karlebach G, Shamir R (2008) Modelling and analysis of gene regulatory networks. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol 9(10):770–780
Kauffman SA (1993) The origins of order: self-organisation and selection in evolution. Oxford University 
Press, New York
Kauffman S (1971) Differentiation of malignant to benign cells. J Theor Biol 31(3):429–451
Kauffman S (2013) Evolution beyond Newton, Darwin, and entailing law. In Lineweaver C, Davies 
M, Ruse P (eds) Complexity and the arrow of time. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 
162–190
Kauffman SA (2016) Humanity in a creative universe. Oxford University Press
Keller EF (2009) Organisms, machines, and thunderstorms: a history of self-organization, part two. Com-
plexity, emergence, and stable attractors. Hist Stud Nat Sci 39(1):1–31
Keller EF (2008) Organisms, machines, and thunderstorms: a history of self-organization, part one. Hist 
Stud Nat Sci 38(1):45–75

1 3
Non‑equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle…
Page 25 of 26 
41
Kirchhoff MD (2018) Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life-mind continuity thesis. Synthese 195:2519–
2540. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11229-​016-​1100-6
Kirchhoff MD, Froese T (2017) Where there is life there is mind: In support of a strong life-mind conti-
nuity thesis. Entropy 19(4):169
Kirchhoff M, Parr T, Palacios E, Friston K, Kiverstein J (2018) The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, 
active inference and the free energy principle. J R Soc Interface 15(138):20170792
Kitano H (2004) Biological robustness. Nat Rev Genet 5(11):826–837
Lebowitz JL (1993) Boltzmann’s entropy and time’s arrow. Phys today 46:32
Levins R (1966) The strategy of model building in population biology. Am Sci 54(4):421–31
Longo G, Montévil M (2014) From physics to biology by extending criticality and symmetry breakings. 
In: Perspectives on organisms. Springer, Berlin, pp 161–185
Longo G, Montévil M, Kauffman S (2012) No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution of the 
biosphere. In: Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on genetic and evolutionary 
computation conference companion, ACM, New York, pp 1379–1392
Mandell AJ, Selz KA (1990) Heterochrony as a generalizable principle in biological dynamics. In: Cor-
relations and connectivity. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 281–294
Manu S, Surkova AV, Spirov VV, Gursky H, Kim Janssens A.-R. et  al (2009) Canalization of gene 
expression and domain shifts in the Drosophila blastoderm by dynamical attractors. PLoS Comput 
Biol 5:e1000303
Manu S, Surkova AV, Spirov VV, Gursky H, Kim Janssens A.-R. et al (2009) Canalization of gene expres-
sion in the Drosophila blastoderm by gap gene cross regulation. PLoS Biol 7(2009):e1000049
Marinescu IE, Lawlor PN, Kording KP (2018) Quasi-experimental causality in neuroscience and behav-
ioural research. Nat Hum Behav 2(12):891–898
Matsuda H, Ogita N, Sasaki A, Satō K (1992) Statistical mechanics of population: the lattice Lotka–Volt-
erra model. Prog Theor Phys 88(6):1035–1049
Matthewson J (2011) Trade-offs in model-building: a more target-oriented approach. Stud Hist Philos Sci 
Part A 42(2):324–333
May R (2004) Uses and abuses of mathematics in biology. Science 303:790–794
May RM (1976) Models for two interacting populations. In May RM (ed) Theoretical ecology: principles 
and applications, 1st edn. Blackwell Scientific Publication, Oxford,  pp 49–70
McLeish TC (2015) Are there ergodic limits to evolution? Ergodic exploration of genome space and con-
vergence. Interface Focus 5(6):20150041
Nicolis G, Prigogine I (1977) Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems. Wiley-Interscience, New 
York
Nikolov S, Yankulova E, Wolkenhauer O, Petrov V (2007) Principal difference between stability and 
structural stability (robustness) as used in systems biology. Nonlinear Dyn Psychol Life Sci 
11(4):413–33
Okasha S (2012) Emergence, hierarchy and top-down causation in evolutionary biology. Interface focus 
2(1):49–54
Palacios P (2018) Had we but world enough, and time... but we don’t!: Justifying the thermodynamic and 
infinite-time limits in statistical mechanics. Found Phys 48(5):526–541
Palacios P (2021) Ehrenfest and ehrenfest-Afanassjewa on the ergodic hypothesis. In Uffink J, Valente G, 
Werndl C, Zuchowski L (eds) The legacy of Tatjana Afanassjewa. Women in the History of Phi-
losophy and Sciences, vol 7. Springer, Cham, pp. 101–120
Parr T, Friston KJ (2019) Generalised free energy and active inference. Biol Cybern 113(5–6):495–513
Parr T, Da Costa L, Friston K (2020) Markov blankets, information geometry and stochastic thermody-
namics. Philos Trans Royal Soc A 378(2164):20190159
Potochnik A (2017) Idealization and the aims of science. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Prigogine I, Nicolis I (1967) On symmetry-breaking instabilities in dissipative systems. J Chem Phys 
46(9):3542–50
Ramstead MJD, Badcock PB, Friston K (2018) Answering Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formu-
lation. Phys Life Rev 24:1–16
Robertson K (2020) Asymmetry, abstraction, and autonomy: justifying coarse-graining in statistical 
mechanics. Brit J Philos Sci 71(2):547–579
Rubin S, Parr T, Da Costa L, Friston K (2020) Future climates: Markov blankets and active inference in 
the biosphere. J R Soc Interface 17(172):20200503
Ruelle D, Takens F (1971) On the nature of turbulence. Les rencontres physiciens-mathématiciens de 
Strasbourg-RCP25 12:1–44

	
M. Colombo, P. Palacios 
1 3
41 
Page 26 of 26
Scheutzow M (2007) Attractors for ergodic and monotone random dynamical systems. In: Dalang RC, 
Russo F, Dozzi M (eds) Seminar on stochasticanalysis, random fields and applications V. Progress 
in probability, vol 59. Birkhäuser, Basel, pp 331–344
Schrödinger E (1944/1992) What is life?: With mind and matter and autobiographical sketches. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Seth AK (2014) The cybernetic Bayesian brain. In: Open Mind (ed) Open MIND. MIND Group, 
Frankfurt
Sinai YG (1970) Dynamical systems with elastic reflections. Russ Math Surv 25(1):137–189
Smith S (2017) Organisms as persisters. Philos Theory Pract Biol 9:14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3998/​ptb.​69590​
04.​0009.​014
Sornette D (2009) Why stock markets crash. Princeton University Press
Sornette D (2017) Why stock markets crash: critical events in complex financial systems. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton
Su H, Wang G, Yuan R, Wang J, Tang Y, Ao P, Zhu X (2017) Decoding early myelopoiesis from dynam-
ics of core endogenous network. Sci China Life Sci 60(6):627–646
Turner JS (1982) Self-organization in non-equilibrium chemistry and biology. In: Schieve W, Allen PM 
(eds) Self-organization and Dissipative Structures. Texas University Press, Austin, pp 40–63
van Lith J (2001) Ergodic theory, interpretations of probability and the foundations of statistical mechan-
ics. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part B Stud Hist Philos Mod Phys 32(4):581–594
Van Valen L (1973) A new evolutionary law. Evol Theory 1:1–30
Wallace D (2016) Probability and irreversibility in modern statistical mechanics: classical and quantum. 
In Bedingham D, Maroney O, Timpson C (eds) Quantum foundations of statistical mechanics. 
Oxford University Press
Weisberg M (2013) Simulation and similarity: using models to understand the world. Oxford University 
Press, New York
Wightman AS (1985) Regular and chaotic motions in dynamical systems introduction to the problems. 
In: Regular and chaotic motions in dynamic systems. Springer, Boston, pp 1–26
Wright S (1932) The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in evolution. Proc sixth 
Int Congress Genet 1:356–366
Yuan R, Zhu X, Wang G, Li S, Ao P (2017) Cancer as robust intrinsic state shaped by evolution: a key 
issues review. Rep Prog Phys 80(4):042701
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

