Constraints (2023) 28:513–514
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601-023-09365-0
Reasoning and inference for (Maximum) satisﬁability:
new insights
Mohamed Sami Cherif1
Published online: 23 October 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
At the heart of computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence, logic is often used as a powerful
language to model and solve complex problems that arise in academia and in real-world
applications. A well-known formalism in this context is the Satisﬁability (SAT) problem
which simply checks whether a given propositional formula in the form of a set of constraints,
called clauses, can be satisﬁed. A natural optimization extension of this problem is Maximum
Satisﬁability (Max-SAT) which consists in determining the maximum number of clausal
constraints that can be satisﬁed within the formula. In our work, we are interested in studying
the power and limits of inference and reasoning in the context of (Maximum) Satisﬁability.
Our ﬁrst contributions revolve around investigating inference in SAT and Max-SAT solving.
First, we study statistical inference within a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) framework for
online selection of branching heuristics in SAT and we show that it can further enhance
the efﬁciency of modern clause-learning solvers. Moreover, we provide further insights on
the power of inference in Branch and Bound algorithms for Max-SAT solving through the
property of UP-resilience. Our contributions also extend to SAT and Max-SAT proof theory.
We particularly attempt to theoretically bridge the gap between SAT and Max-SAT inference.
Keywords Artiﬁcial intelligence · Satisﬁability · Maximum satisﬁability · Inference ·
Reasoning
School: Aix-Marseille University, France
Supervisors: Djamal Habet · Richard Ostrowski
Graduated: Tuesday, December 13th, 2022
Link to full text: https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-04088137
B Mohamed Sami Cherif
sami.cherif@u-picardie.fr
1
MIS, Universite de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France
123

514
Constraints (2023) 28:513–514
Also published in
– Understanding the Power of Max-SAT Resolution through UP-Resilience
– Proofs and Certiﬁcates for Max-SAT
– From Crossing-Free Resolution to Max-SAT Resolution
– Combining VSIDS and CHB Using Restarts in SAT
– A Proof Builder for MaxSAT
– Inferring Clauses and Formulas in Max-SAT
– Towards Bridging the Gap Between SAT and Max-SAT Refutations
Notes 2 gold medals, 1 silver medal and 1 bronze medal awarded for solvers developed
during PhD at the international SAT competition
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123

