Constraints (2023) 28:516–517
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601-023-09356-1
PHD THESIS ABSTRACT
Spacetime programming: a synchronous language
for constraint search
Pierre Talbot1
Published online: 23 September 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
Constraint programming is a paradigm for computing with mathematical relations named
constraints. It is a declarative approach to describe many real-world problems including
scheduling, vehicles routing, biology and musical composition. Constraint programming
mustbecontrastedwithproceduralapproachesthatdescribehow aproblemissolved,whereas
constraint models describe what the problem is. The part of how a constraint problem is
solved is left to a general constraint solver. Unfortunately, there is no solving algorithm
efﬁcient enough to every problem, because the search strategy must often be customized
per problem to attain reasonable efﬁciency. This is a daunting task that requires expertise
and good understanding on the solver’s intrinsics. Moreover, higher-level constraint-based
languages provide limited support to specify search strategies. In this dissertation, we tackle
this challenge by designing a programming language for specifying search strategies. The
dissertation is constructed around two axes:
• A novel theory of constraint programming based on lattice theory.
• A programming language, called spacetime programming, building on lattice theory for
its data structures and on synchronous programming for its computational model.
The ﬁrst part formalizes the components of inference and search in a constraint solver.
This allows us to scrutinize various constraint-based languages through the same underlying
foundations. In this respect, we give the semantics of several paradigms including constraint
logic programming and concurrent constraint programming using lattices. The second part
is dedicated to building a practical language where search strategies can be easily composed.
Compositionality consists of taking several distinct strategies and, via some operators, to
compose these in order to obtain a new strategy. Existing proposals include extensions to
logic programming, monadic constraint programming and search combinators, but all suffer
from different drawbacks as explained in the dissertation. The original aspect of spacetime
programming is to make use of a temporal dimension, offered by the synchronous paradigm,
to compose and synchronize search strategies on a shared logical clock.
This paradigm opens the door to new and more complex search strategies in constraint
programming but also in applications requiring backtracking search. We demonstrated its
usefulness in an interactive computer-aided composition system where we designed a search
B Pierre Talbot
pierre.talbot@uni.lu
1
University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
123

Constraints (2023) 28:516–517
517
strategy to help the composer navigating in the state space generated by a musical constraint
problem. We also explored a model checking algorithm where a model dynamically generates
a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) representing the reachability of some states. Although
these applications are experimental, they hint at the suitability of spacetime programming in
a larger context.
School: Sorbonne University, Paris, France
Supervisors: Carlos Agon, Philippe Esling
Graduated: Wednesday, 6th June, 2018
Link to full text: https://theses.hal.science/tel-02924854
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123

