Constraints (2023) 28:511–512
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601-023-09353-4
PHD THESIS ABSTRACT
Optimization methods based on decision diagrams
for constraint programming, AI planning,
and mathematical programming
Margarita Paz Castro1
Published online: 22 September 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
Decision diagrams (DDs) are graphical structures that can be used to solve discrete opti-
mization problems by representing the set of feasible solutions as paths in a graph. This
graphical encoding of the feasibility set can represent complex combinatorial structures and
is the foundation of several novel optimization techniques. Due to their ﬂexibility, DDs have
become an attractive optimization tool for researchers in different ﬁelds, including operations
research and computer science.
This dissertation investigates new techniques to use DDs in conjunction with existing
discrete optimization approaches based on constraint programming (CP), artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI), and integer programming (IP). The central thesis of this dissertation is that DDs
are effective tools to capture complex combinatorial structures of discrete optimization prob-
lems that are not fully exploited by general-purpose solvers. Thus, combinations of DDs with
existing technologies can achieve state-of-the-art performance on challenging optimization
problems.
Throughout this work, we address this thesis by developing novel DD procedures that
leverage methodologies from different optimization ﬁelds to solve discrete optimization
problems. Our ﬁrst project employs Lagrangian duality to strengthen DD bounds for pickup-
and-delivery problems. The second project explores new ways to generate admissible
heuristics for AI planning tasks by combining DD relaxations with AI planning techniques.
This work also studies the relationship between DD heuristics and existing admissible heuris-
tics in the community. Lastly, we propose a novel combinatorial lifting procedure and two
cutting plane approaches based on DDs for general-form binary optimization problems. We
show theoretical guarantees for our lifting procedure (e.g., conditions to obtain facet deﬁning
inequalities) and provide a thorough theoretical analysis of our two cutting plane procedures.
We apply our DD techniques to different problems, extending the usability of DDs in the
ﬁeld. Our ﬁrst work extends the literature of DDs for sequencing problems by considering
capacity constraints and proposing a DD construction procedure based on this restriction.
We also present two DD encodings for delete-free AI planning and analyze the properties
B Margarita Paz Castro
margarita.castro@ing.puc.cl
1
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile: Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
123

512
Constraints (2023) 28:511–512
of both representations. Our last project introduces a new DD network ﬂow formulation and
proposes a novel DD encoding for second-order cone inequalities.
School: University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Supervisors: J. Christopher Beck and Andre A. Cire
Graduated: Monday, March 1, 2021
Link to full text: https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/104977
Also published in:
• An MDD-based Lagrangian approach to the multicommodity pickup-and-delivery TSP
• Decision diagrams for discrete optimization: A survey of recent advances
• Solving delete free planning with relaxed decision diagram based heuristics
• Relaxed BDDs: An admissible heuristic for delete-free planning based on a discrete
relaxation
• A combinatorial cut-and-lift procedure with an application to 0-1s-order conic pro-
gramming
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123

