Constraints (2023) 28:510
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601-023-09357-0
PHD THESIS ABSTRACT
Scheduling through logic-based tools
Jordi Coll Caballero1
Published online: 18 September 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
A scheduling problem can be deﬁned in a nutshell as the problem of determining when and
how the activities of a project have to be run, according to some project requirements. Such
problems are ubiquitous nowadays since they frequently appear in industry and services. In
mostcases the computation of solutions of scheduling problems is hard, especially when some
objective, such as the duration of the project, has to be optimised. The recent performance
advances on solving the problems of Boolean Satisﬁability (SAT) and SAT Modulo Theories
(SMT) have risen the interest in formulating hard combinatorial problems as SAT or SMT
formulas, which are then solved with efﬁcient algorithms. One of the principal advantages
of such logic-based techniques is that they can certify optimality of solutions.
The main contribution of this thesis is the presentation of efﬁcient SMT-based methods to
solve scheduling problems. More precisely we tackle the well-known Resource-Constrained
Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP) as well as many extensions of this problem with addi-
tionalrequirementsandmodellingchallenges.Namely,wealsosolvetheproblemscommonly
denotedbyMRCPSP,RCPSP/t,MRCPSP/maxandMSPSP.Themostchallengingconstraints
in RCPSP-based problems are resource constraints, which specify a limited availability of
shared resources, usually renewable, that activities cannot surpass at any time. To handle
such constraints we use decision diagram based SAT encodings of pseudo-Boolean (PB)
constraints. Since these encodings have a high impact on solving times, we take advantage of
collateral constraints to compactly encode PB constraints, while preserving good propaga-
tion properties. However we go one step further, because we believe that such PB encoding
technique can be useful in other ﬁelds different than scheduling. With this idea in mind, we
design our PB encodings in an application-independent way, and we provide many encoding
alternatives different from decision diagram representations. The systems that we present are
able to outperform the best state-of-the-art exact solvers for the studied scheduling problems.
School: Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
Supervisors: Josep Suy Franch
Mateu Villaret Ausellé
Graduated: Wednesday, 17th of July, 2019
Link to full text: http://hdl.handle.net/10803/667963
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
B Jordi Coll Caballero
jordi.coll@imae.udg.edu
1
Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
123

