BOOK REVIEW
Andrew Adamatzky: Physarum Machines: Computers
from Slime Mould
World Scientiﬁc Publishing, 2010, ISBN: 978-981-4327-58-9
Vincenzo Bonifaci
Published online: 15 September 2012
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012
Andrew Adamatzky is a professor at the University of the West of England working
in the area of unconventional computing, a research area that investigates forms of
computation based on platforms other than the familiar silicon-based computer.
Many alternative forms of computation are based on biological systems. In the last
ten years or so, after several exciting discoveries in experimental biology, slime
molds have joined the unconventional computing club. Physarum polycephalum is
an acellular slime mold with remarkable computing capabilities: for example, it is
able to construct the shortest path between two points in a maze. Adamatzky’s book
is devoted to demonstrating and discussing many illustrative examples of
Physarum’s computational power.
The initial part of the book gives an overview of Physarum computing and a
discussion of the technical setup necessary to replicate the experiments. One reason
that slime molds are being used in biological experiments, and as unconventional
computing devices, is that they are cheap and easy to cultivate. You do not need
expensive equipment. The book makes this point extremely clear, by giving a
tutorial on experimenting with Physarum. The tutorial covers where to obtain
Physarum, how to store it, what to feed it, and so on.
The core of the book contains many examples of the problems solved by
Physarum, from path ﬁnding to logical gates. These examples are illustrated by
many gorgeous color pictures taken by the author during his own experiments.
Other chapters discuss how to modify the slime mold’s behavior in various ways,
with attractants, repellents or light, and how to grow the slime mold on water or
make it ﬂoat.
An interesting aspect of the book is the comparison between Physarum
computation and reaction-diffusion computation, which is based on special types
V. Bonifaci (&)
Istituto di Analisi dei Sistemi ed Informatica ‘‘Antonio Ruberti’’,
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Roma, Italy
e-mail: vincenzo.bonifaci@iasi.cnr.it
123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2013) 14:123–124
DOI 10.1007/s10710-012-9169-2

of chemical reactions. Adamatzky is also an expert on reaction-diffusion
computation.
Most chapters read essentially as ‘‘lab diaries’’. Each of them includes many
photographs and some diagrams. A summary is included at the end of each, with the
ﬁndings of the experiments and references to the literature. The book includes an
extensive bibliography and an index.
The book may be most enjoyed by the scientiﬁcally curious who want to
experiment hands-on with slime mold. Or by readers working in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence or Robotics that are considering the use of a biological hardware
platform and want to know about Physarum. With the exception of one chapter, the
discussion of mathematical models or algorithms is avoided or kept to a minimum.
Unfortunately there are hardly enough details to implement the software needed to
run the computer experiments. However, the list of references may be quite valuable
to the determined programmer.
The book is somewhat expensive. Doubtless this is due to the many color
pictures, which are a crucial component of the book. Nonetheless, it is a timely text
that allows the reader a glimpse into the fascinating abilities of an organism as
simple and yet complex as the Physarum.
124
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2013) 14:123–124
123

