General Relativity and Gravitation (2022) 54:115
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10714-022-02973-w
REVIEW ARTICLE
Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic
incompleteness to cosmic censorship
Klaas Landsman1
Received: 4 May 2022 / Accepted: 5 August 2022 / Published online: 29 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Supplementing earlier literature by e.g. Tipler et al. (1980), Israel (1987), Thorne
(1994), Earman (1999), Senovilla and Garﬁnkle (2015), Curiel (2019) and Landsman
(2021), I provide a historical and conceptual analysis of Penrose’s path-breaking 1965
singularity (or incompleteness) theorem. The emphasis is on the nature and historical
origin of the assumptions and deﬁnitions used in—or otherwise relevant to—the the-
orem, as well as on the discrepancy between the (astro)physical goals of the theorem
and its actual content: even if its assumptions are met, the theorem fails to prove the
existence or formation of black holes. Penrose himself was well aware of this gap,
which he subsequently tried to overcome with his visionary and inﬂuential cosmic cen-
sorship conjectures. Roughly speaking, to infer from (null) geodesic incompleteness
that there is a “black” object one needs weak cosmic censorship, whereas in addition
a “hole” exists (as opposed to a boundary of an extendible space-time causing the
incompleteness of geodesics) if strong cosmic censorship holds.
Keywords Roger Penrose · History of general relativity · Singularity theorems
This article belongs to the Topical Collection: Singularity theorems, causality, and all that (SCRI21).
This expository paper is based on my keynote talk Penrose in perspective at the conference Singularity
theorems, causality, and all that: A tribute to Roger Penrose (SCRI21), June 14–18, 2021, organized by
Piotr Chru´sciel, Greg Galloway, Michael Kunzinger, Ettore Minguzzi, and Roland Steinbauer. I am
singularly grateful to these organizers for the invitation to speak. I am also indebted to Michel Janssen for
showing me a copy of Einstein’s letter to Besso (March 1, 1931) quoted in footnote 10, as well as to José
Senovilla for several important corrections on the ﬁrst version of this paper. Finally, with gratitude I spoke
to Penrose for two hours on July 2, 2022 in Oxford, followed by a walk, which led to further clariﬁcations.
B Klaas Landsman
landsman@math.ru.nl
1
Department of Mathematics, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
123

115
Page 2 of 39
K. Landsman
Contents
1 Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2 Singularities and singularity theorems before 1965 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3 Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities: exegesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4 Intermezzo: singularities revisited and reﬁned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5 Cosmic censorship: Penrose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6 Cosmic censorship: from Penrose to pde
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7 Epilogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1 Introduction
Penrose’s short paper ‘Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities’ from 1965
was surely one of the most important contributions to general relativity since Einstein
had formulated the theory in 1915:
However, all bets were off concerning the possibility of a non-singular outcome
to a collapse after the publication of a theorem by Roger Penrose (1965), which
has claims to be considered the most inﬂuential development in general relativity
in the 50 years after Einstein founded the theory. Penrose demonstrated that
singularities were, after all, a generic feature of gravitational collapse and must
appear soon after the formation of a trapped surface (a surface from which
light cannot escape outwards). Although the theorem could offer no information
about the nature of the singularity, there was a widespread belief that it would
have an all-enveloping spacelike character, as in the Schwarzschild case, thus
obstructing further development of the situation. Penrose’s paper was just as
important for what it initiated as for what it accomplished. Powerful global
techniques exploiting the causal structure of space-time had been introduced
into the theory for the ﬁrst time.
(Israel [99, p. 253])
Penrose’s theorem said roughly this: Suppose that a star—any kind of star
whatsoever—implodes so far that its gravity becomes strong enough to form an
apparent horizon, that is, strong enough to pull outgoing light rays back inward.
After this happens, nothing can prevent the gravity from growing so strong that
it creates a singularity. Consequently (since black holes always have apparent
horizons), every black hole must have a singularity inside itself. (Thorne [186,
p. 227])
The singularity theorems constitute the ﬁrst genuine post-Einsteinian content of
classical gr, not foreseen in any way by Einstein (…) The global mathematical
developments needed for the singularity theorems, and the ideas on incomplete-
ness or trapping—and thus also their derived inferences—were not treated nor
mentioned, either directly or indirectly, in any of Einstein’s writings. In 1965
grleft adolescence behind, emancipated from its creator, and became a mature
physical theory full of vitality and surprises. (Senovilla and Garﬁnkle, [175, p.
2])
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 3 of 39
115
The comparably path-breaking series of papers—this time on the observational side—
by the Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration (2019) on their famous image of the
black hole in M87 opens as follows:
Black holes are a fundamental prediction of the theory of general relativity
(gr; Einstein 1915). A deﬁning feature of black holes is their event horizon, a
one-way causal boundary in space-time from which not even light can escape
(Schwarzschild 1916). The production of black holes is generic in gr (Penrose
(965)).
(Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration [61], p. L1)
On the basis of this paper, to general acclaim Penrose won half of the 2020 Physics
Nobel Prize:
for the discovery that black hole formation is a robust prediction of the general
theory of relativity.
All records show that this is certainly how the (astro)physics community interpreted
Penrose’s result.1 In particular, it put an end to claims even by leading relativists to the
effect that curvature singularities of the kind found in the static Schwarzschild solution
from 1916 (and later in the Kerr solution from 1963), as well as in the dynamical
Oppenheimer–Snyder solution from 1939, were artiﬁcial consequences of unphysical
idealizations (such as spherical or axial symmetry) and would be absent in realistic
models.
But let us recall that Penrose [148] actually proved that in the presence of a suitable
curvature condition, a space-time (M, g) that contains a non-compact Cauchy surface
as well as a trapped surface cannot be future null geodesically complete. Thus it is
far from obvious how Penrose’s theorem relates to the above summaries by Thorne,
the eht, and the Nobel Prize committee (Israel is more accurate; the discontinuity
between Einstein and Penrose claimed by Senovilla and Garﬁnkle will be addressed).
Putting it bluntly, the main differences between Penrose’s actual theorem and its
reputation are that:
• The theorem says nothing about event horizons, which form the “black” ingredient
of a black hole;
• It is inconclusive about “singularities”, which should form the “hole” part of a
black hole.
Hence the link between the theorem and black holes is opaque. What is missing is
the further inference, perhaps under additional assumptions, from the existence of
incomplete null geodesics to the existence of an event horizon, as well as an argument
relating incompleteness to the existence of a singularity in some physically meaningful
sense (such as a curvature singularity), as opposed to, for example, the sudden end
of a geodesic being caused by extendibility of the space-time under consideration.
Penrose [148] was well aware of both problems, see Sect. 3 below. Addressing the
ﬁrst had to wait for a good deﬁnition of an event horizon, which he provided in [151]
1 Israel [99], Tipler, Clarke, & Ellis [187], Earman [47, 49], Senovilla [173], Senovilla & Garﬁnkle [175]
and Curiel [32] survey singularities and singularity theorems in gr in a historical context. For textbook
treatments see e.g. [3, 26, 93, 103, 107, 139, 173, 189], and [131]. For Penrose’s theorem see also [2] and
[71].
123

115
Page 4 of 39
K. Landsman
and which led, in the same paper, to what is now called his weak cosmic censorship
conjecture. Penrose subsequently addressed the second (extendibility) problem, albeit
rather indirectly at ﬁrst, by what we now call strong cosmic censorship.
Here is the plan of the remainder of this paper:
Section 2 summarizes the status of singularities and singularity theorems in
gr before 1965.2
Section 3 goes through [148] in detail, paying special attention to what was and
was not new.
Section 4 resumes the discussion of singularities, including Penrose’s [154, 155]
“localization” thereof.
Section 5 discusses cosmic censorship mainly from the point of view of Penrose
[151, 153–155].
Section 6 explains the transition from his cosmic censorship conjectures to the
versions that are currently used.
Section 7 is an Epilogue, reﬂecting a little on scientiﬁc revolutions and historiog-
raphy in the present context.
Let me stress, perhaps against ﬁrst appearances, that this paper is intended to increase
our admiration of Penrose’s work in gr, which—apart from equally deep and inﬂuen-
tial ideas on gravitational radiation and asymptotic ﬂatness, spinor and twistor theory,
black hole thermodynamics, and cosmology—may be seen as a sustained effort to
accomplish what many people seem to believe his 1965 theorem already did.
2 Singularities and singularity theorems before 1965
The period from 1916 to 1965 is well covered by [47, 49, 51, 175, 181] but problems
of interpretation remain. Like the history of gr itself [100, 101], I see a steady but
bumpyroad—thistimefromEinsteintoPenrose—whereultimatelythemathematician
overruled the physicist and won.
Both Hilbert [96] and Einstein [55] saw singularities as points in space-time where
some components gμν of the metric were ill-deﬁned and/or det(g) = 0, with some
attention paid to the role of the coordinate system. Such singularities were seen in the
Schwarzschild solution from 1916 at r = 2m, as well as in the de Sitter solution from
1917.3 Slightly rewritten by Einstein [55], de Sitter’s metric is
ds2 = dr2 + R2 sin2  r
R

d2 −cos2  r
R

dt2,
(2.1)
whered2 = dθ2+sin2 θdϕ2,and R isrelatedtothecosmologicalconstantλ = 3/R2
(de Sitter [180]). Einstein’s understanding of singularities has (understandably) been
questioned,4 but let me note that:
2 This section adds only little to [187], [49], and [175].
3 The Friedman solution (rediscovered by Lemaître [118]) dates from 1922, so it was not part of the earliest
discussions.
4 For example: ‘He tended to be more disturbed by (what today we would call) merely apparent singularities
and less disturbed by (what we would call) real singularities. Einstein had strong a priori ideas about what
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 5 of 39
115
• Not just Einstein but even Hilbert [96], who was also an expert in gr, failed to
recognize the apparent “singularity” of the Schwarzschild metric at r = 2m as a
mere coordinate singularity.5
• Not just Einstein but even Weyl [191] saw r = π R/2 as a genuine singularity in
de Sitter’s metric.6 But Einstein was not confused by the coordinate singularity
at r = 0 and did understand the need for different coordinate patches in order to
deﬁne regularity (and hence singularity) of the metric:
Furthermore, the continuity condition for the gμν and the gμν [including their ﬁrst
derivatives, as he says earlier] must not be interpreted to mean that it must be
possible to choose coordinates such that the conditions are satisﬁed in the entire
space. Obviously, one must only demand that for the neighborhood of every point
one can select coordinates such that the continuity conditions are met within this
neighborhood. [55, p. 271]; [57, p. 37].
Counterfactually granting Einstein [55] that r = π R/2 is indeed a “singularity”—
since he believed that ‘no choice of coordinates can remove this discontinuity’—the
interesting point is his subsequent argument that it is ‘genuine’. Namely, he deﬁnes a
point P to lie ‘in the ﬁnite domain when it can be connected by a curve with a ﬁxed,
chosen point P0, so that the distance integral
 P
P0 ds has a ﬁnite value.’ He then shows
results a correct physical theory should deliver. (…) He tended to push aside technical problems and jump
over essential diffculties. (…) His difﬁculties lay with cases that today beginning students of gtr take for
granted.’ [49, p. 185].
5 Andtheywerenottheonlyones:‘untiltheearly1960sthegeneralopinionwasthatitwasarealsingularity’
[49, p. 188]. Hilbert [96] required a coordinate transformation intended to remove an apparent singularity to
be regular (i.e. continuous and continuously differentiable) and invertible even at the location of the (alleged)
singularity. This defeats the purpose and is not even true for changing from Cartesian to polar coordinates.
‘How Hilbert, one of the great mathematical minds of the century, could have failed to appreciate this
elementary point deﬁes rational explanation.’ [49, p. 193]. The sphere at the Schwarzschild radius r = 2m
was alternatively described as a “discontinuity” (Schwarzschild), “magic circle” (Eddington), “barrier”
(Kottler), “limit circle” (Brillouin), and even “the death” (Nordmann); I learnt this in a seminar by Dennis
Lehmkuhl on April 12th, 2021. After important but inconclusive work by Eddington (1924), Lemaître
[119], Sect. 11, correctly concluded that ‘The singularity of the Schwarzschild ﬁeld [i.e. at r = 2m] is
thus a ﬁctitious singularity, analogous to that which appears at the horizon of the centre in the original
form of the de Sitter universe.’ However, his work was not well known and took decades to be digested.
For example, Einstein [56], p. 922, apparently unaware of [119], still called the Schwarzschild metric
“singular” at r = 2m since g00 vanishes and ‘both light rays and material particles take an inﬁnitely long
time (measured in “coordinate time”) in order to reach the point r = 2m when originating from a point
r > 2m’ (scare quotes are Einstein’s but emphasis added to highlight the changes from his reply to de
Sitter). See also [58, 82], Penrose [47], Sect. 1.2, Penrose [49], Sect. 2, and van Dongen and Lehmkuhl
(in progress). It seems that Finkelstein [63]was the ﬁrst author to introduce the modern understanding of
r = 2m (now no longer seen as singular) as a one-way membrane. But he did not use the term “event
horizon”, which had just been introduced by Rindler [161], who in turn did not mention the Schwarzschild
solution! It was Penrose [150] who ﬁrst put all this together.
Until the 1930s almost no attention was paid to what we now understand to be the real singularity of
the Schwarzschild metric at r = 0, ﬁrstly because Newtonian gravity has a similar singularity seen as
unproblematic, and secondly because this vacuum solution was not supposed to be valid in the interior of a
star, i.e. as r →0; indeed no star was known or expected to have a radius r < 2m. This was also Einstein’s
(ﬁnal) reply to Hadamard, who during a lecture in Paris on April 5, 1922, asked Einstein what happened if
the radius of the Sun were less than the Schwarzschild radius [6].
6 See Janssen [100] , pp. 202–207, for this episode. de Sitter space-time, independently introduced by
Levi-Civita [121], has no singularities at all (it is also globally hyperbolic), although it is not geodesically
convex [9].
123

115
Page 6 of 39
K. Landsman
that the (alleged) singularities at r = π R/2 lie ‘in the ﬁnite domain’, concluding that
‘the De Sitter solution has a genuine singularity’ (eine echte Singularität). This, then,
he considers ‘a grave argument against the admissibility of [de Sitter’s] solution’. Thus
Einstein’s logic seems crystal clear:
• He ﬁrst deﬁnes precisely what he means by a singular space-time (or ‘solution’,
as he calls it):
1. There must be at least one point P where in all coordinate systems some
component gμν or gμν (or its ﬁrst derivative) fails to be continuous (this is the
case, for example, if det(g) = 0);
2. Such points P can be connected to “regular” points P0 by some curve of ﬁnite
proper length.
• Admissible space-times must be non-singular, i.e., either the metric is regular at
all points P, or, if there are any singular points, these must lie at inﬁnite (proper)
distance from all regular points.
Criterion 1 is at odds with the modern notion of a (smooth) Lorentzian manifold,
which cannot contain such points. But this was far from obvious at the time and still
needed to be spelled out as late as 1963:7
the clue to clarity is to refuse ever to speak of a singularity but instead to phrase
everything in terms of the properties of differentiable metric ﬁelds on manifolds.
If one is given a manifold, and on it a metric which does not at all points satisfy the
necessary differentiability requirements, one simply throws away all the points
of singularity. The starting point for any further discussion is then the largest
submanifold on which the metric is differentiable. This is done because there is
not known any useful way of describing the singularities of a function except by
describing its behavior at regular points near the singularity. The ﬁrst problem
then is to select a criteria which will identify in an intuitively acceptable way a
“nonsingular space.” Evidently, differentiability is only a minimum prerequisite,
since everything becomes differentiable when the singular points are discarded.
The problem is rather to recognize the holes left in the space where singular (or
even regular) points have been omitted.
(Misner [132, p. 924])
I will discuss Misner’s paper below. Returning to Einstein [55], at least in a Whig
interpretation of history his second criterion may be claimed to foreshadow geodesic
incompleteness. It would have been more reasonable, though, if he had used causal
geodesics instead of arbitrary curves; ﬁrst deciding for causal curves on physical
grounds and/or because this is enough for all interesting examples,8 his criterion does
not even make sense if arbitrary (as opposed to geodesic) causal curves are allowed.9
7 Even for mathematicians, leaving out singular points from the space under consideration is not an obvious
move, as for example algebraic geometry shows. Within differential geometry, stratiﬁed spaces provide
another example [158].
8 In de Sitter space-time one can reach singular points (r = π R/2) from regular ones (0 ≤r < π R/2)
with any kind of curve.
9 First, any two points that can be connected by a lightlike (i.e. null) curve can also be connected by either
a lightlike geodesic or a timelike curve; see e.g. [131], Theorems 2.20 and 2.22, or [112], Proposition 5.13,
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 7 of 39
115
Even in the absence of satisfactory deﬁnitions of a singular space-time, towards
whichlittleprogresswasmadeuntilthe1960s,onemaylookfor“singularitytheorems”
prior to Penrose’s. But because it is not clear what is meant by a “singularity”, there is
considerable leeway in identifying such theorems, ranging from accepting Genesis 1:1
to rejecting anything before Penrose [148] to deserve the name.10 For example, both
Tipler et al. [187] and Earman [49] attribute the ﬁrst singularity theorem to Tolman and
Ward [188], whereas Senovilla and Garﬁnkle emphatically start with Raychaudhuri
[159].
Prior to Robertson [165] and Walker [190] and Tolman and Ward [188] analyzed
closed homogenous and isotropic universes ﬁlled with matter in the form of a perfect
ﬂuid with ρ > 0 and p ≥0 (and zero cosmological constant), to conclude that such
models have a beginning in a state of zero volume and also recollapse after a state
of maximal expansion. However, they did not conclude that there was a big bang,
instead believing in some sort of cyclic process of repeated expansions, recollapses,
and bounces.11
Earman [49] reviews various analogous cosmological results from the 1930s, due to
Tolman, Robertson, de Sitter, Synge, and Lemaître, which with hindsight may be clas-
siﬁed as “singularity theorems”, in which “singularities” are deﬁned in diverse ways,
including zero volume (or radius), inﬁnite density, as well as problematic expressions
for the metric. Lemaître [119], which stands out in its astronomy, mathematics, and
physics, was the ﬁrst paper to use an energy condition.12 But all these authors imme-
diately give arguments why their results must be mathematical artifacts, typically by
appealing to their unrealistic underlying idealizations or to unknown new physics.
Even Lemaître [119] writes:
all going back to [152] . Second, as pointed out by Clarke [26, pp. 2–3] in precisely the present context of
[55], any two points that can be connected by a timelike curve can also be connected by a timelike curve of
ﬁnite proper length (namely by ‘wiggling the curve to make its speed close to the speed of light’), which
makes Einstein’s criterion vacuous as stated. See also [49] and [138] for broader discussions of this episode.
10 Following the Friedman solution from 1922 and its rediscovery by Lemaître [118], who—unlike the
mathematician Friedman—as an astronomer related the solution to the redshifts of extragalactic nebulae
that had been discovered in 1917, it was well understood in the 1930s that theoretically speaking the
expanding universe might have had a beginning, but this possibility was not taken very seriously until the
1960s [187]. See [137, 138], and [181] for Einstein’s views. Believing the universe was static, his initial
reaction to Friedmann [66] and Lemaître [118] was that their solutions were ‘irrelevant’ and ‘abominable’,
respectively, but after talking to Eddington in 1930 and Tolman in 1931 he came to accept an expanding
universe. As a letter to Besso from March 1, 1931 shows, Einstein also clearly realized, like many others,
that ‘the expansion of matter points to a beginning of time which lies 1010, respectively 1011 years in the
past.’ (‘Der Hacken ist aber, dass die Expansion der Materie auf einen zeitlichen Anfang schliessen lässt,
der 1010 bzw. 1011 Jahre zurückliegt’). The so-called Einstein–de Sitter universe (which is a ﬂat flrw
model remaining popular until the end of the twentieth century) indeed starts from what we now call a big
bang, but like other leading relativists including de Sitter (!) and Eddington, Einstein tried to avoid this
conclusion, in his case by ‘pointing out that the inhomogeneity of the distribution of stellar material makes
our approximate treatment illusory’; in other words, by appealing to the unphysical idealizations inherent
in the symmetries of the Friedman–Lemaître(–Robertson–Walker) solution. As we will see, this became a
common move against singularities in gr, which Penrose [148] and Hawking [89–91] made obsolete.
11 From a modern point of view such a process means that their space-time can be extended through t = 0,
which in the case at hand is impossible because of the curvature singularity as t →0 (in this case it is the
Ricci scalar that diverges).
12 This happens after eq. (2,10) on page 678 of the reprint in 1997, where he states that ‘in all reasonable
applications T 1
1 , T 2
2 and T 3
3 will be negative, and in all cases less than T 4
4 = ρ in absolute value’.
123

115
Page 8 of 39
K. Landsman
The matter has to ﬁnd, though, a way of avoiding the vanishing of its volume.
([119], p. 678 of 1997 reprint)
Meanwhile, progress was also made on the astrophysical side.13 Light stars were found
to retire as white dwarfs, in which nuclear burning has ended and inward gravitational
pressure is stopped by a degenerate electron gas. In 1931, Chandrasekhar and Landau
independently discovered that this only works for masses M ≤1.46M⊙(I take the
current value); heavier stars collapse into neutron stars (typically after a supernova
explosion). But also these have an upper mass, as ﬁrst suggested by Oppenheimer and
Volkoff [141] ; the current upper bound is about 2.3M⊙. Heavier stars collapse into a
black hole.
Yet this conclusion, so obvious with hindsight, was resisted as much as the idea of
a big bang, despite a paper by Oppenheimer and Snyder [142] in which the collapse
process was explicitly described within gr, albeit under the assumption of spherical
symmetry and an idealized equation of state.14 It was:
a manuscript that has strong claims to be considered the most daring and uncan-
nily prophetic paper in the ﬁeld. There is nothing in this paper which needs
revision today.
(Israel [99, pp. 226–227])
But there is a big difference between our perspective and the contemporary one (see
also Sect. 7):
At the end of the 1930s not only was there no agreement on how to deﬁne
singularities, there was not even a consensus about the status of singularities in
the key test case, the Schwarzschild solution.
(Earman [49, p. 240])
Restricting this summary to events directly relevant to Penrose’s paper, all authors
agree that the next key paper was Raychaudhuri [159] ; as already mentioned, Senovilla
and Garﬁnkle [175] even take this to contain the very ﬁrst singularity theorem in gr.
Raychaudhuri studies a universe ﬁlled with dust, i.e.15
T μν = ρuμuν,
(2.2)
but allows ρ to be an arbitrary positive function ρ(t, x), as opposed to previous treat-
ments where ρ depends on t alone. Indeed, the goal of Raychaudhuri’s paper is clear
from its abstract, which states that:
a simple change over to anisotropy without the introduction of spin does not
solve any of the outstanding difﬁculties of isotropic cosmological models.16
(Raychaudhuri [159, p. 1123])
13 See [99, 123, 186] for the relevant history, which is fascinating by itself.
14 As pointed out to me by Senovilla, the interior part of their solution is the contracting part of Friedmann’s
[66] solution. See also [43], whose work was all but ignored; the poor author ‘died soon after on the operation
table’ [34].
15 Raychaudhuri’s reasoning breaks down if a pressure term phμν is added to Tμν, since in that case
the congruence he uses is no longer geodesic, which in turn adversely affects his analogue of the central
equation (2.3).
16 By ‘spin’ Raychaudhuri means ωi j = 1
2 (∇iu j −∇jui), noticing that ωi j = 0 iff the ﬂow uμ is
hypersurface orthogonal. He cites [83] as an example where ‘spin’ contributes to making this famously
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 9 of 39
115
Instead of the parameter θ = ∇μuμ familiar from modern renditions of his work,
Raychaudhuri uses the volume element √−det(g), or rather G = (−det(g))1/6, but
these are related.17 For this reason, the famous equation for θ named after him, namely
(assuming that ∇uu = 0, which follows from (2.2))
∇uθ ≡˙θ = −1
3θ2 −σμνσ μν + ωμνωμν −Rμνuμuν,
(2.3)
cannot be found in his paper;18 instead, one ﬁnds an equivalent (but less transparent)
second-order differential equation for G. Either way, if Rμνuμuν ≥0 (which Ray-
chaudhuri infers from the energy condition ρ ≥0 and the Einstein equations) and
ωμν = 0 (i.e. if the ﬂow is irrotational), then, since σμνσ μν ≥0 for any congruence,
(2.3) implies that if θ > 0 on some hypersurface orthogonal to the ﬂow at some time,
i.e. the universe is expanding, then θ →∞at some ﬁnite time in the past, which
corresponds to G →0. Since ρ√−det(g) = ρG3 is constant, this suggests ρ →∞,
but G depends on the coordinates and G →0 could merely mark a singularity of
the congruence. On Raychaudhuri’s assumption that matter moves along the timelike
geodesics tangent to u, however, he does obtain a density and curvature singularity,
adding that the time from such a ‘singular state’ to ‘the present state’ is a maximum
for isotropic models, so that adding anisotropy to isotropic cosmological models even
brings the initial singularity forward!19
Similar comments apply to Komar [105], whose Introduction is worth quoting as a
sign of the times:
A principal success of the general theory of relativity in the realm of cosmology
is given by the Friedmann solution of the ﬁeld equations. This solution, which
employs the assumptions that the universe is spacially isotropic and that the
state of matter may be represented by incoherent dust, yields the result that the
universe is not stationary, but is rather in a state either of expansion from a
singular point in time (which would correspond to creation), or of contraction
toward a singular point in time (which would correspond to annihilation). The
question naturally arises whether such singular points are a consequence of the
acausal solution nonsingular. Gödel’s paper also played a signiﬁcant role in the mathematical turn gr took
in the 1960s [187, p. 111]. The July 2007 issue of Pramana–Journal of Physics (Volume 69, no. 1) is devoted
to Raychaudhuri and his equation. See also [49, 53, 187] for the history and context of Raychaudhuri’s
work in gr.
17 If uμ is hypersurface orthogonal and normalized to gμνuμuν
=
−1, the relation is θ
=
∂t ln(√−det(h)), where h is the metric induced by g on the hypersurface to which the ﬂow is orthog-
onal. See e.g. [112], Sect. 6.1, Eq. (6.25).
18 Here σμν := k(μν)−1
3 θhμν, with kμν = hρ
μhσν ∇ρuσ , where h is the spatial metric hμν = gμν +uμuν,
and ωμν = k[μν]. Eq. (2.3) appears, for example, in [52], Eq. (36), which is the earliest source I know.
19 In general, θ →∞could indicate that the hypersurface orthogonal to the ﬂow becomes lightlike (and
then timelike), in which case neither the density nor the space-time needs to be singular [28, 49, 167,
187]. Instead of a singularity in the energy density this implies that the domain of inﬂuence of some
initial spacelike hypersurface carrying the initial data for the Einstein equations comes to an end, so that
a (necessarily lightlike) Cauchy horizon forms. This happens, for example, in the Taub–NUT space-time
[132, 133, 176]. Cauchy horizons may still lead to singularities under a perturbation that destabilizes the
Cauchy horizon, cf. Sect. 6. This cannot happen in Bianchi type I models [94] and type IX models [176],
where Raychaudhuri’s argument does lead to a singularity in the energy density and even in space-time.
123

115
Page 10 of 39
K. Landsman
particular symmetry presupposed in Friedmann’s model, or whether perhaps for
more general distributions of matter one need not expect instants of creation or
annihilation of the universe. The purpose of this paper is to show that singularities
in the solution of the ﬁeld equations of general relativity are to be expected under
very general hypotheses (enumerated speciﬁcally below), and in particular that
the singular instant of creation (or annihilation) necessarily would occur at a
ﬁnite time in the past (or future, respectively).
(Komar [105, p. 104])
Replacing‘cosmology’by‘gravitationalcollapse’and‘Friedmann’by‘Schwarzschild’,
this purpose is hardly different from Penrose’s: it echoes the general spirit that one
would like to go beyond the simpliﬁed singular models of the past and see if their
singularities persist (which Komar shows they do).
In modern fashion, Komar just relies on energy assumptions, due to which he need
not specify Tμν explicitly—unlike Raychaudhuri [159], whom he does not cite.20
These are: T00 ≥0 and T ≥0, and T00 = 0 implies Ti j = 0. But by ﬁat he forces
his geodesic congruence to be the same as Raychaudhuri’s, including its identiﬁcation
with the matter ﬂow lines. This then leads him to very similar conclusions.21
Both papers crossed mathematical work on relativistic ﬂuid mechanics,22 which in
turn crossed or included the study of spatially homogeneous (Bianchi) cosmologies
initiated by Gödel [84], Taub [185] and the Hamburg group, summarized by Heckmann
and Schücking [94]. The general goal was
to ﬁnd singularity free [!] ﬂuid ﬁlled Bianchi cosmological models. (Ellis [59,
p. 2])
This research inﬂuenced all subsequent developments, where Raychaudhuri’s argu-
ment survived as a lemma for the mature singularity theorems, in whose proofs it is
used to prove focusing of geodesics.
To preface the next phase involving the young relativists Misner, Penrose, and
Hawking, I quote:
Wheeler and Sciama had a widespread impact on the development of the under-
standing of singularities, particularly through their students. Wheeler’s students
included Misner, Shepley, Thorne, and Geroch, while Sciama’s included Ellis,
Hawking, Carter, Rees, and Clarke. However, Sciama has claimed, on occasion,
that his most important contribution to relativity has been in inﬂuencing Roger
Penrose to work on the subject!
(Ellis [187, p. 136])
The last pre-Penrose papers on singularities I mention are Misner [132] and Shepley
([176, 177]).23 Once again, but for a different reason, it is instructive to quote from
the Introduction of [176]:
20 [160] seems a little reprimand for this. [173] combines their results in his Theorem 5.1.
21 Similar results were found by Landau, whose Russian colleagues recognized their inconclusiveness [49,
§5]. This eventually led to the so-called BKL-approach to singularities in gr. See [4] or a recent review.
22 For example, prior to 1955 by Eisenhart, Synge, Lichnerowicz, and subsequently by the Hamburg group
in gr founded by Jordan, consisting notably of Behr, Ehlers, Heckmann, and Schücking. See [187] for
references.
23 Misner [132], footnote 4, thanks his PhD student Shepley for ‘preparing this review’ (i.e. of the deﬁnition
of a singularity in space-time in the Introduction), adding that ‘We have borrowed heavily from [lectures by]
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 11 of 39
115
Most cosmological models in general relativity have a point of singularity (…)
which can be reached by a geodesic of ﬁnite total length from other points of
the space-time manifold, where the metric is degenerate or otherwise irregular
(for example, a point where a curvature scalar is inﬁnite). All known dust-ﬁlled
models, without cosmological constant, have singular points, and it may be
conjectured that the presence of dustlike matter ﬁlling space always leads to a
singularity. This paper shows that this conjecture is true for an important class
of universes.
(Shepley [176, p. 1403])
This shows that using geodesic incompleteness as a characterization of a singularity
was familiar at the time, although e.g. Heckmann & Schucking [94] do not mention
it.24 But it was seen as insufﬁcient:
completeness is vulgarly used as the deﬁnition of non-singularity. (Ryan & She-
pley [167, p. 80])
Thus Misner [132] reﬁnes this idea. After the call to arms already quoted in Sect.
2, followed by a comparison with the Riemannian case, geodesic incompleteness is
proposed as a necessary condition for a space-time to be singular, in which case it
is sufﬁcient that ‘some scalar polynomial in the curvature tensor and its covariant
derivatives be unbounded on an (open) geodesic segment of ﬁnite length,’ since this
implies inextendibility of the geodesic in question into some potential extension of
the space-time.25
Shepley [176] claims that Bianchi type IX universes ﬁlled with dust are singular
even if the congruence of matter ﬂow lines is rotating. But although he ﬁnds points
where det(g) = 0, he shows neither geodesic incompleteness, nor divergence of the
density or of some curvature scalar, admitting that ‘The question of what happens as
the singular point approaches is presently under investigation’ (p. 1409).26
3 Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities: exegesis
The brevity (2.5 pages) and brilliance of Penrose [148] makes almost every comma
relevant, but let me try some restraint. Following a brief discussion of gravitational
collapse, Penrose explains his motivation:
L. Marcus’ (sic), i.e. Lawrence Markus (1922–2020). Shepley [177] is a Princeton PhD thesis supervised
by Misner and Wheeler. Some relevant passages reappear in Ryan and Shepley [167], from which I will
quote as if these were written in 1963–1964. Footnote 19 in Misner [132] shows that [133], which contains
a similar analysis, must have been almost ready already in 1963.
24 Mentioning gr but not the search for a deﬁnition of a singular space-time, [95, 110], and [62] all study
causal geodesic (in)completeness in Lorentzian manifolds in comparison with the Riemannian case.
25 For a detailed treatment of all of this see Beem, Ehrlich, & Easley [3], Chapter 6. See also Chru´sciel,
[22], Sect. 4.4. If each ﬁnite segment of some incomplete geodesic is contained in a compact subset of
space-time, then Misner does not seem to count this incompleteness as a singularity, since in that case
space-time is typically extendible (as happens in Taub–NUT).
26 This may refer to [129], which is criticized in Collins and Ellis [28], or to Ryan and Shepley [167],
Chapter 10, which at last proves geodesic incompleteness and inextendibility. See also [49].
123

115
Page 12 of 39
K. Landsman
The question has been raised as to whether [the Schwarzschild] singularity is,
in fact, simply a property of the high symmetry assumed. The matter collapses
radially inwards to the single point at the center, so that a resulting space-time
catastrophe there is perhaps not surprising. Could not the presence of pertur-
bations which destroy the spherical symmetry alter the situation drastically?
(…)
Itwillbeshownthat,afteracertaincriticalconditionhasbeenfulﬁlled,deviations
from spherical symmetry cannot prevent space-time singularities from arising.
(Penrose [148, p. 57, 58])
Penrose does not strictly deﬁne what he means by a singularity, and cites none of
the papers discussed in the previous section except [142]. But the examples he gives
(namely gravitational collapse, Schwarzschild, and Kerr) suggest that he has curvature
singularities in mind. Indeed, the preamble to his theorem shows that he does not
identify singularities with incomplete geodesics:27
The existence of a singularity can never be inferred, however, without an
assumption such as completeness [i.e. inextendibility] for the manifold under
consideration.
[[148] (p. 58)]
Similarly, in a list of four possibilities to avoid singularities despite his theorem,28
Penrose includes:
(c) The space-time manifold is incomplete [i.e. extendible].29
(p. 58)
Geodesic completeness ﬁrst appears in the statement of the theorem, in which it is
a reductio ad absurdum assumption, see below, whose negation as a way out of the
ensuing contradiction is left to the reader and is nowhere deﬁned as a singularity. The
logic of the above two quotes therefore seems to be that inextendibility of the manifold,
as opposed to a ‘physical’ singularity, could be the cause of geodesic incompleteness
andassuchhastobeexcludedtomakeroomforacurvaturesingularityasthephysically
relevant cause of geodesic incompleteness. This logic foreshadows strong cosmic
censorship; cf. Sect. 5.
We now come to the theorem, which states that the following assumptions are
together inconsistent:
27 I suppose ‘completeness’ here means inextendibility as opposed to geodesic completeness, since a few
lines later Penrose states his theorem as the incompatibility between certain assumptions (see main text) and
future null completeness, which is subsequently speciﬁed as ‘Every null geodesic in M4+ can be extended
into the future to arbitrarily afﬁne parameter values (null completeness)’ i.e. null geodesic completeness.
Similarly, (c) above only makes sense if Penrose takes ‘incomplete’ to mean extendible. I thank Erik Curiel
and José Senovilla for a discussion of this point (via email, May 2021), about which we agree.
28 The others are: ‘(a) Negative local energy occurs; (b) Einstein’s equations are violated; (d) The concept
of space-time loses its meaning at very high curvatures—possibly because of quantum phenomena.’ Penrose
omits (e): There is no Cauchy surface. But, as Senovilla pointed out to me, on a modern understanding this
may be taken to be a consequence of his (c).
29 A footnote at this point adds that ‘The “I’m all right, Jack” philosophy with regard to the singularities
would be included under this heading!’. This reconﬁrms that Penrose considers extendibility a possible but
cheap way to avoid singularities.
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 13 of 39
115
Theorem 1 For any space-time (M, g), the following assumptions are contradic-
tory:30
1. A space-time is a four-dimensional time-orientable Lorentzian manifold;31
2. (M, g) is future null geodesically complete;
3. M contains a non-compact Cauchy surface C3;
4. One has (−Rμν + 1
2gμν R)tμtν ≥0 for any timelike vector t (at any point);32
5. There exists a trapped surface in M.
Penrose [148] deﬁnes a Cauchy surface by the property that every inextendible timelike
or null geodesic meets it.33 This speciﬁc concept of a Cauchy surface in gr seems to
have originated with Penrose, who therefore, with Leray [120], Choquet-Bruhat [12]
and Geroch [76] should be included on the list of architects of global hyperbolicity in
gr.34 Here is a picture from 1965 in the master’s hand:
30 In the preamble to this list Penrose supposes that M is ‘the future time development’ of C3. Short of
anything like the results of Choquet-Bruhat & Geroch [16], this simply seems to refer to his deﬁnition of
C3 as a Cauchy surface, see below.
31 Penrose always works in signature (+ −−−) and includes a cosmological constant λ in condition 4,
which I put to zero.
32 For null vectors t this inequality implies Rμνtμtν ≤0 by continuity. This is what is actually used in
the proof. Penrose [150] indeed states the curvature condition in the latter way. As we have seen, such
conditions were hardly new in 1965, neither as curvature conditions nor, via the Einstein equations, as
energy conditions (which here would simply be Tμνtμtν ≥0).
33 On the tacit understanding that C3 is achronal (or semispacelike, in Penrose’s own terminology) this is
equivalent to the property D(C3) = M (where the domain of dependence is deﬁned via timelike curves),
and hence to the later deﬁnition to the effect that C3 is any subset of M that intersects every inextendible
timelike curve once. See Penrose [150, 152]. Penrose [146] had already loosely deﬁned a Cauchy surface
C3 as a hypersurface that intersects every null geodesic exactly once.
34 Domains of dependence D(S) of hypersurfaces S ⊂M, and the closely related concept of a Cauchy
surface (for which D(S) = M) originate in hyperbolic pde theory in ﬂat space, for which [29] was the
standard reference at the time. The equivalence between the existence of a Cauchy surface as Choquet-
Bruhat [148] deﬁnes it and global hyperbolicity as used in the analysis of the Cauchy problem for gr by
Leray [120] and Choquet-Bruhat [12], i.e. compactness (in a suitable topology) of the space of causal curves
C(x, y) for any pair (x, y) of causally connected points, is announced in Penrose ([150], p. 191), based
on lectures in 1967 (a footnote on the same page says that ‘This will be shown elsewhere’). Penrose even
mentions the factorization theorem M ∼= R × S in the presence of a Cauchy surface S. The proof of both
results appeared in print only in Geroch [76], but it seems safe to assume that all of this must have been
reasonably clear to Penrose already at the end of 1964. Indeed, the author of papers like [143] would have
had no trouble adapting the description of domains of dependence and Cauchy surfaces in ﬂat space in
terms of characteristics in Courant and Hilbert [29] to curved space-times. For some history of the Cauchy
problem in gr see [14, 15, 164, 184].
123

115
Page 14 of 39
K. Landsman
Drawing of a (would-be) Cauchy (hyper)surface, taken from Penrose [146], p. 218.
The concept of a trapped surface was also introduced by Penrose [148] himself,
deﬁned as a
closed, spacelike, two-surface T 2 with the property that the two systems of null
geodesics which meet T 2 orthogonally converge locally in future directions at
T 2.
(p. 58)
Qua idea and deﬁnition trapped surfaces belong to the most innovative and lasting con-
tributions of [148].35 In the presence of a radial coordinate r, as in the Schwarzschild,
Reissner–Nordström, and Kerr solutions, Penrose’s convergence condition is equiva-
lent to the gradient ∇r being timelike, which in the Schwarzschild solution happens
for r < 2m, and which in the other two (subcritical) cases is the case at least for a
while after crossing the event horizon. The convergence condition can be stated in
terms of the null hypersurface C generated by the future directed null congruence
emanating from any spacelike surface T 2. Pick a tetrad (e1, e2, L+, L−) with (e1, e2)
spacelike and tangent to C, L± null and tangent (and hence orthogonal) to C, such that
g(ei, e j) = δi j, g(ei, L±) = 0 for i, j = 1, 2, g(L±, L±) = 0, and g(L+, L−) = −1,
all deﬁned on C. With θ± = ∇μLμ
±, the surface T 2 is trapped iff θ± < 0 throughout
T 2 for both signs (whereas in Minkowski space-time one of θ± is > 0 whilst the other
θ∓is < 0).
Thirty years later, Penrose recalled how he suddenly got the idea in the late autumn
of 1964:36
35 See Hawking and Ellis [93], chapter 9, for an early analysis of trapped surfaces in causal theory per se,
and [174] for a recent review. The study of trapped surface formation from the pde point of view began
with [172] and was continued by e.g. Christodoulou and his students [5, 17, 18, 20, 37, 122]. Schoen and
Yau [171] used the concept of a marginally outer trapped surface (mots), which is a Lorentzian analogue
of a minimal surface in Riemannian geometry and is probably the most important variation on Penrose’s
trapped surface (in the latter both expansion factors θ± of the null congruence emanating from T 2 are
strictly negative, whereas for a mots one equals zero). See [1] and [72] for reviews. motss appear in later
singularity theorems with weaker assumptions [54] as well as in the Penrose inequality, see Sect. 5.
36 It is not obvious that this recollection is about trapped surfaces, but on July 2, 2022, Penrose conﬁrmed
that it was.
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 15 of 39
115
My conversation with Robinson stopped momentarily as we crossed a side road,
and resumed again at the other side.37 Evidently, during those few moments an
idea occurred to me, but then the ensuing conversation blotted it from my mind!
Later in the day, after Robinson had left, I returned to my ofﬁce. I remember
havinganoddfeelingofelationthatIcouldnotaccountfor.Ibegangoingthrough
in my mind all the various things that had happened to me during the day, in
an attempt to ﬁnd what it was that had caused this elation. After eliminating
numerous inadequate possibilities, I ﬁnally brought to mind the thought that I
had had while crossing the street.38
[186, p. 227]
The proof of the singularity theorem displays some of the unprecedented causal and
topological techniques Penrose had developed in the preceding years in connection
with gravitational radiation [136, 145, 147]. It is very similar to all later reformulations
I am aware of:39
• Assumptions 1, 2, 4, and 5 imply (directly) that ∂I +(T 2) (which Penrose calls
B3) is compact;
• Assumptions 1 and 3 imply (by contradiction) that ∂I +(T 2) is non-compact.
The argument for the ﬁrst point is that the null Raychaudhuri equation for θ± (which
is due to Penrose, who writes ρ = −1
2θ± for both cases) and the boundary condition
θ± < 0 give a focal point on each null geodesic ruling C. It is left to the reader to
realize that ∂I +(T 2) = J +(T 2)\I +(T 2), which follows from global hyperbolicity
(which makes J +(T 2) closed), and that beyond each focal point the null geodesic
enters I +(T 2) and hence leaves ∂I +(T 2), in order to conclude with Penrose that
∂I +(T 2) is compact.40
Penrose’s homotopical argument for the second point seems correct but has not
survived;41 the most rigorous proof I know of (see e.g. [71]) is obtained by combining
the following results:42
37 ThisreferstoIvorRobinson(1923–2016),asopposedtoDavidRobinson.Bothwererelativistsassociated
with Penrose via King’s College London, where Penrose was a postdoc from 1961–1963 (he wrote his 1965
paper during late 1964 at Birkbeck College). [166] by David Robinson is a relativist’s memoir that also
contains interesting information about Penrose.
38 It is hard to overlook the analogy with Poincaré’s famous recollection of his crucial ﬂash of insight into
the theory of Fuchsian functions, referring to an event in 1880: ‘At that moment I left Caen where I then
lived, to take part in a geologic expedition organized by the École des Mines. The circumstances of the
journey made me forget my mathematical work; arrived at Coutances we boarded an omnibus for I don’t
know what journey. At the moment when I put my foot on the step the idea came to me, without anything
in my previous thoughts having prepared me for it; that the transformations I had made use of to deﬁne
the Fuchsian functions were identical with those of non-Euclidean geometry. I did not verify this; I did not
have the time for it, since [as soon as] I sat down in the bus I resumed the conversation already begun, but I
was entirely certain at once. On returning to Caen I veriﬁed the result at my leisure to salve my conscience.’
[86, p. 217].
39 See the second set of references in footnote 1.
40 See e.g. [2], paraphrased also in [112], Sects. 6.3–6.4, for a detailed outline of this reasoning.
41 In our discussion on July 2, 2022, Penrose even described his proof of the second point as ‘stupid’, and
acknowledged Misner as the source of the simpler proof that later appeared in Hawking and Ellis [93], Sect.
8.2, Theorem 1.
42 The ﬁrst is Lemma 3.17 in [152]; see also Minguzzi [131], Theorem 2.87 (iii). The second is Theorem
1 in Budic et al. [8] ; see also Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 in Galloway [70].
123

115
Page 16 of 39
K. Landsman
1. Any achronal boundary such as ∂I +(T 2) is a (locally Lipschitz) topological hyper-
surface.
2. Any compact achronal topological hypersurface in a globally hyperbolic space-
time is a Cauchy surface; hence by Geroch [76] Property 7, any Cauchy surface
in this space-time is compact.
4 Intermezzo: singularities revisited and reﬁned
In his PhD Thesis, Hawking writes without any further ado (or mention of inextendibil-
ity):
any model must have a singularity, that is, it cannot be a geodesically complete
C1, piecewise C2 manifold.
(Hawking [89, Sect. 4.1])
And similarly in the paper announcing his singularity theorem, citing Misner [132] at
this point:
Space-time is said to be singularity free if it is time-complete (all timelike
geodesics can be extended to arbitrary length) and if the metric is a C2 ten-
sor ﬁeld.
(Hawking [90, p.
444])
In his subsequent Adams Prize Essay,43 Hawking explicitly assumes inextendibility
and proposes to:
take timelike and lightlike geodesic incompleteness as our deﬁnition of a singu-
larity of space-time.
(Hawking [91, Sect.
6.1])
All of this was directly inspired by Penrose [148], but it seems to have been Hawking,
rather than Penrose, who ﬁrst advocated causal geodesic incompleteness as the def-
43 See [59] and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adams_Prize for the history of this award. ‘The Adams Prize
is awarded jointly each year by the Faculty of Mathematics and St John’s College to UK-based researchers,
under the age of 40, doing ﬁrst class international research in the Mathematical Sciences.’ Each year a topic
is set, which in 1966 was Geometric problems of relativity. Although Penrose won the prize, Hawking was
awarded an ‘auxiliary Adams Prize’ in the same year. The memoir [59] by George Ellis about Hawking is
especially valuable since Ellis was around himself at the time: ‘After the publication of [Penrose’s] paper
in January 1965, the members of Dennis Sciama’s general relativity group in the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics at Cambridge University (particularly Stephen Hawking, myself, and
Brandon Carter) hurriedly tried to learn the new methods that Penrose had introduced. We were assisted
in this by discussions with Felix Pirani and the group at King’s College, London; with John Wheeler and
Charles Misner, who visited Cambridge from the USA for an extended period; and with Roger Penrose
and Bob Geroch, who was visiting Penrose at Birkbeck College, London. In particular we had a one day
seminar in Cambridge attended by the members of the King’s College group, where I and Brandon Carter
summarized our understandings of the ingredients of Penrose’s theorem. (…) Stephen arrived at [his] results
by discussions with the Cambridge group that under Dennis Sciama’s guidance met to discuss ideas at tea
time each day, and with the London groups (as well as attending many seminars, we used to regularly catch
the train to attend lectures on general relativity at King’s College, London).’ [59, pp. 3–4]. See also Tipler
et al. [187], pp. 135–136.
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 17 of 39
115
inition of a space-time singularity. In a later defense of this deﬁnition, Hawking and
Ellis make both a physical and a pragmatic point:44
Timelike geodesic incompleteness has an immediate physical signiﬁcance in
that it presents the possibility that there could be freely moving observers or
particles whose histories did not exist after (or before) a ﬁnite interval of proper
time. This would appear to be an even more objectionable feature than inﬁnite
curvature and so it seems appropriate to regard such a space as singular. (…)
The advantage of taking timelike and/or null incompleteness as being indicative
of the presence of a singularity is [also] that on this basis one can establish a
number of theorems about their occurrence.
(Hawking & Ellis [93, p. 258])
As we have seen, crucial nuance is lost in doing so. Although Geroch initially used
practically the same deﬁnition as Hawking, also citing Misner [132], his subsequent
analysis [74] is more critical:
(a) there is no widely accepted deﬁnition of a singularity in general relativity;
(b) each of the proposed deﬁnitions is subject to some inadequacy.
(Geroch
[74, p. 526])
This paper is still worth reading, as is its more technical successor [77]; see also [3,
26, 31, 32, 48, 173].
Almost 60 years later, none of the problems that arose from identifying space-
time singularities with incomplete causal geodesics has been resolved: timelike, null
(i.e. lightlike), causal, and general geodesic incompleteness are all inequivalent to
each other; each is in turn inequivalent to incompleteness with respect to curves with
either arbitrary or bounded acceleration; geodesically incomplete manifolds (of any
kind) exist without curvature singularities; global hyperbolicity is compatible with
geodesic incompleteness; geodesic completeness is compatible with a lack of global
hyperbolicity; et cetera.
Penrose [154] gave a new deﬁnition of a singularity (i.e. Deﬁnition 2 below) ‘which
is not quite the same as that suggested by the singularity theorems’ (p. 85). It has two
novel and distinguishing features:
1. It is perspectival, in that not just the singularity matters but also its relationship to
points which it can inﬂuence. This is crucial for understanding Penrose’s mature
idea of cosmic censorship (Sect. 5).
2. Inextendible timelike curves replace incomplete causal geodesics as marks of sin-
gularities.
The change from ‘causal’ to ‘timelike’ is innocent,45 but the change from incom-
plete geodesics to inextendible curves is not (this change is required by the proof of
Theorem 5 below).46 The key difference lies in the possibility that an inextendible
44 Also cf. Geroch [74], p. 534: ‘Finally, we remark that geodesic incompleteness (…) is commonly used
as a deﬁnition of a singularity because with such a deﬁnition one can show that large classes of solutions
of Einstein’s equations are singular.’
45 Cf. Theorem (2.3) in [80]; one could even use lightlike curves [65, §3.3]. Causal geodesics would lead
to some weaker causality condition than global hyperbolicity, cf. Theorem 5 below.
46 It is the second (‘converse’) part of the proof of Theorem 5 below that does not work for causal geodesics
instead of curves, since the curve c constructed there is not necessarily a geodesic. The fact that we just get
123

115
Page 18 of 39
K. Landsman
causal curve may go off to inﬁnity and yet count as a singularity in the new sense,
i.e. as a ‘locally naked’ one.47 For example, even M = R4 carrying plane gravita-
tional waves, which is geodesically complete and strongly causal but not globally
hyperbolic, will now count as singular,48 as does anti-de Sitter.49 Consequently, Deﬁ-
nition 2 below accepts more singularities than the singularity theorems, and excluding
these new singularities therefore certainly excludes all old-school singularities: it will
be an unnecessarily strong condition. However, in strongly causal space-times that
are asymptotically ﬂat at null inﬁnity the right intuition to think about the “new” sin-
gularities remains: causal curves that either crash into a curvature singularity or reach
the edge of an extendible space-time.50
Penrose states his new deﬁnition in the language of terminal indecomposable sets
[80], but this language can be avoided. A simpler account is as follows:
1. Suppose that (M, g) is past distinguishing, i.e., I −(x) = I −(y) implies x = y.
This property allows us to exchange properties of points x for properties of their
timelike pasts I −(x).51
2. By deﬁnition, if z ∈I −(x) then z can signal to x, or inﬂuence x; we may say that
z is naked for x. For the next step, we note that z ∈I −(x) is equivalent to the
property I −(z) ⊂I −(x).
3. If z is the endpoint of some future-directed timelike curve c, then I −(z) ⊂I −(x)
if and only if
I −(c) ⊂I −(x).
(4.1)
4. Crucially, this inclusion is also deﬁned if c has no endpoint (i.e. is inextendible).
This suggests:
Footnote 46 continued
a causal curve at that point goes back to the deﬁnition of domains of dependence and Cauchy surfaces in
terms of causal curves rather than geodesics.
47 Inextendible causal curves may also hover around in a compact set, but this is impossible in strongly
causal space-times.
48 Thisexample,whichwaskindlysuggestedtomeinthiscontextbySenovilla,isevenduetoPenrose[146]!
A metric g = dudv −dy2 −dz2 + H(u, y, z)du2 on R4, which describes gravitational or electromagnetic
waves, is Ricci-ﬂat iff (∂2y +∂2z )H = 0, which is solved by g = dudv−dy2−dz2+ f (u)(y2−z2)+g(u)yz.
See [3], Chapter 13, [64, 65], and [73] for details and generalizations. If f ̸= 0 such space-times cannot be
asymptotically ﬂat at null inﬁnity (cf. footnote 54), which would therefore be desirable. Also cf. Penrose
[155], p. 623.
49 In this context, anti-de Sitter should be seen as a special case of the Malament–Hogarth space-times
[97, 127], which are never globally hyperbolic and yet typically geodesically complete (as indeed is anti-de
Sitter).
50 Penrose [154, 155] assumes that (M, g) is strongly causal, which on the causal ladder is one step above
being past distinguishing (Minguzzi [131], chapter 4, Deﬁnition 4.46), i.e. the condition that sufﬁces to
make sense of Deﬁnition 2. However, strong causality is necessary for Theorem 5 below. This is true for
Penrose’s original proof because of his reliance on the theory of TIPs, and in my version of the proof this
is because of the invocation of Theorem 2.53 in [131], where the case distinction I need relies on strong
causality via Remark 2.54 and Theorem 2.80.
51 One may also use past-directed inextendible causal curves, replacing I −(·) by I +(·), etc. For strong
cosmic censorship this deﬁnition is equivalent to the given one, as follows from Theorem 5 below, which
follows either way [155].
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 19 of 39
115
Deﬁnition 2 A future-directed future-inextendible causal curve c in M is naked for
x ∈M if (4.1) holds.
For example, in Minkowski space-time, for ﬁxed x take z ∈I −(x) and remove z.
Then any fd future-inextendible timelike curve c whose endpoint would have been z
satisﬁes (4.1).
5 Cosmic censorship: Penrose
Let us now return to Penrose [148]. In Sect. 3 I already noted that his emphasis on the
inextendibility (or, as he put it, completeness) of the underlying space-time shows that
Penrose was fully aware that (null) geodesic incompleteness alone was insufﬁcient
to point to a curvature (or “physical”) singularity, i.e., a “hole”. Similarly, Penrose
realized that the “black” in our (later) term “black hole” was as yet lacking:52
Whether or not “visible” singularities inevitably arise under appropriate cir-
cumstances is an intriguing question not covered by the present discussion.
(Penrose [148, footnote 9])
This was taken up in his magisterial and very inﬂuential paper ‘Gravitational collapse:
The role of general relativity’ [151], in which Penrose introduced what we now call
weak cosmic censorship:53
We are thus presented with what is perhaps the most fundamental question of
general-relativistic collapse theory, namely: does there exist a “cosmic censor”
who forbids the appearance of naked singularities, clothing each one in an abso-
lute event horizon? In one sense, a “cosmic censor” can be shown not to exist.
For it follows from a theorem of Hawking that the “big bang” singularity is, in
principle, observable. But it is not known whether singularities observable from
outside will ever arise in a generic collapse which starts off from a perfectly
reasonable nonsingular initial state.
(Penrose [151, p. 1162])
For a mathematician like Penrose, this conjecture (here phrased as a question)
relied on a precise deﬁnition of an “absolute event horizon”. Like his 1965 singularity
theorem,alsothisconceptusedmathematicalideasthatPenrosehadinitiallydeveloped
for gravitational waves, especially his notion of null inﬁnity I , pronounced “scri”
[144, 145, 150]. Perhaps because [151] is mainly addressed to physicists, he relegates
this pretty important matter to a footnote, which reads:54
52 The rise of the term “black hole” is discussed in the appendix to [113], which was written by Erik Curiel.
See also [99]and [186]. I will freely use this material in what follows. Brieﬂy, although it seems that the
term was coined by Dicke and/or Wheeler, [151] marked its ﬁrst use in the scientiﬁc literature, where for
the ﬁrst few years it was usually surrounded by scare quotes. Other pioneers of the term were Bardeen,
Carter, Christodoulou, and Hawking.
53 For reviews of cosmic censorship before the pde people took over see Geroch & Horowitz [79], Sect.
5.4, Tipler, Clarke, & Ellis [187], Sect. 6, Earman [47], Chapter 3, and Joshi [102], Chapter 4. See Sect. 6
for the pde approach.
54 Instead of Penrose’s weakly asymptotically simple space-times, I use the cleaner notion of space-times
(M, g) that are asymptotically ﬂat at null inﬁnity [22, Sect. 3.1]. This means that (M, g) has a conformal
123

115
Page 20 of 39
K. Landsman
In a general space-time with a well-deﬁned external future inﬁnity, the absolute
event horizon would be deﬁned as the boundary of the union of all timelike curves
which escape to this external future inﬁnity. In the terminology of [150], if M is
a weakly asymptotically simple space-time, for example, then the absolute event
horizon in M is ˙I−(I +) [= ∂I −(I +)]. (Penrose [151, footnote 3, p. 1146 of
the 2002 reprint])
Penrose leaves it to the reader to extract the mathematical deﬁnition of a black hole
from this; and as in the case of the deﬁnition of a singularity, it was again Hawking
who was subsequently more explicit:
A black hole on a spacelike surface [S] is deﬁned to be a connected component
of the region of the surface bounded by the event horizon [i.e. M\I −(I +)∩S].
(Hawking [92, Abstract, p. 152])
Later (p. 156) he explains that this is a region ‘from which there is no escape to I +’.
This deﬁnition is repeated in Hawking & Ellis [93], Sect. 9.2, and is still standard,55
usually in the simple form M\I −(I +).
However, since there can be holes (in the sense of curvature singularities) that are
not black in having no event horizons,56 and there may be event horizons that do not
cover any kind of singularity,57 it might be better to call (a connected component of)
M\I −(I +) a black object instead of a black hole. In any case, his deﬁnition of an
event horizon led Penrose to a more precise deﬁnition of weak cosmic censorship:
I ﬁrst review what is now the “standard” picture of gravitational collapse to a
black hole—which I shall refer to as the establishment viewpoint. The picture
is, in fact, a very good one, with a remarkable degree of internal consistency.
But it is worth emphasizing that, among other things, this picture does depend
on a very big assumption, that of cosmic censorship. In my own view, this
Footnote 54 continued
completion ( ˆM, ˆg), i.e., a conformal embedding ι : M →ˆM such that ∂ˆM = ˆM\ι(M) ≡I = I +∪I −,
where I ± := ∂ˆM ∩J±(M). Writing ι∗ˆg = ι∗2g for some smooth function  :
ˆM →[0, ∞), one
asks  > 0 on ι(M),  = 0 on ∂ˆM, and d ̸= 0 on ∂ˆM. Adding fall-off conditions on the Ricci tensor
guaranteeing that I ± are null hypersurfaces in ˆM, one ﬁnally requires that I ± ∼= R× S2. To simplify the
notation I always assume that null inﬁnity I is such that its timelike past I −(I +) lies in M, i.e. does not
intersect the boundary ∂ˆM. If this is not the case (as e.g. in anti-de Sitter space), just write I −(I +) ∩M
instead of I −(I +) everywhere.
55 This does not mean it is uncontroversial [33]. The opposition between Rovelli and Wald is especially
telling. Rovelli states that Penrose’s deﬁnition of an absolute event horizon is ‘very useless, because it
assumes we can compute the future of real black holes, and we cannot’ [33, p. 30] to which Wald replies
that ‘I have no idea why there should be any controversy of any kind about the deﬁnition of a black hole.
There is a precise, clear deﬁnition in the context of asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes (…) I don’t see this as any
different than what occurs everywhere else in physics, where one can give precise deﬁnitions for idealized
cases but these are not achievable/measurable in the real world.’ ([33], p. 32).
56 Simply take the Schwarzschild metric for m < 0, or the supercharged Reissner–Nordström metric (i.e.
e2 > m2 > 0), or the fast rotating Kerr solution (i.e. a2 > m2 > 0); these are of course the simplest
examples of Penrose’s naked singularities.
57 For an artiﬁcial example, in the usual conformal completion of Minkowski space-time M [145], truncate
I + = {(p, q) | p = π/2, q ∈(−π/2, π/2)} to {(p, q) | p = π/2, q ∈(−π/2, 0)}. This turns the
region J+(0) into a fake black hole in ﬂat space-time. What I call black objects also include regular (i.e.
geodesically complete) black “holes”. See e.g. [10, 68, 179, 183], and references therein
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 21 of 39
115
assumption might well be false in suitable circumstances. I believe that the
consequences of possible violations of cosmic censorship are certainly worth
considering seriously (…) In effect, this principle states that naked singularities
do not develop out of an initially nonsingular state (…). A naked singularity
may be said to exist in a space-time M if there is a well-deﬁned external inﬁnity
(that is, I +, if M is weakly asymptotically simple) from which timelike curves
may be drawn into the past that terminate on the singularity. I shall not make
precise, here, the concept of “terminating on a singularity” but refer instead to
Hawking’s concept of asymptotic predictability.58 This is a precise condition on
a space-time M that may be taken as a statement that M accords with a form
of cosmic censorship. Imposing such a condition, we deduce the existence of
an absolute event horizon E, which encloses but does not intersect the singular
region. This horizon E may be deﬁned as the boundary of the past of the external
inﬁnity.
(Penrose [153, p. 125])
The ﬁrst part is tongue in cheek, since the “establishment” included—or even was—
Penrose himself! The ‘form of cosmic censorship’ probably refers to Hawking’s [92]
theorem to the effect that any future trapped surface lies entirely within a black hole.59
Penrose [153] goes on to develop the Penrose inequality, which he saw as a test for
cosmic censorhip he expected to fail (which it has not, so far).60
The challenge of making ‘the concept of “terminating on a singularity”’ more pre-
cise was taken up in [154], see also [155], and led to Deﬁnition 2 above. A deﬁnition of
cosmic censorship should then specify the nature of the points x relative to which “sin-
gular” curves c are naked. Hence it would have been natural if Penrose had proposed
e.g. the following deﬁnition (cf. footnote 54):61
Deﬁnition 3 Let (M, g) be a strongly causal space-time that is asymptotically ﬂat at
null inﬁnity.
1. An N-naked singularity in M with respect to some region of exposure N ⊂ˆM is
a future-inextendible causal curve c in M that is naked for some point x ∈N, i.e.,
the pair (c, x) satisﬁes I −(c) ⊂I −(x).
2. The N-weak cosmic censorship conjecture states that a “physically reasonable”
space-time (M, g) contains no N-naked singularities, i.e., no curve c in M and
point x ∈N as speciﬁed in 1. exist.
Paraphrasing Geroch & Horowitz [79], p. 274, the set N represents the region of
space-time (or possibly of its conformal completion ˆM) ‘in which observers could
58 A space-time (M, g) is (future) asymptotically predictable from a partial Cauchy surface S if I + ⊂
D+(S), where the domain of dependence D+(S) is computed in the conformal completion ˆM of M [93,
p. 310], cf. footnote 54. A violation of this condition would come from some null geodesic outside D+(S),
presumably marking a singularity at least in the spirit of [148], reaching I +. This would makes such a
singularity visible to asymptotic observers.
59 See also Proposition 9.2.1 in [93] , corrected by [27].
60 See [7] and [128] for reviews of the Penrose inequality. See also [112], Sect. 10.11 for a brief summary.
A special case, the Riemannian Penrose inquality, has been proved; see [117] for details.
61 Deﬁnition 3 is stated in words by Geroch & Horowitz [79], pp. 274–277. See also Earman [47], pp.
74–78.
123

115
Page 22 of 39
K. Landsman
detect that their universe is singular.’ This deﬁnition is quite subtle and excludes for
example that the big bang or the big crunch are seen as naked singularities (and the
ensuing cosmos as violating weak cosmic censorship): for the big bang, which we
can “see”, no such curve c exists (any relevant c is past inextendible), whereas for the
big crunch no x would exist. See Geroch & Horowitz [79], pp. 274–277 and Penrose
[155], §12.3.2.62
Various choices of the region N have (often implicitly) been proposed in the liter-
ature, for example:
• N = I −(I +),i.e.thecomplementoftheblackholeregionin M (myinterpretation
of [151]);
• N = I −(I +)∩I +(I −) ≡D(M, I ), i.e. the domain of outer communication(s)
in M;63
• N = D(M, I ) ∪I with I = I + ∪I −[157];
• N = J −(I +) ∩J +(S), where S is some partial Cauchy surface in M.64
• N = J −(I +) [187];65. See also footnote 73.
• N = I + [79];66
• N = M [154, 155], see below (strong cosmic censorship); this is deﬁned without
any need for asymptotic ﬂatness.
The ﬁrst and last choices seem optimal in having a clean characterization via Theo-
rems 4 and 5. First:
Theorem 4 Let (M, g) be a strongly causal space-time that is asymptotically ﬂat at
null inﬁnity. Then (M, g) contains no naked singularities with respect to I −(I +) iff
I −(I +) is globally hyperbolic.
This is proved in the same way as Penrose’s Theorem 5 below, adding a case distinc-
tion x ∈I −(I +) and x /∈I −(I +) that does not upset the result. If one accepts
the choice N = I −(I +), Theorem 4 might of course serve to deﬁne weak cosmic
censorship as global hyperbolicity of I −(I +). Except for N = M there seems to
be no complete analogue of Theorem 4 for the other choices of N; at best, there is a
one-sided implication to global hyperbolicity of N. In any case, I side with Earman
(private communication) that one may regard weak cosmic censorship as a family of
conjectures, one for each relevant region N.
62 In Penrose [155], p. 618, a ‘physically reasonable’ space-time is taken to mean: ‘A system which evolves,
according to classical general relativity with reasonable equation of state, from generic non-singular initial
data on a suitable Cauchy surface.’ But this is stated in connection with weak cosmic censorship. In strong
cosmic censorship, the above formulation is problematic since it suggests that the ‘evolved’ space-times
in question are globally hyperbolic, which by Theorem 5 makes strong cosmic censorship trivially true. I
return to this problem in Sect. 6 below. In [154] Penrose does not state genericity conditions.
63 See e.g. Chru´sciel [22], Sect. 3.1, for this notion. Modern black hole uniqueness theorems like Theorem
3.1 in [25] assume weak cosmic censorship deﬁned as global hyperbolicity of I −(I +) ∩I +(I −).
64 This comes tantalizingly close to Hawking’s future asymptotically predictability but is not equivalent to
it, see [108], especially Lemma 2.10. See also Wald [189], Sect. 12.1 and Chru´sciel [22], Sect. 3.5.1.
65 In fact, Tipler, Clarke & Ellis [187], p. 176, deﬁne weak cosmic censorship as global hyperbolicity of
J−(I +).
66 Their deﬁnition of (weak) cosmic censorship is that the closure of N (deﬁned in M) in ˆM does not
intersect I + (p. 280).
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 23 of 39
115
But Deﬁnition 3 is ahistorical! Instead, Penrose [154, 155] immediately moved on,
arguing that:67
It seems to me to be comparatively unimportant whether the observer himself
can escape to inﬁnity. Classical general relativity is a scale-invariant theory, so if
locally naked singularities occur on a very tiny scale, they should also, in princi-
ple, occur on a very large scale in which a ‘trapped’ observer could have days or
even years to ponder upon the implications of the uncertainties introduced by the
observations of such a singularity. (…) Indeed, for inhabitants of recollapsing
closed universes (as possibly we ourselves are) there is no ‘inﬁnity’, so the ques-
tion of being locally ‘trapped’ is one of degree rather than principle. It would
seem, therefore, that if cosmic censorship is a principle of Nature, it should be
formulated in such a way as to preclude such locally naked singularities (Penrose
[155, p.619]).
Thus ‘locally naked singularities’ are deﬁned via Deﬁnition 3 (assuming only strong
causality) by choosing N = M. Then the key result (which a posteriori justiﬁes his
use of curves instead of geodesics) is due to Penrose [154, 155]:
Theorem 5 A strongly causal space-time has no locally naked singularities iff it is
globally hyperbolic.
Proof.68 I ﬁrst prove the implication “global hyperbolicity ⇒no locally naked singu-
larities” by contradiction. Suppose that (M, g) is globally hyperbolic and that (4.1)
holds for some c and x. Take y on c and then take a future-directed sequence (yn) of
points on c, with y0 = y. Because of (4.1) this sequence lies in J +(y)∩J −(x), which
is compact by assumption. Hence (yn) has a limit point z in J +(y) ∩J −(x).
Now deﬁne curves (γn) as the segments of c from y to yn. By Theorem 2.53 in
[131], case (i), which is a sharp version of the limit curve lemma of causal theory
going back to [152], these curves have a uniform limit γ . Its arc length (as measured
by an auxiliary complete Riemannian metric) is, on the one hand, inﬁnite (since c is
endless and hence has inﬁnite arc length, which is approached as the yn move up along
c). But on the other hand it is ﬁnite, since γ ends at z (and fd continuous causal curves
have ﬁnite arc length iff they have an endpoint). Hence (4.1) cannot be true for any c
and x.
The (contrapositive) proof of the converse implication relies on the following
lemma:69
Lemma 6 Let (M, g) be a space-time, let S ⊂M be closed and achronal, and let
x, y ∈M.
1. If y ∈int(D−(S)), then J +(y) ∩J −(S) is compact. In particular, taking S =
∂I −(x) and assuming y ∈I −(x), it follows that J +(y) ∩J −(x) is compact.
67 Geroch & Horwitz [79] do not endorse this: ‘One would not, however, wish to regard [Kerr space-time
with a2 < m2] as a counterexample to cosmic censorship, for it is only the “nearby” observers who can
detect the singular behavior, not the “distant” observers.’ (p. 277). Slowly rotating Kerr space-time is not
globally hyperbolic but it does have an event horizon.
68 This proof is taken from [112], Sect. 10.4. Penrose [155] gives a different argument using TIPs.
69 Here I do follow Penrose [155], p. 624. The lemma combines Propositions 5.20 and 5.5 (h) in [152] .
123

115
Page 24 of 39
K. Landsman
2. We have int(D−(S)) = I −(S) ∩I +(D−(S)).
To prove the converse direction of Theorem 5, assume that (M, g) is not globally
hyperbolic. Then, under the assumption of strong causality, there are x, y for which
J −(x) ∩J +(y) is not compact.70 We may assume that y ∈I −(x). Part 1 of Lemma
6 gives y /∈int(D−(∂I −(x))). Part 2 gives some y′ ∈I −(x) with y′ /∈D−(∂I −(x)),
so that, by deﬁnition of D−, there exists some fd future-inextendible curve c from y′
that avoids ∂I −(x). Since y′ ∈I −(x), this curve does lie in I −(x), and hence (4.1)
holds.71
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 7 The strong cosmic censorship conjecture states that no “physically rea-
sonable” space-time (M, g) contains locally naked singularities, i.e. pairs (c, x) as
in Deﬁnition 2 such that I −(c) ⊂I −(x). Equivalently, by Theorem 5 the conjecture
states that any “physically reasonable” space-time is globally hyperbolic.
In this formulation (unlike many others), strong cosmic censorship (as deﬁnd by the
last bullet above) implies weak cosmic censorship (as deﬁnd by the ﬁrst bullet).72
Under the assumptions of Penrose’s singularity theorem one can prove an analogue
of Hawking’s [92] theorem on the invisibility of trapped surfaces (cf. [93, Proposition
9.2.1]):
Theorem 8 Under the assumptions of Theorem 1 and the additional clause that (M, g)
be asymptotically ﬂat at null inﬁnity, any future trapped surface must lie entirely within
the “black region” M\I −(I +).
I just sketch the proof, as the details are similar to Hawking’s. If the trapped surface T 2
were to (partly) lie in I −(I +), then also part of ∂I +(T 2) lies in I −(I +). Hence some
of the lightlike geodesics γ ruling ∂I +(T 2) with past endpoint on T 2 would reach
I + and hence have inﬁnite length. But the deﬁnition of a trapped surface excludes
this, as in the proof of Theorem 1, since it forces each γ to be incomplete.
⊓⊔
Since this forces M\I −(I +) to be non-empty, there must be an event horizon
∂I −(I +), which by the same argument must cover not only any trapped surface
but also all ensuing incomplete null geodesics.
6 Cosmic censorship: from Penrose to PDE
Theorem 8 bridges part of the gap between Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem and
its intended application to black holes, in that in the asymptotically ﬂat setting an
event horizon comes for free. However, according to this analysis (whose centerpiece
is Penrose’s Theorem 5), strong cosmic censorship (à la Penrose, cf. Deﬁnition 7) is
70 Unless M is compact this is true even without the assumption of strong causality, see [98] .
71 All this can be checked in the Minkowskian example following Deﬁnition 2, where, assuming z ∈I +(y),
the removal of z ruins compactness of J+(y) ∩J−(x) and hence global hyperbolicity. The existence of c
is trivial.
72 This follows from the deﬁnitions, but it also follows from Theorems 4 and 5 and the observation that
if (M, g) is globally hyperbolic, then so is I −(I +): if x ∈J+(y) for x, y ∈I −(I +) ⊂M, then
J+(y) ∩J−(x) ⊂I −(I +).
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 25 of 39
115
in fact one of the assumptions of the singularity theorem, so that its implication of
weak cosmic censorship (once again in the sense of Penrose, i.e. deﬁned by taking
N = I −(I +) in Deﬁnition 3) is hardly surprising. And we are also left with the issue
of the (in)extendibility of space-time.
With hindsight, it would have been natural if, one the basis of [148], Penrose had
deﬁned:73
• Weak cosmic censorship as the existence and stability of event horizons (in case
of singularities);
• Strong cosmic censorship as the nonexistence or instability of Cauchy horizons
(in all cases).
This would have directly addressed the above gap. In the ﬁrst (weak) case this is
indeed what he did, but he subsequently replaced this by the version of strong cosmic
censorship that really interested him.74 However, via a detour explained below, the
latter eventually did lead to the second bullet point.
The current versions of both cosmic censorship conjectures are based on the initial-
value approach or pde approach to gr, whose starting point may be taken to be the
celebrated theorem of Choquet-Bruhat and Geroch [16].75 This theorem states that
for each initial data triple (S, h, K) satisfying the vaccum constraints, where (S, h)
is a complete 3d Riemannian manifold carrying an additional symmetric 2-tensor K,
there exists a maximal globally hyperbolic development or mghd (M, g, i), where
(M, g) is a space-time satisfying the (vacuum) Einstein equations and i : S →M
is an embedding such that g returns the initial data (h, K) on i(S), in that i∗g = h
and K is the extrinsic curvature of i(S) ⊂M. The space-time (M, g) contains i(S)
as a Cauchy surface and hence is globally hyperbolic (as the name mghd suggests).
Moreover, the triple (M, g, i) is unique up to (unique) time-orientation-preserving
isometries ﬁxing the Cauchy surface,76 i.e. for any other mghd(M′, g′, i′) there exists
73 Compare Tipler, Clarke, & Ellis [187], p. 167: ‘The strong cosmic censorship principle is said to hold
if the entire space-time (M, g) is globally hyperbolic, i.e., if there are no nontrivial Cauchy horizons, and
the weak cosmic censorship principle is said to hold if all breakdowns of global hyperbolicity occur inside
a black hole, i.e. if the region J−(I +) is globally hyperbolic.’
74 Penrose [156] still states that the inference from geodesic incompleteness to a black hole requires weak
cosmic censorship in a version that looks like a form of Deﬁnition 3 with either N = I −(I +) or N = I +.
But, as in [155], he then moves on to strong cosmic censorship (in his version, of course) as the version one
really wants. Note that (his) strong cosmic censorship does not imply the N = I +-weak version! In our
discussion on July 2, 2022, Penrose said that for him the essence of strong cosmic censorship had always
been the avoidance of timelike singularities, and that (in)extendibility was secondary.
75 The original source is [16], who merely sketched a proof (based on Zorn’s lemma). Even the 800-page
textbook by Choquet-Bruhat [13] does not contain a proof of the theorem (which is Theorem XII.12.2); the
treatment in Hawking & Ellis [93], Sect. 7.6, is slightly more detailed but far from complete, too. [162] is a
book-length exposition, but ironically the proof of Theorem 16.6 is wrong; it is corrected in https://people.
kth.se~hansr/mghd.pdf. A constructive proof was given by Sbierski [169]. For a summary see [112], Sect.
7.6, which also contains further information.
76 Though rarely if ever mentioned in statements of the theorem, the isometry ψ is unique [116] . This can
be shown by Proposition 3.62 in [139] or the equivalent argument in footnote 639 of [112], to the effect
that an isometry ψ is determined at least locally (i.e. in a convex nbhd of x) by its tangent map ψ′x at some
ﬁxed x ∈M′. Take x ∈i′(S). Since ψ is ﬁxed all along i′(S) by the condition ψ ◦i′ = i and since it also
ﬁxes the (future-directed) normal Nx to i′(S) by the condition ψ∗g = h, it is determined locally. Theorem
1 in [88] then applies, which is a rigidity theorem for isometries going back at least to [75], Appendix A.
123

115
Page 26 of 39
K. Landsman
an isometry ψ : M′ →M that preserves time orientation and satisﬁes ψ ◦i′ = i.
This theorem has given rise to an ideology about gr in which:
• All valid assumptions about gr are assumptions about initial data (S, h, K).
• All valid questions about gr are questions about “the” mghd (M, g, i) of these
data.
This pde-based program sometimes gives a different perspective from the Penrose–
Hawking–Geroch mathematical approach to gr originating in the 1960s, in which
typically larger (usually maximally extended) space-times are studied. In particular,
in the pde approach one would at ﬁrst sight ask if some mghd (M, g, i) obtained from
“physically reasonable” initial data satisﬁes strong cosmic censorship.
By Theorem 5 this comes down to the question if (M, g) is globally hyperbolic. But
this is true by construction! Hence Penrose’s clear and distinct formulation of strong
cosmic censorship seems problematic in a paradoxical way:
1. Global hyperbolicity of the mghd (M, g, i) of any initial data set (S, h, K) is
automatic.
2. Global hyperbolicity of maximally extended (black hole) space-times is often too
strong.77
Inwhattheycallthe‘evolutionaryapproach’tocosmiccensorship,Geroch&Horowitz
[79], Sect. 5.4, show a way out and en passant sketch the modern pde versions of both
the weak and strong case. As we shall see, their version of strong cosmic censorship
can actually be seen as a special case of Penrose’s.
Their proposal for weak cosmic censorship is based on their earlier reﬁnement of
Penrose’s notion of asymptotic ﬂatness at null inﬁnity [78]. Using the notation of
footnote 54, assuming that the scaling function  satisﬁes ˆ  = 0, as can always be
achieved by a redeﬁnition of , the extra condition is that the null geodesics ruling
the null hypersurface I ± are complete.78
Consider now the following statement: for any asymptotically ﬂat initial-data
set, topologically R3, its maximal evolution [i.e. mghd] is an asymptotically ﬂat
spacetime [at null inﬁnity] (i.e. it even satisﬁes completeness of null inﬁnity).
This statement, we claim, captures a sense of cosmic censorship. That the initial-
data set be topologically R3 ensures that the evolution is not singular already on
S; that S be asymptotically ﬂat ensures that one deals with isolated systems, and
in particular that any singular behavior of the evolution must be due to the system
itselfandnotexternalinﬂuences.Suppose,then,thatthismaximalevolutionwere
singular, say to the future of S. It certainly cannot be nakedly singular for the
future of S, for S must be a Cauchy surface for its evolution. Furthermore, the
statement asserts that this evolution must be sufﬁciently large that it includes
the entire asymptotic regime, so in particular asymptotic observers can live out
their entire lives within this maximal evolution. What this statement means,
77 For example, maximally extended Kerr space-time is not even globally hyperbolic in the physically
relevant case 0 < a2 < m2.
78 Without this, the Penrose–Hawking deﬁnition of a black hole as a connected component of M\I −(I +),
with absolute event horizon ∂I −(I +), would be problematic. See e.g. footnote 57. At least, examples like
this are avoided now.
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 27 of 39
115
then, is that asymptotic observers will forever be unaffected by any singular
behavior of the spacetime. But this is a version of cosmic censorship. We have
essentially just re-expressed our earlier statement (that the closure of N have
empty intersection with I +), but now in a way that avoids the counterexample
obtained by removing a point from Minkowski spacetime. (Geroch & Horowitz
[79, pp. 285–286])
In heuristic terms this means that, if we disregard exceptional initial conditions,
no singularities are observed from inﬁnity, even though observations from inﬁn-
ity are allowed to continue indeﬁnitely.
(Christodoulou [18, p. A26])
This statement of weak cosmic censorship is exemplary from a pde point if view: it
starts with an assumption on initial data and formulates a question about the ensuing
mghd. However, like the deﬁnition of a black hole it depends on the concept of
null inﬁnity, which is “prescient” and may be seen as an undesirable idealization (cf.
[33], and footnote 55). Thus [18] reformulated the above statement of weak cosmic
censorship in such a way that the idealization I + no longer occurs.79
Either way, this turns the Penrosian version of weak cosmic censorship on its head!
For whereas his version states that outgoing signals from a black hole singularity are
blocked by a (future) event horizon H+(E ), the new version is about incoming (null)
signals: the further these are away from H+(E ), the longer it takes them to enter
H+(E ), and in the limit (i.e., in the original formulation, at null inﬁnity) this takes
inﬁnitely long, making future null inﬁnity I + complete. Yet there is a connection
with Penrose: lack of global hyperbolicity of I −(I +) gives a partial Cauchy surface
in M a Cauchy horizon which cuts off I +. This is clear from simple examples like
Schwarzschild for m < 0, Reissner–Nordström at e2 > m2, or Kerr at a2 > m2; see
e.g. [42] and [112], Sect. 10.6.
The status of the weak cosmic censorship conjecture(s) in any reasonable form is
open.80 One especially problematic issue is the status of the genericity conditions that
deﬁne “physically reasonable” space-times (or initial conditions) and hence the range
of applicability of the conjecture(s). For example, the physical relevance of genericity
conditions typically used in the mathematical literature, which are evidently based on
pde techniques, has been questioned [87, Sect. 3.4] .
The current (pde) version of strong cosmic censorship also goes back to [79]:
Consider, for motivation, an initial-data set whose maximal evolution is
extendible to the future of S (…) This extended spacetime cannot, by deﬁni-
tion of the maximal evolution, have S as a Cauchy surface. That is, from a point
p in the extension there must exist a maximally extended past-directed time-
79 Let (S, h, K) be asymptotically ﬂat initial data for the Einstein equations (satisfying the constraints),
with mghd(M, g, i). Christodoulou then deﬁnes (M, g) to have complete future null inﬁnity iff for any
s > 0 there exists a region B0 ⊂B ⊂S such that ∂D+(B), which is ruled by null geodesics, has the
property that each null geodesic starting in ∂J+(B0) ∩∂D+(B) can be future extended beyond parameter
value s. Here D+(B) is the future domain of dependence of B, and each null geodesic in question is
supposed to have tangent vector L = T −N, where T is the fd unit normal to S in M and N is the outward
unit normal to ∂B in S.
80 For reviews see [5, 19, 20, 37, 103, 109, 140]. N.B. Black hole uniqueness theorems [25] rely on weak
cosmic censorship!
123

115
Page 28 of 39
K. Landsman
like curve which cannot be assigned a past endpoint, and which fails to meet
S. In this rather mild sense the extended spacetime must be nakedly singular.
One might therefore imagine formulating cosmic censorship as the assertion that
every maximal evolution [i.e. mghd] is inextendible, i.e. that, once the maximal
evolution is completed, it is not possible to add any ‘extra regions’ as vantage
points from which observers could detect that their spacetime is singular to the
future of S.
(Geroch & Horowitz [79, pp. 286–287])
Interestingly, they immediately reﬁne this suggestion by giving the example of a small
spacelike disk S in Minkowski spacetime M, whose mghd is its domain of dependence
D(S) (which is a double cone), which is clearly extendible to all of M. To avoid cases
like that, they end up with the following:
Conjecture 5.2. For p any point in any extension of the maximal evolution of
any non-compact initial data set S, I −(p) ∩S has non-compact closure.
[79,
pp. 288]
But this reﬁnement seems not to have survived, perhaps because the models on which
the conjecture is tested already exclude trivial (counter)examples like the one men-
tioned. Thus we now simple have:
The appropriate notion of cosmic censorship (…) is that the generic solution
to Einstein’s equations is globally hyperbolic, i.e., that the maximal Cauchy
development of a generic initial data set is inextendible. (Moncrief [134, p. 88])
The strong cosmic censorship conjecture says that ‘most’ spacetimes devel-
oped as solutions of Einstein’s equations from prescribed initial data cannot be
extended outside of their maximal domains of dependence.81
(Chru´sciel,
Isenberg, & Moncrief [24, p. 1671])
Conjecture 17.1 (Strong Cosmic Censorship). For generic initial data for Ein-
stein’s equations, the mghd is inextendible.
(Ringström [162, p. 188])
Conjecture 3.5 (Strong cosmic censorship). For generic asymptotically ﬂat vac-
uum data sets, the maximal Cauchy development (M, g) is inextendible as a
suitably regular Lorentzian manifold.
(Dafermos [40, p. 11])
If the extension satisﬁes the Einstein equations this is a special case of Penrose’s
formulation [155], applied to a judicious choice of space-time! To see this, recall the
following concept [21]:
Deﬁnition 9 A development of initial data (S, h, K) satisfying the vacuum constraints
is a triple (M, g, i), where (M, g) is a space-time solving the vacuum Einstein equa-
tions and i : S →M is a spacelike embedding such that i∗g = h and i(S) has extrinsic
curvature K in M. Such a development is called maximal if it has no extension (M′, g′)
that also satisﬁes the vacuum Einstein equations.82
81 In §3 they further specify ‘most’ in terms of open and dense subsets in the space of initial data
82 Thus the difference between a development and a Cauchy development is that in the former i(S) is no
longer required to be Cauchy surface in M, so that (M, g) is not necessarily globally hyperbolic. Chru´sciel
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 29 of 39
115
Now apply Penrose’s strong cosmic censorship to such a maximal development, i.e.
require it to be globally hyperbolic (cf. Theorem 5). The connection with inextendibil-
ity is then easily made:
Proposition 10 A maximal development of initial data (S, h, K) is globally hyperbolic
(with Cauchy surface i(S)) if and only if the mghd of (S, h, K) is inextendible as a
solution to the vacuum Einstein equations. In that case, “the” maximal development
coincides with “the” mghd (up to isomorphism).
Proof The set of isometry classes [M, g, i] of Cauchy developments (M, g, i) of
given initial data (S, h, K) is partially ordered, and the mghd [Mt, gt, it] is its top
element. Hence if some maximal development (Mm, gm, im) is globally hyperbolic,
then [Mm, gm, im] ≤[Mt, gt, it]. On the other hand, since (Mt, gt, it) is a solution
and (Mm, gm, im) is maximal also the converse holds, so (Mm, gm, im) ∼= (Mt, gt, it).
⊓⊔
Therefore, Penrose’s conjecture applied to the maximal development à la [21] states
that for “generic” initial data the mghd is inextendible as a solution to the vacuum
Einstein equations. The tension that Penrose’s formulation may have given rise to
reﬂected the ambiguity about the space-time his condition of global hyperbolicity is
supposed to apply to: it seems that in the 1960s and 1970s people had maximally
extended solutions in mind,83 see e.g. the Penrose diagrams in [93], whereas from the
1990s onward the mghd in the pde picture had become the space-time of choice.
However, the strong cosmic censorship conjecture as stated by all authors quoted
above is stronger than the one suggested by Proposition 10, in that even extensions
that do not satisfy the Einstein equations are excluded. Indeed, any space-time solves
these equations for some energy-momentum tensor, however unfamiliar, and one has
no idea what kind of (strange) matter is contained in an extension. But the Einstein
equations should at least be deﬁned:84 to this end one may either consider extensions
in which the metric is C2 (i.e. the borderline case where Einstein equations make sense
as classical pdes), or allow C0 metrics for which the associated Christoffel symbols
are locally L2 (which is the least regular case in which the metric can still be deﬁned
as a weak solution to Einstein’s equations).85
[21] proves existence of maximal developments (but not uniqueness up to isometry, as in the globally
hyperbolic case).
83 Note that although each extendible space-time has an inextendible extension [77], which may be taken as
“maximal”, this inextendible extension is not unique (except perhaps if one imposes unphysical conditions
like analyticity).
84 [24] and [23] consider smooth extensions.
85 See [81], [20], p. 9, and [124], footnote 1. Minkowski space-time turns out to be inextendible even in
C0 [170], so in that case the validity of strong cosmic censorship is independent of the regularity of the
extension. However, for two-ended asymptotically ﬂat data for the spherically symmetric Einstein–Max-
well-scalar ﬁeld system (to which the conjecture, so far discussed for the vacuum case, can be extended in
the obvious way), the conjecture fails in C0, i.e. the mghd is extendible with a C0 metric, but it holds in
C1, in that the metric of the extension fails to be C1 [35, 36]. The situation for the Kerr metric is similar
[41].
123

115
Page 30 of 39
K. Landsman
Sensitivity to the precise formulation of genericity conditions (which from a pde
point of view deﬁne which initial data are deemed “physically reasonable” and from
a traditional gr perspective do so for space-times) is another issue;86 already the
Kerr metric, in which strong cosmic censorship fails for all parameter values (as
long as a ̸= 0 and m ̸= 0), shows that genericity conditions are necessary. Such
counterexamples made it especially courageous of Penrose to conjecture strong cosmic
censorship; but of course he had good arguments. His key observation, indeed one of
his most prophetic insights, was ﬁrst published in 1968 (i.e. before even weak cosmic
censorship had been formulated by him):
There is a further difﬁculty confronting our observer who tries to cross [the
Cauchy horizon] H+(H ). As he looks out at the universe he is “leaving behind,”
he sees, in one ﬁnal ﬂash, as he crosses H+(H ), the entire later history of the rest
of his “old universe.” If, for example, an unlimited amount of matter eventually
falls into the star then presumably he will be confronted with an inﬁnite density
of matter along “H+(H )”. Even if only a ﬁnite amount of matter falls in, it may
not be possible in generic situations to avoid a curvature singularity in place of
H+(H ). This is at present an open question. But it may be, that the place to
look for curvature singularities is in this region rather than (or as well as?) at the
“center.”
(Penrose [150, p. 222])
Here one should realize that for Penrose H+(H ) is a (future) Cauchy horizon (relative
to some partial Cauchy surface S) in some “large” (typically maximally extended)
space-time, whereas from a pde point of view it is the boundary of the mghd of the
corresponding initial data on S, if it has one; that is, if it is extendible (in a suitable
regularity class). Either way, the conjectured “blueshift instability” of H+(H ) has
been conﬁrmed in a large number of studies and remains the key to strong cosmic
censorship.87
Failure of strong cosmic censorship is often taken to imply a failure of determinism
in gr.88 The idea is that the (classical) world—including the (physical degrees of
freedom of the) gravitational ﬁeld itself—is governed by hyperbolic partial differential
equations whose initial data should be given on a hypersurface S and whose solutions
should thereby be determined on its domain of dependence D(S) [29]. From Penrose’s
point of view, if a (typically maximally extended) space-time (M′, g′) fails to be
86 Papers that state such conditions include [35], [162], Sect. 17.2.3 [163], Sect. 11 and [125].
87
Further to [178], see [130] down to [11] for heuristics. Mathematically rigorous work started with
Defermos [35] see also [38, 39]; more recent papers may be traced back from [104]. The conclusion seems
to be that at least in asymptotically ﬂat cases Cauchy horizons turn into weak null singularities, which are
null boundaries with C0 metric but ρ
μν not locally L2 [124]. At least for one-ended asymptotically ﬂat
initial data, behind such a weak null singularity there is also a strong curvature singularity at r = 0. See also
[125] for the two-ended case, and [69] for extremal Reissner–Nordström black holes (i.e. 0 < m = |e|).
For cosmological constant λ ̸= 0 the situation changes, e.g. in de Sitter space (λ > 0) the verdict on strong
cosmic censorship depends critically on both the matter coupling and the regularity of the extension [44],
whilst in anti-de Sitter (λ < 0) even weak cosmic censorship fails [30] . The so-called cosmological case,
which is characterized by taking initial data on compact spacelike slices and indeed includes (toy) examples
relevant to cosmology, was ﬁrst studied by Misner and Taub [133], who noted the instability of the Cauchy
horizon in Taub–NUT space (this work actually predated Misnev & Taub, see footnote 23). See also [167]
and [28].
88 See also [46, 47, 126, 162, 182].
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 31 of 39
115
globally hyperbolic, then, taking some partial Cauchy surface S′, neither the part
M′\D(S′) ̸= ∅of space-time behind the Cauchy horizon of S′ itself, nor things
happening within space-time behind this horizon, are determined by initial data on
S′. From the pde point of view, although any mghd (M, g) is globally hyperbolic
with Cauchy surface S ⊂M, if (M, g) is extendible with extension (M′, g′), then by
deﬁnition S fails to be a Cauchy surface for M′ ⊃M and we are back to Penrose.
If the extension (M′, g′) satisﬁes the Einstein equations and is globally hyperbolic,
which is logically possible, then the lack of determinism is merely apparent: although
(M′, g′) is not determined by the initial data on S originally expected to do so, it
is determined by new initial data on some Cauchy surface S′ ⊂M′, which may be
accessible to physicists in M′. But in interesting examples the mghd(M, g) typically
has extensions (M′, g′) that fail to be either globally hyperbolic or unique (up to
isometry), or both.89 In those cases the ensuing violation of determinism seems real
(though hard to interpret).
In any case, although extendibility of the mghd does seem to give rise to some form
of indeterminism in gr, so that (contrapositively) determinism necessitates strong
cosmic censorship in the pde sense of inextendibility of the mghd, the latter is not
sufﬁcient for determinism. The indeterminism of someone falling into a black hole
singularity is perfectly well compatible with global hyperbolicity, as the Schwarzschild
solution shows. More generally, in classical (mathematical) physics indeterminism
may come from either a lack of uniqueness of solutions or from a lack of existence
thereof; the latter includes incompleteness of solutions, i.e. non-existence after (or
before) some ﬁnite time. Strong cosmic censorship secures uniqueness of solutions of
the Einstein equations (whose existence is given by pde theory à la Choquet-Bruhat),
but, as we have seen, it fails to imply existence (i.e. for all times) of solutions of the
geodesic equation [46]. Hence at the classical level strong cosmic censorship does
not imply determinism.90 But ironically, determinism might be rescued by quantum
mechanics: because of the unitarity of their time-evolution quantum objects cannot
disappear into a singularity, and hence they form standing waves. These only become
sources of indeterminism if they undergo measurement.91
7 Epilogue
Prior to the 1960s spacetime singularities were regarded as a minor embarrass-
ment for GTR. They constituted an embarrassment because it was thought by
Einstein and others that a true singularity, a singularity in the fabric of spacetime
itself, was an absurdity. But the embarrassment was a minor one that could be
swept under the rug; for the then known models of GTR containing singularities
all embodied very special and physically unrealistic features. Two developments
89 This happens e.g. in Taub–NUT and Gowdy cosmologies. See e.g. [23, 24, 45, 134, 162, 163, 187].
90 In non-relativistic mechanics bodies may disappear to inﬁnity in ﬁnite time [168], and hence, by the
same (time-reversed) token, may appear from nowhere in ﬁnite time and hence inﬂuence affairs in a way
unforeseeable from any Cauchy surface. This analogy with gr, e.g. with white holes, is discussed by Earman
[50], Sect. 3.6.
91 See [111, 114, 115] for the ﬁnal proof of randomness of measurement outcomes in quantum mechanics.
123

115
Page 32 of 39
K. Landsman
forced a major shift in attitude. First, the observation of the cosmic low tempera-
ture blackbody radiation lent credence to the notion that our universe originated
in a big bang singularity.92 Second, and even more importantly, a series of the-
orems due principally to Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose indicated that,
according to GTR, singularities cannot be relegated to the distant past because
under quite general conditions they can be expected to occur both in cosmology
and in the gravitational collapse of stars. Thus, singularities cannot be swept
under the rug; they are, so to speak, woven into the pattern of the rug. Of course,
these theorems might have been taken as turning what was initially only a minor
embarrassment into a major scandal. Instead, what occurred in some quarters
was a 180◦reorientation in point of view: singularities were no longer relegated
to obscurity; rather they were to be recognized as a central feature of the GTR,
a feature which called attention to a new aspect of reality that was neglected in
all previous physical theories, Newtonian and special relativistic alike.
(Earman [47, p. 65])
Thus the way the scientiﬁc community came to believe in both black holes and a big
bang in the 1960s, following 50 years of denial in the light of considerable evidence
right from the start of general relativity, seems nothing short of a scientiﬁc revolution.
In Kuhnian parlance, the singularity theorems of Penrose and Hawking from 1965–
1966 launched the underlying “paradigm shift”. But here is a critical note:
Kuhn has much of interest to say about normal science, about the way in which
a scientiﬁc community is united by a set of practices. But what Kuhn failed to
articulate is that practices are just that—practices. They need not be, in general,
statements in which scientists (implicitly or explicitly) believe, and this for two
main reasons. First, what unites a scientiﬁc community need not be a set of
beliefs. Shared beliefs are much less common than shared practices. (…) Second,
beliefs, in themselves, cannot explain the scientiﬁc process. Statements lead on
to statements only in the logical plane. Historically, people must intervene to get
one statement from the other.
(Netz [135, p. 2])
Much like ancient Greek mathematics (which is what Netz writes about), singularities
in gr provide a fascinating interplay between practices and beliefs. With hindsight
this interplay was almost paradoxical:
• Before1965,practices likeFriedman[66,67]orLemaître[118,119]incosmology,
and Oppenheimer & Snyder [142] in astrophysics, which on sober judgement
should have caused a paradigm shift, failed to do so, because they clashed with
what the leading scientists then believed.
• After 1965 the opposite happened: at the level of practice, for the reasons explained
in this paper (namely that it is inconclusive exactly about the subject it should be
92 It might be appropriate to point out that it was rather the agreement between: (i) the interpretation of this
observation as coming form a possible big bang [102, Part IV]; (ii) Friedman-type cosmological models
in gr [60]; (iii) the interpretation of redshifts of galaxies as indicating an expanding universe [138]; (iv)
Gamow’s earlier calculations of the abundance of light elements [106, Chapter 4]; (v) Hawking’s singularity
theorem (which was only understood by relativists), which led to the concensus about the big bang from
1966 onwards.
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 33 of 39
115
about, namely black holes) Penrose’s theorem would not have been able to launch a
revolution. But what the relevant scientiﬁc community believed about the theorem,
culminating in his 2020 Nobel Prize, carried the day.
Finally, in the context of the history of mathematics, Grattan-Guiness [85] calls atten-
tion to the historical actors’ knowledge or ignorance of their ignorance. Restricting
ourselves to the two main actors:
Did Einstein [55] know that he did not know what a singular space-time was? The
evidence is mixed (see Sect. 2): he combined egregious mistakes (in which he was not
alone) with stunning foresight.
Was Penrose [148] aware of the gap between his theorem and its intended appli-
cation to black holes? Here the evidence is clear: he was, and he subsequently did
everything he could to overcome it.
Data availability The data for this article consist of the reasoning and the references. All references
are easily found either on the internet or, in case of books, in standard academic libraries. Readers
who have any trouble ﬁnding a reference are welcome to contact the author for further help. The
only exception of data not freely available is the letter from Einstein to Besso quoted in footnote 10.
Those interested in seeing the entire letter should contact the Einstein archives via Hanoch Gutfreund
(hanoch.gutfreund@mail.huji.ac.il)and/orDianaBuchwald(Diana_buchwald@caltech.
edu).
OpenAccess ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Andersson, L., Eichmair, M., Metzger, J.: Jang’s equation and its applications to marginally trapped
surfaces. Contemp. Math. 554, 13–46 (2011)
2. Aretakis, S.: Lecture Notes on General Relativity. https://web.math.princeton.edu/~aretakis/
columbiaGR.pdf (2013)
3. Beem, J.K., Ehrlich, P.E., Easley, K.: Global Lorentzian Geometry, 2nd edition. M. Dekker (1996)
4. Belinski, V., Henneaux, M.: The Cosmological Singularity. Cambridge University Press (2018)
5. Bieri, L.: Black hole formation and stability: a mathematical investigation. Bull. AMS (N.S.) 55, 1–30
(2018)
6. Biezunski, M.: Einstein’s reception in Paris in 1922. In: The Comparative Reception of Relativity,
ed. Glick, T.F., pp. 169–188. Springer (1987)
7. Bray, H.L., Chru´sciel, P.T.: The Penrose inequality. In: The Einstein Equations and the Large Scale
Behavior of Gravitational Fields, eds. Friedrich, H., Chru´sciel, P.T., pp. 39–70. Springer (2004)
8. Budic, R., Isenberg, J., Lindblom, L., Yasskin, P.B.: On the determination of Cauchy surfaces from
intrinsic properties. Commun. Math. Phys. 61, 87–95 (1978)
9. Calabi, E., Markus, L.: Relativistic space forms. Ann. Math. 75, 63–76 (1962)
10. Carballo-Rubio, R., Di Filippo, F., Liberati, S., Visser, M.: Geodesically complete black holes. Phys.
Rev. D 101, 084047 (2020)
11. Chesler, P.M., Narayan, R., Curiel, E.: Singularities in Reissner-Nordström black holes. Class. Quant.
Gravity 37, 025009 (2020)
123

115
Page 34 of 39
K. Landsman
12. Choquet-Bruhat, Y.: Hyperbolic partial differential equations on a manifold. In: Batelle Rencontres:
1967 Lectures in Mathematics and Physics, eds. C. DeWitt and J.A. Wheeler, pp. 84–106. W.A.
Benjamin (1968)
13. Choquet-Bruhat, Y.: General Relativity and the Einstein Equations. Oxford University Press (2009)
14. Choquet-Bruhat, Y.: Beginnings of the Cauchy problem (2014) . arXiv:1410.3490
15. Choquet-Bruhat, Y.: A Lady Mathematician in this Strange Universe: Memoirs. World Scientiﬁc
(2018)
16. Choquet-Bruhat, Y., Geroch, R.: Global aspects of the Cauchy problem in general relativity. Commun.
Math. Phys. 14, 329–335 (1969)
17. Christodoulou, D.: The formation of black holes and singularities in spherically symmetric gravita-
tional collapse. Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 44, 339–373 (1991)
18. Christodoulou, D.: On the global initial value problem and the issue of singularities. Class. Quant.
Gravity 16, A23–A35 (1999)
19. Christodoulou, D.: The instability of naked singularities in the gravitational collapse of a scalar ﬁeld.
Ann. Math. 149, 183–217 (1999)
20. Christodoulou, D.: The Formation of Black Holes in General Relativity EMS (2009)
21. Chru´sciel, P.T.: On uniqueness in the large of solutions of Einstein’s equations (“Strong Cosmic
Censorship”). Mathematical aspects of classical ﬁeld theory. Contemp. Math. 132, 235–274 (1992)
22. Chru´sciel, P.T.: Geometry of Black Holes. Oxford University Press (2020)
23. Chru´sciel, P.T., Isenberg, J.: Nonisometric vacuum extensions of vacuum maximal globally hyperbolic
space-times. Phys. Rev. D 48, 1616–1628 (1993)
24. Chru´sciel, P.T., Isenberg, J., Moncrief, V.: Strong cosmic censorship in polarised Gowdy space-times.
Class. Quantum Gravity 7, 1671–168 (1990)
25. Chru´sciel, P.T., Lopes Costa, J., Heusler, M.: Stationary black holes: uniqueness and beyond. Living
Rev. Relat. 15 (7) (2012)
26. Clarke, C.J.S.: The Analysis of Space-Time Singularities. Cambridge University Press (1993)
27. Claudel, C.-M.: Black holes and closed trapped surfaces: a revision of a classic theorem.
arXiv:gr-qc/0005031 (2000)
28. Collins, C.B., Ellis, G.F.R.: Singularities in Bianchi cosmologies. Phys. Rep. 56, 65–105 (1979)
29. Courant, R., Hilbert, D.: Methods of Mathematical Physics. Volume II: Partial Differential Equations
(Wiley Interscience) (1962)
30. Crisford, T., Santos, J.E.: Violating the weak cosmic censorship conjecture in four-dimensional Anti-
de Sitter space. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 181101 (2017)
31. Curiel, E.: The analysis of singular space-times. Philosophy of Science 66, S119–S145. Revised and
extended version at http://strangebeautiful.com/phil-phys.html (1999)
32. Curiel, E.: Singularities and Black Holes. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
2019).https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/space-time-singularities/ (2019)
33. Curiel, E.: The many deﬁnitions of a black hole. Nat. Astron. 3, 27–34 (2019)
34. Dadhich, N.: Indian contribution to the physics of black holes: 2020 Nobel Prize. Curr. Sci. 119,
2030–2033 (2020)
35. Dafermos, M.: Stability and instability of the Cauchy horizon for the spherically symmetric Einstein-
Maxwell-scalar ﬁeld equations. Ann. Math. 158, 875–928 (2003)
36. Dafermos, M.: The interior of charged black holes and the problem of uniqueness in general relativity.
Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 58, 445–504 (2005)
37. Dafermos, M.: The formation of black holes in General Relativity [after D. Christodoulou]. Séminaire
Bourbaki 64, no. 1051. https://www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~md384/expose-chr.pdf (2012)
38. Dafermos, M.: The geometry and analysis of black hole space-times in general relativity (eth
Nachdiplom lectures). https://www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~md384/Ravello_Lectures_1.pdf (2013)
39. Dafermos, M.: Black holes without spacelike singularities. Commun. Math. Phys. 332, 729–757
(2014)
40. Dafermos, M.: The mathematical analysis of black holes in general relativity. Proceedings of the
ICM, 2014, https://www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~md384/ICMarticleMihalis.pdf (2014)
41. Dafermos, M., Luk, J.: The interior of dynamical vacuum black holes I: The C0-stability of the Kerr
Cauchy horizon. arXiv:1710.01722 (2017)
42. Dafermos, M., Rodnianski, I.: Lectures on black holes and linear waves. arXiv:0811.0354 (2008)
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 35 of 39
115
43. Datt, B.: Über eine Klasse von Lösungen der Gravitationsgleichungen der Relativität. Z. Phys. 108,
314–321 (1938). English translation: On a class of solutions of the gravitation equations of relativity,
Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 31, 1619–1627 (1999)
44. Dias, O.J.C., Reall, H.S., Santos, J.E.: Strong cosmic censorship: taking the rough with the smooth.
J. High Energy Phys. 2018, 1 (2018)
45. Doboszewski, J.: Non-uniquely extendible maximal globally hyperbolic space-times in classical gen-
eral relativity: a philosophical survey. Eur. Stud. Philos. Sci. 6, 193–212 (2017)
46. Doboszewski, J.: Relativistic space-times and deﬁnitions of determinism. Eur. J. Philos. Sci. 9, 24
(2019)
47. Earman, J.: Bangs, Crunches, Whimpers, and Shrieks: Singularities and Acausalities in Relativistic
Spacetimes. Oxford University Press (1995)
48. Earman, J.: Tolerance for space-time singularities. Found. Phys. 26, 623–640 (1996)
49. Earman, J.: The Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems: History and implications. In: The Expanding
Worlds of General Relativity. Einstein Studies, vol. 7, eds. Goenner, H., Renn, J., Ritter, T., Sauer, T.,
pp. 236–267. Birkhäuser (1999)
50. Earman, J.: Aspects of determinism in modern physics. In: Handbook of the Philosophy of Science.
Vol. 2: Philosophy of Physics, Part B, eds. Butterﬁeld, J., Earman, J., pp. 1369–1434. North-
Holland/Elsevier (2007)
51. Earman, J., Eisenstaedt, J.: Einstein and Singularities. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 30, 185–235
(1999)
52. Ehlers, J.: Beiträge zur relativistischen Mechanik kontinuierlicher Medien. Abh. Akad. Wiss. Lit.
Mainz Math.-Naturwiss. Kl. 11, 792–837 (1961). English translation: Contributions to the relativistic
mechanics of continuous media. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 25, 1225–1266 (1993)
53. Ehlers, J.: A.K. Raychaudhuri and his equation. Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 15, 1573–1580 (2006)
54. Eichmair, M., Galloway, G.J., Pollack, D.: Topological censorship from the initial data point of view.
J. Diff. Geomet. 95, 389–405 (2013)
55. Einstein, A.: Kritisches zu einer von Hrn. de Sitter gegebenen Lösung der Gravitationsgleichungen.
Sitzungsber. Preuß. Akad. Wiss. Phys. Math. Kl. 270–272 (1918)
56. Einstein, A.: On a stationary system with spherical symmetry consisting of many gravitating masses.
Ann. Math. 40, 922–936 (1939)
57. Einstein, A.: The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 7: The Berlin Years: Writings, 1918–1921.
https://einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol7-trans/ (2002)
58. Eisenstaedt, J.: Lemaître and the Schwarzschild solution. In: The Attraction of Gravitation: New
Studies in the History of General Relativity, eds. Earman, J., Janssen, M., Norton, J.D., pp. 353–389
Birkhäuser (1993)
59. Ellis, G.F.R.: Stephen Hawking’s 1966 Adams Prize Essay. Eur. J. Phys. H 39, 403–411 (2014)
60. Ellis, G.F.R., Maartens, R., MacCallum, M.A.H.: Relativistic Cosmology. Cambridge University
Press (2012)
61. Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration: First M87 event horizon telescope results. I. The shadow of
the supermassive black hole. Astrophys. J. Lett. 75:L1 (2019)
62. Fierz, M., Jost, R.: Afﬁne Vollständigkeit und kompakte Lorentz’sche Mannigfaltigkeiten. Helv. Phys.
Acta 38, 137–141 (1965)
63. Finkelstein, D.: Past-future asymmetry of the gravitational ﬁeld of a point particle. Phys. Rev. 110,
956–967 (1958)
64. Flores, J.L., Sánchez, M.: Causality and conjugate points in general plane waves. Class. Quant. Gravity
20, 2275–2291 (2003)
65. Flores, J.L., Sánchez, M.: The causal boundary of wave-type spacetimes. JHEP 3, 036 (2008)
66. Friedman, A.: Über die Krümmung des Raumes. Z. Phys. 10, 377–386 (1922). English translation:
On the curvature of space. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 31, 1991–2000 (1999)
67. Friedman, A.: Über die Möglichkeit einer Welt mit konstanter negativer Krümmung des Raumes. Z.
Phys. 21, 326–332 (1924). English translation: On the possibility of a world with constant negative
curvature of space. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 31, 2001–2008 (1999)
68. Frolov, V.P.: Notes on nonsingular models of black holes. Phys. Rev. D 94, 104056 (2016)
69. Gajic, D., Luk, J.: The interior of dynamical extremal black holes in spherical symmetry. Pure Appl.
Anal. 1, 263–326 (2019)
70. Galloway, G.J.: Some results on Cauchy surface criteria in Lorentzian geometry. Ill. J. Math. 29, 1–10
(1985)
123

115
Page 36 of 39
K. Landsman
71. Galloway, G.J.: Notes on Lorentzian causality. https://www.math.miami.edu/~galloway/vienna-
course-notes.pdf (2014)
72. Galloway, G.J., Miao, P., Schoen, R.: Initial data and the Einstein constraint equations. In: General
Relativity and Gravitation: A Centennial Perspective, eds. Ashtekar, A., Berger, B.K., Isenberg, J.,
MacCallum, M., pp. 412–448. Cambridge University Press (2015)
73. García-Parrado, A., Senovilla, J.M.M.: Causal structures and causal boundaries. Class. Quant. Gravity
22, R1–R84 (2005)
74. Geroch, R.: What is a singularity in General Relativity? Ann. Phys. 48, 526–540 (1968)
75. Geroch, R.: Limits of spacetimes. Commun. Math. Phys. 13, 180–193 (1969)
76. Geroch, R.: Domain of dependence. J. Math. Phys. 11, 437–449 (1970)
77. Geroch, R.: Singularities. In: Relativity, eds. Carmeli, M., Fickler, S., Witten, L., pp. 259–292. Plenum
(1970)
78. Geroch, R., Horowitz, G.: Asymptotically simple does not imply asymptotically Minkowskian. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 40, 203–206 (1978)
79. Geroch, R., Horowitz, G.: Global structure of spacetimes. In: General Relativity: An Einstein Cente-
nary Survey, eds. Hawking, S.W., Israel, W., pp. 212–293. Cambridge University Press (1979)
80. Geroch, R., Kronheimer, E.H., Penrose, R.: Ideal points in space-time. Proc. Royal Soc. (London)
A327, 545–567 (1972)
81. Geroch, R., Traschen, J.: Strings and other distributional sources in general relativity. Phys. Rev. D
36, 1017–1031 (1987)
82. Godart, O.: Contributions of Lemaitre to General Relativity (1922–1934). In: Studies in the History
of General Relativity, eds. Eisenstaedt, J., Kox, A.J., pp. 437–452. Birkhäuser (1992)
83. Gödel, K.: An example of a new type of cosmological solution of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of
gravitation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 447–450 (1949)
84. Gödel,K.:Rotatinguniversesingeneralrelativitytheory.In:ProceedingsoftheInternationalCongress
of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, ed. Graves, L.M. et al., pp. 175–181 (1952). Reprinted in Gen. Relativ.
Gravit. 32, 1419–1427 (2000)
85. Grattan-Guinness, I.: The mathematics of the past: distinguishing its history from our heritage. Hist.
Math. 31, 163–185 (2004)
86. Grey, J.: Henri Poincaré: A Scientiﬁc Biography. Princeton University Press (2013)
87. Gundlach, C., Martin-Garcia, J.M.: Critical phenomena in gravitational collapse. Living Rev. Relativ.
10, 5 (2007)
88. Halvorson, H., Manchak, J.B.: Closing the Hole Argument. Br. J. Philos. Sci. in press. http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/19790/ (2022)
89. Hawking, S.W.: Properties of Expanding Universes. PhD Thesis, University of Cambridge. https://
www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/251038 (1965)
90. Hawking, S.W.: Singularities in the universe. Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 444–445 (1966)
91. Hawking, S.W.: Singularities and the geometry of space-time (Adams Prize Essay). Reprinted in Eur.
J. Phys. H 39, 413–503 (2014) (1966)
92. Hawking, S.W.: Black holes in general relativity. Commun. Math. Phys. 25, 152–166 (1972)
93. Hawking, S.W., Ellis, G.F.R.: The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time. Cambridge University Press
(1973)
94. Heckmann, O., Schücking, E.: Relativistic cosmology. In: Gravitation: An Introduction to Current
Research, ed. Witten, L., pp. 438–469. Wiley (1962)
95. Hermann, R.: An incomplete compact homogeneous Lorentz metric. J. Math. Mech. 13, 497–501
(1964)
96. Hilbert, D.: Die Grundlagen der Physik (Zweite Mitteilung), Nachr. K. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen Math.-
Phys. Kl. 53–76 (1917)
97. Hogarth, M.: Predictability, Computability, and Spacetime. PhD Thesis, University of Cambridge.
http://www.hypercomputation.net/download/1996a_hogarth.pdf (1996)
98. Hounnonkpe,R.A.,Minguzzi,E.:Globallyhyperbolicspace-timescanbedeﬁnedwithoutthe‘causal’
condition. Class. Quantum Grav. 36, 197001 (2019)
99. Israel, W.: Dark stars: The evolution of an idea. In: Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, eds. Hawking,
S.W., Israel, W., pp. 199–276. Cambridge University Press (1987)
100. Janssen, M.: “No success like failure ...”: Einstein’s quest for general relativity, 1907–1920. In: The
Cambridge Companion to Einstein, eds. Janssen, M., Lehner, C., pp. 167–227. Cambridge University
Press (2014)
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 37 of 39
115
101. Janssen, M., Renn, J.: How Einstein Found His Field Equations: Sources & Interpretation. Springer
(2022)
102. Jones, B.J.T.: Precision Cosmology: The First Half Million Years. Cambridge University Press (2017)
103. Joshi, P.S.: Gravitational Collapse and Spacetime Singularities. Cambridge University Press (2007)
104. Kehle, C., Van de Moortel, M.: Strong Cosmic Censorship in the presence of matter: the decisive
effect of horizon oscillations on the black hole interior geometry. arXiv:2105.04604 (2021)
105. Komar, A.: Necessity of singularities in the solution of the ﬁeld equations of general relativity. Phys.
Rev. 104, 544–546 (1956)
106. Kragh, H.: Conceptions of the Cosmos. A History of Cosmology: From Myths to the Accelerating
Universe. Oxford University Press (2007)
107. Kriele, M.: Spacetime: Foundations of General Relativity and Differential Geometry. Springer (1999)
108. Królak, A.: Towards the proof of the cosmic censorship hypothesis. Class. Quant. Gravity 3, 267–280
(1986)
109. Królak, A.: Cosmic censorship hypothesis. Contemp. Math. 359, 51–64 (2004)
110. Kundt, W.: Note on the completeness of spacetimes. Z. Phys. 172, 488–489 (1963)
111. Landsman, K.: Foundations of Quantum Theory: From Classical Concepts to Operator Algebras.
Springer (2017)
112. Landsman, K.: Foundations of General Relativity: From Einstein to Black Holes. Radboud University
Press (2021)
113. Landsman, K.: Singularities, black holes, and cosmic censorship: A tribute to Roger Penrose. Found.
Phys. 51, 42 (2021)
114. Landsman, K.: Indeterminism and undecidability. In: Undecidability, Uncomputability, and Unpre-
dictability, eds. Aguirre, A., Merali, Z., Sloan, D., pp. 17–46. Springer (2021). arXiv:2003.03554
115. Landsman, K.: Bohmian mechanics is not deterministic. arXiv:2202.12279 (2022)
116. Landsman, K.: Reopening the hole argument. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/20399/(2022)
117. Lee, D.A.: Geometric Relativity. American Mathematical Society (2019)
118. Lemaître, G.: Un Univers homogène de masse constante et de rayon croissant rendant compte de la
vitesse radiale des nébuleuses extra-galactiques. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles A 47, 49–59 (1927)
119. Lemaître, G.: L’univers en expansion. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles A 53, 51–85 (1933). English transla-
tion: The expanding Universe, In: Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 29, 641–680 (1997), with editorial note and
biography by Andrzej Krasi´nski, pp. 637–40
120. Leray, J.: Hyperbolic Differential Equations. Mimeographed Lecture Notes. The Institute for
Advanced Study (1953)
121. Levi-Civita, T.: Rend. R. Acc. Lincei 26, 519–31 (1917)
122. Li, J., Yu, P.: Construction of Cauchy data of vacuum Einstein ﬁeld equations evolving to black holes.
Ann. Math. 181, 699–768 (2015)
123. Longair, M.S.: The Cosmic Century: A History of Astrophysics and Cosmology. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press (2006)
124. Luk, J.: Weak null singularities in general relativity. J. AMS 31, 1–63 (2017)
125. Luk, J., Oh, S.-J.: Strong cosmic censorship in spherical symmetry for two-ended asymptotically ﬂat
Initial data I: the interior of the black hole region. Ann. Math. 190, 1–111. II: The exterior of the
black hole region. Ann. PDE 5(6) (2019)
126. Manchak, J.B.: On the inextendibility of space-time. Philos. Sci. 84, 1215–1225 (2017)
127. Manchak, J.B.: Malament-Hogarth machines. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 71, 1143–1153 (2020)
128. Mars, M.: Present status of the Penrose inequality. Class. Quant. Gravity 26, 193001 (2009)
129. Matzner, R.A., Shepley, L.C., Warren, J.B.: Dynamics of SO(3, R)-homogeneous cosmologies. Ann.
Phys. 57, 401–460 (1970)
130. McNamara, J.M.: Instability of black hole inner horizons. Proc. Royal Soc. A 358, 499–517 (1978)
131. Minguzzi, E.: Lorentzian causality theory. Living Rev. Relativ. 22, 3 (2019)
132. Misner, C.W.: The ﬂatter regions of Newman, Unti, and Tamburino’s generalized Schwarzschild
space. J. Math. Phys. 4, 924–937 (1963)
133. Misner, C.W., Taub, A.H.: A singularity-free empty universe. Soviet Phys. JETP 55, 233–255 (1969)
134. Moncrief, V.: Global properties of Gowdy space-times with T 3×R topology. Ann. Phys. 132, 87–107
(1981)
135. Netz, R.: The Shaping of Deduction in Greek Mathematics: A Study in Cognitive History. Cambridge
University Press (1999)
123

115
Page 38 of 39
K. Landsman
136. Newman, E., Penrose, R.: An approach to gravitational radiation by a method of spin coefﬁcients. J.
Math. Phys. 3, 566–578 (1962)
137. Nussbaumer, H.: Einstein’s conversion from his static to an expanding universe. Eur. Phys. J. H. 39,
37–62 (2014)
138. Nussbaumer, H., Bieri, L.: Discovering the Expanding Universe. Cambridge University Press (2009)
139. O’Neill, B.: Semi-Riemannian Geometry. Academic Press (1983)
140. Ong, Y.C.: Space-time singularities and cosmic censorship conjecture: a review with some thoughts.
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 35, 2030007 (2020)
141. Oppenheimer, J.R., Volkoff, G.M.: On massive neutron cores. Phys. Rev. 55, 374–381 (1939)
142. Oppenheimer, J.R., Snyder, H.: On continued gravitational contraction. Phys. Rev. 56, 455–459 (1939)
143. Penrose, R.: Null hypersurface initial data for classical ﬁelds of arbitrary spin and for general relativity.
Aerospace Research Laboratories 63–65 (1963). Reprinted in Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 12, 225–264
(1980)
144. Penrose, R.: Asymptotic properties of ﬁelds and space-times. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 66–68 (1963)
145. Penrose, R.: Conformal treatment of inﬁnity. In: Relativity, Groups, and Topology, eds. DeWitt, B.,
DeWitt-Morette, C.M., pp. 565–584 Gordon & Breach (1964). Reprinted in Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 43,
901–922 (2011), with a historical introduction by H. Friedrich, ibid., pp. 897–900
146. Penrose, R.: A remarkable property of plane waves in general relativity. Rev. Mod. Phys. 37, 215–220
(1965)
147. Penrose, R.: Zero rest-mass ﬁelds including gravitation: asymptotic behaviour. Proc. Royal Soc.
London A 284, 159–203 (1965)
148. Penrose, R.: Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 57–59 (1965)
149. Penrose, R. : An analysis of the structure of space-time. Adams Prize Essay (1966). In: Roger Penrose:
Collected Works, Volume 1: 1953–1967, pp. 579–730. Oxford University Press (2011)
150. Penrose, R.: Structure of space-time. In: Batelle Rencontres: 1967 Lectures in Mathematics and
Physics, eds. DeWitt, C., Wheeler, J.A., pp. 121–235. W.A. Benjamin (1968)
151. Penrose, R.: Gravitational collapse: The role of general relativity. Riv. Nuovo Cim. Numero Speziale
I, 252 (1969). Reprinted in Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 34, 1141–1165 (2002)
152. Penrose, R.: Techniques of Differential Topology in Relativity (SIAM) (1972)
153. Penrose, R.: Naked singularities. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 224, 125–134 (1973)
154. Penrose, R.: Gravitational collapse. In: Gravitational Radiation and Gravitational Collapse, ed.
DeWitt-Morette, C., pp. 82–91. International Astronomical Union (1974)
155. Penrose, R.: Singularities and time-asymmetry. In: General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey,
eds. Hawking, S.W., Israel, W., pp. 581–638. Cambridge University Press (1979)
156. Penrose, R.: The question of cosmic censorship. J. Astrophys. Astron. 20, 233–248 (1999)
157. Penrose, R., Sorkin, R.D., Woolgar, E.: A positive mass theorem based on the focusing and retardation
of null geodesics. arXiv:gr-qc/9301015 (1993)
158. Pﬂaum, M.: Analytic and Geometric Study of Stratiﬁed Spaces. Springer (2001)
159. Raychaudhuri, A.K.: Relativistic cosmology: I. Phys. Rev. 98, 1123–1126 (1955)
160. Raychaudhuri, A.K.: Singular state in relativistic cosmology. Phys. Rev. 106, 172–173 (1957)
161. Rindler, W.: Visual horizons in world models. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 116, 662–677 (1956)
162. Ringström, H.: The Cauchy Problem in General Relativity. EMS (2009)
163. Ringström, H.: Cosmic censorship for Gowdy spacetimes. Living Rev. Relativ. 13, 2 (2010)
164. Ringström, H.: Origins and development of the Cauchy problem in general relativity. Class. Quant.
Gravity 32, 124003 (2015)
165. Robertson, H.P.: Relativistic cosmology. Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, 62–90 (1933)
166. Robinson, D.C.: Gravitation and general relativity at King’s College London. Eur. Phys. J. H 44,
181–270 (2019)
167. Ryan,M.P.,Shepley,L.C.:HomogeneousRelativisticCosmologies.PrincetonUniversityPress(1975)
168. Saari, D.G., Xia, Z.: Off to inﬁnity in ﬁnite time. Notices AMS 42, 538–546 (1995)
169. Sbierski, J.: On the existence of a maximal Cauchy development for the Einstein equations: a dezorni-
ﬁcation. Ann. Henri Poincaré 17, 301–329 (2016)
170. Sbierski, J.: The C0-inextendibility of the Schwarzschild space-time and the spacelike diameter in
Lorentzian geometry. J. Differ. Geom. 108, 319–378 (2018)
171. Schoen, R., Yau, S.T.: Proof of the positive mass theorem. II. Commun. Math. Phys. 79, 231–260
(1981)
123

Penrose’s 1965 singularity theorem: from geodesic...
Page 39 of 39
115
172. Schoen, R., Yau, S.T.: The existence of a black hole due to condensation of matter. Commun. Math.
Phys. 65, 575–579 (1983)
173. Senovilla, J.M.M.: Singularity theorems and their consequences. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 30, 701–848
(1998). Corrected version: arXiv:1801.04912
174. Senovilla, J.M.M.: Trapped surfaces. Int. J. Mod. Phys.: Conf. Series 7, 1–30 (2012)
175. Senovilla, J.M.M., Garﬁnkle, D.: The 1965 Penrose singularity theorem. Class. Quant. Gravity 32,
124008 (2015)
176. Shepley, L.C.: Singularities in spatially homogeneous, dust-ﬁlled uiverses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 52,
1403–1409 (1964)
177. Shepley, L.C.: SO(3, R)-Homogeneous Cosmologies. PhD Thesis, Princeton University (1965)
178. Simpson, M., Penrose, R.: Internal instability in a Reissner-Nordström black hole. Int. J. Theor. Phys.
7, 183–197 (1973)
179. Simpson, A., Visser, M.: The eye of the storm: a regular Kerr black hole. J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys.
03, 011 (2022)
180. Sitter, W. de.: On the relativity of inertia: Remarks concerning Einstein’s latest hypothe-
sis. Proc. R. Netherlands Acad. Arts Sci. 19, 1217–1225 (1917). https://archive.org/details/
proceedingsofsec192koni/page/1216/mode/2up
181. Smeenk, C.: Einstein’s role in the creation of relativistic cosmology. In: The Cambridge Companion
to Einstein, eds. Janssen, M., Lehner, C., pp. 228–269. Cambridge University Press (2014)
182. Smeenk, C., Wüthrich, C.: Determinism and general relativity. Philos. Sci. 88, 638–664 (2021)
183. Spallucci, E., Smailagic, A.: Regular black holes from semi-classical down to Planckian size. Int. J.
Mod. Phys. D 26, 1730013 (2017)
184. Stachel, J.: The Cauchy problem in general relativity–The early years. In: Studies in the History of
General Relativity, eds. Eisenstaedt, J., Kox, A.J., pp. 407–418. Birkhäuser (1992)
185. Taub, A.H.: Empty space-times admitting a three parameter group of motions. Ann. Math. 53, 472–
490 (1951). Reprinted in Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 36, 2699–2719 (2004)
186. Thorne, K.S.: Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy. W.W. Norton (1994)
187. Tipler, F.J., Clarke, C.J.S., Ellis, G.F.R.: Singularities and horizons–A review article. In: General
Relativity and Gravitation: One Hundred Years After the Birth of Albert Einstein, Vol. 2, ed. Held,
A., pp. 97–206. Plenum Press (1980)
188. Tolman, R.C., Ward, M.: On the behavior of non-static models of the universe when the cosmological
term is omitted. Phys. Rev. 39, 835–843 (1932)
189. Wald, R.M.: General Relativity. University of Chicago Press (1984)
190. Walker, A.G.: On Milne’s theory of world-structure. Proc. London Math. Soc. Series 2(42), 90–127
(1937)
191. Weyl, H.: Raum - Zeit - Materie: Vorlesungen über Allgemeine Relativitätstheorie. Springer (1918)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

