Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-019-00280-0
On the Modal Aspects of Causal Sets
Tomasz Placek1
Received: 22 January 2019 / Accepted: 17 June 2019 / Published online: 29 June 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
The possibility question concerns the status of possibilities: do they form an irreducible
category of the external reality, or are they merely features of our cognitive framework?
If fundamental physics is ever to shed light on this issue, it must be done by some
future theory that uniﬁes insights of general relativity and quantum mechanics. The
paper investigates one programme of this kind, namely the causal sets programme,
as it apparently considers alternative developments of a given system. To evaluate
this claim, we prove some algebraic facts about the sequential growth of causal sets.
These facts tell against alternative developments, given that causal sets are understood
as particular events. We thus interpret causal sets as multi-realisable objects, like
states. This interpretation, however, is undermined by an argument for the probabilistic
constraint of general covariance, as it says that multiple paths along which a causal
set is produced are not physically different.
1 Introduction: The Possibility Question
In “Dilemma of determinism” (1884) William James succinctly contrasts the two
camps in the the modality debate.1 One camp admits that “possibilities may be in
excess of actualities”, [. . .] [ so that ] actualities seem to ﬂoat in a wider sea of
possibilities from out of which they are chosen”. The other camp, which he called
“determinists”, says that possibilities “exist nowhere, and that necessity on the one
hand and impossibility on the other are the sole categories of the real. Possibilities
that fail to get realized are [. . .] pure illusions: they never were possibilities at all.[. . .]
The cloud of alternatives our minds escort this mass of actuality withal is a cloud of
sheer deceptions, to which ‘impossibilities’ is the only name that rightfully belongs”.
1 ThesupportoftheWSN2017programmeofthePolishFoundationforScienceisgratefullyacknowledged.
I am indebted to David Rideout, David Meyer, and the participants of their seminar for discussions on causal
sets. My special thanks go to Craig Callender.
B Tomasz Placek
Tomasz.Placek@uj.edu.pl
1
Philosophy Department, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
601
James made two comments which are particularly pertinent to the debate between
the two camps. The ﬁrst, and to which we full-heartedly subscribe, is that the issue is “a
perfectly sharp one”, or, as he says: “The truth must lie with one side or the other, and
its lying with one side makes the other false”. His second remark voiced scepticism as
to whether science can resolve the issue. In his view, scientiﬁc conclusions are based
on facts alone, but as for “the evidence of existing facts, the possibility-question must
remain a mystery never to be cleared up.” We take issue with this view, since (we
think) it is based on an oversimpliﬁed view on the relations between scientiﬁc theories
and experimental data. We tend to think of the possibility question as concerning a
high-level claim, comparable (yet still more abstract) to the question of whether matter
is continuous or corpuscular. Given that at the end of the nineteenth century theoretical
and experimental data persuaded the scientiﬁc community to accept the corpuscular
view, so we hope that future science might help to resolve the possibility question.
The second camp tends to be associated with Humean positions (although not nec-
essarily with the views of the historical David Hume). However, the progress in the
development of neo-Humean theories of laws of nature urges caution in this regard.
Today’s neo-Humeans countenance indeterminism, posing the question whether our
world is deterministic or not. The neo-Humeans accomplished a rare feat of eluci-
dating indeterminism in non-modal terms, in contrast to a large modal tradition. To
highlight an otherwise well-known neo-Humean account of laws of nature, the Mill-
Ramsey-Lewis best-system account identiﬁes laws of nature with the theorems of all
true deductive systems that strike the best balence with respect to strength and sim-
plicity. A system of laws is then said to be indeterministic if it is true about a pair
of divergent worlds, i.e., qualitatively different worlds, whose initial segments are
qualitatively alike. Finally, our world is called “indeterministic” if its set of laws com-
prises an indeterministic system of laws [7]. Note that the account appeals to concepts
such as the linguistic description of a world, axiomatisation, strength and simplic-
ity of an axiomatic system, the balance between the last two features, and does not
invoke any modal notions. The resulting notions of laws and indeterminism depend
on particularities of a language in which a world’s description is stated, as well as
on the understanding of strength, simplicity, and the balance between the two, the
latter being rather properties of our conceptual framework than features of the objec-
tive non-linguistic and non-conceptual reality. Thus, neo-Humean indeterminism falls
somewhat unlikely under “a category of the real”. Furthermore, arguably neo-Humean
indeterminism and modal indeterminism are not co-extensional concepts. The best sys-
tem account may deliver the verdict “a world is indeterministic” that results from the
laws of nature not being complete enough (since best balance sacriﬁes a certain degree
of strength in this regard), whereas the world in question is ﬂat, possibility-wise. In the
opposite direction, a not complete enough system of laws might fail to discern a pair
of diverging worlds, and thus gives the verdict of determinism, where possibility-wise
indeterminism reigns.
There are two morals to be taken from this neo-Humean story. First, for clarity’s
sake, given that the rejection of possibilities can be combined with indeterminism,
we will not phrase the possibility question as concerning determinism (in contrast to
James). Second, while subscribing to James’ succinct formulation, “are possibilities
a category of the real”, we add the gloss that the real is to be meant as the objective
123

602
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
reality, independent of its linguistic characterisation, or its representation in this or
that cognitive framework.
Given the high-brow formulation of the possibility question, how is fundamental
science meant to help resolve it? To reﬂect ﬁrst on the current situation, our best theo-
ries, namely quantum mechanics and general relativity, are not of much help. General
relativity is the theory of the large, and is silent or problematic about small objects, like
particles and their evolutions. Although it admits space-times that are somewhat rem-
iniscent of alternative future possibilities, they always come with causal anomalies,
which makes the qualiﬁcation “future possibilities” problematic.2 Quantum mechan-
ics, the theory of the small, initially appears to be more up to the task, as by a handbook
description of its measurement algorithm, it yields the set of possible results of a par-
ticular measurement. But, to recall, the measurement algorithm is in conﬂict with
the evolution law of quantum mechanics, Schrödinger’s equation, which describes
deterministic evolutions of quantum states. The conﬂict is known as the measurement
problem of quantum mechanics, and its resolution is the aim of the interpretations of
quantum mechanics. According to some interpretations, moreover, a measurement’s
possible results are understood as determined by values of a hidden factor, so the
results are not alternative possibilities, in the required sense. In any case, without
resolving the measurement problem, quantum mechanics can hardly shed light on the
possibility question.
The present predicament suggests that we need to look at a theory of the large and the
small, one which provides a uniﬁcation of the quantum and general relativity. Currently
there are a few programmes of that kind, known as programmes in quantum gravity.
However, a question which presents itself is what features of a theory are relevant to the
possibility question. How are possibilities represented in the mathematical structures
of the theory? In short, what should we look for if we are interested in the question of
possibility? We do not know what a general answer to the queries is, however intriguing
they are. Therefore, we follow in this paper a simple instinct that links possibilities to
theadmittanceofalternativeevolutionsofatheory’ssystem,or(somewhatdifferently),
to the existence of crossing trajectories in a theory’s state space. From this perspective,
the causal sets programme in quantum gravity initially seem quite promising. In the
remainder of this paper we will investigate modal aspects of this programme.
The plan of the rest of this paper is as follows. In Sect. 2 we introduce the causal sets
programme and then in Sect. 3 we discuss causal order— the prominent concept of
this programme. Then Sect. 4 presents our mathematical results concerning sequential
growth: it gives a set-theoretical reading of the theoretical physics style heuristic argu-
ments of the programme and then exhibits the proofs of some facts about evolutions
of causal sets. These facts are a formal skeleton of the paper, as they undermine the
cogency of the notion of alternative possibilities in the model of sequential growth.
Section 5 thus turns to formal metaphysics to discuss under what conditions events
can happen together. The conclusion of this section is that causal sets should be inter-
preted as repeatable states rather than complex non-repeatable events. Next Sect. 6
discusses this interpretation, focusing in particular on its probabilistic aspects. It is
2 Technically, these are the so-called non-isometric extensions of a maximal globally hyperbolic space-time,
cf. Chru´sciel and Isenberg [4].
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
603
argued there that one of the assumed probabilistic rules, called general covariance,
implies the rejection of physical reality of alternative possible paths leading to a given
state. Finally, Sect. 7 discusses some options of how to preserve the concept of alterna-
tive possibilities in the theory of sequential growth. We begin with introducing causal
sets programme.
2 On the Causal Sets Programme
Our concern in this paper is indeterministic (modal) aspects of the causal sets
programme, which was launched by Raphael Sorkin and collaborators.3 This is a
programme in quantum gravity that is based on two ideas: (i) a deep structure of quan-
tum space-time, which the theory identiﬁes with a causal set (“causet”, in short), is
discrete, and (ii) a causet is partially ordered by a causally interpreted ordering. The
programme advances a few further claims that might as well draw a metaphysician’s
attention. To quote,
Another [feature of the theory] is a complete departure from determinism –
even at the fundamental scale, when all aspects of the “state of the system” are
“known”, the classical limit of the theory is postulated to be stochastic in nature.
[. . .] Unitarity will likely have to be abandoned to formulate the quantum theory
in a discrete setting. [. . .] Locality as a fundamental physical principle seems to
be abandoned. [11, p. 109].
To add one more metaphysically controversial doctrine, there is real becoming accord-
ing to the programme. That is, the universe is thought of as growing in consecutive
stages, where the stages are deﬁned in causal rather than temporal terms. Time and,
generally, space-time, is constituted in the growth.
As expected, the sheer number of controversial claims has commanded attention
of metaphysicians, philosophers of science, and physicists. The programme has been
discussed, criticised, or defended from many perspectives. For a discussion from a
philosophy of physics perspective, see Wüthrich and Callender [15], Wüthrich [14],
and the references therein.
In what follows, I will focus on a somewhat less discussed feature of the programme:
whether it represents possibilities as a separate category of physical reality. Recent
decades have seen signiﬁcant progress in the mathematically rigorous modelling of
modalities,bothinmodallogicsandformalmetaphysics.Thus,theinteractionbetween
these philosophical traditions and the causal sets programme can be both illuminating
and fruitful for both parties, I believe. From this perspective we will investigate the
model of sequential growth that Rideout [11] and Rideout and Sorkin [12] put forward.
Since the concept of ordering is crucial for modal issues, we focus on it in the next
section.
3 Cf. Bombelli et al. [2]; for more info on the programme, see the causal sets reference webpage, www.
phy.olemiss.edu/~luca/Topics/st/causal_sets.html.
123

604
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
3 Causal Order
As a causet is a partial order ⪯, i.e., a reﬂexive, antisymmetric, and transitive order,4
that is further subject to a local ﬁniteness assumption (see below), we focus ﬁrst on the
order. Calling the order “causal” indicates that it is to generalize the causal ordering
of general relativity, GR, deﬁned as
x ⪯GR y iff there exists a future-directed causal curve from x to y.
The focus on this concept of general relativity comes from a diagnosis that “of all the
major concepts in our current best theories, the spacetime causal order from general
relativity and the path integral from quantum theory will survive the coming rev-
olution” [5, p. 247], which in turn is based on a number of mathematical results, a
particularly important one being Malament’s [9] theorem. The theorem says that for an
important class of GR space-times (the so-called future and past distinguishing space-
times), a causal isomorphism preserves the metric structure up to a conformal factor.
This is typically glossed by saying that causal ordering determines metric structure up
to conformal factor.5
Since a null-curve is causal, and a point can be connected to itself by a null-curve,
⪯is reﬂexive. In some contexts, however, one may prefer to work with a related strict
order (i.e., irreﬂexive and transitive) rather than a partial causal order ⪯. This strict
order is deﬁned by the equivalence x ≺y ⇔x ⪯y ∧x ̸= y. Depending on the
context, we will freely switch between ⪯and ≺.
Irreﬂexivity and transitivity of ≺imply asymmetry, x ≺y ⇒¬(y ≺x). Asym-
metry of ≺as well as anti-symmetry of ⪯in turn prohibit loops, x ≺y ∧y ≺x
(or x ⪯y ∧y ⪯x ∧x ̸= y). The prohibition of causal loops signals a departure
from the general relativistic causal ordering, which permits such loops. This remark
is not intended as criticism, since causal loops in GR are often seen as anomalous,
or an artefact of the theory that allows for too many models, with many unphysical
ones.6 A more worrisome observation is that causal ordering of GR seems to have
deterministic underpinnings. After all, globally hyperbolic space-times have the ini-
tial value problem (IVP) well-posed, by the Choquet-Bruchat and Geroch theorem [3],
meaning that there is a unique (up to isometry) maximal globally hyperbolic space-
time that extends an initial data set and satisﬁes Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. As globally
hyperbolic space-times are often considered generic models of GR, the result pro-
vides evidence for the determinism of GR, if restricted to generic space-times. Thus,
restricting ourselves to globally hyperbolic space-times, if we have x ⪯GR y and
x ⪯GR z and know that x belongs to space-time M, then y and z must both belong
to the same space-time M. This is to be contrasted with a modal-temporal ordering
<, understood as “it might happen in the future of”. For example, the fact that Toss
< Heads and Toss < Tails does not entail that Tails and Heads can happen together
4 Reﬂexive means that x ⪯x, anti-symmetry means that x ⪯y and y ⪯x imply x = y, and transitive
means that x ⪯y and y ⪯z imply x ⪯z.
5 For a discussion of mathematical results underlying the causal sets program, see Reference Wüthrich
[16].
6 By Censorship Conjecture, the generic space-times of general relativity are globally hyperbolic; in such
space-times causal loops are absent. By equating “generic” with “physical” (a frequent move) one thus
relegates GR causal loops to the realm of non-physical.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
605
(are co-possible). Here by Toss we understand a particular toss of a given coin, and
Tails/Heads refer to alternative particular events of the coin landing tails up/heads up
on a table. For indeterminism-friendly settings one might thus be tempted to venture
into non-globally hyperbolic models, but they do not offer much help, either. Although
in these cases there are non-unique space-times that extend a given initial data set,
these space-times typically have causal anomalies such as causal loops, so GR causal
ordering is then different from the asymmetric ordering postulated for causal sets.
The moral of these observations is that GR will not help us understand the causal
sets ordering ≺in an indeterminism-friendly way. As a result, the task of ﬁnding some
structures in causal sets that can be interpreted as alternative possibilities becomes
even more pressing.
The program gives prominence to the order concept that abstracts from individual-
ity of what is ordered. The notion of set, with individuality of its elements, seems to
be unnecessary and irrelevant given that order, volume, and quantum paths are sufﬁ-
cient for the deep structures of quantum space-times. Yet, in mathematics, one deﬁnes
partial ordering as a partially ordered set, and causal sets theorists follow suit in their
deﬁnitions. In their prose, however, they draw a distinction between “non-numbered”
sets and “numbered sets”. Further, diagrams depicting causal sets suggest that the only
captured feature is the pattern of ordering (for non-numbered causets) or pattern of
ordering plus a labelling function (for numbered causets). To produce corresponding
representations, a natural move is to take recourse to equivalence classes (ﬁrst case),
with labelling added (second case). In the sections below, we provide such a repre-
sentation and carry out the discussion of the causal sets in these terms. We focus on
un-numbered causal sets, since by ignoring frame-dependent ordering they seem more
fundamental.
Having rehearsed the basic notions of causal ordering, numbered causets, and non-
numbered causets, we next do some formal work. We give formal (set-theoretical)
reading of theoretical physics style heuristic constructions of the causal sets pro-
gramme. This is to exhibit mathematical meaning of these constructions, and, more
importantly, to produce rigorous proofs of some facts about the process of sequential
growth. The facts are important as they suggest that there is no room for alterna-
tive possible developments in the theory of sequential growth, contrary to what the
programme promises.
4 Facts About Un-numbered Causets
A causet is a partially ordered set, ⟨C, ⪯⟩, with a local ﬁniteness postulate,
∀x, z ∈C card{y ∈C | x ⪯y ⪯z} < ∞,
(1)
i.e., the cardinality of elements lying between any two elements (that is, inside any
Alexandrov’s diamond) is ﬁnite. Recalling the terminology, a chain in ⟨C, ⪯⟩is a
linearly ordered subset of C, and a path between x and y in C is a maximal chain
between x and y.
123

606
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
To get a grip on paterns of order alone, in abstraction from any particular sets,
we use slightly different deﬁnitions, and we do so in two steps. Yet, we begin with a
set-relative notion:
Deﬁnition 1 (Proto-causets) Let D be a countably inﬁnite set. A proto-causet over D
is a non-empty partial order ⟨S, ⪯⟩, S ⊆D, that satisﬁes Local Finiteness postulate
(Eq. 1). The set of proto-causets over D will be denoted by PCD.
In accordance with the general idea that it is order rather than individual relata that is
important, we next abstract from individuals (at least in part), focusing on appropriate
equivalence classes.7
Deﬁnition 2 Let OPD be the set of order-preserving isomorphisms on PCD. The set of
causets over D is: CD = {[S, ⪯] | ⟨S, ⪯⟩∈PCD}, where [S, ⪯] = {⟨S′, ⪯′⟩| ∃R ∈
OPD R(⟨S, ⪯⟩, ⟨S′, ⪯′⟩)}.
Socausets areequivalenceclasses of proto-causets wrt order preservingisomorphisms.
We next introduce a relation of link on PCD that carries over to CD, and which is
to represent stages of the universe’s growth.
Deﬁnition 3 (Links on PCD) For ⟨S, ⪯⟩, ⟨S′, ⪯′⟩∈PCD, we say that these two proto-
causets form a link in PCD iff there is e ∈S′ \ S s.t. S′ = S ∪{e}, ⪯′
|S=⪯, and
∀x ∈S′ e ′ x. We say that ⟨S, ⪯⟩is a parent, ⟨S′, ⪯′⟩is a child, and e is a new
element in the link’s child.
Note that by this deﬁnition a new element in a child cannot be below an element of
the parent. Thus, the child’s new element is placed either above a maximal chain in
the parent, or space-like related (henceforth SL R ) to all elements of the parent.
For the record, here is how the above deﬁnition carries over to causets:
Deﬁnition 4 (Links on CD) For A, B ∈CD, we say that ⟨A, B⟩is a link in CD iff
there are ⟨S, ⪯⟩and ⟨S′, ⪯′⟩in PCD such that A = [S, ⪯], B = [S′, ⪯′] and ⟨S, ⪯⟩
and ⟨S′, ⪯′⟩form a link in PCD.
For links in CD we use the same terminology of parent, child, and the child’s new
element as for the corresponding concepts in PCD.
Let us observe that there are causets with single parents, and causets with multiple
parents. As for the former, any causet based on a chain, or based on an anti-chain,
has a single parent. The simplest two-parents causet is • (the parents are
and • •
respectively). On the other hand, any two ﬁnite causets have a common ancestor, the
singleton-based causet •.
Since models of sequential growth use only ﬁnite causets (or, to be precise, causets
based on ﬁnite proto-causets), from now on we restict our attention to the sets PCﬁn
D
and Cﬁn
D of ﬁnite proto-causets and causets based on ﬁnite proto-causets, respectively,
where D is countably inﬁnite.
Links in Cﬁn
D might serve the role of what in mathematical jargon is called cov-
ering relation, that is, the ordering that is no more breakable by transitivity into its
constituents. In this spirit we use links to deﬁne an ordering on Cﬁn
D :
7 The relativisation to a base set D still remains, but it can be removed at the cost of using somewhat more
extricate mathematics.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
607
Fig. 1 Although SA ⊊SB, it is
not the case that A < B, where
A = [SA, ≺A] and
B = [SB, ≺B], since the only
way to add the new element to
SA is to place it below an
element of SA
SA
z
z
y
y
x
x
SB
Deﬁnition 5 (Ordering of Cﬁn
D ) For A, B ∈Cﬁn
D , A < B iff there is a ﬁnite sequence
[S1, ⪯1], [S2, ⪯2], . . . [Sn, ⪯n] in Cﬁn
D s.t. A = [S1, ⪯1], B = [Sn, ⪯n] and for every
i : 1 ≤i < n, [Si, ⪯i] and [Si+1, ⪯i+1] form a link in Cﬁn
D .
We subsequently show that < is a strict ordering on Cﬁn
D :
Fact 6 < is a irrreﬂexive and transitive relation on Cﬁn
D .
Proof < is irrreﬂexive because no ⟨[S, ⪯], [S, ⪯]⟩is a link in Cﬁn
D . For transitivity
of <, let the sequence [S1, ⪯1], [S2, ⪯2], . . . , [Sn, ⪯n] be a witness for A < B,
and the sequence [S′
1, ⪯′
1], [S′
2, ⪯′
2], . . . , [S′
m, ⪯′
m] be a witness for B < C. Since
B = [Sn, ⪯n] = [S′
1, ⪯′
1], the concatenation of these two sequences (with [Sn, ⪯n]
and [S′
1, ⪯′
1] identiﬁed) is a witness for A < C.
⊓⊔
As already remarked, irreﬂexivity and transitivity imply the asymmetry of <.
The question may present itself as to why should we opt to use the ordering of
Deﬁnition 5 rather than the set-theoretical inclusion to order Cﬁn
D . The answer is that
the former is friendly to the concept of sequential growth in a way that the latter is not.
Figure 1 show the two inclusion-related proto-causets none of which is an outgrowth
of the other, as there is no sequence of parent-child links joining the two.
Another question is what are the consequences of working with equivalence classes
of speciﬁed posets rather than speciﬁed posets themselves. What comes to the fore
is that a parent in PCﬁn
D has typically much more children than a parent in Cﬁn
D . To
calculate the number of children of a parent in PCﬁn
D that has m maximal elements,
we count the number of ways a new element can be placed above these maxima, to
obtain
m
0

+
m
1

+ . . . +
 m
m−1

+
m
m

. That number is greatly reduced once we do
equivalence classes of Cﬁn
D . Figure 2 shows a case of two children in PCﬁn
D giving rise
to one child in Cﬁn
D .8
As we have just learned, Cﬁn
D with the relation < forms a strictly ordered set. We
now investigate some further properties of it.
Fact 7 Any two ﬁnite causets A, B ∈Cﬁn
D have a maximal lower bound C in Cﬁn
D , i.e.,
there is no C′ > C that lower bounds A and B. But some pairs of causets might have
more than one maximal lower bound.
8 The ﬁgure suggests that the pasts of new elements in isomorphic children ⟨SB, ≺B⟩and ⟨SD, ≺D⟩, i.e.,
{x, z} and {y, z}, resp., are isomorphic as well, but generally this suggestion is wrong—for a counterexample,
see Fig. 3.2 of Rideout [11].
123

608
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
Fig. 2 Two proto-causets
⟨SB, ≺B⟩and ⟨SD, ≺D⟩,
children of proto-causet
⟨SA, ≺A⟩. Since ⟨SB, ≺B⟩and
⟨SD, ≺D⟩are isomorphic, they
yield just one child
[SA, ≺A] = [SB, ≺B] of causet
[SA, ≺A]
z
z
y
x
t
t
z
SA
y
y
x
x
SB
SD
Fig. 3 Two causets E and F
have two maximal lower bounds,
A and B. Two causets A and B
have two minimal upper bounds,
E and F
F
E
B
A
Proof If A and B are comparable by < or identical, we are done. If A and B are
incomparable by <, we pick a path l leading from the one-element causet [1, ⪯1] to A
and a path l′ leading from [1, ⪯1] to B. As these paths are ﬁnite and both start with the
same element, there is a maximal element mll′ in the paths’ intersection. Since A, B
are ﬁnite, the number of paths from [1, ⪯1] to A and from [1, ⪯1] to B is ﬁnite, and
hence the set of mll′’s is ﬁnite as well. This set thus has maximal elements, which by
the constructions are maximal lower bounds of A and B.
As for the part of the Fact starting with “But . . .”, consult Fig. 3 that depicts two ﬁnite
causets with two maximal lower bounds.9
⊓⊔
In the case of inﬁnite causets, although any two are obviously lower bounded by
[1, ⪯1], it is not known if they have maximal lower bounds.
Let us next turn to upper bounds:
Fact 8 Any two causets A, B ∈Cﬁn
D have an upper bound C in Cﬁn
D . However, they
might fail to have a least upper bound (supremum).
9 In the case of inﬁnite causets, although any two are obviously lower bounded by [1, ⪯1], it is not known
if they have maximal lower bounds.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
609
Proof Since A and B are based on ﬁnite proto-causets, while D is countably inﬁnite,
we can pick disjoint subsets SA and SB of D to represent A and B, respectively. We then
construct the so-called parallel composition of such two disjoint proto-causets ⟨SA, ⪯A
⟩and ⟨SB, ⪯B⟩, then argue that the composition makes a proto-causet, and ﬁnally
take the equivalence class that the proto-causet deﬁnes. The parallel composition of
⟨SA, ⪯A⟩and ⟨SB, ⪯B⟩is deﬁned by putting S = SA ∪SB, and for x, y ∈S: x ⪯y
iff x ⪯A y or x ⪯B y. ⟨S, ⪯⟩is a poset, and clearly S ⊆D. Further, since S is
ﬁnite, being the sum of two ﬁnite sets, ⟨S, ⪯⟩satisﬁes Local Finiteness postulate
(Eq. 1). Accordingly, ⟨S, ⪯⟩is a proto-cause and so it deﬁnes the equivalence class
C = [S, ⪯] ∈Cﬁn
D .
It remains to be seen that A < C and B < C. Given the ﬁniteness assumptions,
elements of SB = {b1, b2, . . . , bn} can be added consecutively to SA forming a ﬁnite
chain of proto-causets:
⟨SA, ⪯A⟩, ⟨SA ∪{b1}, ⪯1⟩, ⟨SA ∪{b1, b2}, ⪯2⟩, . . . ⟨SA ∪{b1, b2, . . . bn}, ⪯⟩,
where each ⪯i is an appropriate restriction of ⪯, namely ⪯i=⪯|SA∪{b1,b2,...,bi} (i ⩽n).
Observe that in S each element of SA is incomparable to each element of SB, so indeed
⪯i is = ⪯i+1 restricted to SA ∪{b1, b2, . . . , bi}, i.e., ⪯i=⪯i+1 |SA∪{b1,b2,...,bi}. Thus,
any two consecutive elements of the above chain form a link, and the sequence of
these links witnesses A < C. An analogous sequence of proto-causets leading from
SB to S shows that B < C as well.
For the second part of the Fact (beginning with “However . . .”), see Fig. 3: it
exhibits two causets that have two minimal upper bounds. i.e., they have no least
upper bound.10
⊓⊔
An interesting consequence of the last two facts is that ⟨Cﬁn
D , <⟩does not form a
lattice, so it is not a Boolean algebra. That cast doubts on a motivation for causets,
which was a construction of a Boolean algebra, so that the logic of causets-based
quantum gravity be classical. Reference [13, p. 366] aims, for instance, to obtain a
Boolean algebra by deﬁning events as ﬁnite subsets of causets:
Let us write A for the space of all events. Structurally, A is a Boolean algebra,
meaningthatunion,intersection,complementationandsymmetric-differenceare
deﬁned for it. In logical terms these correspond respectively to the connectives
or, and, not, and xor.
One can of course take a Boolean algebra of subsets of a ﬁnite set of causets. This
algebra, however, is distinct from partial order ⟨Cﬁn
D , <⟩, which is not even a lattice.
In particular, the algebra is orderred by the set-theoretical inclusion ⊆, not the causal
ordering <. It is not at all clear how to wed the Boolean algebra idea to the basic
structure ⟨Cﬁn
D , <⟩.
The last formal topic in this section are the maximal causets which are achievable
in the process of sequential growth. We are invited to think of a child’s new element as
10 Note, however, that numbered causets (which trace their ancestry) can be ordered into a tree-like branch-
ing structure, i.e., with a single minimal element and no two causets having an upper bound. For more on
this, see the Appendix.
123

610
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
a novel outgrowth of a parent, something that has become. We thus have ﬁnite chains
of causets, i.e., related by <, representing ﬁnitely many stages of growth. So we can
legitimately ask where the process of all the causets growing out of the singleton-based
causet leads to. Since ⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩, with A ≤B deﬁned as A < B or A = B, is a poset,
by the Hausdorff maximality principle, we have this fact:
Fact 9 There are maximal chains in ⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩; any chain in ⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩can be extended
to a maximal chain; each maximal chain in ⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩contains the singleton-based
causet.
Moreover, we may identify a maximal outgrowth in the process of sequential growth
with a union-like operation on maximal chains in ⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩, which exist by the Fact
above. The identiﬁcation is doable, as evidenced by this fact:
Fact 10 Theunionof therepresentatives of theelements of amaximal chainin⟨Cﬁn
D , ≤⟩
is a countably inﬁnite proto-causet (so it yields as its equivalence class a countably
inﬁnite causet).
Proof Let L = A1, A2, . . . be a maximal chain in ⟨Cﬁn
D , ⩽⟩, guaranteed to exist by
Fact 9. Since L is a maximal chain, every pair Ai, Ai+1 (i ∈N) forms a link in Cﬁn
D .
There is thus a sequence L′ of representatives of A1, A2, . . ., namely L′ = ⟨S1, ⪯1⟩,
⟨S2, ⪯2⟩, . . . s.t. Ai = [Si, ⪯i] and each pair ⟨Si, ⪯i⟩, ⟨Si+1, ⪯i+1⟩forms a link in
PCﬁn
D . Take now the union of the base sets of the representatives: S∗= {Sγ | ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ
⟩∈L′}. Clearly, S∗⊆D as each Sγ ⊆D. Since S∗is the union of countably inﬁnitely
many ﬁnite sets, it is countably inﬁnite. Deﬁne next a candidate for an ordering on
S∗: for x, y ∈S∗, x ⪯∗y iff there is ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩∈L′ s.t. x, y ∈Sγ and x ⪯γ y. The
deﬁnition is consistent as it is impossible that for some ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩, ⟨Sη, ⪯η⟩∈L′ there
are x, y ∈Sγ ∩Sη s.t. x ⪯γ y but y η x (because the two are comparable by < and
the ordering on a parent is a restriction to the parent of the ordering on its child). For
irreﬂexivity of ⪯∗, by the construction, for any x ∈S∗there is ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩∈L′ and,
as x γ x for every x ∈Sγ , ⪯∗is irreﬂexive as well. For transitivity, let ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩
be a witness for x <∗y and ⟨Sη, ⪯η⟩be a witness for y ⪯∗z. The two witnesses
are comparable by <; let thus ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩< ⟨Sη, ⪯η⟩(the other case is exactly alike).
Since this implies Sγ ⊆Sη, it follows that x, y, z ∈Sη. As x <γ y, by consistency
of ⪯−orderings in elements of L′, x <η y. This together with y ⪯η z implies, by
transitivity of ⪯η and deﬁnition of ⪯∗, that x ⪯∗z. We thus established that ⟨S∗, ⪯∗⟩
is a poset, with S∗⊆D. It remains to see if it satisﬁes Local Finitely postulate as
well. Note that for any x, y ∈S∗, there is Sγ s.t. x, y ∈Sγ . By Local Finiteness
for ⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩, the set {z ∈Sγ | x ⪯γ z ⪯γ y} is ﬁnite. Also, if z′ ∈S′
γ \ Sγ for
⟨Sγ ′, ⪯γ ′⟩∈L′, then z′ γ ′ y – by the deﬁniton of links, since y ∈Sγ . And by
the deﬁnition of ⪯∗, if x ⪯γ z ⪯γ y, then x ⪯∗z ⪯∗y. Combining these two
observations, {z ∈Sγ | x ⪯γ z ⪯γ y} = {z ∈S∗| x ⪯∗z ⪯∗y}, which is
ﬁnite. We thus have shown that ⟨S∗, ⪯∗⟩∈PCD; hence it yields the equivalence class
[S∗, ⪯∗] ∈CD.
⊓⊔
We end this formal part by mentioning one more fact that has an interpretative
signiﬁcance.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
611
Fact 11 If a causet A is based on a proto-causet SA containing two maximal chains
of different length, then A has more than one parent.
Proof Since the proto-causet SA has two maximal chains of different length, it can be
produced from two posets, each resulting from SA by shortening a different maximal
chain of unequal length. (By shortening of a one-element chain we mean here the
removal of this chain). Since these two posets differ wrt length of the two resulting
chains, they are not equivalent, and hence deﬁne different causets, which by the con-
structions are parents of the original causet. And, as these parents are not identical,
they are incomparable by <, so they belong to different maximal chains in ⟨Cﬁn
D , <⟩.
⊓⊔
The consequence of this fact is that a typical causet has multiple parents, each parent
belonging to a different maximal chain of causets, with all these chains containing the
causet in question.11 This consequence creates tension with a modal interpretation of
causets once we identify maximal chains of causets with possible histories producible
in the process of sequential growth: after all, how can we have a parent from a different
history than our own? Another problematic feature of causets is that any two causets
have an upper bound, see Fact 8. Before we discuss this tension further, we turn to
formal metaphysics for help in elucidating the concept of alternative possibilities.
5 Causets: Events or States?
A natural interpretation of a causet’s children is modal: children of a given parent
are alternative possible stages of the universe’s growth. Since a causet gives way to
another causet, it does not contain the whole information about a maximal course
of events that sequential growth can produce (an exception are causets produced by
maximal chains in Cﬁn
D , as in Fact 10). A causet thus seems to be identiﬁable to what is
sometimes called “partial history”. This is to be contrasted with “history” simpliciter,
that is, a maximal course of events. A partial history is compatible with more than one
alternative history—otherwise it would not be partial. If one likes, one might think of
histories simpliciter as causally-produced outgrowths of partial histories. In a similar
vein, one may think of later causets (in the sense of <) as being more ﬁne-grained (less
partial) than their predecessors. While a partial history is compatible with more than
one alternative ﬁne-grainings of it, two alternative ﬁne-grainings of a partial history
cannot be compatible, and hence cannot be compatible with one and the same history.
This is a familiar and intuitive tale, but, as we have already alluded, it seems to be in
conﬂict with algebraic facts about causets.
The crux of the problem is the concept of alternative possibilities. How do we draw a
distinction between alternative partial histories, and co-possible partial histories? The
former cannot happen together, whereas the latter can, by being parts of a maximal
course of events. An easier question is how to differentiate between alternative possible
events and co-possible events. One might opt for a deﬂated responce that collapses co-
possibility with consistency, such as in “the set of events is co-possible iff a complete
11 The reference to typicality above reﬂects the relative rarity of causets in which all maximal chains have
equal length.
123

612
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
description of this set is consistent”. Although this answer has some credibility among
philosophers, it does not look like a cogent move in the context of fundamental physics,
with its use of causal concepts, like ⪯of sequential growth, which is a primitive
causal notion, not reducible to logic. Now, an appeal to causal ordering, understood
quite weakly, as “. . . can causally inﬂuence . . .”, delivers a powerfull criterion of co-
possibility, due to Belnap [1]: if there is z such that x ⪯z and y ⪯z, then all three,
x, y, and z are co-possible. In plain words, if there is a possible later witness of x and
y, then x and y can really happen together; if the later witness actually happened, x and
y happened as well. If in doubt whether a particular key stroke I might execute on my
laptop, and a particular electromagnetic outburst on Andromeda that astrophysicists
predict, can happen together, look for some third possible event, whose past comprises
the two events in question. It is much easier to decide if the two events have happened
together, as one faces an easier task of ﬁnding some actual event. Deciding whether
the two events can happen together sets us a higher target of ﬁnding an appropriate
possible event.
The later witness intuition is the implication from the existence of a later witness
to a co-possibility. The other direction is more problematic, as a world might come
to an abrupt end. The absence of a later witness of two events might signal a world’s
abrupt end rather than incompatibility of two events in question.12 Nevertheless, by
having accepted the more problematic direction as well, we can use it to argue for
negative verdicts. For instance, we observe that there is no possible event in the future
of a particular coin toss that could be causally inﬂuenced by two possible results of
it, landing Heads up and landing Tails up. Any possible event in the future of that ﬂip
can inﬂuenced by Heads up, or by Tails up, but not by both. Hence Tails up and Heads
up are not co-possible.
The criterion of a later witness (with both directions) plays an essential role in
Belnap’s [1] Branching Space-Times (BST) theory. In mathematical parlance, a subset
of a partially ordered set that satisﬁes the criterion is called an “upward directed
subset”. BST then deﬁnes histories as maximal upward directed subsets of a partially
ordered set of all possible events.
Causets do not seem to satisfy the later witness intuition—unless the set Cﬁn
D does
not admit alternative ﬁnite causets. But if it does admit two alternative causets, then
by Fact 8 there is a (ﬁnite) causet that upper bounds the two (wrt <). Recalling the
reading of the order < on Cﬁn
D , this means that starting from one alternative causet, or
from another alternative causet, one arrives at the upper bound of the two by causal
processesofsequentialgrowth.Onemaythuswonderifthetwocausetsweregenuinely
alternative to begin with. Somewhat similarly, causets do not seem to satisfy the
demand that no event has a causal past containing incompatible parts; by Fact 11 a
typical causet has many parents, with any two of them belonging to different maximal
chains of causets.
The intuition of a later witness concerns events, so without an argument, we should
not expect it to carry over to objects of other categories. Also, although elements of
a causet are sometimes explicated as events (cf. Sorkin [13]), perhaps they are events
12 For a further discussion of the criterion, as well as of alternative criteria of co-possibility, see Reference
[10].
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
613
in some other sense, or not at all events, or a causet (set of events) is not an event-like
concept. The later witness intuition builds upon a concept of event in which the identity
criteria for eventhood include having a ﬁxed past. So in this sense of “events”, an event
cannot occur more than once and, moreover, in two senses: it cannot be repeated in
either one history, or in multiple histories. If an event were multi-realizable by having
parts (or instances) in alternative histories, one might explicate the notion of event’s
past in such a way that its past would comprise objects that are not co-possible. Such
multi-realizable events have a room in analytic metaphysics. For the record, recall
David Lewis’s [8, p. 196] notion of non-fragile event, which serves as a basic block
in his theory of causation. Lewis’s non-fragile event is multi-realizable in alternative
possible worlds, but (as I understand it) not in one possible world. So a non-fragile
event might have occurred somewhat differently than it actually occurred. But it cannot
re-occur after a time being. This suggests that perhaps causets are multi-realizable
events.
Drawing on different senses of “events” might be confusing and so it would be
better to use a different and more general term, “states”. Clearly, the state of a given
object can be repeated in the object’s history and an object might hit upon the same
state in its alternative histories. After all, we can perfectly imagine an object’s state
that can be reached along alternative histories of that object. To illustrate, a particular
state of clutter on my desk may follow the Head-up result of a particular coin-ﬂip, as
well as the Tail-up result of that ﬂip—after the coin has been removed from the desk.
To extend this idea to states of an isolated system (or, of a world) requires states to
not fully encode their pasts. Then the existence of a later state preceded by two other
states does not means that these two latter states belong to the same history. These
two states can be stages of two alternative processes that lead to the same state. As a
result, with states the intuition of a later witness fades away.
Understanding causets as states removes the sting of Facts 8 and 11, at least to a
certain extent. For any two states, they are followed, sooner or later, by another state.
Furthermore, every typical state has more than one immediate predecessor (a parent
state). This says more than that every typical state can be arrived along multiple paths.
The last stages of these paths, before they converge on a state in question, are to be
different. Let us take it tentatively for a sound albeit somewhat exuberant picture of
emerging and criss-crossing possible evolutions.
There is an advantage of the turn to states: now the model of sequential growth
exhibits features that are known from a typical way a physical theory is constructed.
The sequential growth generates a state space (aka phase space). In the state space there
are maximal sequences of states, one following another, by Fact 9.13 These sequences
are discrete trajectories in the state space. Each non-maximal state belongs to multiple
trajectories, which makes a dramatic contrast to never-crossing trajectories of the
Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics. A typical state has many parents, each
parent belonging to a different trajectory, and every non-maximal state has more than
one child. Thus, multiple trajectories crisscross at each typical state (where “typical”
means non-maximal and fulﬁlling the description given in footnote 11). This is a
picture of exuberant possibilities that grow profusely, with almost any state being an
13 By Fact 10, each maximal sequence of states can be considered itself a maximal state.
123

614
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
outgrowth of multiple alternative processes (encoded by trajectories). That opulence of
possibilities might appear distressing but, no worries, there is way to tame it, namely,
probabilities.
As a digression, we return to the later witness intuition: can we accommodate it in
this framework? We noted that the intuition requires an event-concept with the identity
criteria including sameness of the events’ past. Clearly, a typical causet does not satisfy
such criteria, as it can be produced along different causal paths. But can we still make
good of this intuition in the causal sets programme? To this end we need to use a subtler
notion of causet that encodes the causet’s ancestry as well. A causet, understood as
a state, typically has many ancestries, depending along which path it emerges. Thus,
a simple way to encode a causet’s ancestry is to associate it to a path in Cﬁn
D leading
from a singleton-based causet to the causet in question. As any two subsequent causets
in this path are different by exactly one element, the result of this association is that
the causet’s elements are now numbered, with the numbering representing the order
of creation leading to this causet. A multiple-realizable un-numbered causet is now
differentiated into a family of numbered causets, each numbering representing a path
leading to the causet’s creation. For more info in numbered causets, see Appendix.
The set of numbered causets is strictly ordered by a relation based on an concept
analogous to that of a link in Cﬁn
D . It can be proven that no two numbered causets have
an upper bound (understood as a numbered causet). Any two numbered causets always
have a lower bound, however, and all paths through the forest of numbered causets
begin with a singleton-based causet. In short, numbered causets form a branching
tree.14 A branching tree format implies that two numbered causets have a common
later witness iff they are members of a maximal chain of numbered causets. Since the
right-hand side of this bi-conditional is (naturally) read as saying that the two causets
are co-possible, the bi-conditional is just the statement of the later witness intuition.
By interpreting causets as repeatable states, we now read chains of causets pro-
ducible in sequential growth as discrete criss-crossing trajectories in a state space.
This somewhat unorderly picture is to be pruned by probabilistic constraints, to which
we now turn.
6 Probability to the Rescue?
Although sequential growth produces an abundance of criss-crossing trajectories in the
space of un-numbered causets, some trajectories might be barely probable, or improb-
able. By interpreting the assignment of zero probability to a trajectory as impossibility
of this trajectory, one might obtain a less exuberant picture of the possibilities emerg-
ing from sequential growth. Introducing probabilities to the theory of causets involves
two tasks. The ﬁrst is purely formal, and address questions like what objects proba-
bilities are deﬁned on, and which constraints they are subject to. The other task is to
show how numerical values of formally deﬁned probabilities result from a physical
process, as described by some equations. Both the tasks are addressed in Rideout [11]
and Rideout and Sorkin [12]. In this commentary I focus on the formal task alone.
14 I owe this observations to D. Rideout, in a personal communication.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
615
To begin with, we should decide which framework, of un-numbered causets or of
numbered causets, should be used for the introduction of probabilities. Although our
exegesis of the above papers pushes us in opposite directions, we opt for un-numbered
causets.15 The next decision is the following: to what objects are probabilities to be
assigned?
6.1 Transition Probabilities
Probabilities are assigned to pairs <parent, child>, written as μ(<parent, child>),
and interpreted as the probabilities of transitions from a parent to its child. The inter-
pretation implies that the probability of the passage from a parent to its child is
probabilistically independent from the parent’s history. It follows that the probability
of a passage from B1 to B2 along a given path γ in Cﬁn
D is the product of transition
probabilities of all parent-child links forming the path γ .
Next, the probabilities are subject to a “summing to unity” constraint.
6.2 Summing to Unity
Let A be a causet with children B1, B2, . . . , Bk.
Then k
i=1 μ(⟨A, Bi⟩) = 1.
With this contraint, one can associate a Kolmogorovian probability space ⟨X, F, p⟩to
each causet A. Here the base set X is the set of all pairs ⟨A, Bi⟩, where B1, B2, . . . , Bk
are the children of A (or equivalently, X is the set of all children of A). F is the
ﬁeld of subsets of X and p is the probability measure on F, uniquely deﬁned by
transition probabilities μ on X. Clearly, F is ﬁnite, as any ﬁnite causet has ﬁnitely
many children.16
ThenextconditioniswhatRideoutandSorkin[12]termtheBellcausalitycondition.
Tostateit,weneedtheconceptofaprecursor.Theprecursorofalinkconsistsofexactly
those elements of the link’s parent that causally precede the new element in the link’s
child.
6.3 Bell Causality Condition
Let C be an arbitrary causet based on n-elements proto-causets, C1, C2 be two chil-
dren of C, whose new elements are e1 and e2, respectively.17 Consider then a “pruned”
segment B of C, which is the union of the preceqursor of link ⟨C, C1⟩and the prece-
15 The description of how a causet’s children are to be counted for the summing to unity constraint requires
numbered causets. But the idea that a causet can be reached along multiple paths, which underlies general
covariance, is in line with un-numbered causets, but not with numbered causets.
16 Note that “summing to unity” delivers different numbers, depending on how a causet’s children are
counted. Typically a numbered causet has more children than its un-numbered cousin.
17 Since the set-theoretical representation of causets is somewhat multi-layered, giving a precise deﬁnition
of concepts like precursor, or a child’s new element requires lengthy and little-illuminating work. We thus
leave the condition in a none too precise form, relying on the reader’s ability to grasp it, and do the formal
work, if needed.
123

616
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
qursor of link ⟨C, C2⟩. Construct then two children B1, B2 of B by adding e1 and e2
to B, respectively. Then the condition requires the following:
μ(C, C1)
μ(C, C2) = μ(B, B1)
μ(B, B2).
(2)
To comment on the condition, the “pruned” causet B might contain substantially
fewer elements than the initial causet C. Each element of B causally precedes a new
element in one child or the other. Thus, although the links C, C1 and C, C2 might be
located somehere high in the tree produced by the sequential growth, the links B, B1
and B, B2 might be located signiﬁcantly lower. The meaning of the equation is that
as far as the quotient of transition probabilities with a ﬁxed parent is concerned, the
quotient does not depend on these elements of the parent that are causally unrelated to
the children’s new elements. From a more formal perspective, the condition imposes a
contraint on how probability spaces associated with different causets are to be related.
The next condition intends to “gauge out” the paths along which a causet is pro-
duced. We left it to the end of this section, as it casts new light on the interpretation
of causets.
6.4 General Covariance
For any C ∈Cﬁn
D , if γ and γ ′ are paths in Cﬁn
D that originate at the singleton-based
causet and terminate at C, then the product of the transition probabilities along the
links of γ must be the same as the product of the transition probabilities along the
links of γ ′.
Why should one identify the probabilities along various paths leading to a causet
C? Each path encodes an order of becoming of C. Each path thus yields a different
numbering of elements of C. Since by Deﬁnition 3, a new element cannot be placed
below an old element, it is impossible that x ≺y, while n(y) ≤n(x), where n is a
numbering function, and ≤is the ordering of natural numbers. Accordingly, every path
leading to C induces an ordering n, called “natural”, that is subject to this condition:
if x ≺y, then n(x) < n(y). (Note that this condition is a one-way implication
rather than the equivalence. For a deﬁnition of numbering functions, incl. a natural
numbering, see the Appendix). Thus, abstracting from numerical values, all natural
numberings for a given causet C agree on how causally related elements of C are
ordered. They disagree (still abstracting from particular numerical values) on causally
unrelated elements, understood here as SLR elements. But this disagreement cannot
be substantial. After all, for SLR events {e1, e2, . . . , en} the question of which was
created ﬁrst, does not admit a non-perspectival answer. If we ask at e1, the answer is
“e1”, if we ask at e2, the answer is “e2”, etc. Rideout and Sorkin [12] thus concede that
natural numberings are not meant “to carry any physical information”. Since natural
numberings for C and paths leading to C stand in one-to-one correspondence, the
paths leading to C do not carry any physical information either. This is the reason
of why all paths leading to C receive the same probability. But if the paths carry no
physical information needed for diverging probability assignments, how can they, with
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
617
the absence of differentiating physical information, be considered alternative possible
paths to C?
General covariance casts a somewhat unfriendly light on our interpretation of ele-
ments of Cﬁn
D as states. Recall that a typical element A ∈Cﬁn
D has multiple parents,
and hence can be reached by multiple paths, all starting with the singleton-based
causet. However, since the premises of General Covariance are satisﬁed, the proba-
bilities of reaching A along different paths should be the same. Now reading A as a
multi-realizable state, we get that no matter how this A is arrived at, the probability
of its production should be the same. This might appear somewhat strange, as we
may imagine (drawing on our everyday’s experience) that some paths leading to a
given state are easier than the other. To explain away this weirdness, we turn to the
argument for general covariance, only to learn that this argument concludes that paths
are not physically real. But if they are not physically real, they can hardly play the role
of alternative possible paths leading to C. After all, if the paths do not to carry any
physical information, what information are they supposed to carry? The only answer,
I think, is that this information regards our ways of representing reality rather than
any information about reality itself, where ways of representing might result from the
formal methods we use. Clearly, one needs a much more substantial differentiation of
paths to consider them as alternative possible ways of producing a given causet.
Havingseentheproblemsproducedbytheprobabilisticconstraintofgeneralcovari-
ance, one might be tempted to reject it. Obviously, the constraint invokes the standard
desideratum that physical laws be invariant under arbitrary differentiable coordinate
transformations, with the underlying idea that a choice of coordinates is conven-
tional, and hence should have any bearing on what the laws of nature look like. But,
since causets do not live in differentiable manifolds and continuous spacetime is only
apparent, there is no single clear-cut answer how to apply the idea underlying general
covariance to causets. Probabilistic general covariance is just one proposal, and (we
think) not a fortunate one. One rendering of the idea is to require that ordering of
elements in a causet has no physical signiﬁcance. This seems to imply that there is
only physically meaningful way of becoming for any given causet. This is a rejection
of indeterministic becoming.
7 Discussion
In this paper we have focused on the modal aspects of causets. Let us recall where the
argumentation set out in this paper leads us. After proving a few facts about causets,
we argued that causets cannot be understood as particular events, as objects that are
not multi-realizable. For this concept of eventhood there is a persuasive criterion for
co-possibility, which is based on the later witness intuition. Since any two causets in
Cﬁn
D have an upper bound (i.e., a later witness, exactly), any two causets in Cﬁn
D are
co-possible, and hence Cﬁn
D admits exactly one maximal set of co-possible causets,
i.e., just one history, identiﬁed thus with Cﬁn
D itself. The modalities are trivialised and
no room is left for substantial possibilities.
We were therefore compelled to turn to a different understanding of causets. As a
typical causets has many parents and belongs to multiple maximal chains in Cﬁn
D , we
123

618
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
Fig. 4 Two paths, i and ii, of the
creation of causet C
ii
i
C
considered causets to be multi-realizable, like states or Lewisian non-fragile events.
On this understanding, causets producible by sequential growth form a state space;
maximal chains in this state space are (discrete) trajectories. The picture is in radical
contrast to the orderly trajectories of classical physics, as all trajectories in Cﬁn
D start
at a (unique) minimal element and multiple trajectories cross at a typical state. Still
we found the picture promising, as the theory is supposed to be indeterministic, and
one might hope that probabilities will help to reduce the number trajectories. While
examining the argument for general covariance, which is a constraint on the proba-
bilities deﬁnable on causets, we found that by this argument, the multiplicity of paths
leading to a given should not be considered physically real. The paths had better be
taken as our different representations of one physical process. With this diagnosis we
end up back in a familiar pickle: as now paths converging to a given causet C are not
thought of as alternative evolutions, whatever causets are below a given causet they are
co-possible. By a familiar argument, drawing on Fact 8, we get that Cﬁn
D is a (single)
maximal set of co-possible causets, i.e. a (single) possible history. Is there a way out
of this predicament, apart from rejecting substantial possibilities? We end this paper
with two suggestions.
First, it seems to us that the appeal to the physical irrelevancy of the ordering of
SLR events may take two forms, and these two forms are conﬂated in the causal sets
theory. The ﬁrst appeal is operative in the concept of un-numbered causet. Just by
being un-numbered, the causet does not provide us with any information as to how
a subset of its SLR elements is ordered (but it gives information on, e.g., how large
is the subset). The second appeal is at work in the argument for general covariance,
and it concerns paths of causets rather than a single causet. A (ﬁnite) path of causets
represents a particular order of creation of a given causet. Figure 4 shows two paths
leading to a simple causet C. Are these paths different? If one takes the order of
creation as trumping relativity, the answer is afﬁrmative: path (i) depicts a singleton-
based causet giving birth to a causet with a single link, which in turn gives birth to a
causet with one element causally un-related to a causally-related pair. Path (ii) tells
a different story, about a singleton-based causet giving way to a causet based on a
causally un-related pair, and ﬁnally—to a causet based on a triple, with one element
un-related to a causally related pair. Note that since all the involved causets are un-
numbered, there is no problematic ordering of causally unrelated elements in each
causet.
123

Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
619
Things are different, however, if priority is given to relativity, to the point of ignoring
the concept of creation. Then one is deemed to look at the ﬁnal causet C, in a vain
attempt to ﬁgure out an order of its elements. The attempt is vain, as it must involve
the dubious task of assigning order of priority to SLR events.
Thus, to give a chance to alternative multiple possible histories in Cﬁn
D , one option
is to take the concept of the order of creation seriously: the advice is to let creation
trump relativity. Since this move undermines the argument for General Covariance,
for consistency’s sake this constraint should not be postulated. This need not be done
since the irrelevancy of the ordering of causally unrelated elements is already captured
in un-numbered causets.
Our second suggestion of how to escape from the predicament is to re-think what
it means, in terms of the causets theory, that two elements of a causet are not compa-
rable by the causal ordering. In the present paper we followed the custom of causets
theorists identifying causally incomparable elements with space-like related elements.
However, in a fully ﬂedged modal account, this identiﬁcation simply appears to be
wrong. Two events might be incomparable because they belong to different alternative
evolutions, not because they belong to the same evolution and are space-like related.
We leave, however, the task of developing this suggestion and examining its cogency
to a future work.
8 Appendix: On Numbered Causets
In a numbered causet, its elements have partial identity as they are numbered. I call it
“partial” because the identity of elements of the underlying set D is forgotten. Still, by
knowing a numbering, a given number can be associated to the appropriate elements
of posets, whose base sets are subsets of D.
Formally, we deﬁne a (ﬁnite) numbered causet as a pair ⟨A, n⟩, where A ∈Cﬁn
D and
n is a numbering function for A, which we now explain.
Deﬁnition 12 (Numbering function for a causet)Let A = {⟨Sγ , ⪯γ ⟩| γ ∈} ∈Cﬁn
D
be based on m-elements proto-causets (with  an appropriate index set). A function
n : 
γ ∈ Sγ →{1, 2, . . . , m} is a numbering function for A iff it satisﬁes the three
conditions below:
(i) for each γ ∈, the restriction n|Sγ of n to Sγ is a bijection between Sγ and
{1, 2, . . . , m},
(ii) if x ∈Sγ and y ∈Sη (γ, η ∈) are equivalent (in the sense of being linked by
an order-preserving isomorphism between Sγ and Sη), then n(x) = n(y), and
(iii) for every γ ∈, if x ⪯γ y, then n(x) <N n(y).
Denoting the set of ﬁnite numbered causets by nCﬁn
D , analogously to Deﬁnition 3
we deﬁne a link in nCﬁn
D and then, in terms of the link, the ordering < of nCﬁn
D .18 It
can be proved that ⟨nCﬁn
D , <⟩is a strict order and that any two elements of it have an
18 In contrast to a link in Cﬁn
D , a condition on numbering functions is needed, to the effect that numbering
functions associated with a parent and a child, resp., agree on some sets. We leave the details to the reader.
123

620
Foundations of Physics (2020) 50:600–620
inﬁmum (greatest lower bound) but no upper bound. Thus, ⟨nCﬁn
D , <⟩is a tree. We
leave the proofs to the reader.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1. Belnap, N.: Branching space-time. Synthese 92, 385–434. ‘Postprint’ archived at PhilSci Archive,
(1992). http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001003
2. Bombelli, L., Lee, J., Meyer, D., Sorkin, R.D.: Space-time as a causal set. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 521–524
(1987)
3. Choquet-Bruhat, Y., Geroch, R.: Global aspects of the Cauchy problem in general relativity. Commun.
Math. Phys. 14, 329–335 (1969)
4. Chru´sciel, P.T., Isenberg, J.: Nonisometric vacuuum extensions of vacuum maximal globally hyperbolic
spacetimes. Phys. Rev. D 48(4), 16616–1628 (1991)
5. Dowker, F., Zalel, S.: Evolution of universes in causal set cosmology. Comptes Rendus Phys. 18,
246–253 (2017)
6. James, W.: The dilemma of determinism. Unit. Rev. 22, 193–224 (1884)
7. Lewis, D.: New work for a theory of universals. Australas. J. Philos. 61, 343–377 (1983)
8. Lewis,D.:PostscriptstoCausation.In:PhilosophicalPapersVolumeII,pp.172–213.OxfordUniversity
Press, Oxford (1986)
9. Malament, D.B.: The class of continuous timelike curves determines the topology of spacetime. J.
Math. Phys. 18, 1399–1404 (1977)
10. Müller, T.: Alternatives to histories? Employing a local notion of modal consistency in branching
theories. Erkenntnis 79(3), 343–364 (2014)
11. Rideout, D. P.: Dynamics of Causal Sets. PhD thesis, Graduate School of Syracuse University (2001)
12. Rideout, D.P., Sorkin, R.D.: A classical sequential growth dynamics for causal sets. Phys. Rev. D 61,
024002 (2000)
13. Sorkin, R.: Logic is to the quantum as geometry is to gravity. In: Murugan, J., Weltman, A., Ellis, G.F.R.
(eds.) Foundations of Space and Time: Reﬂections on Quantum Gravity, pp. 363–384. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (2012)
14. Wüthrich, C.: The structure of causal sets. J. Gen. Philos. Sci. 43, 223–241 (2012)
15. Wüthrich, C., Callender, C.: What becomes of a causal set? Br. J. Philos. Sci. 68(3), 907–925 (2017)
16. Wüthrich, C.: Spacetime from causality: causal set theory. In: Huggett, N., Wüthrich, C. (eds.) The
Emergence of Spacetime in Quantum Theories of Gravity. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2019)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

