Vol.:(0123456789)
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-022-00546-0
1 3
Laws of Nature as Constraints
Emily Adlam1 
Received: 30 September 2021 / Accepted: 31 January 2022 / Published online: 10 February 2022 
© Crown 2022
Abstract
The laws of nature have come a long way since the time of Newton: quantum 
mechanics and relativity have given us good reasons to take seriously the possibil-
ity of laws which may be non-local, atemporal, ‘all-at-once,’ retrocausal, or in some 
other way not well-suited to the standard dynamical time evolution paradigm. Laws 
of this kind can be accommodated within a Humean approach to lawhood, but many 
extant non-Humean approaches face significant challenges when we try to apply 
them to laws outside the time evolution picture. Thus for proponents of non-Humean 
approaches to lawhood there is a clear need for a novel non-Humean account which 
is capable of accommodating these sorts of laws. In this paper we propose such an 
account, characterizing lawhood in terms of constraints, which are understood as 
a form of modal structure. We demonstrate that our proposed realist account can 
indeed accommodate a large variety of laws outside the time evolution paradigm, 
and describe some possible applications to important philosophical problems.
Keywords  Laws of nature · Philosophy of physics · Retrocausality
1  Introduction
The laws of nature have come a long way since the time of Newton: quantum 
mechanics and relativity have given us good reasons to take seriously the possibil-
ity of laws which may be non-local, atemporal, ‘all-at-once,’ retrocausal, or in some 
other way not well-suited to the standard dynamical time evolution paradigm. Laws 
of this kind can be accommodated within a Humean approach to lawhood, but many 
extant non-Humean approaches face significant challenges when we try to apply 
them to laws outside the time evolution picture. Thus for proponents of non-Humean 
approaches to lawhood there is a clear need for a novel realist (i.e. non-Humean) 
account which is capable of accommodating these sorts of laws. In this paper we 
propose such an account, characterizing lawhood in terms of constraints, which are 
 *	 Emily Adlam 
	
eadlam90@gmail.com
1	
University of Western Ontario, London, Canada

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 2 of 41
understood as a form of modal structure. We demonstrate that our proposed realist 
account can indeed accommodate a large variety of laws outside the time evolution 
paradigm.
One important motivation for this project is the recognition that the ideas we have 
about what laws look like inevitably shape the types of laws which scientists formu-
late. Thus the limitations of our current notion of lawhood translate to limitations on 
scientific thought: although laws outside the dynamical time-evolution paradigm are 
gaining increasing prominence in physics, many physicists are reluctant to accept 
them and there remains confusion about their conceptual significance. Moreover, the 
development of these approaches is often hampered by attempts to assimilate them 
to a time-evolution picture—for example Kastner, observing that modern-day pro-
ponents of retrocausal models often attempt to express them in dynamical terms, 
comments that ‘the dynamical stories presented in these interpretations are incon-
sistent with the ontology they require.’ [1] So in order to facilitate further progress 
within these research programmes it is crucial to develop a conceptually clear way 
of thinking about lawhood which can accommodate laws outside the time evolution 
paradigm. Thus the framework presented in this article is intended to help emerg-
ing research on non-dynamical laws propagate into broader scientific thought and to 
give scientists better conceptual resources for their explorations of various kinds of 
non-standard laws.
A further motivation is based on the fact that there are many philosophical top-
ics where the notion of lawhood plays a crucial part: for example, laws are often 
invoked in the analysis of causation [2], explanation [3], determinism [4], scien-
tific confirmation [5], prediction [6] and free will [7]. But these analyses frequently 
assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that the laws in question take the standard 
Newtonian time-evolution form, and thus in light of developments in modern phys-
ics which indicate that laws may not always take this specific form, there’s a clear 
need for us to re-evaluate the role that laws play in these applications. Furthermore, 
in many of these applications it makes a difference whether the account of lawhood 
is realist or non-realist—for example, one might well draw different conclusions 
about determinism and its relationship with free will in the realist setting where 
laws make things happen versus in the Humean best-systems setting where laws 
are simply read off whatever does happen. Therefore proponents of non-Humean 
approaches will agree that it is important to address these questions using a real-
ist account of lawhood which is capable of accommodating laws outside the time-
evolution paradigm—i.e. the kind of account which we aim to set out in this article.
At this juncture, we should clarify that we will focus throughout this paper on 
the fundamental laws of physics—Schrodinger’s equation, the Dirac equation, the 
Einstein equations and their ilk, as well their as yet unknown successors. We have 
no doubt that interesting issues may arise in attempting to expand the framework we 
suggest here to the laws of the special sciences and ceteris paribus laws, but that is a 
task for another day.

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 3 of 41 
28
2  Physics Beyond Time Evolution
Newton bequeathed to us a picture of physics in which the fundamental role of laws 
is to give rise to time evolution: the Newtonian universe can be regarded as some-
thing like a computer which takes in an initial state and evolves it forward in time 
[8]. Newton’s vision has been enormously influential on the philosophy of science 
and lawhood, and even today many philosophical discussions about lawhood use 
Newton’s laws as an example, presumably on the grounds that F = ma is a simple 
case which is presumed to share most of the relevant features of more complex laws.
But science has come a long way since the time of Newton, and thus we should 
not necessarily expect that accounts of lawhood based on a Newtonian time-evolu-
tion picture will be well-suited to the realities of modern physics. In this section, 
we will discuss several important examples of laws appearing in modern physics 
which look very different to the traditional Newtonian time evolution laws. This will 
provide motivation for the claim that a more general realist framework is needed, 
and also provide some inspiration when we move to considering what sort of form 
that realist framework might take. Note that it is not our intention to argue that all 
the putative laws mentioned in this section are definitely fundamental laws of phys-
ics, or indeed that these examples prove beyond doubt that we must abandon the 
time-evolution picture. The point is merely that all of these types of laws are taken 
seriously by at least some sectors of the scientific community, and on the naturalistic 
grounds that our account of lawhood should be led by scientific practice rather than 
pre-existing metaphysical commitments, we need an account of lawhood which is 
capable of accommodating the same range of possibilities as science itself.
2.1  Lagrangian Approaches
We don’t even need to go beyond classical mechanics to encounter laws which don’t 
work well within the standard time-evolution picture. For although it is most com-
mon to conceptualise classical mechanics in terms of the Newtonian schema [9] 
in which laws act on states to produce time evolution, there is also an alternative 
Lagrangian description of classical mechanics in which systems are required to 
take the path which optimizes a quantity known as the Lagrangian [10]. Lagrangian 
methods are well-recognised as valuable mathematical tools, but they have not usu-
ally been taken seriously as possible descriptions of reality, presumably because the 
Lagrangian is optimized over an entire history and thus the Lagrangian description 
can’t straightforwardly be understood within the standard time-evolution picture [8, 
11].
However path integrals—the analogue of the Lagrangian method within quantum 
mechanics [12]—have become so important to quantum field theory that increas-
ingly we are seeing calls to reconsider the idea that the Lagrangian description is 
purely a mathematical trick [13, 14]. There seems no reason other than a prejudice 
in favour of the time evolution picture to insist that the real laws must take a New-
tonian form: it may well be time to give serious attention to the possibility that the 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 4 of 41
Lagrangian formulation is more fundamental [8, 11], and therefore it seems reason-
able to ask whether we can come up with an account of lawhood which allows that 
Lagrangian constraints may indeed be laws.
2.2  Non‑dynamical Approaches
There is a practice within physics of presenting theories in terms of their ‘kinemat-
ics’ (state space) and ‘dynamics’ (laws of evolution) [15], and thus it is common for 
philosophical accounts of laws of nature to conceptualise laws in this way. But there 
are a number of theories in modern physics where it doesn’t make a great deal of 
sense to have a rigid division between ‘state space’ and ‘evolution laws.’ For exam-
ple, a solution to the Einstein equations of General Relativity is not a state at a time 
but an entire history of a universe [16], so it doesn’t seem to require any concept of 
time evolution at all. A time-evolution formulation of the Einstein equations does 
exist [17, 18], but the original global formulation remains central to research in the 
field and there seems no obvious reason to think that the time-evolution formulation 
must be more fundamental. Similarly, a number of approaches to quantum gravity, 
including quantum loop gravity [19], postulate laws which apply ‘all-at-once’ to the 
whole of history, rather than taking a state at a time and evolving it forwards.
Note that the terms ‘kinematics’ and ‘dynamics’ are still sometimes used in the 
context of General Relativity and other theories without a notion of time evolution, 
where ‘kinematically possible’ now refers to the set of models which are considered 
to be of the right mathematical type to represent a physically possible world, and 
‘dynamically possible’ refers to the set of models which do in fact represent a physi-
cally possible world [20]. But as Spekkens points out, there may be many different 
ways of splitting a theory into ‘kinematics’ and ‘dynamics’ and moreoever, the kine-
matics and dynamics of a theory can only ever be tested together, so there is no hope 
of empirically distinguishing which distinction between kinematics and dynamics is 
the correct one. Spekkens argues that we should therefore refrain from making this 
distinction altogether and instead think in terms of causal structure [21] (or perhaps 
modal structure for greater generality). If Spekkens is right, simply decoupling the 
notion of dynamics from the time-evolution picture will not be enough to save tra-
ditional accounts of lawhood: it may turn out that the fundamental laws of physics 
simply can’t be parsed within the kinematics/dynamics framework at all, and thus 
we are in need of some alternative account of lawhood which does not lean so heav-
ily on that distinction.
2.3  Retrocausal Approaches
Retrocausal approaches to the interpretation of quantum mechanics have been 
attracting significant attention in recent years; see for example the two-state vector 
interpretation [22], the transactional interpretation [23], Kent’s approach to Lorent-
zian beables [24], Wharton’s retrocausal path integral approach [25], and Suther-
land’s causally symmetric Bohmian model [26]. The proliferation of such models 
provides good reason to suppose that a correct understanding of quantum mechanics 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 5 of 41 
28
may require us to rethink some of our ideas about time and temporal evolution. Of 
course, one can always choose to rewrite retrocausal laws in an non-retrocausal way 
by adding appropriate hidden-variables and/or fine-turning initial states; but it has 
been argued that in certain cases the resulting non-retrocausal law will look asym-
metric [27, 28] or contain inexplicable coincidences [29] and thus even if the non-
retrocausal description always remains technically possible, there are compelling 
reasons to take the retrocausal descriptions seriously.
As noted in Ref. [11], there are two importantly different notions of retrocau-
sality currently employed in the field. Some approaches (such as the two-state vec-
tor interpretation) explicitly postulate two distinct directions of dynamical causal-
ity, such as a forwards-evolving state and also a backwards-evolving state, and in 
such cases we might hope to accommodate retrocausality within standard pictures 
of lawhood by means of making a small alteration which allows for evolution back-
wards as well as forwards. But other approaches (such as Wharton’s models) seem 
more at home within an ‘all-at-once,’ block universe model where the laws of nature 
apply atemporally to the whole of history. Moreoever, there are strong indications 
that the latter approach is the more coherent one: Ref. [11] argues that only the ‘all-
at-once’ picture can circumvent the conceptual difficulties associated with retrocau-
sality, and Ref. [1] argues that even in accounts which appear to promote two direc-
tions of dynamical causality, ‘such dynamical stories are just narrative overlays on 
a static ontology.’ And of course, in an ‘all-at-once’ picture there is by construction 
no notion of evolution at all, so if we are to make sense of block universe laws like 
this we are in need of an approach to lawhood which is not predicated on dynamics 
or time evolution.
2.4  Quantum Information and Foundations
Large sectors of the growing field of quantum information science are concerned 
with discovering general constraints on what information-processing tasks can be 
achieved using quantum systems and then investigating the consequences of those 
constraints. For example, there is the ‘no-signalling principle’—that is to say, the 
fact that measurements on distinct quantum systems commute entails that quantum 
mechanics can’t be used to send signals faster than light [30]. A generalisation of 
no-signalling known as ‘information causality’ has been used to derive the exact 
value of the limits on quantum non-local correlations [31]. We also have ‘monog-
amy,’ which places limits on how strongly quantum systems can be entangled with 
two or more distinct systems [32, 33], and ‘no-cloning,’ which places limits on the 
ways in which quantum information can be copied [34]. These sorts of constraints 
are regarded by many researchers in the field as being deep and fundamental fea-
tures of physical reality, and yet they are certainly not dynamical laws or time evolu-
tion laws in the usual sense, since they are primarily concerned with describing what 
is possible or impossible.
Similarly, in the adjacent field of quantum foundations, there has been a 
great deal of interest in operational theories [35, 36] and a related family of 
research programmes including nonlocal correlations [31, 32, 37], generalized 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 6 of 41
probabilistic theories [38–41], empirical models [42], and device-independent 
approaches [43–46]. These frameworks are often used to prove relations of the form 
‘every theory which has property A also has property B,’ or to come up with opera-
tional axiomatisations of quantum mechanics. The properties and axioms that fea-
ture in these sorts of approaches are, once again, not usually concerned directly with 
dynamics or time evolution: they frequently take the form of constraints delimit-
ing the the bounds of the possible, such as ‘the existence of a continuous revers-
ible transformation between any two pure states’ or ‘the existence of an information 
unit.’ Again, proponents of these approaches often seem to be of the opinion that 
these properties and axioms are deep, fundamental features of the physical world, 
but they are clearly not dynamical or time evolution laws. Thus it seems desirable 
to have some kind of framework in which we could at least entertain the possibility 
that these sorts of information-theoretic and operational constraints are genuinely 
lawlike.
2.5  Consistency Conditions
Einstein’s equations of general relativity admit solutions which contain closed time-
like curves, i.e. points in spacetime which lie in their own causal future [47]. The 
existence of closed timelike curves raises the spectre of logical paradoxes like the 
grandfather paradox, where someone travels into the past via a closed timelike curve 
and shoots their grandfather in order to prevent their own conception. To rule out 
the possibility of such paradoxes it is necessary to impose consistency constraints on 
the fields at points along the closed timelike curve: ‘local data are constrained in a 
way that is not present in spacetimes with a more normal causal structure.’ Earman 
considers that the best way of conceptualizing these consistency constraints is to 
suppose that they ‘have law status.’ [48] Moreover, he argues that it’s unlikely these 
constraints can be expressed in wholly local terms, and thus ‘in general, the consist-
ency constraints may have to refer to the global structure of spacetime.’ Therefore 
if consistency constraints are indeed laws, they certainly cannot be the familiar sort 
of local time evolution laws: they must be some new sort of global, all-at-once laws. 
Earman suggests understanding these unusual global laws within the best-systems 
approach, but in principle there is no reason why one could not entertain global laws 
of this kind within a realist approach to lawhood, and thus there is a clear need for a 
realist framework which accommodates constraints of this kind.
2.6  Constraints
The notion of expressing laws as constraints has attracted interest in other areas of 
physics as well. For example, Deutsch and Marletto’s constructor theory expresses 
physical law in terms of what tasks are possible and impossible [49]. The second 
law of thermodynamics is a law of this kind—in the Kelvin formulation, it tells us 
that processes which convert heat completely into work are impossible in the con-
structor theory sense, i.e. the conversion of heat into work might occasionally occur 
by fluke but it can’t be reliably achieved. Note that the concepts of ‘possible’ and 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 7 of 41 
28
‘impossible’ employed here are in a sense non-local, since they refer not to indi-
vidual instances but to behaviour over repeated instances: possible tasks are those 
which can be executed repeatably, in a cycle, with arbitrary accuracy, whilst impos-
sible tasks are those which can’t, though they might still occur as a one-off. Moreo-
ver, we know from past failed attempts at deriving the second law from the time 
evolution equations used in statistical mechanics [50, 51] that it is typically very 
difficult to account for such impossibility constraints in terms of purely time-evo-
lution laws, so it seems likely that in order to take Deutsch and Marletto’s construc-
tion seriously we will need an account of lawhood which is not predicated on time 
evolution.
Similarly, Filomeno discusses various phenomena within physics where the 
dynamics exhibit typicality properties such that we get emergent stable patterns 
which are almost independent of the details of the underlying dynamics, and there-
fore it is the constraints on the kinematically possible states (e.g. symmetries of the 
state space) which really determine the behaviour. Filmeno thus argues that we can 
explain the existence of regularities by committing to modal constraints on the kin-
ematic state space rather than being ontologically committed to specific dynamical 
laws [52]. And Hooker has given a detailed classification of the types of constraints 
we encounter in complex dynamical systems, observing that in the Lagrangian for-
mulation the dynamics and the kinematical constraints are combined into a single 
law [53]. Constraints of this sort are clearly not time-evolution laws, and although 
we might attempt to rewrite them in that form, doing so would seem to erase the 
specific modal content of the claim that some sort of process is either possible or 
impossible. Constraint-based laws seem much more at home within some sort of 
block universe picture, where we can imagine them applying all-at-once to prohibit 
the relevant sort of process across the whole of history. Thus, given the increasing 
importance of constraint-based language in physics, it seems reasonable to require 
that our account of lawhood should allow the possibility of laws which take this sort 
of form.
3  Existing Accounts
For many people it seems very natural to suppose that laws govern—that is to say, 
laws make things happen and are thus part of the objective modal structure of real-
ity. However, this realist picture of lawhood has to a large extent fallen out of favour 
in philosophy of science: a significant proportion of modern philosophers favour the 
best-systems view, which holds that laws of nature are simply the axioms of the best 
systematisation of the Humean mosaic, where the ‘best systematisation’ is supposed 
to be the one with the best combination of simplicity, robustness, and strength. The 
best-systems account tells us that laws are merely descriptive and have no modal 
force of their own.
Why do philosophers find the best-systems account so compelling? There are of 
course a number of epistemic and metaphysical reasons which might lead one to 
question the existence of objective modal structure, but on top of these considera-
tions the best-systems view also has one very important advantage: it is extremely 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 8 of 41
permissive about what laws can look like, since anything whatsoever which could 
be written as an axiom of some ‘systematisation’ could in principle be a law. This 
means that the non-standard laws we examined in the previous section could prob-
ably be accommodated fairly easily in the Humean view. Existing realist accounts, 
on the other hand, usually offer some metaphysical account of what a law is and as a 
consequence necessarily present a fairly narrow view of what counts as a law. In this 
section, we will examine several popular realist views and it will become clear that 
none of them is sufficient to accommodate the wide variety of non-Newtonian laws 
described in Sect. 2.
3.1  Universals
One of the most prominent realist approaches to the analysis of laws, developed by 
Armstrong [54], Dretske [55], Tooley [56] and others, tells us that laws are rela-
tions between universals. In particular, Armstrong’s account depends on a concept 
of universals as perfectly natural properties, so a law is to be understood as a spe-
cial necessitation relation that holds only between perfectly natural properties. For 
example, Newton’s second law F = ma is to be analysed as the claim that a rela-
tion of necessitation holds between the universals ‘force,’ ’mass’ and ‘acceleration,’ 
which all look superficially like good candidates to be considered perfectly natural 
properties.
Various objections to the universals account have been raised, but from the per-
spective of the present article, the most important problem is that it has an unavoida-
bly reductionist flavour, because ‘perfectly natural properties,’ are those which ‘slice 
nature at the joints,’ and this slicing metaphor is often taken very literally: the per-
fectly natural properties are considered to be the most basic properties of the small-
est things in nature, whatever they might be. Moreoever, this necessitation approach 
is most naturally situated in a context where we have a clear distinction between kin-
ematics and dynamics, because the universals themselves typically describe possible 
features of kinematical states and the relations between them define the dynamical 
laws determining how these features evolve over time. So the universals account 
seems to work well if we limit ourselves to dynamical laws governing the local evo-
lution of the most fundamental entities, but starts to look fairly weak if we consider 
any other types of law. For example, it has been argued that the universals approach 
struggles to account for conservation laws [57, 58], functional laws [59], laws con-
cerning irreversibly defined properties [60] and laws about the retention of disposi-
tions [61]. And these are just laws which exist already within mainstream modern 
physics—if we try applying the universals picture to some of the emerging ideas 
discussed in Sect. 2 we will undoubtedly have even greater difficulties.
One could, of course, attempt to modify the universals account to be less reduc-
tionist in character. This would involve making a change in what we consider to 
be candidates for ‘perfectly natural properties’—rather than including only basic 
properties of very small things, we should allow this category to include properties 
of spatially distributed entities and processes, such as ‘the Lagrangian.’ We think, 
however, that such a move would carry us too far from what we would naturally 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 9 of 41 
28
understand as a ‘universal,’ or ‘perfectly natural property.’ In particular, one obvi-
ous desideratum for a perfectly natural property is that it should not exhibit multiple 
realizability: it should be exactly the same kind of thing wherever it occurs. But 
there appear to be many instances where we might like to write down laws involving 
properties which exhibit multiple realizability. For example, quantum mechanics, 
relativity and quantum field theory all postulate a ‘no-signalling principle,’ which 
says, roughly, that it is not possible to send signals faster than the speed of light 
[62].1 The no-signalling principle seems like a good candidate for a fundamental law 
of nature—but how is it to be expressed as a relation between universals? We could 
put it in the form ‘(signalling) necessitates (timelike or lightlike connectedness),’ 
but are ‘signalling’ and ‘timelike or lightlike connectedness,’ really universals? ‘Sig-
nalling’ is a general property that applies to any type of process which allows the 
transmission of information, and there are many different ways to achieve signal-
ling - electromagnetic waves, the spoken word, carrier pigeon, and so on. It seems 
implausible to suppose that there’s any one ‘perfectly natural property’ that all these 
very different processes have in common—certainly, they do not seem to satisfy the 
desideratum of ‘exact similarity.’ In a similar vein, we also see multiple realizabil-
ity in the phenomenon of ‘universality’ in physics—the fact that strikingly similar 
behaviours can be exhibited by physical systems of very different types [63]. One 
might reasonably hope to subsume all these different processes under a single gov-
erning law, but regarding these very different systems as instantiations of the same 
universal would seem to be straining at the boundaries of what we could reasonably 
regard as a ‘perfectly natural property.’ Thus it seems unlikely that we can relax our 
definition of ‘universal’ enough to accommodate the variety of laws which appear in 
modern physics without losing hold of what makes the account in terms of univer-
sals compelling in the first place.
3.2  Powers
An alternative realist account of laws of nature, due in particular to Cartwright, 
regards them as simply statements about the powers/capacities/dispositions of enti-
ties [57, 64–67]. These powers/capacities/dispositions are regarded as being real, 
irreducible, and causally responsible for the way in which things turn out: when 
entities interact, their individual powers jointly determine what the outcome of the 
interaction will be.
The power account does seem a little more flexible than the universals approach: 
for example, if we are willing to to accept claims about what powers entities do not 
have as part of the powers account (a controversial point in itself), we could imag-
ine expressing the no-signalling principle in the form ‘no entity has the power to 
produce superluminal signals,’ However, this approach to lawhood is highly local 
in character, for the entities which are the bearers of these powers are usually sup-
posed to be the most fundamental entities, whatever they might be—for example, 
1  There are in fact interesting nuances in the different ways no-signalling is manifested in each of these 
theories, but these will not concern us here

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 10 of 41
one might refer to the power of one fundamental particle to attract another. So pow-
ers are to be attached to specific objects in specific local regions, which doesn’t work 
well for laws applying in a non-local way across large regions of spacetime, such as 
constraint-based laws or the optimization of a Lagrangian. Moreoever, the plausibil-
ity of regarding laws as powers is dependent on a clear distinction between kinemat-
ics and dynamics, because our idea of ‘powers’ is an essentially anthropomorphic 
one: we think of powers as being exercised at particular moments and we take it that 
the exercise of powers produces effects in a temporally ordered sequence. Thus it 
has been noted [58] that the powers account has difficulty dealing with conservation 
laws and symmetry laws, and the same seems true for other sorts of non-dynamical 
laws. It’s not obvious to see how one could describe the optimization of a Lagran-
gian as a power: to which entity do we ascribe the power, and at which moment is 
this power exercised?
Again, one could attempt to modify this account to make it suitable for a non-
dynamical context. This would involve making a change in what we consider to be 
the candidates for bearers of nomic powers - rather than including only very small 
things, we should allow this category to include spatially distributed entities and 
processes. For example, refs [57, 68] suggest that the powers approach should 
understand conservation laws and symmetries as resulting from the ‘dispositional 
essence of the property of being a world.’ However, as argued in [58], once one 
starts ascribing laws to powers of the ‘whole world’ it’s unclear what need there 
could be to invoke powers of individual entities at all, so the central thesis of the 
powers approach starts to look superfluous. Moreover, once we start talking about 
powers of the world as a whole, the idea of powers being associated with individuals 
which act at times on other individuals loses all meaning, and it becomes unclear 
in what sense these ‘powers’ can be described as such at all. Similarly, it’s unlikely 
that any generalisation of the powers view which entirely put paid to the distinc-
tion between kinematics and dynamics would involve anything that would look suf-
ficiently like a ‘power’ to merit the term; so continuing to describe this picture in 
terms of powers only serves as obfuscation.
It’s also worth nothing that powers on their own are not adequate to reconstruct 
most scientific laws. For after all, idiosyncratic individual causal powers are not 
much use to us as epistemic agents; it is necessary that each instance of a particular 
type of entity should have broadly the same powers, so that we can, for example, 
draw conclusions about the behaviour of electrons in the future based on our obser-
vations of electron behaviour in the past. Different accounts achieve this in different 
ways—for example, Ref. [58] offers an explicitly dualist account postulating both 
fundamental powers and fundamental laws governing the ascription of the powers to 
appropriate entities. The dualist approach does somewhat increase the flexibility of 
the powers account, making it possible, for example, to accommodate conservation 
laws, and therefore one might think that such a dualist account would give us the 
resources we need to model non-dynamical laws. But although this approach does 
allow some level of global coordination, ultimately it still requires us suppose that 
these global laws take effect only via individual local interactions: ‘properties are 
‘told’ what to do by the nomic relation,’ [58] where the properties and the things 
that they do are understood to be local and specific to individual entities. So this 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 11 of 41 
28
dualist approach ultimately looks like an attempt to ‘localize’ the global laws by 
situating their effects in properties of specific entities rather than allowing that laws 
may govern holistically and all-at-once; if we want an account of lawhood which 
accommodates genuinely global, atemporal laws, the halfway house offered by the 
dualist account should not satisfy us.
3.3  Primitivism
So far we have focused on reductionist accounts of lawhood, but an alternative exists 
in the form of primitivism, i.e. the idea that lawhood cannot be analysed at all and 
must be considered as a primitive fact. This approach is advocated by Maudlin [69], 
Carroll [70], and Lange [71] among others. Now, one of the difficulties associated 
with primitivism about lawhood is that it is by nature stipulative, and this means that 
if we are not careful, we are in danger of simply building into the definition of law-
hood whatever assumptions about the laws of nature our ancestors happen to have 
made about laws. For example, although Maudlin believes that laws are primitive 
and unanalysable, he asserts that the fundamental laws are all ‘fundamental laws of 
time evolution’ [69] and thus the time evolution assumption is built into his concept 
of a primitive law, so Maudlin’s particular take on anti-reductionism with respect 
to laws looks to be incompatible with many of the types of laws we considered in 
Sect. 2. Of course other anti-reductionist approaches would not necessarily have this 
feature, but they might build in other assumptions: the general point is that if we are 
not careful, the assertion that laws are unanalysable will just amount to an excuse for 
being dogmatic about what laws look like.
That said, there is no reason why a sufficiently general primitivist account could 
not provide a good way of thinking about non-dynamical laws. Indeed, the approach 
we advocate here might be regarded as a version of primitivism. We do not intend 
to be fully committed to primitivism because we don’t necessarily want to claim 
that no correct reductionist account of lawhood could possibly exist; we are simply 
agnostic on this point, and moreover even if such an account did exist we are scepti-
cal that anyone could ever find out what it is. However, the distinction between our 
position and primitivism is fairly small, and thus the framework that we set up here 
is likely to be of interest to primitivists too. A primitivist could certainly maintain 
that ultimately laws are primitive entities, but hold that the framework introduced 
in this paper serves to ‘axiomatize the primitive’ in Schaffer’s sense [72] by defin-
ing a general space of possible laws from which we may draw specific individual 
primitives.
3.4  Modal Structure
Finally, let us consider the position that laws of nature should be regarded as part 
of the objective modal structure of the world. This approach to lawhood is most 
commonly seen in the context of structural realism [73, 74], although it might also 
be regarded as a form of primitivism as discussed in Sect. 3.3. From the structural 
realist point of view there are two different ways to motivate this position, roughly 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 12 of 41
corresponding to the two distinct strands of structural realism. First, one could argue 
that since we have access to laws only via their effects on the physical world, we 
have no epistemic access to them in and of themselves, and therefore we should 
be epistemically committed only to claims about the modal structures which laws 
induce and which mediate their effects on physical reality, rather than metaphysical 
claims about the underlying nature of the laws. This approach is similar to traditional 
arguments for epistemic structural realism (ESR) [75, 76]. Alternatively, one could 
go a step further and argue that laws are nothing above and beyond modal structure 
and therefore by learning about those structures we have learned all there is to know 
about the laws. This approach is akin to ontic structural realism (OSR) [77]. In this 
article we will make no attempt to adjudicate between these two positions: for pre-
sent purposes the important point is that both approaches have the consequence that 
understanding laws comes down to understanding modal structures.
In order to see if this view can accommodate laws beyond the time evolution 
paradigm, it will be necessary to say something about what we mean by ‘modal 
structure.’ The most common approach in the literature conceptualizes the modal 
structure associated with laws in terms of causes, and in accordance with the asym-
metry of the causal relation lawhood is then understood in a temporally directed 
way, such that laws ‘generate or produce’ later states from an initial state [69]. For 
example, Ref.  [78] describes modal structure in terms of the existence of ‘genu-
ine causal powers,’ and Ref. [79] holds that these powers are typically supposed to 
flow ‘along asymmetrical gradients.’ Similarly, Ref. [80] gives an account of modal 
structural realism in terms of causal structure, drawing on the well-established con-
trast between causal and categorical properties. But conceptualizing modal structure 
in this causal, dynamical, temporally directed way seems suited only for laws within 
the time-evolution picture, since many of the more general sorts of laws mentioned 
in Sect. 2 have no built-in temporal or causal direction. Indeed, in light of develop-
ments in modern physics it would seem foolhardy for proponents of the modal struc-
ture approach to tie their position too strongly to causal structure: if the ‘all-at-once’ 
view of lawhood is accepted then there probably can’t be anything like causal struc-
ture at the most fundamental level, since events determined by all-at-once laws will 
typically depend on one another in a reciprocal fashion so there will be no asym-
metrical causal relations to be found. But the absence of specifically causal structure 
need not defeat the modal structure approach to lawhood, because of course there 
could still be more general modal structure in the all-at-once setting (e.g. relations 
like metaphysical necessitation or ontological dependence), and therefore it should 
be a priority for proponents of modal structure to develop an account of these more 
general possibilities.
Another option is to refrain from saying anything at all specific about the nature of 
the modal structures associated with laws of nature. This is the approach advocated by 
proponents of ‘selective realism,’ a form of realism which aims to overcome the pes-
simistic meta-induction by making epistemic commitments only to carefully selected 
features of our theories which we believe are very likely to survive all future theory 
change [81, 82]. For example, structural realism is sometimes regarded as a form of 
selective realism, where the feature that is supposed to survive theory change is simply 
‘structure,’ broadly construed. Of course in order to make selective realism work in the 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 13 of 41 
28
case of a modal approach to laws it will be necessary to refrain from saying anything 
too definite about the modal structures associated with the laws of our current theories, 
because greater specificity leads to a greater risk that the specific structures we have 
identified will not in fact survive theory change. Indeed, in order to rule out underdeter-
mination, selective realists have to insist that nearly all of the modal structures that one 
could imagine associating with a given theory are in fact equivalent, which prevents 
them from actually specifying any concrete structures which might be involved in this 
form of structural realism. This leads to the kind of objection that Esfeld makes in Ref. 
[83], where he argues that OSR is only a ‘partial realism’ because it provides ‘only a 
general scheme for an ontology of the physical domain,’ and hence it is too vague to 
say anything interesting about, for example, how the EPR correlations come about.
In our particular case, the vagueness entailed by the selective approach is especially 
problematic. For moving from time evolution laws to embracing the possibility of con-
straint-based or ‘all-at-once’ laws is a significant conceptual shift, and an important part 
of our motivation for this project is to arrive at an approach to lawhood which allows 
us to be explicit about that shift: the selective approach to modality is too vague for this 
purpose. Second, another part of the motivation for this project is to make it possible 
to give generalised definitions of notions like determinism outside the time evolution 
paradigm; and if we are to do that by appeal to modal structure, we will require some 
fairly definite framework in which to characterise modal structure in order to describe 
features of different possible modal structures. Thus for our purposes the selective 
approach to modal structure is not adequate: the ongoing research programme into laws 
outside the temporal evolution paradigm needs a fairly well-defined way of characteris-
ing different modal structures.
However, as argued in Ref. [84], structural realism does not have to be a form of 
selective realism, and nor does structural realism require the selective approach in order 
to overcome the pessimistic meta-induction: it is possible to maintain that the success 
of past theories is explained by continuity of structure through theory change without 
necessarily being committed to the view that we can always identify which specific 
structures will survive future theory change. This point has also been made by Soto and 
Romero-Maltrana, who advocate what they describe as ‘local selective realism’ which 
allows us to use different criteria for assessing continuity through theory change under 
different circumstances, and which ‘ aims at applying such selection criteria only in 
a retrospective fashion.’ [85] Thus it is reasonable to think that there may be a viable 
structural realist approach to lawhood which a) acknowledges the possibility of modal 
structure which is more general than merely causal structure, but b) does not aim to 
identify with certainty which structures will be preserved through theory change, and 
which therefore says something more concrete than the selective approach would allow. 
This is exactly what we shall seek in the next section.
4  Realist Account of Lawhood in Terms of Constraints
All of the realist approaches we have just examined are significantly more limiting 
than the best-systems approach with respect to the range of laws they can accom-
modate. But there is really no reason that the sort of permissiveness offered by the 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 14 of 41
best-systems account should not be extended to the realist setting, and so it appears 
there is a lacuna in the space of extant positions; it ought to be possible to provide a 
realist account of lawhood which provides a degree of flexibility similar to the best 
systems account. In this section, we will argue that such an account can be achieved 
by combining the modal structure approach as described in Sect. 3.4 with a signifi-
cantly more general account of modal structure.
We emphasize that we will be focused on articulating modal structural realism 
regarding specifically laws—this approach could certainly be coupled with a more 
general structural realism regarding objects in general, but it could also be paired 
with a more conventional object-oriented realism. For example, one could per-
fectly well hold that laws are nothing but modal structure whilst also maintaining 
that the things governed by these modal structures are ordinary physical objects, not 
structures. So although the position we present here may seem particularly at home 
within a structural realist setting, other sorts of realists are also free to adopt it.
4.1  Constraints
Taking inspiration from the examples in Sect. 2, we propose characterising the modal 
structure associated with laws in terms of the constraints that the laws induce. Con-
straints are a suitable tool because the idea of a constraint (at least in the popular imagi-
nation) is a modal one: we typically think about constraints not merely as descriptions 
of the way things happens, but as dictating the way things must happen. Indeed, Ross, 
Ladyman and Spurrett use language of this sort in Ref. [86]: ‘If there are structural facts 
about the whole universe, and these facts constrain all the facts about particular regions 
of the universe ... then the only necessity in nature is furnished by these constraints. The 
constraints—that is, the structures themselves—are real patterns.’
What exactly is a constraint? In accordance with the structural approach, we will 
refrain from speculating on the metaphysical nature of whatever it is that grounds 
these constraints (if indeed anything does), and instead characterise them entirely 
in terms of modal structure. We will make use of the notion of a Humean mosaic, 
which consists of all and only the matters of local, non-modal particular fact in 
a given world—more specifically, we will suppose that the Humean mosaic con-
sists of instantiations of categorical properties in various regions across spacetime, 
including possibly facts about the geometry of spacetime itself. We emphasize that 
our use of this terminology is not intended to reflect a commitment to the stand-
ard Humean ontology consisting only of the Humean mosaic— we use the phrase 
‘Humean mosaic’ to refer to all of the actual, non-modal content of reality, but in 
addition to the Humean mosaic we are committed to the existence of modal struc-
tures which are distinct from the Humean mosaic. In particular, we maintain that 
constraints are distinct from the actual Humean mosaic, but that they also play some 
role in determining the content of the Humean mosaic, and therefore constraints 
must be regarded as ontologically prior to the Humean mosaic.2
2  To define ontological priority, we first define ontological dependence by saying that A ontologically 
depends on B if A depends for its existence on B: for example, sets depend for their existence on their 
members. In many cases (indeed, some say all cases) ontological dependence seems to be asymmetric—
A ontologically depends on B but not vice versa—and in such cases we say that B is ontologically prior 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 15 of 41 
28
In order to make this account more concrete, we will henceforth define con-
straints extensionally, appealing to techniques employed in modal logic: a constraint 
will simply be defined as a set of Humean mosaics, i.e. the set of all mosaics in 
which that constraint is satisfied. In some cases, a constraint will be expressible in 
simple English as a requirement like ‘no process can send information faster than 
light,’ such that the constraint corresponds to exactly the set of mosaics in which 
the requirement is satisfied. But there are many sets of mosaics which will not have 
any straightforward English characterisation, so we will not be able to state the cor-
responding constraint in simple terms. Nonetheless, each set still defines a unique 
constraint.
This way of defining constraints is analogous to the idea that propositions can 
be defined as sets of possible worlds. Indeed, for the proponent of Humean super-
venience who believes that a ‘possible world’ just is a Humean mosaic, the defini-
tions are equivalent. However, the case of propositions is complicated by the fact 
that propositions have intensions, and it has been suggested that the definition in 
terms of possible worlds is too coarse-grained to respect this intensionality [90]. But 
since we intend to understand ‘constraints’ as a matter of objective fact, we need not 
worry about intensions, so the view of propositions as sets of possible worlds fits 
our purposes very nicely: it is precise, clear, and allows us to set out a space of can-
didate laws which assumes very little about what those laws might look like.
This extensional definition of constraints allows us to say something more con-
crete about the sense in which constraints play some role in determining the con-
tents of the Humean mosaic. A constraint guarantees that the actual Humean mosaic 
must belong to the corresponding set; that is to say, every possible world in which a 
given constraint holds is a possible world in which the Humean mosaic of that world 
belongs to the associated set. So for example, if every mosaic in the associated set 
exhibits a certain sort of regularity, every possible world in which that constraint 
holds is a possible world in which that regularity is exhibited, which is the defini-
tion of metaphysical necessitation (in the possible world semantics, we say that ‘X 
metaphysically necessitates Y’ if and only if ‘every possible world in which X is true 
is also a world in which Y is true.’). So constraints determine the contents of the 
Humean mosaic in virtue of metaphysically necessitating that the actual Humean 
mosaic should have certain features. Metaphysical necessitation is clearly a modal 
relation, but there is no need for it be attached to individual local systems or to have 
any particular temporal direction, and therefore it is a good candidate for the kind of 
general modal structure that we need to express a large variety of laws outside the 
time evolution paradigm.
to A [87, 88]. To enliven this rather abstract language, ontological priority may be described metaphori-
cally as specifying the order in which God would have to create things to make a world like ours [89].
Footnote 2 (continued)

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 16 of 41
4.2  Laws
In many cases we can simply think of laws as inducing constraints - for example, if 
the no-signalling principle is considered to be a law of nature, it induces a constraint 
consisting exactly of all the non-signalling mosaics. Such a law can be interpreted as 
saying that the actual Humean mosaic must belong to the corresponding constraint; 
and in the case where the constraint can be given a simple English characterisation, 
the law can be interpreted as saying that the actual Humean mosaic must have the 
corresponding property. If all of the laws of nature induce constraints like this, then 
clearly the actual mosaic must lie in the intersection of all the constraints associated 
with the laws.
However, simply equating laws with constraints would rule out the possibility of 
laws which are genuinely probabilistic even from the external, all-at-once point of 
view, such as a law assigning a probability distribution over possible initial states 
of the universe. So for full generality, we will instead suggest that laws should be 
thought of as inducing probability distributions over constraints. In simple cases like 
the no-signalling principle, where the law is non-probabilistic, the corresponding 
distribution will be trivial—i.e. it will assign probability one to a single constraint 
and zero to all other constraints. In other cases, the distribution associated with a 
law may be non-trivial, so we must imagine that first a constraint is drawn according 
to this distribution, and then the actual mosaic is required to belong to the corre-
sponding set of mosaics. In this picture, we can think of a constraint being drawn for 
each law according to the probability distribution that the law induces, and then the 
actual mosaic must lie in the intersection of all of the selected constraints.
The idea of a constraint being selected according to some distribution may seem 
conceptually problematic, given that this process presumably only happens once and 
therefore no relative frequency interpretation is possible. However, sceptics about 
objective chances or single-case probabilities can always choose to insist that all the 
actual laws induce trivial probability distributions—for as we will see in Sect. 6.4, 
it is perfectly possible to observe apparently non-trivial probabilities from our local 
point of view within a world governed by laws of nature which induce trivial prob-
ability distributions from the external point of view, so this option is not inconsistent 
with any current empirical evidence. Therefore scepticism about objective chances 
need not derail this approach: it merely places certain limits on the space of possible 
laws which we can contemplate.
Note that we could have chosen to work directly in terms of probability distribu-
tions over Humean mosaics, rather than constraints. However, there are several rea-
sons for preferring the language of constraints. First, it is inspired by the increasing 
importance of constraint-based language in physics, as seen in Sect. 2. Second, it 
allows us to acknowledge that a law may require (deterministically or probabilis-
tically) that the actual Humean mosaic belongs to a given set, but then say noth-
ing further about which particular mosaic within the set will be selected—that is, 
the law prescribes no distribution within the set, not even the uniform distribution. 
For example, in the case of the law forbidding signalling which requires that the 
actual Humean mosaic must belong to the set of non-signalling mosaics, it does 
not necessarily seem right to say that the law assigns a uniform distribution over all 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 17 of 41 
28
non-signalling mosaics: in fact the law simply singles out the allowed set, it does 
not tell us how to assign probabilities within that set. Of course we may still end 
up assigning some distributions inside the set of allowed mosaics: for example, we 
may start with some priors which lead us to assign credences over Humean mosa-
ics, and then when we learn the existence of some law which requires that the actual 
Humean mosaic belongs to some set, we eliminate all mosaics outside that set and 
renormalize our credences, leading to a distribution which is non-zero only inside 
the specified set. But the initial credences are nothing to do with the law—it is only 
the updating process which is dictated by the law, and hence the resulting distribu-
tion within the set of mosaics is a subjective probability distribution based on our 
credences rather than an objective chance distribution specified by a law. As we will 
see in Sect. 6.4, this distinction may be important for the analysis of determinism 
and objective chance.
Since constraints need not be expressible in simple English, the probability dis-
tributions induced by various possible laws need have no simple English expression. 
Thus just as the best-systems picture allows anything that can be written as an axiom 
to be a possible law, defining constraints as sets of mosaics similarly allows us to 
define a general space of law-candidates with very few restrictions on what sort of 
laws are allowed. It also easily accommodates laws with non-local effects, because 
a generic constraint created by selecting a set of Humean mosaics at random will 
induce massively non-local relationships between events: for example, if we know 
that the world is subject to a constraint consisting of exactly two mosaics which dif-
fer on matters of fact at exactly two spacetime points (x, t) and (x + Δ, t + Δ) , then 
when we observe what actually happens at spacetime point (x, t) we immediately 
know what happens at (x + Δ, t + Δ) even if it is very far removed in space and 
time.
4.3  Governance
As noted above, in this setting the relation of ‘governance’ is simply equivalent to 
metaphysical necessitation, and this provides us with an interesting new approach 
to the question of what it is for a law to govern. Within traditional time evolution 
pictures of lawhood we must envision a set of laws external to physical reality which 
somehow ‘reach in’ and at each moment of time push particles along certain tra-
jectories, or induce states to evolve in certain ways, or similar; whereas in the con-
straint-based picture the laws of nature select a set of constraints, which single out 
a set of ‘allowed’ mosaics, and then the actual Humean mosaic is selected from this 
set. So rather than reaching into the universe to meddle in the course of physical 
events, the modal structure associated with laws can be regarded as simply selecting 
Humean mosaics all at once in an external fashion, making lawhood consistent with 
a ‘block universe’ picture since the whole mosaic is now the object of the law. Thus 
as hoped, this approach thus represents a concrete way of realising the ‘all-at-once’ 
vision postulated in refs [8, 11, 25, 91].
Note that we have not attempted to provide any account of the mechanism by 
which the laws single out some set of mosaics, nor how the actual mosaic is drawn. 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 18 of 41
One could of course come up with a literal reading of this framework akin to Lew-
is’s literal view of possible worlds, where we take it that the other possible Humean 
mosaics actually exist and so, in the deterministic case where laws are just con-
straints, laws are literally sets of mosaics which actually exist. However this would 
seem to undermine the idea that laws are ontologically prior to the actual Humean 
mosaic, as the actual Humean mosaic is a part of all the sets which contain it and 
thus we could only say that these sets are ontologically prior to the actual Humean 
mosaic if we were willing to say that sets are ontologically prior to their members, 
which would certainly be contentious [72]. And in any case, a major motivation for 
moving to the structuralist picture is to avoid making specific commitments to the 
metaphysical nature of whatever it is that induces the modal structure in question (if 
indeed anything does).
Nonetheless, even if the selection of the actual mosaic from the candidate set is 
regarded only as a formal device, it still points to a different way of thinking about 
how laws govern. Since this new approach is no longer based on a temporal picture 
it is much more hospitable to non-standard, non-dynamical laws, and makes sense 
within a block universe picture with no notion of temporal becoming, and there-
fore this framework offers an interesting opportunity to reconsider some discussions 
around the notion of governance (e.g. see refs [58, 72, 92]). For example, tradition-
ally proponents of OSR have been inclined to resist the notion that laws ‘govern,’ 
because the idea of postulating a governing force independent from nature seems 
incompatible with the naturalism which motivates OSR. The constraint approach 
presented here addresses this concern by providing us with a naturalised notion of 
governance, where laws ‘govern’ in exactly the same way that ordinary modal prop-
erties ‘govern’—a cause can be said to ‘govern’ its effect, for example. Since propo-
nents of OSR are typically willing to countenance modal notions and modal struc-
ture, this is a notion of governance which should be acceptable to them; although the 
constraints are ex hypothesi external to the Humean mosaic, they are not outside of 
or independent from nature as a whole, because according to the OSR worldview the 
objective modal structure of reality is an intrinsic part of nature. Thus this way of 
thinking makes it possible to effect a reconciliation between the traditional ‘govern-
ance’ picture and the naturalised modal structure picture promoted within OSR.
Second, this approach might take the edge off some worries about how it is that 
laws operate in a consistent way across time. For if we take it that the laws of nature 
apply all at once to the whole of history, there’s some principled reason why we 
should expect to see consistency across the whole of history; conversely, if laws 
operate locally and instantaneously as in the standard kinematical/dynamical pic-
ture, it’s less clear why we should expect the laws to work in exactly the same way 
at every separate instance, and thus the worry that they might suddenly stop working 
somewhere in the future has more bite. Of course this is not intended to be a deduc-
tively valid argument: the constraint framework can’t guarantee that the future will 
be the same as the past, because laws which change discontinuously at a certain time 
or which fluctuate across history can certainly be expressed as constraints, and thus 
we still have to make some sort of consistency assumption. But at least in the global 
setting the laws are applied externally once and for all when the actual Humean 
mosaic is selected, so we don’t have to worry about the possibility that the laws 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 19 of 41 
28
will suddenly stop working or wonder about what coordinates different instances of 
nomic powers across spacetime.
4.4  Humean Supervenience
Although we have defined our framework in terms of Humean mosaic, it is none-
theless the case that it is not compatible with Humean supervenience, since in this 
framework two worlds with different laws of nature could give rise to the same 
Humean mosaic. This is true even if we limit ourselves to non-probabilistic cases 
where the mosaic is singled out uniquely by the laws of nature. For example, if A, B 
and C are Humean mosaics, one world could have a law of nature assigning prob-
ability 1 to the single constraint {A} and a second world could have two laws of 
nature with the first assigning probability 1 to the constraint {A, B} and the second 
assigning probability 1 to the constraint {A, C} , and the different laws of nature of 
both of these worlds will deterministically produce the same Human mosaic, A. So 
according to this realist approach, two worlds with the same Humean mosaic may 
differ in virtue of being governed by different laws. Indeed, there are an infinite 
number of constraints which would uniquely single out the mosaic A, since there are 
an infinite number of Humean mosaics from which we could select mosaics B, C in 
order to form the constraint {A, B} , {A, C} . But according to this realist approach to 
lawhood and modal structure, there is exactly one set of constraints which does in 
fact result from the actual laws of nature, and it is this single set of constraints which 
represents the actual objective modal structure of the world, even though it is not 
the only set of constraints which is compatible with the actual Humean mosaic. Our 
approach therefore explicitly rejects the Humean idea that laws merely supervene on 
the actual Humean mosaic, since it is defined in terms of sets of mosaics, only one 
of which is the actual one.
This is of course to be expected from any approach which takes the existence 
of objective modal structure seriously: if modal structure can’t simply be read off 
the Humean mosaic, it must be the case that exactly one out of the various pos-
sible modal structures which are compatible with the Humean mosaic represents 
the actual objective modal structure of reality. We do not consider this failure of 
Humean supervenience to be epistemically or metaphysically problematic, because 
we find the existence of objective modality compelling for independent reasons—
not least because it is very difficult to make sense of scientific practice without some 
modal notions. Moreover, as argued convincingly by Ismael [93], even those com-
mitted to a strong form of empiricism can under appropriate circumstances have 
good reason to form beliefs in modal facts which outrun the content of the Humean 
mosaic.
4.5  Humean Mosaics
So far our discussion has left the notion of a ‘Humean mosaic’ largely unanalysed. 
But it is important to be clear that our use of Humean mosaics is not supposed to 
be a statement about our ontological commitments: although the Humean mosaic 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 20 of 41
consists entirely of instantiations of properties across spacetime, we don’t mean 
to claim that this minimal Humean ontology necessarily includes everything that 
exists. The real fundamental ontology could be objects, fields, processes, relations, 
structures, or indeed there could be no fundamental ontology at all: this approach 
is intended to be agnostic as to that point. But any fundamental ontology must ulti-
mately give rise to some distribution of categorical properties across spacetime 
(even if ‘properties’ and/or ‘spacetime’ are regarded as emergent features), and 
this distribution of properties across spacetime is the level at which we as observ-
ers make contact with objective reality, so it is the appropriate level at which to 
describe the modal features of laws. Any two laws which gave rise to different modal 
structure for the fundamental ontology but identical modal structure at the level of 
the Humean mosaic would not be interestingly different from the point of view of 
human observers and our epistemic access to reality. A similar point is made by Jaag 
and Loew in Ref. [94]. Their intention is to offer a defence of Humean superveni-
ence, which is of course entirely contrary to our project here, but we are in agree-
ment on the basic point that the Humean mosaic ‘is an apt model of the world’s 
higher-level structure ... (and thus) explains otherwise opaque inferential relations,’ 
and that Humean mosaics are therefore highly suitable objects to use in our charac-
terisation of the effect of constraints on the structure of reality.
For example, proponents of OSR presumably would not wish to say that nature 
contains categorical, non-relational properties at a fundamental level, but they will 
nonetheless need to provide an account of how structures give rise to (at least the 
appearance of) distributions of properties across spacetime, and thus they can still 
adopt the constraint framework at the level of these emergent distributions of prop-
erties. Similarly, there are indications from quantum gravity that ‘spacetime’ may be 
emergent from some other sort of substratum [19], and therefore we might not want 
to be committed to the claim that the spacetime on which the Humean mosaic is 
defined is genuinely fundamental. But laws governing this substratum will have con-
sequences for the geometry of spacetime and the distribution of properties across it, 
and therefore these laws will still give rise to meaningful constraints within the con-
straint framework. (Of course, given that it has so far proven difficult to use theories 
of quantum gravity to make many concrete empirical predictions, it might not be 
straightforward to determine what these constraints look like—but at least in princi-
ple they must exist!).
Even with this proviso, the sorts of laws which one can imagine coming up 
with will depend sensitively on what sorts of categorical properties one allows 
that the Humean mosaic will contain. For example, some physicists would 
probably insist that the Humean mosaic should contain properties like ‘spin’ 
whereas others might feel that spin is an abstraction which can be completely 
accounted for by keeping track of spatial position (as is done in the de Broglie-
Bohm interpretation [95]). This is in fact an intentional feature, because the pro-
ject we are engaged on is motivated in large part by the naturalistic idea that 
a philosophical account of laws should be led by science and not vice versa, 
and leaving open this question about the categorical properties which appear in 
the Humean mosaic is an important part of that vision: it allows us to postulate 
a space of Humean mosaics which contain all of the basic properties featured 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 21 of 41 
28
in the theories we currently take seriously, whilst also allowing the possibility 
of mosaics which contain properties that we have not yet imagined. Specifying 
what sorts of categorical properties may appear in a Humean mosaic is loosely 
analogous to specifying an ontology, or to setting out the kinematical space of 
the theory, with further constraints that single out a smaller subset of mosaics 
then playing the role of the dynamics. Moreover, this specification can itself be 
regarded as a constraint: limiting ourselves to consideration of Humean mosa-
ics which contain only pointlike masses is functionally equivalent to imposing 
a constraint consisting of all and only those Humean mosaics which contain 
only pointlike masses. So in principle we can imagine that the infinite space of 
Humean mosaics contains every possible mosaic featuring every possible cat-
egorical property, and the ‘laws of nature’ then specify what sorts of properties 
exist as well as how those properties behave.
One type of realist view which might seem a little more difficult to accommo-
date in the constraint framework is a branching-world approach like the Everett 
interpretation of quantum mechanics [96], since a single Humean mosaic doesn’t 
seem adequate to fully capture what the world is like in such a setting. How-
ever, the role of the Humean mosaic in the constraint frameowrk is simply to 
capture the ‘actual, non-modal’ contents of reality, in order that we can identify 
sets consisting of different ways the non-modal contents of reality could be. And 
presumably there is at least in principle some way of specifying the actual, non-
modal contents of reality within an Everettian universe—for example, one might 
imagine replacing a ‘Humean mosaic’ with a ‘universal wavefunction’ and then 
consider a constraint to be a set of different ‘universal wavefunctions’ with dif-
fering local or global structure. So the constraint framework could in princi-
ple be expanded to accommodate branching-world pictures. However, we have 
refrained from doing so here because the way in which human observers actually 
make contact with and learn about the objective modal structure of reality is 
via observations of what appears from our point of view to be a single Humean 
mosaic, i.e. various instantiations of properties across spacetime. Even if we are 
in an Everettian universe we will never be able to directly observe the structure 
of the universal wavefunction; at best we can form hypotheses about it based 
on what prima facie appears to be a single Humean mosaic. So the attempt to 
make inferences about the objective modal structure of reality encounters addi-
tional epistemic difficulties in the context of branching-world pictures, and we 
have elected here not to engage in detail with these issues—though we would 
invite proponents of branching-world or multiple-world pictures to take up these 
questions.
5  Examples
In this section, we give some examples of how various different sorts of laws 
would look within the constraint framework.

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 22 of 41
5.1  Time Evolution Laws
Our stated aim for this analysis was to provide a realist approach which is more 
general than theories based only on the time evolution picture, so it is important that 
our framework should also accommodate time evolution laws as a special case. It 
might seem a little odd to think about a time evolution law in terms of constraints 
on an entire Humean mosaic, since we typically think of time evolution laws as act-
ing moment-by-moment on instantaneous states—but in fact, many sectors of the 
philosophy of physics community have already adopted a constraint-based approach 
to time-evolution laws. For example, in Ref. [20], Wallace writes ’A history of the 
system is then a smooth function q ∶ℝ→Q assigning to each time t the configura-
tion q(t) of the system at that time. The dynamical equations of Newtonian mechan-
ics distinguish dynamically possible from dynamically impossible histories.’ Similar 
language also appears in refs [97, 98]. In this sense, the proposal we have made here 
simply formalises a way of thinking about lawhood that has been common for some 
time but which has not yet passed over into mainstream philosophical analyses of 
lawhood (or at least, not into non-Humean analyses of lawhood).
This approach allows us to rewrite any time-evolution theory in the form of a 
constraint theory where the role of the laws is not to act moment-by-moment on 
states but rather to pick out the set of possible histories. It is then straightforward 
to write such laws in the constraint framework: a deterministic evolution law which 
applies to systems of type s is analysed as a probability distribution which assigns 
probability 1 to the constraint consisting of the set of all Humean mosaics in which 
all systems of type s have histories which are dynamically possible according to the 
law (where the ‘histories’ in question may extend over the whole of time, or the 
entire time during which the system in question exists).
We can also write indeterministic time evolution laws in the same language. 
Given an indeterministic time evolution law, we can construct a probability dis-
tribution over each possible history of the system by multiplying the probabilities 
assigned by the law at each time-step, and if necessary taking a limit as the time-
steps approach size zero. Then a law which assigns probability ps(h) to history h for 
a particular system s can be analysed as a law which assigns probability ps(h) to the 
set of all mosaics in which system s has history h, and so on for every system of the 
same type across the whole Humean mosaic.
5.2  Constraints
Clearly, laws which are already written explicitly in terms of constraints will be a 
natural fit for this framework. Moreover, if the law is already written in explicitly 
operational terms, it is straightforward to identify sets of Humean mosaics obeying 
the law, since operational language can straightforwardly be translated to assertions 
about distributions of categorical properties over spacetime. For example, provided 
we can give a suitably operational definition of terms like ‘signal’ and ‘faster than 
light,’ then the ‘no-signalling principle’ can straightforwardly be analysed as a law 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 23 of 41 
28
which assigns probability 1 to the set of Humean mosaics in which no signal travels 
faster than light.
5.3  Constructors
Constructor laws are a little more complex: they allow that ‘impossible’ processes 
may occur as a one-off, so we can’t simply analyse a constructor law as a law assign-
ing probability 0 to the set of all mosaics where the ‘impossible’ process occurs. 
Rather, we must analyse such a law as a probability distribution assigning proba-
bility 0 to the set of all mosaics in which process x occurs in a cycle—i.e. where 
the same setup is used to execute process x some nontrivial number of consecutive 
times (and each execution is successful, or highly accurate). But fortunately this is 
possible within the constraint framework because of the non-local character of con-
straints, which allows us to consider laws as applying ‘all-at-once’ to some extended 
series of events, rather than simply producing the events one at a time in a tempo-
rally ordered sequence. We would simply have to specify how often the process is 
allowed to occur at a given level of accuracy before we would consider the law to be 
violated, and then define a constraint consisting of all mosaics in which the number 
of occurrences of the process is smaller than this cutoff.
5.4  Lagrangians
A deterministic Lagrangian theory can be analysed as a law which assigns prob-
ability 1 to the set of all mosaics in which systems always take the path which opti-
mizes their Lagrangian; and a probabilistic Lagrangian theory which assigns prob-
ability ps(h) to history h for a particular system s can be analysed as a law which 
assigns probability ps(h) to the set of all mosaics in which system s has history h. 
This description allows us to take seriously the atemporal character of these descrip-
tions: rather than saying that earlier parts in the history cause later parts and not vice 
versa, as in the traditional time-evolution picture, we are now able to allow that the 
laws select the whole history all at once, so the relationship between earlier parts 
and later parts of the history is reciprocal and holistic.
5.5  Retrocausal Laws
We noted earlier that it is important to distinguish between the type of retrocausality 
which involves both forwards and backwards evolution, and the type of retrocausal-
ity which arises naturally in an ‘all-at-once’ picture without either forwards or back-
wards evolution.
The former can be accommodated within the constraint picture in the form of two 
distinct laws. In the deterministic case, for a retrocausal description of a system of 
type s, we have one law which induces a distribution assigning probability 1 to the 
constraint consisting of the set of all Humean mosaics in which all systems of type s 
have histories which are dynamically possible according to the forwards-dynamics, 
and another which induces a distribution assigning probability 1 to the constraint 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 24 of 41
consisting of the set of all Humean mosaics in which all systems of type s have his-
tories which are dynamically possible according to the backwards-dynamics. The 
probabilistic case would be similar, except the laws would now induce nontrivial 
probability distributions assigning probabilities to histories according to the prob-
abilities assigned to the forward and backwards dynamics respectively.
For the latter, we need only a single law which singles out a set of Humean mosa-
ics exhibiting appropriate correlations between events at different times. As a very 
simplistic example, consider a law inducing a distribution assigning probability 1 
to the set of all Humean mosaics in which the result of the measurement at position 
(x, t) is the same as the result of the measurement at position (y, t + 훿) with 𝛿> 0 . 
If we happen to know about this law, then when we observe the result at (x, t) we 
know immediately the value of the result at (y, t + 훿) , but it is not the case that the 
earlier result causes the latter and not vice versa: the law simply requires that they 
should be the same, and thus from the external, all-at-once point of view their effect 
on one another is perfectly reciprocal. Obviously in this very simple case there are 
no compelling theoretical reasons to prefer the all-at-once approach to the approach 
where the earlier result causes the latter one to have some value, but as noted in 
Sect. 2, in more complex cases we might have good cause to prefer the all-at-once 
approach, and the constraint framework allows us to postulate such all-at-once laws 
in a straighforward manner.
5.6  Axioms of a Best System
In order to substantiate our claim that this realist proposal offers a similar degree 
of flexibility to the Humean best-systems approach, it is important to show that any 
putative law which can be written as the axiom of a ‘best-system’ can also be writ-
ten in the constraint framework.
Lewis’ later accounts of the best-system approach distinguish two types of axi-
oms. Deterministic axioms simply state facts about the actual Humean mosaic, e.g. 
‘everywhere in the mosaic a body’s acceleration is equal to the net force on the body 
divided by its mass.’ We can always rewrite such an axiom as a constraint according 
to the recipe ‘axiom → the set of all Humean mosaics in which the axiom is true.’ 
Probabilistic axioms, meanwhile, ‘pertain not only to what happens in history, but 
also to what the chances are of various outcomes in various situations’ e.g. ‘atoms 
of type A always have probability x of decaying within the next h seconds.’ We can 
always rewrite such an axiom as a probability distribution over constraints according 
to the recipe ‘axiom assigning probability p to some event e → distribution assigning 
probability p to the set of all mosaics in which event e occurs.’ Thus the constraint 
framework can accommodate any type of law which the best-systems framework 
can accommodate.
Is the converse true? In principle every probability distribution over constraints 
could be written as an axiom by inverting the procedure we have jut described. 
However, it is built into the best-systems approach that the actual laws of nature 
must be ‘simple,’ whereas there are many possible constraints which would not lead 
to axioms which look ‘simple’ according to any reasonable description. We have 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 25 of 41 
28
made no requirement in our framework that the actual laws of nature must induce 
constraints which are simple; so the constraint framework actually accommodates 
far more possible laws than the best-systems framework, since it allows us to con-
sider laws which would not be simple enough to be taken seriously within the best-
systems framework.
6  Applications
As noted earlier, one of the main purposes of this framework is to facilitate re-
assessements of the role played by laws in various areas of science and philosophy. 
In this section we briefly preview a few possible directions for future research. In 
particular, we reinforce the ways in which the realist approach set out in this paper 
leads to analyses that differ from comparable Humean accounts. It is not our inten-
tion to argue here that the realist analyses are superior to the Humean one, but they 
are certainly different analyses, therefore for proponents of non-Humean approaches 
to lawhood it is important to have access to this realist approach.
6.1  Consistency Constraints
The case of consistency conditions for spacetimes without closed causal loops is a 
particualrly interesting one for the constraint framework, because consistency con-
ditions don’t actually have to be imposed as laws at all within the constraint frame-
work: they emerge as consequences of the framework itself. This is because the laws 
of nature are understood to take the form of sets of Humean mosaics, or probability 
distributions over each set; and of course, each Humean mosaic represents a com-
plete and consistent way the arrangements of physical fact within a world could be. 
Thus it is never possible to obtain a consistency problem from a law of nature which 
takes the form ‘the actual Humean mosaic must belong to a given set,’ since inevi-
tably every mosaic in the set is consistent. Consistency conditions are therefore a 
natural feature of this framework rather than a distinct set of laws which must be 
imposed externally.
Moreover, it should be clear that this is the way things must be for any account of 
lawhood which does not uphold Humean supervenience. This can be seen from the 
following argument, where we postulate that laws and consistency conditions are 
independent and then derive a contradiction: 
1.	 There exists a world W governed by a set of laws {L} plus a law C enforcing a 
consistency condition
2.	 The law C is logically independent from the laws {L}
3.	 If law C did not hold in world W, the laws {L} would give rise to inconsistencies
4.	 The laws of a given world do not supervene on the Humean mosaic of that world
5.	 1), 3) and 4) together entail: there is another possible world W′ which is the gov-
erned only by the set of laws {L} without the consistency condition C

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 26 of 41
6.	 3) and 5) together entail: there exists a possible world W′ which contains incon-
sistencies
But an ‘inconsistency’ here refers to a scenario in which one and the same quantity 
has two different values at the same spacetime point, which is logically impossi-
ble (unless we are willing to countenance branching world scenarios). So, if we are 
not willing to countenance branching world scenarios, there cannot be a possible 
world which contains inconsistencies; thus we have derived a contradiction. It fol-
lows that any realist about laws (i.e. anyone who does not believe in Humean super-
venience with respect to lawhood) must maintain that if a consistency condition is 
really indispensable, that consistency condition can’t be independent from the laws 
themselves. The constraint framework delivers this guarantee, since no set of laws 
expressed within the constraint framework can ever lead to inconsistencies.
6.2  Unification
One important consequence of the generality of the constraint approach is that it 
allows us to express very different sorts of laws within the same framework. This 
is important for two reasons. First, if we want to perform analyses of philosophi-
cal ideas drawing on the notion of lawhood without leaning too strongly on specific 
assumptions about the form of the laws in question, it’s necessary to do so using a 
framework which can accommodate a wide variety of laws. For example, traditional 
definitions of determinism intended for the time evolution picture don’t work well 
for non time evolution laws, but below we will suggest a way to define determin-
ism in a way that makes sense for any set of laws which can be expressed in the 
constraint framework. Thus the constraint approach allows us to make meaningful 
comparisons between the properties of very different sorts of laws.
Second, we noted in Sect.  2 that physicists and philosophers are increasingly 
questioning the meaningfulness of the traditional distinction between kinematics and 
dynamics. Moreoever, we saw in Sect. 4.5 that the requirements we would tradition-
ally refer to as ‘kinematics’ can be written in the form of a constraint consisting of 
all and only those Humean mosaics which contain only entities of the sort featured 
in the relevant kinematical space. We can then impose further constraints singling 
out smaller subsets of that set of Humean mosaics, and those further constraints play 
the role of the dynamics. So the constraint framework allows us to express both kin-
ematics and dynamics in the same formalism, and thus it represents an important 
step towards delivering on the vision discussed in Sect. 2
Third, we may sometimes want to consider a case where we have very different 
sorts of laws acting within one and the same world. Prima facie it may seem difficult 
to understand how a set of very heterogenous laws could be made consistent with 
each other: for example, how do we combine a constructor-type law with a time evo-
lution law? Which law do we apply first in any given situations? Which is the more 
fundamental? But the constraint framework provides a straightforward way in which 
to combine different sorts of laws - and as long as there is at least one mosaic in the 
intersection of all of their constraints we can be assured that we have no consistency 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 27 of 41 
28
problem. By contrast, the Humean approach can in principle accommodate all these 
sorts of laws, but it may be less clear whether we can make sense of a wide variety 
of types of law all occurring within a single world, because one would typically 
expect that the axioms of the ‘best deductive system’ would all be of a roughly simi-
lar type. For example, in any reasonable deductive system it should always be clear 
how to combine any set of two or more different axioms, and one might worry that 
a deductive system which combines both constructor-type laws and time evolution 
laws would not necessarily have that feature. Thus in fact the constraint framework 
suggested here might actually be useful to Humeans too, since a Humean wanting to 
postulate a set of highly heterogenous laws could always use the constraint language 
as a way of formulating their axioms, and simply leave out the part of our approach 
where we suppose that constraints represent objective modal structure.
6.3  Simplicity
We saw in Sect. 5.6 that the constraint framework differs from the Humean approach 
in that it is not necessarily limited to postulating laws which look ‘simple’ according 
to some standard of simplicity. This highlights an important distinction between the 
realist and non-realist approaches. For the realist, the laws of nature are an objective 
modal fact about reality and whether or not they are simple is something which we 
might hope to discover by observation. Of course, in practice we tend to assume that 
the laws of nature are reasonably simple, since otherwise the problem of discover-
ing them becomes intractable, but in the realist picture this simplicity principle is a 
hypothesis rather than a matter of definition. Whereas for the Humean, the laws of 
nature are by definition whatever axioms lead to the simplest possible description 
of matters of fact, so striving for simplicity is non-optional. And this has practical 
consequences: for the realist, simplicity is just one of many hypotheses which we 
may adopt to narrow down the search space for possible laws, so it could be par-
tially or completely discarded if empirical or theoretical reasons gave us cause to 
think the laws do not in fact correspond to the simplest possible description in some 
particular case, whereas for the Humean, being the simplest possible description is 
part of what it is to be a law, so we are not entitled to elevate to the status of law a 
description which fails to be the simplest possible description, even if we have other 
compelling reasons to consider doing so.
This feature may be of particular relevance as parts of physics begin to move 
away from the time-evolution paradigm, because once we start dealing with other 
sorts of laws it’s possible that we will encounter laws that look more or less simple 
from different points of view. For example, we can certainly imagine laws applying 
to the whole of history all-at-once in an atemporal fashion which look simple from 
the external point of view but which look very complicated if we try to write down 
their consequences for human observers (in much the same way as the motion of 
the planets looks mathematically simple if we consider the sun to be at rest but very 
complicated if we take the earth to be at rest). It’s unclear whose point of view the 
axioms of the best system are supposed to be simple from—the original formula-
tion in terms of a ‘gods-eye’ description of the whole of history [6] does appear to 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 28 of 41
suggest that simplicity from the external point of view is the key feature, but later 
strands of Humean thought such as the ‘better best systems approach’ [99] have 
emphasized the importance of coming up with laws which are simple and usable 
from the point of view of human observers. This ambiguity can mostly be swept 
under the carpet when we are dealing with time-evolution laws, which don’t look 
notably different from the external and local points of view, but as physicists move 
beyond the time evolution paradigm it seems likely that this will become an increas-
ingly pressing question.
Thus a particularly interesting feature of the constraint framework is that it pro-
vides a new locus for these sorts of hypotheses. For example, rather than suppos-
ing that laws will look simple when expressed as dynamical equations, what if we 
instead hypothesize that they are simple in the sense that it should be possible to 
demarcate the relevant constraints in some way that is more efficient than simply 
specifying all the mosaics which are in the set? That is to say, perhaps we should 
be aiming to come up with laws which offer a simple description of the universe as 
a whole, rather than focusing on the simplicity of their description of moment-by-
moment dynamical evolution. We know from experience that assumptions like sim-
plicity often work reasonably well in science, but there is no reason to assume that 
the specific way in which we have applied these assumptions in the past is optimal: 
applying old assumptions in a global way rather than a local way may well open up 
new routes for scientific advancement.
6.4  Probability and Determinism
The constraint framework allows us to disambiguate several different ways in which 
laws may be deterministic. The traditional notion of determinism pertains to what 
is often referred to as Laplacean determinism, where the result of a measurement 
at a given time is wholly determined by the state of the world at that time [100]. 
This definition makes sense in the time evolution picture; but in the context of non-
dynamical laws there’s no particular reason to think that ‘the state at a time’ has any 
special significance, and so we are in need of a new generalized notion of determin-
ism, which we may arrive at using our new generalized notion of lawhood.
For example, we might choose to say we have determinism at a ‘global’ level if 
all of the laws of nature induce trivial distributions i.e. they only assign probabilities 
of 1 and 0. In that case we have no need for any objective chances, and each law is 
simply associated with a single constraint. Note that global determinism does not 
entail Laplacean determinism—for example, a law of the form ‘a certain process P 
produces outcome A with probability 0.8 and outcome B with probability 0.2,’ could 
be parsed as a constraint to the effect ‘across all occurrences of process P over all 
of spacetime, 80 percent have outcome A and 20 percent have outcome B,’ and pro-
cess P would therefore look indeterministic from a local point of view, but from the 
global point of view there would be no objective chances involved. So even though 
our best current theories don’t seem to obey Laplacean determinism, it could cer-
tainly still be the case that we have determinism at a global level.

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 29 of 41 
28
If the probability distributions induced by the laws are all trivial and the intersec-
tion of the corresponding constraints contains only a single mosaic, then the actual 
Humean mosaic is singled out uniquely, so we have what one might describe as 
strong global determinism. If the probability distributions induced by the laws are 
all trivial but the intersection of the corresponding constraints contains more than 
one mosaic, then the actual Humean mosaic must be selected from the intersection, 
so we have what one might describe as weak global determinism. The latter can still 
be regarded as a form of determinism because the selection of a mosaic from the 
intersection is not a ‘chancy’ event: the laws do not define any particular probability 
distribution over the mosaics in the intersection, not even the uniform distribution, 
since any one of them will do just as well as any other. The selection of the actual 
Humean mosaic from this set is therefore analogous to the selection of the initial 
conditions in in Laplacean determinism: it is arbitrary and it is not determined by 
anything, but it is also not chancy. Weak global determinism is thus simply a gen-
eralisation of the idea that in Laplacean determinism, both the initial conditions and 
the laws are needed to determine a unique course of history.
Observe that the constraint framework provides us with a straightforward way to 
articulate the differences between Laplacean determinism, weak global determinism 
and strong global determinism - these distinctions could certainly not be formulated 
in the language of dynamical time evolution laws. Note further that it is important 
for this analysis that our approach is a realist one, since if laws do not have modal 
force there can be no fact of the matter about whether they single the actual mosaic 
out uniquely, so a Humean analysis would necessarily look quite different. So the 
constraint framework does indeed seem to be fulfilling its intended purpose by pro-
viding a means of re-assessing topics like determinism in the context of realist but 
non-dynamical laws.
6.5  Higher Modal Structure
The framework we have suggested here has the further advantage that once we have 
made some proposal about the laws of nature using the constraint language, we can 
easily draw conclusions about the ‘higher-up’ modal structure induced by these laws 
of nature between various less fundamental features of reality.
For example, consider two constraints, A and B, such that B is a proper subset of 
A—that is to say, every Humean mosaic satisfying the law associated with A must 
also satisfy the law associated with B. Equivalently, we can say that every possible 
world containing a Humean mosaic satisfying the law associated with A must also 
be a possible world containing a Humean mosaic satisfying the law associated with 
B. This should look familiar, because the relation of metaphysical necessitation is 
often defined by saying that X metaphysically necessitates Y iff every possible world 
where X is true is also a possible world where Y is true [101]. Thus the fact that B is 
a proper subset of A can be understood as expressing the fact that A metaphysically 
necessitates B, so the constraint framework provides a convenient way of studying 
the modal structure associated with relations between different sorts of regularities. 
For example, A could be the constraint associated with the no-signalling principle 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 30 of 41
and B could be the constraint associated with the no-signalling monogamy bound: it 
follows from the proof given in Ref. [32] that B is a proper subset of A, and thus we 
are licensed to say that the no-signalling principle metaphysically necessitates the 
no-signalling monogamy bound.
Moreover, the same argument can be made in the case where A is associated with 
a law whilst B is a constraint which merely expresses a contingent fact—for exam-
ple, A could be the set of all mosaics in which it is everywhere true that F = ma 
while B could be the set of all mosaics in which it is true that on some particu-
lar occasion F = ma . Clearly here it will be the case that A is a proper subset of B 
and hence in this setting the relation of metaphysical necessitation also underlies the 
relations between laws and individual instances of laws, allowing us to unify rela-
tions between regularities, and relations between laws and their instances, in terms 
of a single overarching form of modal structure.
6.6  The Past Hypothesis
One argument that has been put forward in favour of the best systems approach 
is that it allows us to regard the past hypothesis as a law of nature rather than a 
mere coincidence [102]. Now, realists about laws might well feel that the supposed 
gain here is a spurious one, for the best systems account has made the past hypoth-
esis nomological only in virtue of making the nomological into a brute fact: in the 
Humean picture laws are just descriptions of whatever actually happens, so the fact 
that the past hypothesis is a law doesn’t make it any less mysterious, and thus insofar 
as one finds the past hypothesis suspiciously coincidental from the realist point of 
view, one should also find it suspiciously coincidental within the Humean picture.
However, there is nonetheless an important insight here. The reason the past 
hypothesis is not normally treated as nomological is that physicists typically expect 
that physical systems can be decomposed into kinematics and dynamics; the initial 
state of a system is an element of the kinematics and is therefore by definition not a 
law, since laws are supposed to be dynamical. But as Hicks points out, Humeanism 
in its standard form does not accommodate any such distinction [103]: if including 
the initial state in the best-system leads to a significant simplification, it follows on 
the Humean view that the initial state is a law. Hicks regards this as a problem to be 
rectified, but from the present perspective it is a significant advantage: the Humean 
view gives us licence to ignore arbitrary distinctions such as the kinematics/dynam-
ics split and simply write down whichever laws provide the best systematization, 
regardless of whether they accord with common assumptions about what laws ought 
to look like.
So really the novel contribution of Humeanism to the problem of the past hypoth-
esis is located not in its antirealism but rather in the fact that it licences us to take 
nonstandard, temporally non-local laws seriously, and thus allows us to put the ini-
tial state into the laws of nature. But we do not have to become Humeans in order to 
achieve this end—we simply have to reject the standard kinematics/dynamics dis-
tinction. The constraint framework straightforwardly allows us to include the past 
hypothesis in the laws of nature, since it can be understood as a constraint which 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 31 of 41 
28
assigns probability 1 (or at least, high probability) to the set of Humean mosaics 
where the initial state is a ‘low entropy’ state (or some more sophisticated descrip-
tion [104]).
So the constraint framework allows us to make the past hypothesis nomological 
in a more robust sense than the Humean approach: it is not merely a fact about the 
universe which happens to appear in the best-system, but it is determined by some 
law that is part of the objective modal structure of reality and thus it can be given a 
lawlike explanation in just the same way as anything else in the universe.
7  Objections
In this section, we discuss some possible objections that might be raised to the anal-
ysis of lawhood we have presented
7.1  Epistemic Issues
If constraints are ontologically prior to the Humean mosaic, then it seems that laws 
of nature are necessarily external to the Humean mosaic, and this feature forms 
the basis of a common objection to realist accounts of lawhood: if laws are not a 
part of the Humean mosaic, and we are only able to observe directly those things 
which feature in the Humean mosaic, how can we ever come to know about or have 
grounds for believing in laws of nature? This kind of concern is particularly com-
mon amongst empiricists, many of whom reject the notion of modality altogether 
[105]. To address these concerns, it will be important to distinguish between two 
different epistemic difficulties. First, how could we ever know or have grounds to 
believe that laws which are ontologically prior to the Humean mosaic exist? And 
second, how could we find out about their true metaphysical nature?
With regard to the first difficulty, the answer seems straightforward: we infer that 
laws exist based on our observations of their effects on the world. That is to say, 
we observe regularities and then apply inference to the best explanation to conclude 
that these regularities are the effect of some objective structure, which is either the 
consequence of or to be directly identified with the laws of nature. For as Hildebrand 
argues, if an entity is external to the actual universe but is essential to the analysis 
of lawhood, then in fact we do have a way to find out about it—to wit, by studying 
the laws of nature [106]. Likewise, Ismael offers a comprehensive argument to the 
effect that objective modality can be acceptable even to committed empiricists: she 
identifies laws as ‘inductions grounded epistemically in objective facts about pat-
terns in the Humean mosaic ... (which) have modal implications that outrun those 
patterns,’ and thus argues that observing patterns of events in the Humean mosaic 
licences us to form beliefs about modal facts which are not themselves part of the 
Humean mosaic [93]. Similarly, in this paper, we have specifically identified laws 
of nature as those things which are external to the physical universe but which have 
an effect on it: that is the content of the claim of ontological priority. So if there 
are any laws which satisfy this criterion, they are certainly not disconnected from 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 32 of 41
physical reality—they act on physical reality, even if physical reality cannot act back 
on them, so even those with strong empiricist inclinations have compelling reasons 
to believe in them.
With regard to the second difficulty, as we have adopted a structural realist 
approach we should simply hold that we can be epistemically committed to the real 
modal structure associated with laws without knowing anything about the underly-
ing metaphysical nature of the laws (whether because we have no epistemic access 
to laws in and of themselves, in the tradition of ESR, or because laws are nothing 
over and above modal structure, in the tradition of OSR). Of course, this approach 
might rule out some uses to which one might want to put one’s realism about law-
hood: if for example one were attempting to use an analysis of lawhood to solve the 
problem of induction, then indeed one would potentially need to answer questions 
about how laws actually operate on physical reality, in order to make the argument 
that the existence of laws guarantees that the future will be relevantly similar to the 
past. But if one is a realist simply because the existence of governing laws seems 
like the best explanation for observed regularities, or because postulating laws leads 
to a more coherent picture of the content of reality, then there is no obvious need to 
explain how laws bring about the effects that they do.
A more specific variant of this objection to realism involves the concern that it is 
hard to see how universals or capacities or any such metaphysical notion could play 
the role in rational belief-formation that laws clearly do. This is sometimes known 
as the inference problem—that is, the problem of giving an account of how it is that 
laws permit us to make inferences [107–109]. It seems likely that a similar complaint 
would be levelled at our more general claim that laws induce constraints which are 
ontologically prior to the Humean mosaic—why, the Humeans will ask, should we 
base our expectations about future events on something that is not even a part of the 
physical universe? But again, we should resist the claim that the inference problem 
can only be answered by giving an account of the metaphysical nature of the laws. 
According to the view we have put forward here, laws are by definition those things 
which induce certain modal structures, or perhaps laws simply are modal structures, 
so if we believe that certain laws hold then we have every right to form expectations 
about the effects that they will bring about, since that is exactly what the relevant 
modal terminology is designed to capture. In much the same way, we can make 
inferences about the future based on our knowledge of electrons because even if we 
don’t know what electrons actually are we do have a clear understanding of them in 
structural and functional terms: electrons are those things which behave in certain 
ways, so if we believe that electrons do exist and are present in a given instance, we 
can make inferences about the effects they will produce.
Of course, one might attempt to make a distinction on the grounds that in the case 
of electrons there is at least the possibility in principle of finding out more about the 
nature of the underlying constituents, whereas in the case of laws it is most likely 
impossible even in principle for us to find out the true metaphysical nature of the 
laws. Is this an epistemically relevant distinction? Those who consider themselves 
scientific realists but who also espouse Humean (or other non-realist) approaches to 
lawhood certainly seem to think so—the claim seems to be that there is something 
particularly problematic about making inferences to things which are unobservable 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 33 of 41 
28
because they are external to the Humean mosaic, whereas it is less problematic to 
make inferences to things which are unobservable for some more prosaic reason. But 
this particular way of setting the boundary of the knowable seems fairly arbitrary. 
Indeed, we are never going to observe the metaphysical basis for laws ‘directly,’ if 
indeed there is any such basis at all, but then we are almost certainly never going 
to observe electrons ‘directly’ either, since even in a cloud chamber what we actu-
ally observe are the effects of the electron rather than the electron itself. And if we 
have learned anything from the long history of debate over the distinction between 
observable and unobservable objects, it is that if we countenance only beliefs in 
directly observable features of physical reality then very little is safe. Realism about 
laws is in this regard not importantly different from other forms of scientific or met-
aphysical realism: in either case we have solid grounds for realism provided we have 
a solid understanding of the modal properties of the entity in question.
A slightly different objection regards the role of laws in explanation. It has been 
argued that explaining regularities by appeal to laws does little to remove the mys-
tery surrounding them, because we have just swapped the question ‘Why are there 
regularities in the universe?’ with the equally puzzling ‘Why should laws give rise 
to regularities?’ And the same point can be made about the account in terms of 
constraints—there are many possible constraints which would not give rise to any 
noticeable regularities, and so appealing to constraints does nothing to explain the 
existence of regularities without some further supposition about why the laws of 
nature happen to induce the special sorts of constraints which produce noticeable 
regularities. We have not attempted to make such a supposition because we see no 
way to do so without invoking some kind of hypothesis about the underlying meta-
physical nature of the laws, and the point of focusing on structures was precisely 
to avoid those sorts of commitments. Nor is such a supposition necessary, because 
the account we have given is not intended to solve the explanatory problem: it is 
only supposed to offer a picture of the world which allows regularities to be the 
consequences of objective modal structure. The question of why there should be 
any objective modal structure, or structure of this particular kind, is another matter 
altogether.
7.2  Law Selection
Going against the thrust of our approach in this paper, one might argue that it is 
actually a good thing that traditional realist approaches based on a time evolution 
picture severely constrain the space of possible laws, because otherwise there will 
simply be too many possible laws and we will never be able to get the underdeter-
mination down to a reasonable level. Indeed, it’s true that scientists often need to 
constrain the space of possible laws in some way in order to make the search space 
tractable. That is the purpose served by criteria such as ‘simplicity,’ ‘unification,’ 
‘beauty,’ ‘locality,’ ‘unitarity,’ and so on. And it’s also true that insisting that laws 
should take the time evolution form (or at least, it should be possible to rewrite them 
in a time evolution form) is one way in which scientists have historically constrained 
the search space.

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 34 of 41
But scientists also recognise that sometimes constraints on the search space need 
to be abandoned when the empirical data demonstrates their unsuitability. For exam-
ple, in the aftermath of Bell’s theorem [110] many physicists came to the conclusion 
that it was necessary to abandon the principle of locality3 [111] which was previ-
ously regarded as a natural constraint on the set of possible laws. And as we saw in 
Sect. 2 a variety of different scientists have now begun exploring laws which move 
away from the time evolution picture, driven in many cases by the conviction that 
the empirical data have shown the time evolution constraint to be unsuitable. Of 
course this is not yet a consensus position, and it remains possible that science will 
find a way to accommodate all the existing data within a strict time evolution model, 
but given the increasing prominence of these approaches it seems the right time to 
begin exploring some of their consequences for the philosophy of lawhood.
7.3  Cartwright’s Challenge
The constraint methodology works straightforwardly for certain very simple laws—
for example, ‘no signal can propagate faster than light.’ Subject to a satisfactory def-
inition of what counts as a signal, if this is a law it is obeyed exactly, and therefore 
it can very straightforwardly be translated to a constraint consisting of the set of 
Humean mosaics which do not contain any signalling processes.
But what about a law such as the Newtonian gravity relation, F = GMm
r2  ? We can-
not simply identify this law with the set of all mosaics in which it is everywhere 
the case that F = GMm
r2  , because a ‘force’ is not the sort of thing which is typically 
supposed to feature in a Humean mosaic. We would have to combine the Newtonian 
gravity law with the force law F = ma ; but we also cannot identify this law with 
the set of all mosaics in which it is everywhere the case that ma = GMm
r2  , because as 
Cartwright famously pointed out [112], this relationship is never exactly satisfied, 
since bodies are typically subject to more than one force and their final acceleration 
is given by the vector sum of all the forces acting on them. Moreover, we also can-
not make ma = GMm
r2  into a probabilistic law, because although bodies do not usually 
obey ma = GMm
r2  exactly, it is also not the case that their motion is probabilistic - it is 
a deterministic function of all the forces acting on them.
One possible resolution of this problem would be to identify a constraint C with 
the set of worlds for which C belongs to the axioms of the best-system, defined in 
the usual Humean way as the system which optimizes simplicity, strength and fit. 
But the problem with this approach is that it is subject to the same objection often 
levelled against Humeanism—i.e. that ‘simplicity’ is not objective and that therefore 
what counts as a law will depend on our preferred standards of simplicity [113]. 
This is a consequence that the Humean might be willing to accept, but it is sig-
nificantly more problematic in our case, since we have required that laws should be 
ontologically prior to the Humean mosaic and so it seems we cannot allow that they 
should depend on the preferences of the inhabitants of the mosaic.
3  We reinforce that ‘locality’ as referenced in Bell’s theorem is not the same as the mathematical princi-
ple of ‘locality’ employed in quantum field theory; Bell’s theorem says nothing about the latter.

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 35 of 41 
28
An alternative would be to reconsider the idea that forces should not feature in 
the Humean mosaic; then we might be able to identify a set of mosaics in which it 
is exactly true everywhere that there exists a force F = GMm
r2  , and also exactly true 
that the resulting motion is the vector sum of the forces. One’s willingness to accept 
this solution will naturally be dependent on one’s intuitions about whether a ‘force’ 
counts as a local matter of particular fact. We think it is unlikely that Lewis would 
have liked this, but we do not necessarily have to follow Lewis on this point. More-
over within the constraint picture we have a little more leeway, because we have 
already abandoned strict Humean supervenience and therefore we need not be held 
back by the fear of betraying our founding metaphysical principles.
A final possibility would involve abandoning the Newtonian gravitational law in 
favour of conservation laws or a Lagrangian description. For while it is not exactly 
true that ma = GMm
r2  anywhere, it is exactly true that momentum, energy and angular 
momentum are conserved for a closed system, and from these conservation laws it 
is possible to deduce the individual accelerations of the constituent systems. Now 
it is true that in the real world very few systems are truly closed, but this is not a 
problem for the constraint view, because constraints are in general non-dynamical, 
so we can make the system as large as necessary to ensure that the conservation is 
exact—even going so far as to include the whole universe if need be. Indeed, one 
might argue that the reason Newtonian force laws are very seldom exactly true is 
that they are not the ‘real’ laws—it is the conservation laws or Lagrangian descrip-
tions which feature in the true laws of nature, and force laws are simply the result 
of our attempts to parse the messy local consequences of these global laws. From 
this point of view, Cartwright’s challenge results from supposing that laws must be 
spatially and temporally local, whereas in fact laws are generically non-local and 
therefore hold exactly only at a global level.
Of course, it may be objected that although this works for the case of Newtonian 
force laws because we always have the alternative Lagrangian description available 
to us, there are certainly conceivable laws where this sort of description is not pos-
sible - indeed, it is known that a set of dynamical laws has a corresponding Lagran-
gian description if and only if, after transformation into a certain canonical form, the 
right-hand sides of all the equations are derivable by differentiation from a single 
function H [114–116]. And even if it is in fact the case that all laws in the actual 
world do have a Lagrangian equivalent, the stated intention for the constraint frame-
work was to come up with a highly general language which avoids ruling out large 
classes of laws by fiat, so it would be a problem if this framework can’t deal with 
laws which don’t have a Lagrangian description.
However, for any set of deterministic laws which are both individually and jointly 
deterministic, there must be some way of writing these laws (perhaps in the form of 
a single highly complicated disjunctive law, and/or by augmentation with a suitable 
composition rule) such that they hold exactly. If this were not the case, then there 
would be some scenarios in which the set of laws did not prescribe a single outcome, 
meaning that the laws would not after all be jointly deterministic. For example, in 
the force law case, even if the Lagrangian description were not available it would 
be possible to find a law which is exactly true by writing ma = ∫F(x) where the 
integral (or sum in the finite case) is taken over all sources of force. The resulting 

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 36 of 41
law might be highly non-local, extremely complicated and aesthetically displeasing, 
but nonetheless we would be able to pick out a set of Humean mosaics in which this 
law always holds and thus it could be written as a constraint. And a similar argu-
ment shows that any set of laws which individually and jointly prescribe exact prob-
abilities can be written as an exact disjunctive law assigning probabilities over some 
disjunctive sample space of events, meaning that together they can be written as a 
probability distribution over constraints.
7.4  The God Problem
It is common to criticize realist accounts of laws of nature on the grounds that they 
get their plausibility from implicit (or sometimes explicit!) invocation of a deity who 
personally steps in to ensure that the universe obeys the laws of nature; thus it is 
argued that such accounts are a remnant of theism and should be rejected by all 
right-thinking atheists [117, 118]. And one might make a similar criticism of the 
approach we have suggested here, for although we have steered clear of making any 
assertions about the metaphysical underpinnings of the laws of nature, nonetheless 
there seem to be some vaguely theistic ideas in play. In particular, in the discussion 
of constraints we invoked the notion of ‘ontological priority,’ which is often under-
stood in terms of the order in which God creates things, and thus one way to moti-
vate the idea of the Humean mosaic being subject to constraints would be to picture 
the universe as something like a sudoku grid subject to global rules, with God step-
ping in to solve it.
But in fact we should take care with this metaphor, because it seems to be based 
on an intuition that the parts of the universe must come into being in some tempo-
ral order, with God’s process of solving the puzzle constituting a process of tempo-
ral becoming. Yet the universe, considered as an atemporal whole, already contains 
within it the temporal relations which are constitutive of our experience of time; 
and therefore one might argue, a la McTaggart, that we do not need an external 
‘A-Series’ process of temporal becoming in addition to the existing ‘B-Series’ deter-
mined by the temporal relations internal to the universe [119]. Thus it seems that 
the metaphor which conjures up God solving a puzzle adds an unnecessary layer of 
temporal becoming to an account of lawhood which is perfectly adequate without it.
And indeed, it is easy to remove God from the picture. For after all, a sudoku 
grid does not actually require a player: it has a unique correct solution regardless of 
whether anyone ever comes along to solve the puzzle. We need only suppose that the 
universe is the same: the constraints prescribe (either deterministically or probabil-
istically) a set of possible solutions, and the actual mosaic exists and satisfies these 
constraints in an atemporal block universe sense, with no need for a personal being 
to come along and solve the puzzle.
Of course, in the context of epistemic structural realism about laws it is part of 
the deal that we can’t know what laws of nature are or how they get enforced, so 
although ontic structural realists might be able to be dogmatic about this, epistemic 
structural realists can’t—for all they know, perhaps there is a God out there solving 
the puzzle of reality, and/or the universe really is generated in a process of temporal 

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 37 of 41 
28
becoming. But the point to be made here is that the plausibility of the approach does 
not depend in any way on the theistic metaphor, and indeed the theistic metaphor 
may well be more harmful then helpful.
8  Conclusion
Developments in modern physics give us good reason to take seriously the possi-
bility of laws which are non-local, global, atemporal, retrocausal, and/or not easily 
put in the standard kinematical-dynamical form. We have seen that existing realist 
accounts of laws as relations between universals or capacities/dispositions/powers 
are not well suited to accommodate these sorts of non-standard laws, and thus there 
is a clear need for a realist account which brings realism about laws up to date with 
developments in modern physics. Ideally, this account will bring some conceptual 
clarity to the new approaches currently emerging within physics, and will also give 
us the resources to re-assess some common philosophical applications of the con-
cept of lawhood in the light of these scientific development.
We argued that this account can be given by appealing to the idea that laws are 
part of the objective modal structure of reality. However, existing analyses of modal 
structure in terms of individual systems and/or causal relations are not sufficiently 
general for this purpose, and thus we set out to provide a more general account of 
modal structure. Drawing on a number of physics examples, we proposed character-
ising laws in terms of probability distributions over constraints, and demonstrated 
that this approach is capable of accommodating a wide variety of possible laws. 
Finally, we gave some brief examples of possible applications of this framework to 
the philosophical literature on determinism, modal structure and the past hypothesis.
The examples we have offered here are intended only as a preview of the ways in 
which this framework might be applied; all of the discussion in Sect. 6 could be sig-
nificantly expanded, and we have not yet touched on the status of laws in accounts 
of causation, explanation, prediction and confirmation. Moreover, once we take seri-
ously the possibility of non-dynamical laws, there are important scientific questions 
about how researchers might furnish evidence for non-standard laws which can’t 
straightforwardly be tested in ordinary laboratory experiments. Our hope is that the 
constraint approach will furnish a clear and precise language in which some of these 
questions can be articulated and answered.
Acknowledgements  This publication was made possible through the support of the ID 61466 grant 
from the John Templeton Foundation, as part of the “The Quantum Information Structure of Spacetime 
(QISS)” Project (qiss.fr). The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation.
References
	
1.	 Kastner, R.E.: Is there really “retrocausation’’ in time-symmetric approaches to quantum mechan-
ics? AIP Conf. Proc. 1841(1), 020002 (2017)

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 38 of 41
	
2.	 Menzies, P., Beebee, H.: Counterfactual theories of causation. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Summer 2020th edn. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 
Stanford (2020)
	
3.	 Hempel, C.G., et al.: Aspects of Scientific Explanation. Free Press, New York (1965)
	
4.	 Butterfield, J.: Defining determinism. In: Craig, E. (ed.) Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton (2005)
	
5.	 Goddard, L.: The paradoxes of confirmation and the nature of natural laws. Philos. Q. 27(107), 
97–113 (1977)
	
6.	 Dorst, C.: Towards a best predictive system account of laws of nature. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 70(3), 
877–900 (2019)
	
7.	 Hobart, R.E.: Free will as involving determination and inconceivable without it. Mind 43(169), 
1–27 (1934)
	
8.	 Wharton, K.: The universe is not a computer. In: Aguirre, F.B., Merali, G. (eds.) Questioning the 
Foundations of Physics, pp. 177–190. Springer, Berlin (2015)
	
9.	 Smolin, L.: The unique universe. Phys. World 22(06), 21 (2009)
	 10.	 Brizard, A.J.: An Introduction to Lagrangian Mechanics. World Scientific, Singapore (2008)
	 11.	 Adlam, E.: Spooky action at a temporal distance. Entropy 20(1), 41 (2018)
	 12.	 Feynman, R.P., Hibbs, A.R., Styer, D.F.: Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals. Dover Books on 
Physics, Dover Publications, New York (2010)
	 13.	 Hartle, J.B.: The spacetime approach to quantum mechanics. Vistas Astron. 37, 569–583 (1993)
	 14.	 Sorkin, R.D.: Quantum dynamics without the wavefunction. J. Phys. A 40, 3207–3221 (2007)
	 15.	 Wigner, E.P.: Events, laws of nature, and invariance principles. Science 145(3636), 995–999 
(1964)
	 16.	 Wald, R.M.: General Relativity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (2010)
	 17.	 Ringström, H.: The Cauchy Problem in General Relativity. European Mathematical Society, Zürich 
(2009)
	 18.	 Foures-Bruhat, Y.: Théorème d’existence pour certains systèmes d’équations aux dérivées par-
tielles non linéaires. Acta Math. 88(1), 141–225 (1952)
	 19.	 Rovelli, C.: Loop quantum gravity. Living Rev. Relat. 11(1), 5 (2008)
	 20.	 Wallace, D.: Observability, redundancy and modality for dynamical symmetry transformations 
(2019)
	 21.	 Spekkens, R.W.: The paradigm of kinematics and dynamics must yield to causal structure (2012)
	 22.	 Aharonov, Y., Vaidman, L.: The Two-State Vector Formalism of Quantum Mechanics, pp. 369–
412. Springer, Berlin (2002)
	 23.	 Cramer, J.G.: The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 647–687 
(1986)
	 24.	 Kent, A.: Solution to the Lorentzian quantum reality problem. Phys. Rev. A 90(1), 012107 (2014)
	 25.	 Wharton, K.: A new class of retrocausal models. Entropy 20(6), 410 (2018)
	 26.	 Sutherland, R.: Causally symmetric bohm model (2006). arXiv:​quant-​ph/​06010​95
	 27.	 Price, H.: Does time-symmetry imply retrocausality? How the quantum world says “maybe’’? 
Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. B 43(2), 75–83 (2012)
	 28.	 Leifer, M., Pusey, M.: Is a time symmetric interpretation of quantum theory possible without retro-
causality? Proc. R. Soc. A 473, 20160607 (2016)
	 29.	 Evans, P.W., Price, H., Wharton, K.B.: New slant on the EPR-bell experiment. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 
64(2), 297–324 (2013)
	 30.	 Masanes, L., Renner, R., Christandl, M., Winter, A., Barrett, J.: Full security of quantum key distri-
bution from no-signaling constraints. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 60(8), 4973–4986 (2014)
	 31.	 Pawlowski, M., Paterek, T., Kaszlikowski, D., Scarani, V., Winter, A., Żukowski, M.: Information 
causality as a physical principle. Nature 461, 1101–1104 (2009)
	 32.	 Toner, B.: Monogamy of non-local quantum correlations. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A 465, 59–69 
(2009)
	 33.	 Toner, B., Verstraete, F.: Monogamy of Bell correlations and Tsirelson’s bound (2006). arXiv:​
quant-​ph/​06110​01
	 34.	 Scarani, V., Iblisdir, S., Gisin, N., Acín, A.: Quantum cloning. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1225–1256 
(2005)
	 35.	 Chiribella, G., D’Ariano, G.M., Perinotti, P.: Informational derivation of quantum theory. Phys. 
Rev. A 84(1) (2011)

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 39 of 41 
28
	 36.	 Chiribella, G., D’Ariano, G.M., Perinotti, P.: Probabilistic theories with purification. Phys. Rev. A 
81, 062348 (2010)
	 37.	 Rohrlich, D., Popescu, S.: Nonlocality as an axiom for quantum theory (1995). arXiv:​quant-​ph/​
95080​09
	 38.	 Hardy, L.: Quantum theory from five reasonable axioms (2001). arXiv:​quant-​ph/​01010​12
	 39.	 Barrett, J.: Information processing in generalized probabilistic theories (2005). arXiv:​quant-​ph/​
05082​11
	 40.	 Barnum, H., Barrett, J., Orloff Clark, L., Leifer, M., Spekkens, R., Stepanik, N., Wilce, A., Wilke, 
R.: Entropy and information causality in general probabilistic theories. N. J. Phys. 12(3), 033024 
(2010)
	 41.	 Masanes, L., Müller, M.: A derivation of quantum theory from physical requirements. N. J. Phys. 
13(6), 063001 (2011)
	 42.	 Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A.: The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and contextuality. 
N. J. Phys. 13(11), 113036 (2011)
	 43.	 Colbeck, R.: Quantum and relativistic protocols for secure multi-party computation. PhD thesis 
(2009)
	 44.	 Adlam, E., Kent, A.: Device-independent relativistic quantum bit commitment. Phys. Rev. A 92(2), 
022315 (2015)
	 45.	 Tomamichel, M., Fehr, S., Kaniewski, J., Wehner, S.: One-sided device-independent QKD and 
position-based cryptography from monogamy games. In: Johansson, T., Nguyen, P.Q. (eds.) 
Advances in Cryptology—EUROCRYPT 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7881, pp. 
609–625. Springer, Berlin (2013)
	 46.	 Acín, A., Brunner, N., Gisin, N., Massar, S., Pironio, S., Scarani, V.: Device-independent security 
of quantum cryptography against collective attacks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98(23), 230501 (2007)
	 47.	 Thorne, K.S.: Closed timelike curves. In: 13th Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation 
(GR-13), pp. 295–315 (1993)
	 48.	 Earman, John.: Recent work on time travel. (1995)
	 49.	 Deutsch, D., Marletto, C.: Constructor theory of information. Proc. R. Soc. A 471(2174), 20140540 
(2015)
	 50.	 Brown, H.R., Myrvold, W., Uffink, J.: Boltzmann’s h-theorem, its discontents, and the birth of sta-
tistical mechanics. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. B 40(2), 174–191 (2009)
	 51.	 Valente, G.: The approach towards equilibrium in Lanford’s theorem. Eur. J. Philos. Sci. 4(3), 309–
335 (2014)
	 52.	 Filomeno, A.: Typicality of dynamics and the laws of nature. In: Soto, C. (ed.) Current Debates in 
Philosophy of Science. In Honor of Roberto Torretti. Synthese Library Series. Springer, New York 
(2021)
	 53.	 Hooker, C.: On the import of constraints in complex dynamical systems. Found. Sci. 18(4):757–
780 (2013)
	 54.	 Armstrong, D.M.: What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983)
	 55.	 Dretske, F.I.: Laws of nature. Philos. Sci. 44(2), 248–268 (1977)
	 56.	 Tooley, M.: The nature of laws. Can. J. Philos. 7(4), 667–698 (1977)
	 57.	 Bird, A.: Nature’s Metaphysics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007)
	 58.	 Ioannidis, S., Livanios, V., Psillos, S.: No laws and (thin) powers in, no (governing) laws out. Eur. 
J. Philos. Sci. 11(1), 1–26 (2021)
	 59.	 Vetter, B.: Dispositional essentialism and the laws of nature. In: Bird, A., Ellis, B., Sankey, H. 
(eds.) Properties, Powers, and Structures: Issues in the Metaphysics of Realism. Routledge, Milton 
Park (2012)
	 60.	 Hicks, M.T., Schaffer, J.: Derivative properties in fundamental laws. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 68(2) (2017)
	 61.	 Tugby, M.: The problem of retention. Synthese 194(6), 2053–2075 (2017)
	 62.	 Masanes, L., Acin, A., Gisin, N.: General properties of nonsignaling theories. Phys. Rev. A 73(1) 
(2006)
	 63.	 Kadanoff, L.P.: Scaling and universality in statistical physics. Physica A 163(1), 1–14 (1990)
	 64.	 Bird, A.: The dispositionalist conception of laws. Found. Sci. 10(4), 353–370 (2005)
	 65.	 Ellis, B.: Scientific Essentialism. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2001)
	 66.	 Molnar, G.: Powers: A Study in Metaphysics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2003)
	 67.	 Mumford, S.: Laws in Nature. Routledge, Milton Park (2002)
	 68.	 Bigelow, J., Ellis, B., Lierse, C.: The world as one of a kind: natural necessity and laws of nature. 
Br. J. Philos. Sci. 43(3), 371–388 (1992)

	
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28
1 3
28 
Page 40 of 41
	 69.	 Maudlin, T.: The Metaphysics Within Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007)
	 70.	 Carroll, J.W.: Laws of Nature. Cambridge Studies in Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1994)
	 71.	 Lange, M., Lange, P.P.M.: Natural Laws in Scientific Practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(2000)
	 72.	 Schaffer, J.: It is the business of laws to govern. Dialectica 70(4), 577–588 (2016)
	 73.	 French, S.: Structure as a weapon of the realist. Proc. Arist. Soc. 106, 169–187 (2006)
	 74.	 Ladyman, J.: What is structural realism? Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. A 29(3), 409–424 (1998)
	 75.	 Morganti, M.: On the preferability of epistemic structural realism. Synthese 142, 81–107 (2004)
	 76.	 Worrall, J.: Structural realism: the best of both worlds?*. Dialectica 43(1–2), 99–124 (1989)
	 77.	 French, S., Ladyman, J.: In defence of ontic structural realism. In: Bokulich, A., Bokulich, P. (eds.) 
Scientific Structuralism, pp. 25–42. Springer, Berlin (2011)
	 78.	 Berenstain, N., Ladyman, J.: Ontic structural realism and modality. In: Landry, Elaine, Rickles, 
Dean (eds.) Structural Realism: Structure, Object, and Causality. Springer, Berlin (2012)
	 79.	 Ladyman, J., Ross, D.: Every Thing Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (2007)
	 80.	 Esfeld, M.: The modal nature of structures in ontic structural realism. Int. Stud. Philos. Sci. 23(2), 
179–194 (2009)
	 81.	 Kitcher, P.: The Advancement of Science: Science Without Legend, Objectivity Without Illusions. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford (1995)
	 82.	 Psillos, S.: Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth. Philosophical Issues in Science. Taylor 
& Francis, Milton Park (2005)
	 83.	 Esfeld, M.: Ontic structural realism and the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Eur. J. Philos. 
Sci. 3 (2013)
	 84.	 Ladyman, J.A.C.: Structure Not Selection, vol. 1, 1st edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2021)
	 85.	 Soto, C., Romero-Maltrana, D.: Local selective realism: shifting from classical to quantum electro-
dynamics. Found. Sci. 25(4), 955–970 (2020)
	 86.	 Ross, D., Ladyman, J., Spurrett, D.: Causation in a structural world. In: Ladyman, J. (ed.) Every 
Thing Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007)
	 87.	 Schaffer, J.: The internal relatedness of all things. Mind 119(474), 341–376 (2010)
	 88.	 Cameron, R.P.: Turtles all the way down: regress, priority and fundamentality. Philos. Q. 58(230), 
1–14 (2008)
	 89.	 Schaffer, J.: On what grounds what. In: Manley, D., Chalmers, D.J., Wasserman, R. (eds.) Meta-
metaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology, pp. 347–383. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (2009)
	 90.	 Stanley, J.: “Assertion’’ and intentionality. Philos. Stud. 151(1), 87–113 (2010)
	 91.	 Adlam, E.: Quantum mechanics and global determinism. Quanta 7, 40–53 (2018)
	 92.	 Hildebrand, T.: Scientific practice and the epistemology of governing laws. J. Am. Philos. Assoc. 
5(2), 174–188 (2019)
	 93.	 Ismael, J.: An empiricist’s guide to objective modality. In: Slater, M., Yudell, Z. (eds.) Metaphys-
ics and the Philosophy of Science: New Essays, pp. 109–125. Oxford University Press, New York 
(2017)
	 94.	 Jaag, S., Loew, C.: Why defend humean supervenience? J. Philos. 117(7), 387–406 (2020)
	 95.	 Tastevin, G., Laloë, F.: The outcomes of measurements in the de broglie-bohm theory. C. R. Phys. 
(2021)
	 96.	 Wallace, D.: Everett and structure. Stud. Hist. Philos. 34(1), 87–105 (2003)
	 97.	 Martens, N.C.M., Read, J.: Sophistry about symmetries? Synthese 199(1), 315–344 (2020)
	 98.	 List, C., Pivato, M.: Dynamic and stochastic systems as a framework for metaphysics and the phi-
losophy of science. Synthese 198(3), 2551–2612 (2019)
	 99.	 Cohen, J., Callender, C.: A better best system account of lawhood. Philos. Stud. 145(1), 1–34 
(2009)
	100.	 Laplace, P.S.: Théorie analytique des probabilités. Courcier (1820)
	101.	 Kripke, S.A.: Semantical analysis of modal logic i normal modal propositional calculi. Math. Log. 
Q. 9(5–6), 67–96 (1963)
	102.	 Callender, C.: There is no puzzle about the low entropy past. In: Hitchcock, C. (ed.) Contemporary 
Debates in Philosophy of Science, pp. 240–255. Blackwell, Oxford (2004)
	103.	 Hicks, M.T.: Dynamic humeanism. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 69(4), 983–1007 (2017)

1 3
Foundations of Physics (2022) 52:28	
Page 41 of 41 
28
	104.	 Wallace, D.: The logic of the past hypothesis, November 2011. In: B. Loewer, E. Winsberg and B. 
Weslake (ed.) Currently-Untitled Volume Discussing David Albert’s “Time and Chance”
	105.	 van Fraassen, B.C.: The Scientific Image. Clarendon Library of Logic and Philosophy, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford (1980)
	106.	 Hildebrand, T.: Platonic laws of nature. Can. J. Philos. 50(3), 365–381 (2020)
	107.	 Hochberg, H.: Natural necessity and laws of nature. Philos. Sci. 48(3), 386–399 (1981)
	108.	 Van Fraassen, B.C.: Armstrong, cartwright, and Earman on laws and symmetry. Philos. Phenom-
enol. Res. 53(2):431–444 (1993)
	109.	 Lewis, D.: Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1987)
	110.	 Bell, J.: Against ‘measurement’. Phys. World (1990)
	111.	 Seevinck, M.P.: Can quantum theory and special relativity peacefully coexist? (2010)
	112.	 Cartwright, N.: How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1983)
	113.	 Loewer, B.: Humean supervenience. Philos. Top. 24(1), 101–127 (1996)
	114.	 Lanczos, C.: The Variational Principles of Mechanics. Mathematical Expositions, University of 
Toronto Press, Toronto (1949)
	115.	 Ostrogradsky, M.: Mémoire sur les equations différentielles relative au problème des isopérimètres. 
Mémoiries de l’Academie de St Pétèrsburg 6 (1850)
	116.	 Butterfield, J.: Some aspects of modality in analytical mechanics (2002). arXiv:​physi​cs/​02100​81
	117.	 Orr, J.: No god, no powers. Int. Philos. Q. 59(4), 411–426 (2019)
	118.	 Cartwright, N.: No god, no laws (2008)
	119.	 McTaggart, J.E.: The unreality of time. Mind 17(68), 457–474 (1908)
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

