J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
DOI 10.1007/s10827-010-0271-2
Multivariate information-theoretic measures reveal
directed information structure and task relevant
changes in fMRI connectivity
Joseph T. Lizier · Jakob Heinzle ·
Annette Horstmann · John-Dylan Haynes ·
Mikhail Prokopenko
Received: 2 January 2010 / Revised: 17 June 2010 / Accepted: 12 August 2010 / Published online: 27 August 2010
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
Abstract The human brain undertakes highly sophis-
ticated information processing facilitated by the inter-
action between its sub-regions. We present a novel
method for interregional connectivity analysis, using
multivariate extensions to the mutual information and
transfer entropy. The method allows us to identify
the underlying directed information structure between
brain regions, and how that structure changes according
Action Editor: Jonathan David Victor
First two authors contributed equally to this work.
J. T. Lizier (B)
School of Information Technologies,
The University of Sydney,
NSW 2006, Sydney, Australia
e-mail: jlizier@it.usyd.edu.au
J. T. Lizier · M. Prokopenko
CSIRO, Information and Communications Technology
Centre, PO Box 76, Epping, NSW 1710, Australia
J. Heinzle · J.-D. Haynes
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Philippstraße 13, Haus 6,
10115 Berlin, Germany
A. Horstmann · J.-D. Haynes
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Stephanstraße 1A, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
J.-D. Haynes
Graduate School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt Universität
zu Berlin, Luisenstraße 56, 10099 Berlin, Germany
M. Prokopenko
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences,
Inselstraße 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
to behavioral conditions. This method is distinguished
in
using
asymmetric,
multivariate,
information-
theoretical analysis, which captures not only directional
and non-linear relationships, but also collective inter-
actions. Importantly, the method is able to estimate
multivariate information measures with only relatively
little data. We demonstrate the method to analyze
functional magnetic resonance imaging time series to
establish the directed information structure between
brain regions involved in a visuo-motor tracking task.
Importantly, this results in a tiered structure, with
known movement planning regions driving visual and
motor control regions. Also, we examine the changes
in this structure as the difficulty of the tracking task
is increased. We find that task difficulty modulates
the coupling strength between regions of a cortical
network involved in movement planning and between
motor cortex and the cerebellum which is involved
in the fine-tuning of motor control. It is likely these
methods will find utility in identifying interregional
structure (and experimentally induced changes in this
structure) in other cognitive tasks and data modalities.
Keywords fMRI · Visual cortex · Motor cortex ·
Movement planning · Information transfer ·
Transfer entropy · Information structure ·
Neural computation
1 Introduction
Distributed computation in the brain is a complex
process, involving interactions between many regions
in order to achieve a particular task. Thus, in order

86
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
to understand neural processing it is of particular im-
portance to understand how different brain regions
interact (Friston 2002). Our interest lies in establishing
directed, interregional, functional information struc-
ture in the brain based on particular cognitive tasks.
Several studies have considered similar goals. By ob-
serving common information in different brain regions
at different times, a flow of information was inferred
between different regions (Soon et al. 2008; Bode and
Haynes 2009). Functional brain networks were inferred
with a measure of information transfer in a model of
the macaque cortex (Honey et al. 2007). Also, single-
variate information transfer was studied at the regional
level in fMRI measurements in the human visual cor-
tex (Hinrichs et al. 2006). Undirected structure was
studied with multivariate analysis at the regional level
in fMRI measurements during visual processing (Chai
et al. 2009). Other information-theoretical measures
were used to study information transfer between brain
areas of macaques (Liang et al. 2001). A different ap-
proach often used in fMRI is dynamic causal modeling,
a model-based approach that compares a set of a priori
defined neural models and tests how well they explain
the experimental data (Friston et al. 2003).
In establishing such information structure, we are
particularly interested in capturing nonlinear, direc-
tional, collective interactions between different sub-
regions of one brain region facilitating outcomes in
another region. Some of the above studies use linear
methods only (e.g., Granger causality (Bressler et al.
2008) and linear approximations (Liang et al. 2001)),
others do not capture whether an effect is due to a
collective interaction from two or more driving ele-
ments (e.g. Hinrichs et al. 2006 examines only average
values over all voxels in a region), or do not specifically
examine the regional level of interactions. Also, some
are not direct measures of information transfer, rather
inferences of (undirected) common information (e.g.
Chai et al. 2009). Others are reliant on the assumption
of an underlying neural model (e.g. Friston et al. 2003).
Here, we present a new approach to detecting di-
rected information structure between brain regions in
cognitive tasks. Our approach examines the statistical
significance of an ensemble of information transfer
measurements between pairs of brain regions, each of
which examines multiple variables (voxels for fMRI)
in each brain region. This asymmetric, multivariate,
information-theoretical analysis captures not only non-
linear relationships, but also collective interactions aris-
ing from small groups of variables in each region,
and the direction of these relationships. We present a
detailed description of the mathematical foundations
of the approach in Section 2, and a detailed study of
the efficacy of the technique when applied to artificial
data sets in Appendix A. Of particular importance
is that this approach considers the collective interac-
tions resulting from the combined activity of multiple
driving elements. An example collective interaction is
the Exclusive-OR (XOR) logical operation, where an-
alyzing single inputs in isolation reveals nothing about
the outcome, since it is determined collectively by the
multiple input variables. From a practical perspective,
multi-voxel analysis is necessary in order to detect com-
plete spatiotemporal patterns of activity (Norman et al.
2006; Haynes and Rees 2006), which are known to be
more informative about experimental conditions than
single voxel activity. Furthermore, the information-
theoretical basis of our approach distinguishes it in al-
lowing direct measurement of asymmetric information
transfer, and makes it model-free. Also, the particu-
lar combination of information theory and multi-voxel
analysis here is novel, as is the ability of the tech-
nique to provide insights from relatively small data sets.
Finally, note that the interregional information net-
works inferred here are functional, directed networks
rather than structural networks (Friston 1994; Honey
et al. 2007). Functional networks provide insight into
the logical structure of the network and how this struc-
ture changes as a function of network activity (regard-
less of whether the underlying anatomy is known).
We are also interested in determining the changes
in such directed information structure as the cogni-
tive task changes. Changes in connectivity in a vi-
sual attention task have been illustrated with many
techniques, e.g. dynamic causal modeling (Friston and
Büchel 2000), (pairwise) Granger causality (Bressler
et al. 2008) or psycho-physiological interaction (Büchel
and Friston 1997). Visual integration across the vi-
sual field also changes the connectivity (Haynes et al.
2005). In addition, changes in connectivity pattern be-
tween brain regions have been associated with diseases
(Bassett and Bullmore 2009; Rubinov et al. 2009). We
describe a statistical analysis that can be used with our
approach in order to infer differences in the directed
interregional structure as the cognitive task changes.
The method was tested on fMRI data from a study
where subjects undertake a visuo-motor tracking task
under various task difficulties. In Section 3 we present
the materials and methods for this fMRI data set. We
demonstrate the method in Section 4 by applying it to
study the connectivity during this tracking task. Our
analysis of the fMRI data here yields a distinct, tiered,
directed interaction structure which connects cortical
movement planning regions (as information sources)

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
87
to subcortical motor control regions (as information
destinations). The correlations of the strength of the
interregional relationships with task difficulty are then
analyzed to determine which pairs of regions have: a.
more in common, or b. a more pronounced directional
relationship as the task difficulty increases. Most sig-
nificantly, we identify an increased coupling between
regions involved in movement planning and execution
with task difficulty. The method is thus demonstrated
to be useful for investigating interregional structure
in fMRI studies, but it can certainly also be applied
to other modalities such as electrophysiological multi-
electrode array recordings.
2 Methods: interregional information structure
analysis technique
In this section, we present our method for detecting
directed information structure between brain regions
during cognitive tasks. The natural domain for measur-
ing information transfer is information theory (e.g. see
MacKay 2003), which provides a model-free, non-linear
platform for quantifying the information content of
individual variables, variable collections or exchanges
between variables.
We
first
describe
the
underlying
information-
theoretical measures in Section 2.1, then outline how
to extend them to measure multivariate and interre-
gional information transfer in Sections 2.1.3 and 2.1.4.
Subsequently, we describe how to measure the sta-
tistical significance of the interregional information
transfer in order to infer directed information links in
Section 2.2. Finally, we describe how to detect changes
in the directed structure as the cognitive task changes
in Section 2.3.
2.1 Information-theoretical measures
The
fundamental
quantity
in
information
theory
(MacKay 2003) is the Shannon entropy, which repre-
sents the uncertainty associated with any measurement
x of a random variable X (logarithms are in base 2,
giving units in bits): H(X) = −
x p(x) log2 p(x). The
joint entropy of two random variables X and Y is a
generalization to quantify the uncertainty of their joint
distribution: H(X, Y)=−
x,y p(x, y) log2 p(x, y). The
conditional entropy of X given Y is the average un-
certainty that remains about x when y is known:
H(X|Y) = −
x,y p(x, y) log2 p(x|y). While the stan-
dard definition of these values considers discrete vari-
ables, continuous variables can be considered using
techniques such as kernel estimation (Kantz and
Schreiber 1997).
In this work, we use two particular information-
theoretical measures to study the information transfer
between pairs of variables X and Y: the mutual in-
formation and the transfer entropy. Here, we describe
them and the manner in which they are extended to
provide a measure of transfer between two regions or
sets of variables, which is directional, nonlinear and
incorporates collective interactions.
2.1.1 Mutual information as a symmetric measure
of common information
The mutual information (MI) between X and Y mea-
sures the average reduction in uncertainty about x
(or entropy H of x) that results from knowing the value
of y, or vice versa:
I(X; Y) =

x,y
p(x, y) log2
p(x, y)
p(x)p(y).
(1)
In this way, I(X; Y) is a symmetric measure of the
common information between X and Y. Though it has
been previously used to measure directed information
transfer from one variable to another, this is not valid:
it is a static, symmetric measure of shared information.
This is useful in its own right: it may be considered as a
result, but not a direct measure, of information transfer.
The MI has been used for example to study functional
structure of cortical neural networks via analysis of
neuronal spike trains (Bettencourt et al. 2007).
Here, the MI is estimated for continuous-valued
variables using the techniques of Kraskov et al. (2004)
and Kraskov (2004). This technique uses kernel estima-
tion with enhancements designed specifically to handle
data with a small number of observations. We use a
window size of the two closest observations for the
Kraskov-estimators here.
Also, note that the conditional mutual information
between X and Y given Z is the MI between X and Y
when Z is known:
I(X; Y|Z) = H(X|Z) −H(X|Y, Z)
= H(Y|Z) −H(Y|X, Z).
(2)
2.1.2 Transfer entropy as a directed measure
of information transfer
The transfer entropy (TE) (Schreiber 2000) was intro-
duced as a directed measure of dynamic information

88
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
transfer from one variable to another. It quantifies the
information provided by a source node about a desti-
nation’s next state that was not contained in the past of
the destination. Specifically, the transfer entropy from a
source node Y to a destination X is the average mutual
information between the previous state of the source
yn and the next state of the destination xn+1 at time
n + 1, conditioned on the past k states of the destination
x(k)
n
= {xn, xn−1, . . . , xn−k+1}:1,2
Tk(Y →X) =

xn+1,x(k)
n ,yn
p

xn+1, x(k)
n , yn

× log2
p

xn+1|x(k)
n , yn

p

xn+1|x(k)
n
 .
(3)
Equivalently, we can express this directly as a condi-
tional MI, or as the sum of two MI quantities:
Tk(Y →X) = I

Y; X′|X(k)
,
(4)
Tk(Y →X) = I

Y;

X′, X(k)
−I

Y; X(k)
,
(5)
where X′ refers to the next state of the destination and
X(k) refers to its past k states.
The TE may be measured for any two time series
X and Y and is always a valid measure of the predic-
tive gain from the source, but only represents physical
information transfer when measured on a causal link
(Lizier and Prokopenko 2010), e.g. directed anatomical
connections. Here, we will use a history length k = 1
due to limitations of the number of observations. While
the TE is not a direct measure of causal effect, the
use of this short history length alters the character of
the measure towards inferring causal effect (Lizier and
Prokopenko 2010).
As per Eq. (5), the TE is computed here using two
MI estimators in the style of Kraskov et al. (2004)
1The TE can be formed as Tk,l(Y →X), where l past states of
Y are considered as the information source y(l)
n = {yn, yn−1, . . . ,
yn−l+1}.
2Note that the TE is equivalent to the directed transinformation
(DTI) measure under certain parameter settings for the DTI
(specifically M = 1 and N = 0) as per Hinrichs et al. (2006). Also,
note that the TE is equivalent to the specific formulation of the
DTI used in Saito and Harashima (1981) if the TE parameter l
(discussed in footnote 1) is set equal to k.
and Kraskov (2004).3 Again, we use a window size of
the two closest observations for the Kraskov-estimators
here.
The TE is then a non-linear, directional measure
for the information transfer between two variables. It
has been used for example to analyze cortical interac-
tions in simulated data (Honey et al. 2007), EEG data
(Chávez et al. 2003; Grosse-Wentrup 2008), and fMRI
data (Hinrichs et al. 2006), while a related measure was
used in the investigations in Liang et al. (2001). It is
important to note however that it does not detect the
information transfer due to the interaction between two
or more source variables. To capture this aspect, we
need to extend it to consider multivariate sources and
destinations.
2.1.3 Extending information transfer to multivariate
source and destination
Each of these measures of information transfer may
be trivially extended to consider joint variables as
the source and destination, i.e. we have I(X; Y) and
Tk(Y →X) = I(Y; X′|X(k)) where X and Y are joint
variables.
The multivariate mutual information I(X; Y) mea-
sures the amount of information shared between a set
of source variables Y and a set of destination variables
X. It has been studied for example in fMRI data in Chai
et al. (2009).
The multivariate transfer entropy Tk(Y →X) (see
Fig. 1) measures the amount of information that a set of
source variables Y provides about a set of destination
variables X, that was not contained in the past of the
destination set. While the multivariate TE has been
considered elsewhere (e.g. in genetic microarray data
sets (Tung et al. 2007)), we are not aware of its applica-
tion to fMRI data as yet. This is an important extension,
because multivariate voxel patterns are known to be
more informative about experimental conditions than
single voxel activity (Norman et al. 2006; Haynes and
Rees 2006). In particular, Tk(Y →X) will capture the
information transfer that occurs due to the interaction
between a set of source variables (e.g. an exclusive-OR
type interaction); univariate analysis cannot capture
this. As such, in the multivariate TE we now have
a measure for information transfer that is non-linear,
directional and captures collective interactions.
3Note the TE could be computed in the style of Kraskov et al.
(2004) and Kraskov (2004) but with a direct conditional MI
calculation as per Frenzel and Pompe (2007).

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
89
Fig. 1 Multivariate transfer entropy Tk(Y →X) = I(Y; X′|X(k))
from the set of source variables Y to the set of destination
variables X
Note however that the number of available ob-
servations limits the number of joint variables that
may be analyzed in this manner (e.g. see Lungarella
et al. 2005; Kraskov et al. 2004, and Section 2.2.2 and
Appendix A.2 later). This is because spurious corre-
lations are more frequently “detected” as this limit is
approached, increasing the error in measurement.
2.1.4 Measuring information transfer
between two regions of variables
Though theoretically appealing, it is generally im-
practical for us to compute the interregional infor-
mation transfer as the multivariate transfer entropy
Tk(Ra →Rb) between the complete sets of variables
in two regions Ra and Rb. This is because a “region”
in most neural applications contains many variables.4
Complete sampling of these massively multivariate
spaces would require many orders of magnitude more
observations in time than could be practically obtained
(see Lungarella et al. 2005; Kraskov et al. 2004). As
such, the most practical way to retain the benefits of this
measure is to compute the interregional information
transfer from region Ra to region Rb as the multivariate
TE averaged over a large number S of samples of pairs
of subsets of v variables in each region:
Tk,v

Ra →Rb

=

Tk

Ra,i →Rb, j
	
i, j .
(6)
Here i and j label the sample subsets Ra,i and Rb, j
of size v in each region. Again, while it is desirable
4For example, fMRI regions contain potentially hundreds of
voxels.
to average over all pairs of subsets from each region,
where:
S =

|Ra|
v

|Rb|
v

,
(7)
this is impractical for large region sizes |Ra| and |Rb|. In
practical situations, S must be limited with the sample
subsets selected randomly. Thus, Tk,v(Ra →Rb) pro-
vides a measure of interregional information transfer
that is non-linear, directional, captures collective inter-
actions and can be realistically implemented.
The same technique of averaging over subsets of size
v can be used with the multivariate MI to produce a
similar but non-directional measure, the interregional
mutual information:
Iv

Ra; Rb

=

I

Ra,i; Rb, j
	
i, j .
(8)
Indeed, this is done in Chai et al. (2009), where
the authors additionally condition on experimental
conditions.
Finally, we note that both measures may be averaged
over subjects s in order to assess group effects. This
gives the following expressions:
Tg
k,v

Ra →Rb

=

Tk,v

Ra →Rb
	
s ,
(9)
Ig
v

Ra; Rb

=

Iv

Ra; Rb
	
s .
(10)
2.2 Significance testing of information based
connectivity measures
The measures described above quantify the informa-
tion transfer between two single variables or sets of
variables. However, it is important to realize that
since they are computed from a finite number of ob-
servations, these measurements are actually random
variables.
Hence, the presence or absence of a connection (MI
or TE) needs to be assessed using statistical tests. In
the following we explain the statistical procedures used
to infer interregional links in this study. We use the
TE to illustrate the procedures; note that they are also
applicable to the MI.
2.2.1 Significance testing of the transfer entropy
First, we consider statistical significance testing for the
standard univariate TE measurement Tk(Y →X), as

90
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
Fig. 2 Significance testing of the transfer entropy measurement
Tk(Y →X) is performed by Section 2.2.1: 1 generating a number
of surrogate source time-series Y p by permuting the elements
yn of Y; 2 measuring Tk(Y p →X) for each surrogate Y p; 3, 4
determining the likelihood of Tk(Y →X) being distributed as
Tk(Y p →X). The method can be extended to multivariate Y and
X by generating corresponding surrogate source time-series Yp
by permuting the elements yn of Y (Section 2.2.2). Significance
testing of the interregional measure Tk,v(Ra →Rb) is similar
in principle, with small differences in execution described in
Section 2.2.2
previously described in Verdes (2005) and Chávez et al.
(2003). The null hypothesis H0 of the test is that the
state changes x(k)
n
→xn+1 of the destination X have no
temporal dependence on the source Y.
Assuming H0 true, we need to determine the distri-
bution of TE measurements Tk(Y p →X) under this
condition. This is done5 by (see Fig. 2):
1.
generating many surrogate time-series (say P of
them) by permuting the elements yn of the source
time series Y to obtain each surrogate Y p, then
2.
using each Y p to compute a surrogate TE to X:
Tk(Y p →X).
Importantly, these surrogates are computed from
the same number of observations, and the same dis-
tributions
p(yn) and
p(xn+1|x(k)
n ); the only differ-
ence is that the temporal dependence p(xn+1|x(k)
n , yn)
of the state changes of the destination on the source has
been destroyed. Thus the distribution of the surrogates
Tk(Y p →X) describes our expectation for Tk(Y →
X) under H0. We can then:
3.
determine a one-sided p-value of the likelihood
of our observation of Tk(Y →X) being distrib-
uted as Tk(Y p →X); i.e. the probability of observ-
ing a greater Tk(Y →X) than that actually mea-
sured, assuming H0. This can be done either by di-
rectly counting the proportion of surrogates where
5The following explanation assumes that only one previous state
yn of the source is used in the computation of Tk(Y →X); i.e.
the parameter l = 1 (see Schreiber 2000).
Tk(Y p →X) ≥Tk(Y →X), or assuming a normal
distribution of Tk(Y p →X) and computing the
p-value under a z-test.6
4.
For a given α value, we reject H0 when p < α,
concluding then that a significant directed temporal
relationship between the source and destination
does exist.
This
method
provides
an
objectively
determined
threshold for any TE measurement, and the given α
allows comparison to other pairs of variables.
2.2.2 Significance testing of interregional measures
Significance testing of the multivariate measure Tk(Y→
X) is a straightforward extension. Most importantly,
in generating the surrogates Yp we do not permute
the component time series Y1, Y2, . . . of Y individually
but permute the vectors yn at each time point n in Y
as a whole. This ensures that the only difference in
making the surrogate measurements Tk(Yp →X) is the
temporal relationship p(xn+1|x(k)
n , yn).
Significance testing can similarly be extended to the
interregional measure Tk,v(Ra →Rb), though there are
a number of subtle differences. The process begins by:
1.
generating P surrogate regional time-series Rp
a , by
permuting the elements ra,n of Ra, then
2.
using each Rp
a to compute a surrogate interregional
TE to Rb: Tk,v(Rp
a →Rb).
A crucial difference to significance testing for the uni-
variate TE is that these surrogate interregional TE
measurements are means of S surrogate multivariate
TE measurements Tk(Rp
a,i →Rb, j) for paired subsets i
and j of v variables. Importantly, the p-th permutation
is applied to the whole source region as Rp
a before the
S subsets i of v variables for each Rp
a,i are selected
from it. Also, for each of the P permutations Rp
a the
same subsets i and j must be selected as for the ac-
tual measurement Tk,v(Ra →Rb) in Eq. (6). Together,
these constraints ensure that the only difference in
making the surrogate measurements Tk(Rp
a,i →Rb, j) is
the temporal relationship p(rb,n+1|r(k)
b,n, ra,n).
We can then compute a p-value and draw a conclu-
sion on the significance of a directed interregional link
by comparing Tk,v(Ra →Rb) with the P surrogate val-
ues Tk,v(Rp
a →Rb) as per steps 3 and 4 in Section 2.2.1
above. Note that when using a z-test to compute
6We use z-tests in our experiments in Section 4 because we are
comparing to very low α values after making Bonferroni cor-
rections (see Section 2.2.2), which would render direct counting
quite sensitive to statistical fluctuations.

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
91
the p-value, we write the mean over all P surrogate
measures as:
T
P
k,v

Ra →Rb

=

Tk,v

Rp
a →Rb
	
p .
(11)
while the equivalent for the MI is labeled I
P
v .
It is important to note that the method does not
exclude bidirectional relationships (i.e. it does not just
look for which direction was strongest).
Finally, we note that in assessing connectivity be-
tween pairs within R regions, we should correct our sta-
tistical threshold of α for multiple comparisons. We use
the common Bonferroni correction and thus αc = α/N,
where N is the number of connections tested. For undi-
rected links (e.g. with MI) we have N = R(R −1)/2;
for directed links (e.g. with TE) we have N = R(R −1).
Note that except for the number of connections, which
is the double for the directed measure of TE, there is no
difference between the two measures from a statistical
point of view.
In Appendix A we demonstrate the ability of the
technique to correctly infer interregional links in a
numerical data set with relatively low, non-linear cou-
pling, and a small number of observations. We also
demonstrate some level of robustness of the technique
to undersampling in the data sets, and to inference
where data sets are logically related without being di-
rectly linked. Also, we demonstrate how the statistical
significance of the interregional measure can be used to
guide the selection of the number of joint variables v. In
particular, we quantitatively demonstrate that if v is too
large given the number of observations, the measure is
more susceptible to “detecting” spurious correlations
amongst the variables, introducing large variance into
the surrogates Tk,v(Rp
a →Rb) and thereby increasing
the p-value. Using the raw measurement alone will not
discern this situation.
2.2.3 Significance testing across a group of subjects
This method of identifying significant interregional
links outlined above is suitable for application on the
individual level for a given p = αc level. Here we de-
scribe how to summarize the structure of connectivity
for a set of regions across a group of subjects.
We can summarize the results for each subject s in a
matrix Ms(a, b) representing the connectivity from Ra
to Rb in the following way. For a significantly positive
interregional TE measurement7 between regions Ra
and Rb a 1 is entered at the corresponding position in
the matrix. A significantly negative TE is entered as
7We analyze the MI with separate matrices.
−1, while all other entries are set to zero. This matrix
summarizes the significance (non-zero values) and di-
rection of the effect (larger or smaller than chance, 1 or
−1 respectively).
To summarize the structure of the connectivity
across subjects, the significance matrices of the n sub-
jects are added: M(a, b) = 
s Ms(a, b). The values of
M(a, b) range from −n to n. A value of 0 indicates that
the number of positive and negative significant results
was equal across subjects (including the case, where
both values were 0). A positive number m indicates
that across all subjects, there were m subjects more
that had a significant effect with a positive mean, than
with a negative mean (e.g. 4 positive means and 0
negative means, but also 6 positive means and 2 neg-
ative means). The binomial distribution B(n, p = α),
with p = α being the statistical threshold for the sin-
gle subjects, approximates8 our expectation of m from
chance alone. As such, we compare m to B(n, p = α)
to determine whether the interregional relationship is
significant across the group.
2.3 Significance testing for modulation of connectivity
measures
In order to verify whether the connectivity between
brain regions is modulated by an experimental condi-
tion, we performed a second analysis. Since the exper-
imental condition in our test data set (in Section 3)
varied parametrically, we also assessed the modulation
of MI and TE by linear dependence of MI and TI on
experimental conditions. Note however, that other
modulation types (e.g. the difference between two con-
ditions) could be used in exactly the same way. We
fitted the MI or TE measures (mean over all sam-
ples) with a linear regression against the experimental
parameter of interest. Again this resulted in a true
measured slope of the regression and a distribution of
P slopes from the randomly permuted analyses. The
statistical testing was done as described in Section 2.2.3
by assessing the probability that the true value emerges
from a Gaussian distribution characterized by the mean
and variance of the random permutations.
With the TE measurements, these tests determine
changes in directed information transfer for a given re-
gion pair as a function of experimental condition. With
8Note that testing against a binomial distribution is a conservative
choice here, because it is less likely to get 6 significant results
(5 with positive mean and 1 with negative mean) than to get
4 positive ones only. However, when tested over the group we
consider the threshold according to the latter, which is truly
binomial.

92
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
Right SC
Left SC
V1
Right Cerebellum
Left PMd
Left SMA
Right PMd
Left SPL
Right SPL
Left M1
(a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
predictable
unpredictable
CW
CCW
CV
st
CW
CCW
CV
st
time
velocity
v
-v
time
velocity
v
-v
rest period
preparation
period
tracking period
warning signal
Fig. 3
Experimental design and regions of interest (a) Layout of
the screen. Dotted line: illustration of target path (not visible to
subjects), white circle: target, smaller red circle: cursor, gray cross:
fixation cross, small gray arrow: overall movement direction,
larger turquoise and red arrows: movement sequence, illustrating
successive cw- and ccw-components of the stimulus. (b) Velocity
over time. Upper panel: high predictability. Lower panel: low
predictability. cv constant velocity, cw clockwise, ccw counter-
clockwise, st sinusoidal transient. (c) Trial time course. Time
elapses from top to bottom. Successive periods of one trial are
given. Dotted line: path on which the target moves. Cross: fixation
cross, red dot: cursor, white dot: target, arrows indicate direction
of overall movement. (d) The 11 regions of interest from which
data was extracted for the information-theoretic analysis. See
Table 1 for full ROI names. The ROI in the basal ganglia is not
shown here
the MI measurements, the tests determine whether the
regions have more or less in common as a function of
the experimental condition.
Again we considered positive and negative slopes
separately and then merged them in the matrix
Ms(a, b). The significance levels αc are the same as
for the connectivity measures. We examined group
effects by comparing M(a, b) = 
s Ms(a, b) to bino-
mial distributions, as for the interregional measures
themselves.
3 Material: fMRI data set for manual tracking task
The method described above was applied to a data set
acquired to investigate the influence of predictability in
a visuo-motor coordination task. We provide here an
overview of the experimental design and preprocess-
ing necessary to understand the information-theoretic
analysis presented. A full description of all method-
ological details is given in Horstmann (2008).9
9See Chapter 5 of the PhD thesis which can be downloaded from
the German National Library: http://d-nb.info/992989221.
3.1 Subjects and experimental design
We analyzed the data of eight subjects (4 female, mean
age: 27.5 years, SD 3.8) that participated in an fMRI
experiment. All experiments were performed at the
Max Planck Institute for Brain and Cognitive Sciences
in Leipzig. During scanning, subjects were asked to
track with their right index finger a dot that was moving
along a circular outline not visible to the subject (see
Fig. 3).
Continuous visual feedback informed the subjects
about the position of the target and their finger tip. The
target followed an alternating clock-wise (cw) counter-
clock-wise (ccw) trajectory. The difficulty of the track-
ing task was altered between four different levels in
blocks of 16.8 s by changing the regularity of the cw vs.
ccw stretches (see Fig. 3(a) to (c)). 20 such blocks were
sampled for each difficulty. The visuo-motor tracking
task required the integration of visual input, motor
control and proprioceptive feedback, and the difficulty
levels were used to manipulate the predictability of the
movement that had to be tracked. We were interested
in possible changes in the interaction between brain
areas depending on the predictability of the target.

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
93
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) gradi-
ent echo EPI data (Siemens TRIO 3T, TR = 2.8 s,
TE = 30 ms, matrix: 64 × 64, FOV = 19.2 cm, reso-
lution: 3 × 3 × 3 mm, 42 slices) was acquired during the
tracking task from each subject.
3.2 Preprocessing and extraction of regions of interest
We first performed standard preprocessing including
motion correction and spatial normalization on the
data (Friston et al. 2006). In order to extract potential
regions of interest (ROI) the preprocessed data was
analyzed with a general linear model (GLM). We then
looked for a general effect of interest for tracking
(F-test) and extracted regions based on a significance
level of p < 0.05 (family wise error corrected). This
was used to find regions that were activated during
the task. In addition to the regions activated by the
task, two anatomical masks of the left and right su-
perior colliculus (SC) were included, because we were
particularly interested in a possible involvement of the
SC in the task (Lunenburger et al. 2001). For a de-
tailed description of this analysis see Horstmann (2008).
Overall, this procedure yielded 11 ROIs of different
sizes (see Fig. 3 and Table 1). These served as ROIs for
the information-based connectivity analysis. From each
ROI, we extracted the multivariate fMRI data during
the tracking periods (20 tracking periods for each of the
4 difficulty levels, with 7 functional images per tracking
period). In this way, we obtained for each ROI and
difficulty level a data matrix X of dimension NI × NV
for each subject, where NI = 140 is the number of func-
tional images per difficulty level and NV is the number
of voxels in the region as given in Table 1. In order to
avoid spurious results due to motion, scanner drifts or
global brain signal fluctuations, we corrected for the
temporal signal of each voxel for motion and global
Table 1 Table of regions of interest analyzed in the visuo-motor
tracking task
Name of region
Abbreviation
Number of
voxels NV
Left superior colliculus
lSC
42
Right superior colliculus
rSC
35
Right cerebellum
rCer
185
Right basal ganglia
rBG
74
Primary visual cortex
V1
63
Left primary motor cortex
lM1
158
Left supplementary motor area
lSMA
24
Left dorsal premotor cortex
lPMd
296
Right dorsal premotor cortex
rPMd
32
Left superior parietal lobule
lSPL
56
Right superior parietal lobule
rSPL
43
(average over the whole brain) fluctuations. For this,
the average signal over the whole brain was computed
and then together with the 6 motion parameter esti-
mates from the SPM preprocessing regressed out of all
voxel time courses, i.e. the voxel time courses were or-
thogonalized to these seven time courses (global mean
plus 6 motion parameters).
4 Results: application to fMRI experimental data
In this section, we describe the application of the
above methods for determining interregional structure
from an fMRI data set of a visuo-motor tracking task.
We also examine the changes in this structure due
to changes in the difficulty of the visuo-motor task is
altered.
Using the method described in Section 2.1 we ob-
tained for each subject interregional MI and TE mea-
sures for the dataset consisting of multivariate data
from the 11 ROIs (see Section 3). We averaged over
S = 3,000 sampled subset pairs of v = 3 voxels for
each interregional measure.10 In addition, the data
was sorted into 4 difficulty levels. The connectivity
measures between each pair of ROIs could be defined
for each difficulty as the mean of the S = 3000 samples
of connectivity.
To
test
whether
the
connection
between
two
ROIs is significantly different from chance (following
Section 2.2.2), we averaged across the 4 difficulty levels
(and as indicated above across samples). The resulting
value was compared to the distribution obtained from
P = 300 surrogate measurements, for which we calcu-
lated exactly the same value. We used a one-sided z-test
(see Section 2.2.3) with significance level of α = 0.05,
which was corrected for multiple comparisons as αc =
0.05/55 for the MI structure and αc = 0.05/110 for the
TE structure. In comparing across the group (as per
Section 2.2.3), we would expect M(a, b) to follow
a binomial distribution B(n = 8, p = 0.05) by chance
alone and note that a significance level of pg = 0.05/N
(corrected for multiple comparisons) is reached if at
least 3 subjects individually show a significant effect.
Traditionally, the 140 time observations for each
difficulty here would be seen as too small a data set for
10We explain in Appendix B how the number of joint voxels
v = 3 was selected to balance the ability to capture multivari-
ate interactions with the limitations of the number of available
observations. Also in that appendix, we explore the effect of
altering v (including conducting univariate analysis with v = 1).
Furthermore, the appendix explores the effect of altering the
number of subset pairs S and surrogate measurements P.

94
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
the application of information-theoretical measures.
However, our harnessing of underlying Kraskov-type
estimators (Kraskov et al. 2004; Kraskov 2004) and
our focus on statistical significance not only allows our
technique to gain insights from this small data set, but
also to do so in a multivariate fashion. The numerical
surrogate data set analyzed in Appendix A.1 demon-
strated the ability of our technique to correctly infer in-
terregional links in data sets of this size, with relatively
low, non-linear coupling.
In the next sections, we describe several aspects of
the obtained interregional connectivity structure ob-
served during this visuo-motor tracking task. We show
that two subnetworks can be isolated based on the
average MI between brain regions. We then suggest
based on TE measures that the network is organized
in a 3-tier directed structure, with the top two tiers
corresponding to the subnetworks identified with MI.
Finally, we report changes in the connectivity structure
that depend on the difficulty of the visuo-motor track-
ing task. The main focus in the following is to present
the information measure methods and give some inter-
pretations of their results. A more detailed account of
the regional activations patterns, their dependence on
difficulty and an in depth physiological interpretation
will be published elsewhere.
4.1 Subdivision of visuo-motor network based on MI
The interregional MI
Iv(Ra; Rb) was significantly
higher in the true data than in the random permutations
for all possible pairs of regions across the group. That
is, for all 55 undirected connections a significance level
of ps < 0.05 (Bonferroni corrected) was reached in at
least 3 subjects, which is significant across the group as
explained above. On one hand this is insightful, as it
indicates that all of the ROIs have much in common as
the subjects undertake this visuo-motor task. However,
we seek more detailed insights into the information
structure in place here.
Thus, we examine the average interregional MIs
across all subjects for our set of ROIs, with the sym-
metric matrix Ga,b = Ig
v(Ra; Rb) −I
g,P
v
(Ra; Rb) (see
Eqs. (10) and (11)). Note that average MI was defined
relative to the value averaged across all subjects ex-
pected by chance: I
g,P
v
(Ra; Rb) =

I
P
v (Ra; Rb)
	
s. We an-
alyzed this matrix of MI values by applying spectral
reordering, an algorithm that reorders the rows and
columns of the matrix to concentrate the mass of the
matrix as close as possible to the diagonal (Johansen-
Berg et al. 2004). Spectral reordering can be used to
 
 
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
To area
From area
(a)
lSC
V1
rBG
lPMD
lSMA
lSPL
rSC
rCer
rPMD
rSPL
lM1
(b)
Mutual Information
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
S
S
S
Fig. 4
Mutual information structure (a) The average interre-
gional MI (see scalebar on the right) across the group is plotted
for all connections. White dashed lines are inserted to indicate the
borders between the clusters suggested by spectral reordering.
All estimated MIs were significantly higher than chance in at
least 3 of the subjects, and thus significant at the group level.
Here, we show the average value MI over all 8 subjects. Note
that the matrix is symmetric and that there are no entries on
the diagonal (indicated by the bold white line and letters S and
C to illustrate the two subnetworks). For illustration reasons the
maximum gray scale value was chosen to be Iv = 0.065. Only
the MI between the two SC is higher (Iv(lSC,rSC) = 0.164).
(b) Summary of the subdivision of the 11 ROIs into two large
clusters suggested by spectral reordering. All 11 regions that
entered the analysis are drawn as circles and arranged to the left
and right according to their anatomical location. Cortical areas
are indicated by gray circles, subcortical regions by white circles.
The two clusters illustrated in subfigure (a) are illustrated by
the dashed rectangles. Cortical cluster (C, gray circles with solid
outline), SC cluster (S, white circles with solid outlines). The three
remaining ROIs are also indicated (V1, gray with dashed outline,
rBG and rCer, white with dashed outline). ROIs not belonging to
any cluster are drawn with dashed outlines. Note that V1 is placed
on the left rather than in the middle for illustrative purposes. All
abbreviations for brain regions are the same as defined in Table 1

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
95
extract clusters in connectivity structure that is repre-
sented by a symmetric matrix. The reordered average
MI is shown in Fig. 4(a). The spectral reordering clearly
reveals two main structures: a premotor-motor corti-
cal subnetwork consisting of areas M1, lSMA, lPMd,
rPMd, lSPL and rSPL, and a smaller cluster consisting
only of the two superior colliculi. The three other ROIs
(V1, lCer and rBG) are only weakly connected to these
two structures. Figure 4 summarizes the results from
this first part of the analysis.
4.2 Directed information structure
The interregional TE was significantly higher for the
measured data (compared to the surrogate data) for a
number of directed links at the group level (i.e. where
Tk,v was significant for 3 or more subjects as described
earlier). Figure 5 summarizes the directed information
structure determined here.
This reveals a distinct three-tier directed information
transfer structure, which is quite illustrative about the
information structure during the visuo-motor task. The
top two tiers correspond to the premotor-motor cortical
subnetwork and the SC cluster identified using the av-
erage interregional MIs in Fig. 4. The top tier provides
directed information to the middle tier, and both top
and middle provide directed information inputs to the
bottom tier. This bottom tier contains the right cere-
bellum, which is involved in motor control for the right
hand, which was used during the experiment. The basal
ganglia region remains uninvolved, but the primary
visual cortex V1 appears to receive some directed input
from the premotor-motor cortical subnetwork (rSPL).
This tiered structure is in line with the tasks in-
volved in the experiment. The tracking task requires
visuo-motor integration and precise computation of the
motor output. The premotor-motor cortical network,
which is involved in such tasks, should send the relevant
information to the superior colliculi and the cerebel-
lum, where basic movement control mechanisms will
be computed. Also, the superior colliculi are involved
in guiding eye position and attention, which is crucial in
the task requiring visuo-motor control.
4.3 Changes in information structure
Significance testing of the task (difficulty) dependency
of interregional information transfer was performed
for each ROI pair, using both TE and MI. To assess
the changing nature of the directed and undirected
relationships respectively, we computed a linear fit of
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
n<3
n=3
n=4
n=5
n=6
lSC
V1
rBG
lPMD
lSMA
lSPL
rSC
rCer
rPMD
rSPL
lM1
To area
From area
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5
Directed information structure (a) Connection matrix
plotting the number of subjects for which each interregional link
is found to be significant with the interregional TE. Entries in the
connections matrix are discrete, indicating the number of subjects
for which the corresponding connection was significant. A link is
significant at the group level if significant for 3 or more subjects
here (see Section 4). The gray scale values show the number of
subjects for which a link is significant (see legend on the right).
The names of the regions are the same as given in Table 1.
(b) Representation of the directed interregional structure as a
graph. The same layout of cortical areas as in Fig. 4 is presented.
The thickness and style of lines indicates the number of subjects
which had a significant TE connection between the correspond-
ing regions. See legend in subfigure (a) for a description of line
styles
task difficulty for the TE and MI (average over S =
3,000 samples) respectively, and compared resulting
value to the null hypothesis of it having been drawn
from the same distribution as the P = 300 permutations
as outlined in Section 2.3.
The MI between several pairs of regions is mod-
ulated with task difficulty consistently across subjects

96
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
(a)
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
rSC
lSC
V1
rCer
lBG
rSPL
M1
lSMA
lSPL
lPMD
rPMD
n<3
n=3
To area
From area
lSC
V1
rBG
lPMD
lSMA
lSPL
rSC
rCer
rPMD
rSPL
lM1
(b)
Fig. 6 Task dependent modulation of mutual information (a)
The matrix representing the number of significant modulations
of MI found across the group is plotted for all connections.
Gray values code the number of significant subjects (all of which
displayed an increase in MI with task difficulty). Note that the
matrix is symmetric and that there are no entries on the diagonal
(indicated by the bold white line). White dashed lines are inserted
to indicate the borders between the cortical and the superior
colliculus clusters found in the MI analysis. (b) Summary of MI
modulation with task difficulty. Brain areas are drawn as describe
in Fig. 4. Changes observed in 3 subjects are drawn as solid lines.
See also the legend in subfigure (a). Abbreviations are defined in
Table 1
(see Fig. 6). As outlined above (Section 2.2.3) the crite-
rion for significance was that at least 3 subjects showed
a significant slope (in the same direction). We did not
find any significant changes with respect to tracking
difficulty for the directed TE measure.
All observed changes are due to an increase in MI
between ROIs as a result of an increased difficulty of
the tracking. Interestingly, MI was increased within the
cortical premotor-motor network (left SMA, left and
right PMD and left M1), and in the connections from
M1 to the cerebellum.
5 Discussion
We have shown that the method presented here was
successfully applied to an fMRI data set from a visuo-
motor tracking task. The results suggest a structured
network that is in line with what would be expected
from the requirements of the task. Importantly, we also
detected changes in the network structure based on
multivariate MI measures. As fMRI is an indirect mea-
sure of neuronal activity, the interpretation of results
that are based on interactions between voxels is not
always straight forward. In addition, the temporal res-
olution of fMRI does not allow us to measure data at a
rate fast enough to capture direct neuronal interactions.
5.1 Cortico-subcortical structure involved
in visuo-motor tracking
The set of regions that entered the information-
theoretic analysis was further subdivided by the analy-
sis in two respects. First, MI measures suggest a
subdivision of the regions into a large cortical cluster
that contains several motor and premotor areas, a small
collicular cluster that contains the two superior colliculi,
and a third set of regions that contains the ROIs in
V1, the Basal Ganglia and the Cerebellum. Second, the
TE measure revealed a directed connectivity structure
with the following general pattern: Cortical regions are
connected via forward links to the superior colliculi,
and cortical regions as well as the superior colliculi
have directed links to the right Cerebellum. Within
the predefined set of regions, the structure of these
links suggests that cortical premotor and motor areas
influence the superior colliculi and that both of them
influence the cerebellum.
While the MI measures simultaneous fluctuations
in the fMRI signals, the TE tries to infer a directed
influence which is much more susceptible to problems
of temporal resolution in the data acquisition. The low
temporal resolution of fMRI puts some limitations to
the interpretation of the TE results. Although we estab-
lished a directed structure within the voxel space of the
fMRI, this does not necessarily mean that the directed
links correspond directly to neuronal connections be-
tween the respective regions. The temporal resolution
of the fMRI experiment (TR = 2.8 s) is much slower
than typical time scales of neuronal processing. For
example, the delay of the onset of spiking of neurons
in visual areas in response to a visual stimulus increases
by the order of 10 ms only between one visual area
and a second area that is one level higher in the vi-
sual hierarchy (Bullier 2001). Therefore, fast neuronal
interactions might be too fast to be captured by fMRI

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
97
as directed links. In our study, one might, e.g., expect
to find some level of input from the visual cortex (V1)
to the movement planning regions (since planning re-
quires the visual information of where the object is).
Such a directed connection was not found (see Fig. 5).
That is to say, the raw visual information about where
the object is may still influence the activity in the
movement planning regions, but in a way that is too fast
to be detected directly using fMRI. The directed link
from the premotor-motor network to visual cortex, on
the other hand can be interpreted as predictive effects
on the visual system by modulating attention in the pe-
riphery while maintaining visual fixation at the center
of the visual field. This link might be captured because
in the visuo-motor tracking paradigm the general task
structure was relatively slow, and therefore top-down
attentional signals might modulate more slowly than
the bottom-up visual input. The top-down effect does
not need to be at or slower than the time resolution of
fMRI here (TR = 2.8 s) to be detected though, since
we have demonstrated some level of robustness of our
technique to undersampling in the underlying data in
Appendix A.4.
In addition, there might be a confound in TE mea-
sures of directed information between signals in the
different regions, when it comes to interpreting these
links directly on the neuronal level. The hemodynamic
delay can differ between different cortical regions up
to around 1 s (Handwerker et al. 2004), which might
in the worst case invert the temporal succession if one
compares the TE between two regions from BOLD
(blood oxygen level dependent) data to the real neu-
ronal firing. Finally, it might well be that a bidirectional
link on the neuronal level results in an increased MI
between two regions, but is not visible in the TE struc-
ture, because the neuronal interactions are too fast to
be captured by fMRI. These issues do not affect other
data modalities (e.g. EEG), but need to be taken into
account when interpreting the TE results from fMRI
data here.
5.2 Modulation of MI with task difficulty
In applications of fMRI within cognitive neuroscience,
it is, generally, of particular interest to detect changes
that are caused by some experimental manipulations. In
addition to the general structure, we provide evidence
that the method presented here is able to find such task
related changes in the connectivity structure based on
the MI measurement.
Interestingly, two types of connections showed an in-
crease in MI, i.e. functional connectivity, with increased
tracking difficulty. First, the result points towards the
need of an increased cortico-cortical interaction, if a
visuo-motor task becomes less predictable, and thus
more difficult. This increased interaction is reflected in
the connections that are modulated within the cortical
cluster (see Fig. 6). Second, an increase in interactions
between motor cortex and the cerebellum is in ac-
cordance with the increased need of error correcting
movements, when the predictability of the target is
low. In accordance, earlier studies have shown that
the cerebellum is involved in such on-line adjustments
and that M1 and the cerebellum interact during early
phases of motor learning (Tanaka et al. 2009; Penhune
and Doyon 2005). Based on our statistics we did not
find any significant changes that involve the SC, which
might have been expected for such a task (Lunenburger
et al. 2001).
Interestingly, these changes show up only in the MI
and not in the TE. There are two possible interpreta-
tions of this. First, the interaction between the regions
that show a modulation of MI with task difficulty could
be bidirectional. This is likely to be the case for the
cortico-cortical connections. In fact, we did not observe
a directed link between these regions. Second, it is pos-
sible that the changes in MI are the result of relatively
rapid fluctuations due to an unidirectional connection
between two regions. Such changes might be reflected
in the MI structure, but would be missed by the TE
measure, because of the slow temporal resolution of
fMRI.
5.3 What is the effect of using multivariate
interactions?
The main results reported in this paper are based on
an analysis that captures information structure between
sets of v = 3 voxels in regions of interest defined based
on a general activation during the task. Appendix B
describes how v = 3 was selected using p-values from
our statistical significance technique. An additional
question that needs to be addressed then, is whether an
observed structure depends on the choice of v. In par-
ticular, is there any difference between the multivariate
analysis presented here and a univariate analysis that
averages over sets of 1 voxel in each region or even
considers the average time course within the ROI? If
the analysis is multivariate, does the dimensionality of
the studied interactions change the structure?
We have addressed these questions in a series of
additional analyses, summarized in Appendix B. For all
three information structures (TE, MI and modulation
of MI) the multivariate analyses are correlated with the

98
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
univariate analyses suggesting that part of the multi-
variate structure resides on univariate interactions that
are captured by the multivariate analysis as well. How-
ever, all structures derived with multivariate analyses
are much more similar to each other than they are to
the univariate analyses. Hence, there is a consistent
structure that is captured by the multivariate, but not
by the univariate interactions.
Importantly, Appendix B also shows that analysis
using the average time course within the ROIs was not
able to infer any interregional links at the group level.
5.4 Methodological considerations
We have shown that despite the low number of samples,
multivariate information structure can be estimated
from fMRI data. However, there are some method-
ological questions that need to be discussed. One major
problem of measuring neural interactions with fMRI is
the fact that BOLD fMRI provides an indirect measure
of neuronal activity only (Logothetis et al. 2001). The
low temporal sampling rate in the order of seconds
but also the low pass filtering effects of the hemody-
namic response function prevent us from accessing di-
rectly the underlying neuronal connectivity. That said,
Appendix A.4 shows that our technique has some
theoretical robustness to undersampling and memory
in the data (which simulates low-pass filtering). An-
other issue is that we know from Appendix A.3 that
our technique can infer connections where the data
sets have a logical relationship but are not directly
connected. However, Appendix A.3 also shows the
circumstances under which this can occur, highlight-
ing our technique is much less sensitive to these un-
desirable inferences than actual connections, and we
suggest extensions using the complete transfer entropy
(Lizier et al. 2008) that may improve the technique in
these cases. In the absence of such an extension, we
perform the simple “comparisons amongst connected
triplets” described in Appendix A.3 at the group level
for the TE structure, with the results suggesting that
the connected triples involving the left SC are unlikely
to contain pathway and common cause false positives,
but not suggesting the same evidence against the right
SC →right Cerebellum link being a common cause
false positive.11 Finally, we note that the finding of
11As described in Appendix A.3, this simple test does not mean
that the right SC →right Cerebellum link is a false positive; it
simply does not add evidence against the false positive.
changes in the MI structure based on changes in the
task difficulty also shows that modulations in the con-
nectivity structure can be captured. Although we can-
not infer the presence of direct underlying neuronal
connections, we can certainly assess whether the cou-
pling between two regions changes in a task dependent
manner.
We have applied the method to a data set that used
a block design. In this way, the experimental conditions
(difficulty) could be varied slowly, even compared to
the temporal resolution of fMRI, and thus fluctuations
within each experimental condition can be captured.
Many fMRI studies, however, use event related designs,
where the brain response to short events is investi-
gated. Although from a technical point of view, it is
straight forward to apply the method to event related
data, there are certainly limitations that need to be
considered. In particular, the locking of the response to
short events causes large event driven responses. These
onset responses are not informative of the task itself
and thus it is necessary to remove them, which can be
done, e.g., by a linear regression model. An additional
problem will be the even more limited number of data
samples available. Usually, inter trial intervals in event
related fMRI designs are relatively short, which results
in considerable overlap of the BOLD responses from
different events. This is not a problem if a standard gen-
eral linear model is calculated, because the parts can be
separated statistically. But it will make it very difficult
to estimate any kind of interaction. We thus think that
the study of interactions in fMRI is preferably done
using a block design experiment.
5.5 Final conclusion
We have presented a novel approach to analyzing
functional connectivity of time-series data to establish
interregional information structure. Its combined char-
acteristics (being information-theoretical, asymmetric
and multi-variate) distinguish it in identifying direc-
tional, non-linear, and collective interactions between
regions in a model-free manner. Furthermore the
specific information-theoretic estimators used and the
focus on statistical significance allows the technique to
provide insights from comparatively small data sets.
In this paper, the method was applied to fMRI
data from a visuo-motor tracking task. Here, it iden-
tified an interesting three-tier interregional information
structure, with movement planning regions providing
input to visual perception and control regions, and
both these tiers driving motor execution. The method
also identified increased coupling between movement

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
99
planning and motor execution regions as the tracking
task became more difficult.
The presented method has thus been demonstrated
to be useful for investigating interregional structure in
fMRI studies, but importantly it could also be applied
to other modalities such as electrophysiological multi-
electrode array recordings, where the measured data
has a better temporal resolution and allows one to draw
direct conclusions about neuronal interactions.
Future work will include exploring whether the ex-
tensions suggested in Appendix A.3 can correct unde-
sirable inference of indirect logical relationships. We
also seek to investigate information transfer on shorter
time scales as measurement technology improves, in-
cluding potentially identifying coherent information
transfer structures in the cortex (Lizier et al. 2008;
Gong and van Leeuwen 2009).
Acknowledgements
JL and JH thank Thorsten Kahnt for dis-
cussions on the statistical analysis. JL thanks Mikail Rubinov for
helpful suggestions. JL thanks the Australian Research Coun-
cil Complex Open Systems Research Network (COSNet) for
a travel grant that partially supported this work. JDH thanks
the Max Planck Society, the Bernstein Computational Neuro-
science Program of the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research (BMBF Grant 01GQ0411) and the Excellence
Initiative of the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (DFG Grant GSC86/1-2009). MP is grateful for a 2009
Research Grant from The Max Planck Institute for Mathematics
in the Sciences (Leipzig, Germany) on Information-driven Self-
Organization and Complexity Measures.
Author contributions: J.-D.H., J.H. and A.H. conceived the
fMRI experiment. A.H. performed the fMRI experimental work.
J.H. and A.H. pre-processed the data. J.L. and M.P. con-
ceived the information-theoretical analysis. J.L. performed the
information-theoretical analysis. J.H. performed the statistical
analysis. J.L. and J.H. wrote the paper.
Appendix A: Application to numerical data sets
In order to explore the properties of the technique pre-
sented in Section 2, we apply it to a number of artificial
data sets in this section. In particular, we demonstrate:
the efficacy of the technique when applied to small
data sets with a small amount of nonlinear, collective
coupling; how to use the statistical significance to guide
selection of the number of joint voxels under analysis v;
some robustness to undersampling, and to inference of
directed links where only a logical overlap exists.
A.1 Collective, non-linear interregional coupling
The primary test of the technique involves two mul-
tivariate “regions” of 10 variables, X = {X1, . . . , X10}
and Y = {Y1, . . . , Y10}, in which the variables of Y
influence X in a collective, non-linear fashion under
a range of coupling strengths. The coupling strength
is described by the number of variables C in X which
are influenced by those of Y, and the level χ to which
those elements in X are determined from Y. For a given
C and χ, the value xi,n+1 of variable Xi at time step
n + 1 = {2 . . . 140} is determined as:
xi,n+1 =
ϵxxi,n+ χy j,nyl,n+ (1 −ϵx −χ)g for i ≤C
ϵxxi,n+
(1 −ϵx)g
for i > C
,
(12)
where g is a zero mean white noise process with σ =
1, and j and l are indices of variables Y j and Yl in Y
randomly selected to provide a joint input to Xi for the
duration of the time series. The initial values xi,n=1 are
determined by the zero mean white noise process g, and
we have:
y j,n+1 = ϵyy j,n + (1 −ϵy)g.
(13)
Our test data sets thus involve one-way coupling
Y →X, where the coupling is determined in a non-
linear manner from multiple values within the source
region. For our first experiment here, we generate
time-series sets X and Y for all combinations of C =
{1, . . . , 10} and χ = {0.00, 0.05, . . . , 0.30} with ϵx = 0.7
and ϵy = 0.0. With the additional factors of the rela-
tively low influence of Y on X (low χ/ϵx) and a small
number of observations,12 this has been specifically
designed to be a particularly difficult data set from
which to correctly detect a directed interregional link.
We measured the interregional TEs Tk,v(X →Y)
and Tk,v(Y →X) and interregional MI Iv(X; Y) with
v = 2 and k = 1, using Kraskov-estimators with a win-
dow size of the two closest observations. We then com-
puted their statistical significance using the techniques
we presented in Section 2 with S = 2025 and P = 100.
We correct for multiple comparisons across the many
combinations of C and χ in each direction.
Figure 7(a) demonstrates that the interregional TE
detects the interregional link Y →X fairly consistently
for the data sets with larger numbers of coupled vari-
ables C and coupling strengths χ. No false positives are
returned in the situation of zero coupling (χ = 0.00) or
in the reverse direction X →Y (not shown).
The interregional MI does not detect the directed
link at any coupling strength (results not shown). This
12Our use of 140 time steps for each C and χ combination
matches the length of fMRI time series analyzed in Section 4.

100
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
χ
C
"tePValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
10-4
3.57×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
(a)TE
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
χ
C
"miTimeDiff1PValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
10-4
3.57×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
(b) MI with time difference 1
Fig. 7
p-values from z-tests against surrogates for the Y →X
relationship in Appendix A.1 for each data set (C, χ) for: (a)
the interregional TE Tk,v(Y →X); and (b) the interregional MI
Iv(X(n + 1); Y(n)) with time difference of one step from Y to X.
Using correction for multiple comparisons in both Y →X and
X →Y, the cutoff for statistical significance for a desired α =
0.05 becomes αc = 3.57 × 10−4. “X” marks data sets for which
the relevant measure infers a statistically significant link Y →X.
The TE infers a statistically significant link for 24 of the largest
combinations of (C, χ), while the MI with time difference does
so for 9 combinations. The actual minimum p-values in each case
are several orders of magnitude smaller than 10−6, corresponding
to z-scores of 11.1 for the TE and 5.27 for the MI with time
difference
is because the simultaneous values of X(n) and Y(n)
at a given time point n are unrelated (Y(n) influences
X(n + 1), but has no relationship to X(n) in this data
set). Importantly, it does not produce any false positives
here. We also measured the interregional MI with a
1-step time difference between X and Y; this breaks
the symmetry of the measure, and makes detection of
the influence of Y(n) on X(n + 1) possible. As shown
in Fig. 7(b), the statistical significance of this measure
detects the influence Y →X at some of the strongest
couplings, and returns no false positives for X →Y.
The measure is not as effective as the TE however: it
correctly infers the influence for a smaller number of
data sets (C, χ), and with generally larger and less con-
sistent p-values for these larger (C, χ). This is perhaps
because it ignores the mixing of the coupling from Y
with the influence of the past of each Xi via the ϵxxi,n
terms in Eq. (12). The TE (which accounts for the past
of the destination) is more sensitive to this mixing.
The success of our statistical inference with the inter-
regional TE in this particularly difficult example is an
important result. This type of non-linear coupling can-
not be detected by linear methods (e.g. Granger causal-
ity), nor with the non-directional MI. Even when the
MI has a directionality induced in it, it is not as sensitive
as the TE here. Similarly, we verified that single-variate
analysis (with v = 1 voxel) was much less effective:
the TE could only detect the regional link at the
very largest (C, χ) combination (see Appendix A.2).
Finally, we note that a minimum coupling strength is
required before detection by our method to ensure
statistical significance, which is an important property
to protect against false positives.13
A.2 Effect of multivariate analysis
Continuing with the same time series sets X and Y
for various (C, χ) from Appendix A.1, we investigate
the effect of altering the number of joint variables v
included in the measure Tk,v(Y →X).
13The minimum strengths required for detection here may seem
large at first glance, however one must bear in mind the specific
difficulties built into this data set: the non-linear coupling, the
small number of samples, and relatively low influence of the
Y on X (low χ/ϵx). Also our correction for a large number
of comparisons is a factor here. This being said, correcting for
multiple comparisons provides important protection against false
positives so must be maintained when investigating all values of
C here.

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
101
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 0
 2
4
 6
 8
 10
Directed inferences
v
(a) Total number of inferences
 1e-16
 1e-14
 1e-12
 1e-10
 1e-08
 1e-06
 0.0001
 0.01
 1
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
p-value
v
(b) p-values for (C = 8,  = 0.25)
χ
Fig. 8
Analysis of the effect of increasing the number of joint
variables v when using the interregional TE, Tk,v(Y →X), for
inference of the Y →X link in Appendix A.1. (a) the number of
data sets (C, χ) that the link Y →X was successfully inferred for.
(b) the p-values from z-tests against surrogates for one particular
data set (C = 8, χ = 0.25). The horizontal line marks the cutoff
for statistical significance (corrected for multiple comparisons) at
αc = 3.57 × 10−4
Figure 8(a) shows that inference of the directed link
Y →X at the larger (C, χ) combinations is stable for
v between 2 and 6, with the correct inference made for
roughly the same number of (C, χ) data sets here. As a
more focused example, Fig. 8(b) shows the relevant p-
values versus v for the particular data set (C = 8, χ =
0.25), demonstrating that inference of the directed link
could be made here for v between 2 and 7.
Certainly, one would like to maximize number of
joint variables v when using Tk,v(Y →X), since this
provides more scope for capturing multi-variate inter-
actions. Also, increasing v even above the number of
variables involved in interactions in the data can be
advantageous. This is because it raises the proportion
of sample sets Rx,i of v variables in the source which
include a full set of variables that interact to produce
an outcome in the sample destination set Ry, j. For ex-
ample, increasing v above 2 here raises the proportion
of our S sample sets which include both source vari-
ables Y j and Yl that causally effect one of the selected
destination variables Xi (see Eq. (12)).
However, increasing v brings us closer to the limits
imposed by the number of observations available to us.
This is the case for whichever estimator we choose to
use. For example, the Kraskov estimators in use here
are known to have their error in measurement increase
with the number of joint variables considered for a
fixed number of observations (see Fig. 15 in Kraskov
et al. 2004). Similarly, spurious relationships can appear
more easily in the low-sample limit, making the dis-
tribution of measures on the surrogate data sets more
spread out, and therefore raising the relevant p-value.
These plots demonstrate that the number of joint
variables v can only be increased to a certain level be-
fore being limited by the number of available samples.
The p-values with respect to v explicitly show where
these limits are.
A.3 Overlapping data sets without direct relationships
We then investigate a number of instances where inter-
regional data sets logically overlap in some way with-
out having a direct relationship. These instances are
known to present difficulty for inference techniques,
which may infer a directed interregional link when
only an indirect relationship is present (as described in
“problem 4” in Ramsey et al. (2010)). We explore the
conditions under which our technique may be suscepti-
ble to making these inferences.
First, we explore the pathway structure Z →Y →X.
We generate data sets where the individual relation-
ships between the directed pairs Z →Y and Y →X
are each described by Eqs. (12) and (13), with C = 10,
ϵx, ϵy = 0.7 and variable (χ, ϵz).
The p-values from our analysis are displayed in
Fig. 9. Of course, we find that the actual directed link
Z →Y inference depends on the coupling strength (as
per Appendix A.1). It does not seem to have a particu-

102
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
χ
εz
"te-TopRegionToMiddle-pValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
1.49×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
(a) p-values for direct link Z→Y
 
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
χ
εz
"te-TopRegionToBottom-pValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
1.49×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
(b) p-values for indirect link Z→X
 
Fig. 9
p-values from analysis of direct and indirect interre-
gional relationships for the pathway structure Z →Y →X in
Appendix A.3. The analysis is performed using the interregional
transfer entropy with v = 2. “X” marks data sets for which a sta-
tistically significant directed link is inferred. Using correction for
multiple comparisons in all 6 possible directed relationships, the
cutoff for statistical significance for a desired α = 0.05 becomes
αc = 1.49 × 10−4. The actual minimum p-values in each case are
several orders of magnitude smaller than 10−6, corresponding to
z-scores of 14.6 and 6.02 respectively
lar dependence on the self-connection or memory ϵz in
the source (not investigated in Appendix A.1).
Figure 9(b) shows that it is possible for our tech-
nique to infer a directed link Z →X where the real
underlying relationship Z →Y →X is in fact an indi-
rect pathway through Y. We find that inference of the
indirect relationship is much less sensitive than for the
direct relationship, occurring only where there is both
high coupling χ and high memory ϵz in the source.14
Importantly, we found that p-values for Z →X were
always higher (i.e. weaker) than Y →X when both
links were inferred.
If Y is not available, then inference of the indirect
relationship may be desirable, since it still reveals struc-
ture in the available data. Where Y is available though,
ideally only Z →Y and Y →X should be inferred. We
suggest that extension of the complete transfer entropy
(Lizier et al. 2008) to a similar interregional measure
(and with similar statistical significance testing) could
usefully address this issue. The complete TE condi-
tions out the influence of other possible sources, e.g.
Tk(Y →X | Z) = I(Y; X′ | X(k), Z). Extending the
measure should still infer Y →X (since Y adds in-
formation not contained in Z) but not Z →X (since
Z does not add any information not contained in Y).
14High memory in the source Z is required for the values zn (con-
sidered by the interregional TE) to contain some information
about the previous values zn−1 which had an indirect effect on
xn+1 via yn.
We leave extension of this measure and testing of the
technique to future work.
Next, we explore the common cause structure with
Z →Y and Z →X but no direct relationship between
Y and X. We generate data sets where the individual
relationships between the directed pairs Z →Y and
Z →X are described by Eqs. (12) and (13) with C = 10:
and ϵx, ϵy = 0.7 and variable (χ, ϵz) in Fig. 10(a); and
alternately ϵz = 0.7 and variable (χ, ϵx, ϵy) in Fig. 10(b).
Figure 10 shows that it is possible for our technique
to infer a directed link Y →X (with similar results for
X →Y of course) where Y and X are only related by a
common cause. We find that the inference only occurs
under high coupling χ and high memory ϵx,ϵy in the
destinations of the common cause (Fig. 10(b)), with a
possible but less clear dependence on high memory ϵz
in the common cause (Fig. 10(a)).15 Crucially though,
this inference is much less sensitive than for the rel-
evant direct cause from Z. (The Z →Y relationship
for Fig. 10(a) is the same as for the pathway structure,
see Fig. 9(a) for results on the direct cause to compare
to Fig. 10(a)). As expected, the interregional MI re-
vealed a very strong relationship between Y and X (not
shown), e.g. inferring a relationship for all χ > 0 for the
data sets in Fig. 10(a).
15We expected that high memory in the destinations Y and X
and in the common source Z would help preserve information in
Y about the source Z which would be helpful to predicting X.

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
103
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
χ
εz
"numerical-te-CommonSource-YtoX-SourceMemory-pValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
1.49×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
X
X
X
(a) p-values versus χ and  z ( x =  y = 0.7)
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
χ
εx,εy
"numerical-te-CommonSource-XtoY-DestMemory-pValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
1.49×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
(b) p-values versus χ and  x, y ( z = 0.7)
∋
∋
∋
∋
∋
∋
Fig. 10
p-values from analysis of the common cause structure:
Z →Y and Z →X in Appendix A.3. The analysis is performed
using the interregional transfer entropy with v = 2 for the pair
without a directed relationship Y →X. “X” marks data sets for
which a statistically significant directed link is inferred. Using
correction for multiple comparisons in all 6 possible directed
relationships, the cutoff for statistical significance for a desired
α = 0.05 becomes αc = 1.49 × 10−4. The actual minimum p-
values in each case are several orders of magnitude smaller than
10−6, corresponding to z-scores of 6.30 in each case
Similar to our argument regarding the pathway struc-
ture, if Z is not available then inference of Y →X
and X →Y may be useful in revealing structure in the
available data. When the common cause Z is available,
this is undesirable though. In this case, we again suggest
that extension of the complete transfer entropy to an
interregional measure could be expected to eliminate
inference of spurious relationships due to a common
cause.
Without such an extension in place though, the fact
that the false positive links here are much weaker
than the relevant actual direct links suggests the use of
comparisons amongst connected triplets. That is, where
one finds Z →Y, Y →X and Z →X, then:
1.
if Z →X is stronger than Z →Y or Y →X then
it is unlikely that Z →X is a pathway type false
positive;
2.
if Y →X is stronger than Z →X then it is unlikely
that Y →X is a common cause type false positive.
Such comparisons cannot definitively rule out the rel-
evant false positive situation, but can add evidence
against the presence of these types of false positives.
A.4 Undersampling
We also test the technique against data sets which have
been undersampled from the raw underlying data. Us-
ing the same relationship Y →X defined in Eqs. (12)
and (13), we then define Xs = {Xs
1, . . . , Xs
10} where the
constituent time series are undersampled by a factor of
s as Xs
i = {xi,1, xi,1+s, xi,1+2s, . . .}. Ys is similarly defined,
and the technique is then applied to the data sets Xs and
Ys. For comparability, we generate 140 samples in the
undersampled data sets. We use C = 10, χ = 0.3, and
ϵx = 0.7.
As shown in Fig. 11, for these parameter values
we find that there is some robustness in correct infer-
ence of the interregional relationship Ys →Xs using
the interregional TE up to an undersampling factor of
s = 3. (Again, no significant link was inferred in the
reverse direction Xs →Ys). The correct relationship is
detected more reliably with: higher source-destination
coupling χ (not shown), a smaller undersampling factor
s, and higher source memory ϵy (see Fig. 11).16 The un-
dersampled source values including y j,n under consid-
eration can have a causal effect on the destination xi,n+s
by either: influencing xi,n+m, or influencing y j,n+m for
1 ≤m < s; and in both cases consequently influencing
xi,n+s. Higher χ and smaller s increase both effects,
16Note that the combination of undersampling and memory in
our variables provides a smoothing-type effect on the data. As
such, these results imply some level of robustness for the tech-
nique against temporal smoothing in the underlying data.

104
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
s
εy
"numerical-te-undersampled-epsSourceVarious-pValues.txt"
≤ 10-6
10-5
3.91×10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
p-Value
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fig. 11
p-values from analysis of the undersampled data sets
Ys →Xs described in Appendix A.4, with respect to undersam-
pling factor s and source memory ϵy. The analysis is performed
using the interregional transfer entropy with v = 2. “X” marks
data sets (s, ϵy) for which a statistically significant directed link
is inferred. Using correction for multiple comparisons for both
directions for all (s, ϵy) sets, the cutoff for statistical significance
for a desired α = 0.05 becomes αc = 3.91 × 10−4. The actual
minimum p-values are several orders of magnitude smaller than
10−6, with the largest z-score at 15.2
while ϵy increases the latter. Higher memory in the
destination ϵx (with respect to noise g, given χ) should
similarly increase the influence of the source under
consideration and therefore the reliability of detection
in the undersampled data.
Appendix B: Effect of multivariate analysis
We have reported in the main paper results from an
analysis that considered interactions between sets of
v = 3 voxels. We have compared the distribution of the
calculated measure MI or TE from S = 3,000 samples
against the mean of P = 300 surrogate measurements
for each subset sample. The use of v = 3 was motivated
by the trend of p-values versus v in the simulation in
Section A.2 and Fig. 8(b), where we found that the p-
values for our technique were minimized for v = 2 to
4. We confirmed the selection of v = 3 with S = 3,000,
P = 300 by investigating the trend of p-values versus v
for selected region pairs, finding that the p-values for
our technique were typically minimized at the lower
end of the v = 3 to 5 range (results not shown). This
means that v = 3 balanced our desire to capture multi-
variate interactions with the need to remain within the
limitations of the available number of samples.
At this point then, two important questions have to
be raised. First, how strongly does the resulting struc-
ture depend on the choice of parameters. Second, what
is the effect of including more than one voxel (v = 1) in
the subsets, and thus taking into account multivariate
interactions.
To answer these questions we have run several ad-
ditional analyses with the following parameters. First,
we computed the MI and TE measures as described
in the main text again but for v = 1 and v = 5 leaving
S = 3,000 and P = 300 unchanged. We also calculated
the same MI and TE measures for the three sizes (v =
[1, 3, 5]) but using only S = 1,000 samples and P = 100
permutations. Second, we calculated the MI, TE and
MI modulation structures based on the average acti-
vations across all voxels in each ROI. Note that there
is only one possible sample for this average analysis
and thus S = 1. We use P = 300 and the standard TE
(MI) significance tests in Section 2.2.1 coupled with
the group level analysis described in Section 2.2.3.
The average analysis is similar to standard functional
connectivity studies in fMRI that look at correlations
between ROI (Friston 1994). It is important to note
that with the TE this average ROI analysis could not
infer any interregional links at the group level.17 We
then compared the results of all 7 analyses, includ-
ing the main analysis presented in the paper and the
average ROI analysis, by calculating the correlation
coefficients between the corresponding resulting MI,
TE and MI-modulation structures. Importantly, we did
not compare the number of significant subjects, but
directly looked at the correlation coefficients between
the mean values for MI, TE and MI-modulation within
each subject. In Fig. 12 we show the similarity between
the information structures obtained by the different
analyses.
The results can be summarized by two main state-
ments. First, although univariate structures are corre-
lated to the multivariate structures, the multivariate
structures are correlated more strongly amongst each
other than they are to the univariate structures. This
indicates that the multivariate analysis captures some
structure that is not present in the univariate analysis.
Second, these multivariate interactions are captured by
3-voxel as well as 5-voxel interactions in a very similar
way. Hence, the multivariate nature of the interac-
tion does not seem to include very high dimensional
17Similarly, only two interregional links were inferred at the
group level by the interregional TE with univariate analysis
(v = 1) and S = 3,000, P = 300.

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
105
0
0.5
1
MI structure
TE structure
MI modulation
Correlation
p-value
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
avg
avg
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
avg
avg
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
1-s
1- l
3-s
3-l
5-s
5-l
avg
avg
u - m
m - m
u - m
m - m
avg
avg
u - m
m - m
u - m
m - m
avg
avg
u - m
m - m
u - m
m - m
avg
avg
10-6
10-5
10-4
Fig. 12
Comparison of univariate and multivariate analyses. Top
Correlation coefficient between observed information structure
for different sizes of multivariate interaction: v = 1 (univariate),
v = 3 and v = 5 and for the average signal within ROIs (avg).
For every v the structure were calculated and compared for a
larger (l) and a small (s) sample set (S = 3,000, P = 300, and
S = 1,000, P = 100 respectively). Note that the avg analysis does
not include any sampling and thus has only one sampling size
and was performed using P = 300. Gray scale indicates average
correlation coefficient between information structures resulting
from the respective analyses according to the color bar on the
right. Averages are taken across subjects and are based on Fisher
z-transformed correlations and then transformed back. Dashed
lines indicate the border between univariate and multivariate
information analysis. Bottom In order to test whether the multi-
variate measures are more similar to each other than they are to
univariate measures, we compared the z-transformed correlation
coefficients of all entries in the top panels by means of a paired
t-test across subjects (n = 8). We thus tested whether some com-
binations of structures are more similar, than other combinations.
Gray scale indicates the p-values of this test. See colorbar on
the right. P-values thresholded at α = 0.05/N, where N = 210
is the number of t-tests made. White entries are above α and
thus not significant. The comparisons have been ordered to high-
light differences between correlations that include the average
ROI analysis (avg), correlations that include univariate analyses
(m–u), but not avg, and, finally, correlations that include multi-
variate analyses only (m–m)
interactions that cannot be captured by 3-voxel inter-
actions but are present in 5 voxel interactions.
In a second step, we compared the statistical re-
sults obtained from the seven analyses. To do this we
counted the percentage ps of stable significant con-
nections that remain unchanged between two types of
analysis. We defined ps,ij =
2Ns,ij
Ni+N j , where Ns,ij is the
number of links that are significant in both analyses i
and j, thus called stable, and Ni and N j are the num-
bers of significant links in each analysis, respectively.
If ps,ij = 1, all significant connections are the same in
both analyses, and if ps,ij = 0, there is no significant
connection that shows up in both analyses. ps,ij was
calculated for all possible pairs of analyses i and j.
We summarize the results by averaging over the three
main types of analyses defined in Fig. 12. All results are
given in percent as Mean ± SD. In the TE structure,
there are no stable connections in the average over
ROI analysis (avg in Fig. 12) compared to any other
analysis. The percentage of stable significant connec-
tions is 33% ± 14% for comparisons of a univariate to
multivariate analysis (u–m in Fig. 12) and 80% ± 5%
for comparisons between multivariate analyses (m–m
in Fig. 12). For the MI modulation, the corresponding
percentages are: 2% ± 2% (avg), 46% ± 17% (u–m)
and 85% ± 3% (m–m). Again, these numbers show
that the multivariate information measures yield stable
results and that the results are clearly different from
the two kinds of univariate analysis we have compared
them to.
References
Bassett, D. S., & Bullmore, E. T. (2009). Human brain networks
in health and disease. Current Opinion in Neurology, 22(4),
340–347.
Bettencourt, L. M. A., Stephens, G. J., Ham, M. I., & Gross,
G. W. (2007). Functional structure of cortical neuronal net-
works grown in vitro. Physical Review E, 75(2), 021915.

106
J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
Bode, S., & Haynes, J. D. (2009). Decoding sequential stages
of task preparation in the human brain. NeuroImage, 45(2),
606–613.
Bressler, S. L., Tang, W., Sylvester, C. M., Shulman, G. L., &
Corbetta, M. (2008). Top-down control of human visual cor-
tex by frontal and parietal cortex in anticipatory visual spa-
tial attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 28(40), 10056–10061.
Büchel, C., & Friston, K. J. (1997). Modulation of connectivity
in visual pathways by attention: cortical interactions evalu-
ated with structural equation modelling and fMRI. Cerebral
Cortex, 7(8), 768–778.
Bullier, J. (2001). Integrated model of visual processing. Brain
Research Reviews, 36, 96–107.
Chai, B., Walther, D. B., Beck, D. M., & Fei-Fei, L. (2009).
Exploring functional connectivity of the human brain
using multivariate information analysis. In Y. Bengio,
D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, & A. Culotta
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems
(Vol. 22, pp. 270–278). NIPS Foundation.
Chávez, M., Martinerie, J., & Le Van Quyen, M. (2003). Statisti-
cal assessment of nonlinear causality: Application to epilep-
tic EEG signals. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 124(2),
113–128.
Frenzel, S., & Pompe, B. (2007). Partial mutual information for
coupling analysis of multivariate time series. Physical Review
Letters, 99(20), 204101.
Friston, K. (2002). Beyond phrenology: What can neuroimaging
tell us about distributed circuitry? Annual Review of Neuro-
science, 25, 221–250.
Friston, K., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, S., Nichols, T., & Penny, W.
(2006). Statistical parametric mapping: The analysis of func-
tional brain images. Elsevier, London.
Friston, K. J. (1994). Functional and effective connectivity in
neuroimaging: A synthesis. Human Brain Mapping, 2, 56–78.
Friston, K. J., & Büchel, C. (2000). Attentional modulation of
effective connectivity from V2 to V5/MT in humans. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA,
97(13), 7591–7596.
Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., & Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal
modelling. Neuroimage, 19(4), 1273–1302.
Gong, P., & van Leeuwen, C. (2009). Distributed dynamical com-
putation in neural circuits with propagating coherent activity
patterns. PLoS Computational Biology, 5(12), e1000611.
Grosse-Wentrup, M. (2008). Understanding brain connectivity
patterns during motor imagery for brain-computer interfac-
ing. In D. Koller, D. Schuurmans, Y. Bengio, & L. Bottou
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems
(Vol. 21, pp. 561–568). Curran Associates, Inc.
Handwerker, D. A., Ollinger, J. M., & D’Esposito, M. (2004).
Variation of bold hemodynamic responses across subjects
and brain regions and their effects on statistical analyses.
Neuroimage, 21(4), 1639–1651.
Haynes, J. D., & Rees, G. (2006). Decoding mental states from
brain activity in humans. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(7),
523–534.
Haynes, J. D., Tregellas, J., & Rees, G. (2005). Attentional in-
tegration between anatomically distinct stimulus represen-
tations in early visual cortex. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 102(41), 14925–14930.
Hinrichs, H., Heinze, H. J., & Schoenfeld, M. A. (2006). Causal
visual interactions as revealed by an information theoretic
measure and fMRI. NeuroImage, 31(3), 1051–1060.
Honey, C. J., Kotter, R., Breakspear, M., & Sporns, O. (2007).
Network structure of cerebral cortex shapes functional con-
nectivity on multiple time scales. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104(24), 10240–10245.
Horstmann, A. (2008). Sensorimotor integration in human eye-
hand coordination: Neuronal correlates and characteristics of
the system. Ph.D. thesis, Ruhr-Universität Bochum.
Johansen-Berg,
H.,
Behrens,
T.
E.,
Robson,
M.
D.,
Drobnjak, I., Rushworth, M. F., Brady, J. M., et al.
(2004). Changes in connectivity profiles define functionally
distinct regions in human medial frontal cortex. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 101(36),
13335–13340.
Kantz, H., & Schreiber, T. (1997). Nonlinear time series analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kraskov, A. (2004). Synchronization and interdependence mea-
sures and their applications to the electroencephalogram of
epilepsy patients and clustering of data. In Publication series
of the John von Neumann Institute for computing (Vol. 24).
Ph.D. thesis, John von Neumann Institute for Computing,
Jülich, Germany.
Kraskov, A., Stögbauer, H., & Grassberger, P. (2004). Estimating
mutual information. Physical Review E, 69(6), 066138.
Liang, H., Ding, M., & Bressler, S. L. (2001). Temporal dynamics
of information flow in the cerebral cortex. Neurocomputing,
38–40, 1429–1435.
Lizier, J. T., & Prokopenko, M. (2010). Differentiating informa-
tion transfer and causal effect. European Physical Journal B,
73(4), 605–615.
Lizier, J. T., Prokopenko, M., & Zomaya, A. Y. (2008). Local
information transfer as a spatiotemporal filter for complex
systems. Physical Review E, 77(2), 026110.
Logothetis, N., Pauls, J., Augath, M., Trinath, T., & Oeltermann,
A. (2001). Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of
the fMRI signal. Nature, 412, 150–157.
Lunenburger, L., Kleiser, R., Stuphorn, V., Miller, L. E., &
Hoffmann, K. P. (2001). A possible role of the superior col-
liculus in eye-hand coordination. Progress in Brain Research,
134, 109–125. 0079-6123 (Print) 0079-6123 (Linking) Journal
Article Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t Review.
Lungarella, M., Pegors, T., Bulwinkle, D., & Sporns, O. (2005).
Methods for quantifying the informational structure of sen-
sory and motor data. Neuroinformatics, 3(3), 243–262.
MacKay, D. J. (2003). Information theory, inference, and learning
algorithms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Norman, K. A., Polyn, S. M., Detre, G. J., & Haxby, J. V. (2006).
Beyond mind-reading: Multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI
data. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(9), 424–430.
Penhune, V. B., & Doyon, J. (2005). Cerebellum and m1 in-
teraction during early learning of timed motor sequences.
Neuroimage, 26(3), 801–812.
Ramsey, J., Hanson, S., Hanson, C., Halchenko, Y., Poldrack,
R., & Glymour, C. (2010). Six problems for causal inference
from fMRI. NeuroImage, 49(2), 1545–1558.
Rubinov, M., Knock, S. A., Stam, C. J., Micheloyannis, S., Harris,
A. W. F., Williams, L. M., et al. (2009). Small-world prop-
erties of nonlinear brain activity in schizophrenia. Human
Brain Mapping, 30, 403–416.
Saito, Y., & Harashima, H. (1981). Tracking of information
within multichannel EEG record - causal analysis in EEG.
In N. Yamaguchi & K. Fujisawa (Eds.), Recent advances in
EEG and EMG data processing (pp. 133–146). Amsterdam:
Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press.
Schreiber, T. (2000). Measuring information transfer. Physical
Review Letters, 85(2), 461–464.
Soon, C. S., Brass, M., Heinze, H. J., & Haynes, J. D. (2008).
Unconscious determinants of free decisions in the human
brain. Nature Neuroscience, 11(5), 543–545.
Tanaka, Y., Fujimura, N., Tsuji, T., Maruishi, M., Muranaka,
H., & Kasai, T. (2009). Functional interactions between the

J Comput Neurosci (2011) 30:85–107
107
cerebellum and the premotor cortex for error correction
during the slow rate force production task: An fmri study.
Experimental Brain Research, 193(1), 143–150.
Tung, T. Q., Ryu, T., Lee, K. H., & Lee, D. (2007). Infer-
ring gene regulatory networks from microarray time series
data using transfer entropy. In P. Kokol, V. Podgorelec, D.
Miˇcetiˇc-Turk, M. Zorman, & M. Verliˇc (Eds.), Proceedings
of the twentieth IEEE international symposium on computer-
based medical systems (CBMS ’07), Maribor, Slovenia (pp.
383–388). Los Alamitos: IEEE.
Verdes, P. F. (2005). Assessing causality from multivariate time
series. Physical Review E, 72(2), 026222–026229.

