Seam carving based on dynamic energy regulation
Hai Su1 & Zigui Ye1 & Yaping Liu2 & SongSen Yu1
Received: 11 December 2020 /Revised: 25 March 2022 /Accepted: 31 January 2023
# The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
Seam carving algorithm is widely used in content-based image scaling. By calculating the
energy map of the image, it repeatedly removes the pixel line with the lowest energy sum,
which can effectively retain the proportion of significant areas within the image after the
image is scaled down. The traditional seam carving does not take into account the
variation in full-image energy caused by each carving, which is based on the energy
map calculated at the first time. The results of these methods are prone to distortion. So
we put forward a dynamic energy regulation method to simulate the energy change in
each carving to improve the effect of seam carving. Our method adjusts the energy value
of each pixel after each carving according to how much each pixel is affected by carving,
so as to simulate the extra energy introduced by each carving. In the paper, we discuss the
way to regulate energy. We designed a randomized double-blind experiment to compare
our method with several current typical methods. The experimental results demonstrated
the advantages of our method over other methods.
Keywords Seam carving . Significance area . Image structure . Dynamic energy change
1 Introduction
As digital devices become diverse, there is an increasing demand for presenting images on
various display devices with different resolutions and aspect ratios. In order to make the
specified image adjust to different devices, automatic image resizing is becoming more and
more important. The traditional image scaling methods based on interpolation, however, these
equal-scale scaling methods have destroyed significant areas. As can be seen from Fig. 1b, due
to interpolation processing, the figures in the image are compressed and out of proportion.
Multimedia Tools and Applications
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-023-14516-9
* SongSen Yu
yss8109@163.com
1
College of Software, South China Normal University, Foshan 528225, People’s Republic of China
2
College of International business, South China Normal University, Foshan 528225, People’s
Republic of China

In order to overcome shortcomings of traditional algorithms, Seam carving (SC) [3, 15], as
the most representative method of content-based image scaling, can effectively solve the
problem by non-scale scaling. SC can automatically perceive the information in the image,
so that the image can be scaled with different aspect ratios, and it can reduce the proportion
change of significant area. SC calculates the importance of every pixel in an image, and then
selectively removes the less important pixels to retain the more important image areas. But it
caused the image more incline to retain the contour part of the image rather than the actual
significant area, Because of SC only calculates the image energy by gradient energy map.
Another problem is SC does not take the variation in full-image energy caused by each carving
into account. A direct manifestation of this problem is that seams tend to be centralized in one
area, resulting the image is split. (It can be seen in Fig. 1d). In order to correctly identify the
significant area, some researchers [6, 14, 22] combine gradient energy map with saliency map.
Compared with the SC, they can better retain the important content of the image and preserve
better overall visual effect. But the drawback of ignored energy variations remains in these
methods. This leads to problems such as concentration of seams, which seriously damages the
structure of the significant area of the image. Some methods noticed the concentration of
seams that exist in the SC, so they avoided the heavily concentrated seams through some
processing. Such as the multiple-operator methods [4, 11, 16, 23], which intergrate SC, equal
scaling, cropping or other approaches together. Multiple-operator methods selected the appro-
priate scaling method based on the size of the significant area of image. Reference [7]
proposed a modified Seam Carving method based on image blocking. However, these
methods do not solve the problem of energy change. Therefore, results obtained by these
methods are prone to distortion.
With the development of deep learning, some methods [13, 17] try to combine SC with
deep learning. But their focus is still on the representation of the initial energy map. So they
can’t solve the energy change problem brought by new seam.
As discussed above, the energy change after each carving is a drawback that must be
noticed. In order to show the energy changes brought by every seam in the energy map, it is a
reasonable to recalculate the energy map after each carving seems. But this processing will
lead to a big difference between the calculation results and the original image structure. If only
the current energy change after each carving is considered, the energy structure of the image
will gradually deviate from the original structure. This will lead to the subsequent carving
based on the new structure. The original structure was gradually ignored, which results in the
significant region of the final energy map being significantly different from the original
significant region.
Fig. 1 a Original image. b Interpolation method. c SC. d Locally enlarged view in (c)
Multimedia Tools and Applications

Our method adjusts the full image energy after each carving to simulate the image
energy change. We adjust the energy of each pixel of the energy map according to the
overall structure of the image after each carving, and then do the next carving. We focus on
simulating subtle changes of the structure after each carving. And we use gradient energy
map combined with GBVS energy map [8] as the energy map of our method. The selection
of seam can be adjusted with the energy changes caused by each previous carving. By this
way, the adjustment of the energy in our method would not cause a significant change in the
significant region determination, significant areas can be well preserved and original
structure can avoid distortion.
Our main contributions are as follows.
&
We improved SC and enable it to dynamically adjust energy maps based on the location of
each seam and the energy of nearby pixels.
&
We proposed an energy map adjustment method, which enables the pixels adjust accord-
ing to their own energy value and the degree to which is impacted by seam. And it does not
destroy the original structure of images.
2 Related work
The traditional image scaling methods are based on the geometric transformation. It mainly
includes method of mean value, bilinear interpolation [18], nearest neighbor interpolation
[19] and image interpolation based on partial differential equation [21]. The processing of
each pixel by interpolation algorithm only considers the values of the pixels around that
pixel, which leads an equal proportional transformation. The equal proportional transfor-
mation only considers geometrical characteristics but does not consider the characteristics
of image content. The distortion is obvious when images are scaled to a different ratio of
length to width.
Avidan and Shamir proposed the Seam Carving (SC) in 2007. The algorithm is to
preserve the significant area of the image. The integrity of significant area in the image is
maintained by deleting or inserting seams outside the significant area. It gets a better
scaling effect than geometric scaling. In [15], they would pre-calculate the energy value
of the resulting image before removing the seam. They chose to delete or insert seam, which
had the least impact on the energy of the full image, inside of the seam which had the least
energy of its own. However, this method will distort significant area of the image, because
it only uses the gradient energy map of the image to define the energy function. Therefore, it
only retains the object contour in the image and does not preserve visually important
information well.
As for the problem of SC retaining poor import region, relevant researchers have made
improvements and researches on it. They do this by combining gradient energy map and
saliency map to better retain the salient regions. Guoqin Peng et al. [14] combine SC with
visual significance map, which combines ITTI energy map [9] with the gradient energy
map. The method [4444] of combining SC with GBVS energy map is more in line with
human visual system. It retained the object contour of image and the significance area based
on human visual system. When the contrast between the main body area and the back-
ground color is not obvious or the main body area is larger, the image scaling effect is not
good. Improve the way of the combination of GBVS energy map and gradient energy map,
Multimedia Tools and Applications

the method [6] can make the carving effect better. But it only changed the way how energy
graphs are calculated and it did not solve the problem of image distortion caused by
ignoring image structure.
The concentration of seams will result in the destruction of image structure. In order
to avoid damage to important image contents by SC, the method [11] which is based on
SC and deformation firstly pre-classifies the image by judging the size of the significant
area. Then, the image with large significant area is processed by deformation method,
while the image with small significant area is still processed by SC. The compressibility-
aware seam carving method [23] calculates the compressibility of the image in advance
to determine the number of image carving. The carving will be stopped when the seams
reach the required times, and then the image will be scaled to the required proportion by
deformation method. Aghchehkohal et al. [1] propose a method to improve SC based on
the method of meta-heuristic algorithms which combine simulated annealing (SA) [5]
with genetic algorithm (GA) [20]. The structure of the image body was protected by this
method, but the significant area will be deformed, which is similar to uniform scaling.
Lin et al. [10] propose that to avoid seams across significant areas, it allows the
generation discontinuity of seams. Seams bypass significant areas, but it may impair
the structural continuity of the image. Image blocking method (BSC) [7] divide image
into protected and non-protected areas according to the average value of the accumulated
energy of each column of the energy graph. And then the number of seams is assigned
according to the size of each area. Compared with SC, these methods cause less image
distortion, but they usually need to combine with other algorithms or make judgment and
preprocess. That will lead to new judgment problems and cannot avoid the distortion
results brought by SC in the cut part.
Some methods have noted energy changes caused by carving, Ahmadi M et al. [2]
calculated the gradient value of pixels on both sides of seam to be removed and used it as
energy increment to change the energy graph after each carving operation. Lin Y et al. [12]
allocates the energy from each pixel on Seam to the surrounding 8 connected domain pixels.
These methods effect for the main body is still not good.
Methods of deep learning combined with SC only obtained the initial energy map
through deep learning, which changes the position of seams by improving the initial energy
map. For example, it adds energy to the edge of the significant areas through saliency
ordering [13], so that the seams trail the path of minimum energy preserving object
boundaries. In this method [17], it creates a deep energy map using an encoder-decoder
convolution neural network, and then adjusts seams by deep energy map. However, these
methods still tweak the initial energy map, and do not prevent the energy change of the
initial energy map from each seam.
3 Seam carving
The core idea of the Seam Carving algorithm is to calculate the lines with the smallest
accumulated energy, called as seam, in a picture, then determine the number of deletions or
insertions according to the ratio of reduction or enlargement. It requires that the total energy
change of the image is minimized after each carving.
The complete process of SC is shown in Fig. 2. 1. Calculate the gradient energy map of
the input image. 2. Find the seam on the energy map with the smallest accumulated
Multimedia Tools and Applications

energy 3. Delete it. 4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 until the image is scaled to a specified size. As
discussed above, SC uses gradient energy map and it did not consider the energy changes
caused by each carving, which led to problems such as concentration of seams and
resulted in image distortion.
3.1 Gradient energy
Supposing a given image is I, the size is n × m, the gradient energy E of each pixel in image I
is defines in (1).
E Ið Þ ¼ j ∂
∂x Ij þ j ∂
∂y Ij
ð1Þ
The energy value of each pixel in the image matrix is the sum of the absolute values of its
gradients in the x and y directions. The greater the value is, the greater the significance and
importance of this point will be.
Fig. 2 Process of seam carving. ①Calculated gradient energy graph. ②Find a seam. ③Carve off this seam. ④
Determine whether it scales to the specified size or not
Multimedia Tools and Applications

3.2 Seam determination
The vertical seam is defined as (2).
Sx ¼
Sx
i

n
i¼1 ¼ x ið Þ; i
f
gn
i¼1; s:t:∀i; jx ið Þ−x i−1
ð
Þj≤1
ð2Þ
Where x is the mapping of the pixel dot matrix n to m, representing its position in each row.
Each row of the image matrix contains only one seam. Similarly, the formula of horizontal
seam is as (3).
Sy ¼
Sy
j
n
om
j¼1 ¼ y jð Þ; j
f
gm
j¼1; s:t:∀j; jy jð Þ−y j−1
ð
Þj≤1
ð3Þ
Where y is the mapping of the pixel dot matrix m to n, representing its position in each row and
each row of the image matrix contains only one seam.
Carving a seam is similar to removing a row or a column from an image. Supposing we
remove a vertical seam from an image, the seam is determined by the order from top to bottom
in the image. The selection of pixels in the two adjacent rows of this vertical seam in three
ways: straight up, top left and top right. Setting the energy sum of each seam to E(s), the best
seam is the one with the minimum value of E(s). The seam is found by dynamic programming
Fig. 3 a The energy graph of original image. b The energy graph of the result obtained by the SC. c The energy
graph of the result of our method. Compared with the original method, our adjustment can make the energy
distribution more uniform without affecting significant areas
Multimedia Tools and Applications

algorithm. Let the energy of each pixel in the image I be e(i, j), and the cumulative energy
value is M(i, j), which can be define as (4).
M i; j
ð
Þ ¼ e i; j
ð
Þ þ min M i−1; j−1
ð
Þ; M i−1; j
ð
Þ; M i−1; j þ 1
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
ð4Þ
Traversing from the second line of the image I to the last line, the pixels of each line
accumulate the energy of the point which has the smallest energy among the three pixels in
previous line. Then identify pixels in this seam by backtracking. In vertical carving, pixels on
the seam are deleted from the original image, and pixels on the right of the seam are all moved
1 position to the left. This is equivalent to shrinking a column of the entire image. The same
applies to horizontal carving.
4 Method
We here propose a new method to solve the problem of Seam Carving ignoring the extra
energy introduced by each carving and causing the result distortion, After each carving, the
pixels on both sides of the seam will become new neighbors. So the structure of the new image
and the original image will be slightly different, and the distribution of pixel energy in the full
image will inevitably change. It can be seen from Fig. 3b, this distortion becomes apparent as
the increase of the number of seams at a location, and the energy distribution becomes
unnatural. The SC always operates on the original energy map, ignoring the structural changes
due to carving.
Since pixels on both sides of the seams become new neighbors after each carving, the
energy of these pixels will change. The energy of the image that has been carved once is set as
Eo, the energy of the carved seam is Es, and the energy of the original image is E. We find that
Eo is always greater than E minus Es. In the Fig. 4, the energy of both images was increased
after carving. If the change of energy is ignored during the carving of the original image, the
subsequent seams obtained with SC cannot be selected to the most suitable position due to
ignoring the change. The degree of change will increase as the number of carving increases,
then the selection of the subsequent seams position is getting worse and worse. Which causes
problems such as seams concentration, and finally distorts the image. Therefore, it is necessary
to adjust the energy of pixels that are affected heavily after each carving.
In order to show the energy changes brought by every seam in the energy map, our
approach will adjust the pixel energy that is affected more after each carving. By dynamically
Fig. 4 Image energy change before and after carving
Multimedia Tools and Applications

adjusting the energy map, it can show the energy changes brought about by each carving.
Thus, it directs the next seam to a more appropriate location. The complete process of our
method is shown as Fig. 5b.
Fig. 5 Process of Propose method. b is our method flow chart. a is specific adjustment strategy: ①Calculated
energy graph. ②Find a seam. ③Adjust the pixels affected by seam. ④Carve off this seam. ⑤Determine whether
it scales to the specified size or not
Multimedia Tools and Applications

The initial steps are the same as for SC, We also compute the energy map of the image first, and
then find and delete seam with the smallest accumulated energy. The adjustment to our approach is to
make energy adjustmentstothepixels onboth sidesofseam after removing it. The adjustmentstrategy
is shown in Fig. 5a, we add energy value to 16 pixels on both sides of seam, and the adjusted pixel
energy is the original energy e(i) plus q(i) * d(n), where n is the distance between the pixel and seam.
We will introduce q(i) and d (n) in Section 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.
In addition to incorporating visual significance in our approach, the most important thing is
that we adjust the energy of the image after each carving. This will direct subsequent seams to
a more appropriate location, thereby reducing distortion in the resulting image.
We mainly discuss how to adjust the energy map. When a seam is removed, the pixels on the right
and left of that seam become the new neighbors, for these pixels, their 3×3 neighborhood was
changed, so their energy changes. The farther the pixel is from Seam, the less energy it will undergo.
Therefore, our adjustments for each pixel should also change as it is affected, and the more affected the
pixel, the greater the adjustment. In order to better maintain the features of the original image and
protect the significant areas in the adjustment process, we will also make adjustments to different
degrees according to the size of the energy value of the pixels to be adjusted. In our method, the degree
to which pixels are adjusted is set according to two factors: 1. The energy value of this pixel. 2. The
distance between this pixel and seam. Thus, we will talk about the adjustment strategy which includes
energy adjustment and range of adjust the energy.
4.1 Energy adjustment
We put up a method to adjust the energy by increasing energy value to each pixel. Our method
can simulate the change of energy structure of the full image and guide the seam to choose a
more suitable place. We propose an energy formula for qi. The energy value of each pixel is vi,
ri is the difference between the energy value of pixel i and the average value a, and a is the
average energy value of the whole energy graph. In order to protect the original structure by
adjusting the energy, the previously concentrated seams will become more dispersed, which
will inevitably cause some seams to spread out into significant areas. In order to avoid
excessive carving to the significant area, the sigmoid factor (Fig. 6) is adopted in our method.
It can be seen from the Fig. 6 that when ri is too large or too small, the value of qi is always
between 1 and 0, so that the scope of the qi is always controlled within the range of 0–1. It does
well in the following three cases:
When the energy of the pixel point is at the normal level (It’s not far from the average), the
energy value of the point will gradually increase to a high level with the increase of carving
times around the point, so that the subsequent seam can avoid this point as far as possible, and
the dispersion of the seam is realized.
When the energy of a pixel is too small, it means that the significance of this point is very
low. Because the adjustment range is narrow, the energy level not going to improve too much
even after multiple adjustments. This makes the range of low energy regions of the energy map
after multiple adjustments less varied than that of the original energy map.
When the energy value of the pixel is too large and the surrounding points are cut off, the
point gets a high energy value, which ensures that the high energy points are retained.
However, as the upper limit of qi is 1, it avoids a large difference among the energy value
of some points in the non-significant area due to multiple adjustments. It makes the energy
adjustment of non-significant area more uniform and protects the original structure of the
image from being destroyed.
Multimedia Tools and Applications

Therefore, the preliminary formulation is as (5), M is a constant.
qi ¼
1
1 þ e−ri


*M
where
ri ¼ vi−a;
M ¼ 0:1
ð5Þ
In order to avoid the overall energy rising after multiple adjustments makes subsequent adjustments
relatively weak, we keep the energy of pixels within a certain range. Thus, we will normalize the
energy of all pixels in the whole image after each carving, so that the energy of each pixel is within the
range of 0–1. Our experimental results show that if the value of qi is too large, the energy structure of
the whole image will be destroyed, and it performs best when it does not exceed 10% of the maximum
energy value. So we set M to 0.1. According to Fig. 7. We can find that the energy distributions of the
initial energy map of these images are similar, and most of the pixel energy values range from 0 to 0.4.
In other words, if the energy value of a pixel point reaches 0.4, it can be determined that the point is
located in a significant area. As can be seen in Fig. 6, q is close to the maximum value when r = 4, so
we need r = 4 when v = 0.4 if we want to get a large enough adjustment of the pixels in the
significant area. So the formula deforms as (6).
qi ¼
1
1 þ e−ri


*M
where
ri ¼ 4 vi−a
ð
Þ= 0:4−a
ð
Þ
ð6Þ
We set a minimum for the energy adjustment. If the energy of the pixel is too small, the adjusted
value approaches 0, this makes it difficult to show structural change. Here we set a minimum value of
w to make structural changes more obvious and we usually set w to 0.1 in our experiments. Our final
formula is as (7).
qi ¼
1
1 þ e−ri þ w


*M
ð7Þ
Fig. 6 The curve shows the direction of the sigmoid function in the range −10 to 10
Multimedia Tools and Applications

Fig. 7 This figure shows the energy distribution of the energy maps of four different types of pictures after
normalization. The left side of this figure shows the energy histogram after normalizing the energy map, and the
right side shows the original image
Multimedia Tools and Applications

4.2 The range of increased energy
Which points need to be adjusted and how to adjust energy of these points are the topics
discussed in this section.
Set the increment of each pixel point as qi∗d(n), which d(n) = (2/3)n −1, where n is the
horizontal distance between the pixel point and the seam. d(n) has the following curve. The
curve is as follows, which is smooth enough to meet our expectation. We hope that the scope
of each adjustment can be as large as possible, because we find that the larger the scope of
adjustment, the better protection for the image structure. Another problem is that pixels with
different distances from seam, if d(n) are too close to each other (d(n) = 1-(n/32)), it will cause
the resulting image jagged. It can see that the windmill in Fig. 8c is clearly jagged. But if d(n)
decreases rapidly as the distance increases (d(n) = (1/2)n −1), points further away from seam
will be adjusted. This adjustment is so subtle that even has no impact. That makes the scope of
adjustments small, which is also undesirable. In our experiments, we found that we did very
well when we set d(n) = (2/3)n −1. In addition, when the value of n is 16, the value of d is too
small, which will almost do not impact the structure of image. Therefore, in order to save
computing cost, we only deal with the 16 points on the left and the right of the seam.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental conditions
(1)
Test set
Fig. 8 a d(n) = (1/2)n −1. b d(n) = (2/3)n −1. c d(n) = 1-(n/32). d Original image. e The curve of d(n) in (a),
(b) and (c)
Multimedia Tools and Applications

Our test set was created by collecting 500 different movie images and photographic images,
because we believe that high-quality images have a richer visual experience and are more
reflective of the strengths and weaknesses of the seam carving algorithm.
(2)
Experimental environment
The set up details of our experiment are shown in Table 1.
5.2 Results and comparison
We design a randomized double-blind trial to analyze and compare our method. To compare
experimental methods, we selected SC [3], SC + GBVS [6], BSC [7], AeSC [12] and our
method.
By observing Figs. 9A, B, and 11F, it can be found that compared with other methods, our
method and AeSC will not appear obvious boundary, which can guarantee the smoothness and
the character of gradient better. Figure 9A shows a gradual change from left to right in the
background, the two people in front are the main significant area, and the bench in the middle
is the secondary significant area. In this figure, because the SC method only used the gradient
energy map, it leaded to excessive carving of significant areas; SC + GBVS added a visual
significance map, which could retain the main significant areas better. However, due to the
neglect to the overall structure of the original image, the middle part of the image appeared
obvious segmentation; the BSC method avoided dense seams by image blocking, but the
cleavage still appeared in the upper left part of the image, and the bench was obviously
distorted (Fig. 10). Figure 11F is a representative image with a gradient background. It can be
seen that the previous methods are difficult to scale the original image that has a strong
Table 1 Develop the environment parameter table
Project
Parameter
CPU
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6700HQ
System
Windows 10 X64
GPU
NVIDIAGTX 1080
RAM
64GB
Development of language
Python 3.7
Fig. 9 a Original image. b SC. c SC + GBVS. d BSC. e AeSC. f Our approach
Multimedia Tools and Applications

consistency of overall structure, which easily causes image stratification. Due to the blocking
processing of BSC, the structural damage is even more serious, while our method and AeSC
can retain the significant area completely and ensure that the overall image is roughly
consistent with the original image after scaling. However, compared with AESC, our adjust-
ment strategy focuses more on protecting the main area and overall structure, rather than just
dispersing seams. As can be seen from Figs. 9A and 12H, our method provides better
protection for the subject area than AESC in the case of the same overall graph structure. In
Fig. 11E, our method also provides better overall structure protection than AESC and produces
less deformation in the main area (the front wheel of the car in Fig. 11E (e) is obviously
deformed).
In the double-blind condition, a group of pictures was presented and scaled by five methods
respectively. The experiment participants chose the two they thought had the best carving
effect. The results are shown in Table 2, where our method and AESC gain higher approval
ratings due to the introduction of energy adjustment operations. However, due to the differ-
ences in adjustment strategies, our method has better protection for the main area and the
whole map structure, and thus has gained higher support. Among five methods, the compre-
hensive selection rate of our method is 58.8%, which shows that our method is more effective
than other methods.
Fig. 10 a Original image. b SC. c SC + GBVS. d BSC. e AeSC. f Our approach
Fig. 11 a Original image. b SC. c SC + GBVS. d BSC. e AeSC. f Our approach
Multimedia Tools and Applications

6 Conclusions
There have been some improvements in SC since it was proposed, which make it more and
more effective. SC selects low-energy region carving, which can retain the significant part
of the image better after scaling. However, because SC searches for low-energy point
carving in the original energy graph, it easily causes image distortion and segmentation.
Our method adjusts the energy values of pixel points on both sides of the seam after each
carving, so as to show the changes of full-image energy structure caused by each carving
without destroying the original structure, which makes the result more natural. The work
still leaves something to be desired. For the formula of energy adjustment, some variables
are determined based on our analysis of multiple experimental data. Such as the minimum
adjustment and adjustment range. In most experiments, these variables are works well, but
for other images, changing these variables will make the cropping effect of these images
better. In addition, our algorithm is not sensitive to geometric information in the image, and
the protection effect of hypotenuse or other geometry in the image is not good, and the
problem of shape distortion will occur. In the future, we will do further research on these
questions.
Declarations
Conflict of interests The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Aghchehkohal MG, Kumara WGCW (2015) Improved seam carving using meta-heuristics algorithms
combination. IEEE Signal Processing and Intelligent Systems Conference (SPIS), Tehran, Iran, pp 43–47
2. Ahmadi M, Karimi N, Samavi S (2020) Image seam-carving by controlling positional distribution of
seams[C]// 2020 international conference on machine vision and image processing (MVIP). IEEE, pp 1-5.
3. Avidan S, Shamir A (2007) Seam carving for content-aware image resizing. ACM Trans Graph 26(3):10.1–10.9
Fig. 12 a Original image. b SC. c SC + GBVS. d BSC. e AeSC. f Our approach
Table 2 The table shows the results of eight different types of images using four different methods
Methods
SC [3]
SC+GBVS [6]
BSC [7]
AeSC [12]
Proposed method
The vote
28.8
30.0
36.9
45.6
58.8
Multimedia Tools and Applications

4. Dong W, Zhou N, Paul JC et al (2009) Optimized image resizing using seam carving and scaling. ACM
Trans Graph (TOG) 28(5):125
5. Geem ZW, Kim JH, Loganathan GV (2001) A new heuristic optimization algorithm: harmony search.
Simulations. 76(2):60–68
6. Guo Z, Zhang J, Guo X et al (2018) Seam Carving image scaling method with visual significant graph. J
Yunnan Univ Nat Sci Ed 40(2):222–227
7. Guo Y, Liang Y, Yu M et al (2018) An improved seam carving algorithm based on image blocking and
optimized cumulative energy map. J Electron Inf Technol 40(2):331–337
8. Harel J, Koch C, Perona P (2006) Graph-based visual saliency. In: Conference on advances in neural information
processing systems (NIPS). MIT Press, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, June, 2006, 19, pp 545–552
9. Itti L, Koch C, Niebur E (1998) A model of saliency-based visual attention for rapid scene analysis. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 20(11):1254–1259
10. Lin X, Sheng B, Ma L et al (2012) Seamlet carving for shape-aware image resizing. Sci China Inf Sci 55(5):
1073–1081
11. Lin X, Zhang X, Ma L (2015) Image resizing based on seam carving and warping. Comput Sci 42(9):289–
292
12. Lin Y, Lin J, Niu Y, Zhang H (2020) Accumulative energy-based seam carving for image resizing[J]. Int J
Comput Sci Eng 22(2/3):190
13. Mukherjee P, Lall B (2020) Conditional random field based salient proposal set generation and its
application in content aware seam carving. Signal Process Image Commun 87:115890
14. Peng G, Shi M, Yang L (2011) Seam carving for image resizing based on saliency. J Commun Univ China
Sci Technol 18(2):74–78
15. Rubinstein M, Shamir A, Avidan S (2008) Improved seam carving for video retargeting. ACM Trans Graph
27(3):23–31
16. Rubinstein M, Shamir A, Avidan S (2009) Multi-operator media retargeting. ACM Trans Graph (TOG)
28(3):23
17. Song E, Lee M, Lee S (2018) CarvingNet: content-guided seam carving using deep convolution neural
network. IEEE Access 7:284–292
18. Suresha D, Prakash HN (2016) Single picture super resolution of natural images using N-Neighbor
Adaptive Bilinear Interpolation and absolute asymmetry based wavelet hard thresholding. Proc. Int. Conf.
International Conference on Applied and Theoretical Computing and Communication Technology,
Bangalore, India, pp 387–393
19. Thevenaz P, Blu T (2000) Interpolation revisited [medical images application]. IEEE Trans Med Imaging
19(7):739–758
20. Whitley D (1995) A genetic algorithm tutorial. Stat Comput 4(2):65–85
21. Xiao Z, Feng T, Zhang F et al (2015) Image interpolation with corner preserving based on partial differential
equation. J Electron Inf Technol 37(8):1892–1899
22. Zhao W, Zhang J, Wang X et al (2014) Seam carving with improved energy function for image resizing. J
Yunnan Univ Nat Sci Ed 36(2):181–186
23. Zhou B, Wang X, Cao S, Xiang K, Zhao S (2016) Optimal bi-directional seam carving for compressibility-
aware image retar- geting. J Vis Commun Image Represent 41:21–30
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
applicable law.
Multimedia Tools and Applications

