Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-022-09850-6
Abstract
The frame problem refers to the fact that organisms must be able to zero in on rele­
vant aspects of the world and intelligently ignore the vast majority of the world that 
is irrelevant to their goals. In this paper we aim to point out the connection between 
two leading frameworks for thinking about how organisms achieve this. Predictive 
processing is a rapidly growing framework within cognitive science which suggests 
that organisms assign a high ‘weight’ to relevant aspects of the world, effectively 
treating relevant aspects of the world as if they are more precise (in a Bayesian 
sense). This assignment of weight is called precision-weighting and is the predictive 
processing account of how organisms allocate their attention. Relevance Realization 
is a framework that conceptualizes an organism’s ability to realize relevance as re­
sulting from a dynamical system in which a cognitive agent makes use of opponent 
processing relationships to zero in on relevant aspects of the world. In this paper 
we use recent work on the diametric model of autism and psychosis to demonstrate 
that the tradeoffs inherent to precision-weighting are also inherent to relevance re­
alization. This connection will demonstrate that although these frameworks have a 
different intellectual background and use a different set of concepts and vocabulary, 
they are both pointing to the same underlying process. The fact that these differ­
ent frameworks have converged on such a similar solution to the problem of how 
organisms realize relevance serves to demonstrate the plausibility of that solution.
Keywords  Predictive Processing · Relevance realization · Frame Problem · 
Precision-weighting · Autism · Psychosis
The world is of near-infinite complexity, but we are not. How do we deal with this 
complexity? In this sea of “blooming, buzzing, confusion” (James, 1890, p. 492) how 
do we zero in on those aspects of reality which are relevant to us and intelligently 
ignore the far greater portion of the world which is irrelevant to us? This is often 
Accepted: 1 August 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022
Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring 
convergent solutions to the frame problem
Brett P. Andersen1
 · Mark Miller2,3 · John Vervaeke4
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
referred to as the “frame problem” and cognitive scientists have long grappled with 
some version of this question (Dennett, 1987; McCarthy & Hayes, 1969; Vervaeke et 
al., 2012). In this paper we aim to show that two important frameworks for thinking 
about how we separate signal from noise have converged on a very similar answer, 
though they have used a different vocabulary and set of concepts to describe it. By 
establishing the connection between these frameworks, we aim to show that (a) the 
story they tell is more likely to be correct, since convergence on a single answer from 
two different frameworks is an indicator of plausibility, and (b) that these frameworks 
can mutually support and inform each other such that fruitful insight can be gained 
through their synthesis.
In the middle of the 20th century artificial intelligence researchers discovered 
what Dennett (1987) called a “new, deep epistemological problem” that came to be 
known as the frame problem. In its original form, this problem consisted of how to 
program an artificially intelligent agent to intelligently take into account the side 
effects of its actions. For example, if a robot needs to retrieve a battery, but the bat­
tery is on a wagon that also has a bomb on it, the robot must be able to realize that 
retrieving the battery will bring the bomb along with it (thus resulting in its own 
destruction). This may seem like a relatively simple issue, but it turned out to be 
incredibly complicated. The problem is that there are a nearly infinite number of 
potential side effects to any particular action. How can we program the robot to take 
into account the relevant side effects while intelligently ignoring the irrelevant ones? 
We cannot program the robot to systematically assess all of the possibilities because 
there are far too many. Furthermore, as artificial intelligence researchers quickly dis­
covered, there is no algorithm that can solve this problem. This particular version of 
the frame problem turned out to be only one manifestation of a more general problem 
in cognitive science. How can a cognitive agent zero in on relevant aspects of the 
world (i.e., signal) and intelligently ignore irrelevant aspects of the world (i.e., noise; 
Vervaeke et al., 2012)? Indeed, this problem is so pervasive that Vervaeke and col­
leagues (2012) label relevance realization as the criterion of the cognitive, suggest­
ing that “any attempt to engineer an intelligent system must ultimately focus on the 
development of a system that can realize relevance” (p. 7). This cannot be a system 
where relevance is given to the system a priori. Relevance is not a stable class of 
entities because that which is relevant for an organism is always in flux. As such, an 
intelligent system must be able to continually realize what is relevant to it even as the 
context in which it is doing this is changing.
Predictive processing (PP) is an emerging framework in cognitive science which 
depicts the mind as being engaged in a proactive process of prediction-error mini­
mization (Clark, 2013, 2015; Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2013). This framework sug­
gests that we separate signal from noise by forming expectations about the ‘precision’ 
(technically the inverse variance) of incoming prediction errors and assigning a 
higher ‘weight’ to prediction errors which are treated as highly precise (Feldman 
& Friston, 2010). Highly precise prediction errors are then given more influence in 
driving action and updating predictions (Clark, 2015). Importantly, the broad crite­
rion which determines how the brain will assign precision is relevance, meaning that 
signals which are more pragmatically or epistemically relevant to the organism are 
assigned greater precision and thus have a greater effect on downstream processing 
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
(Clark, 2017). The PP framework thus assigns the role of separating signal from 
noise to the process of precision-weighting, which serves to assign different weights 
to select sensory inputs, which also has the effect of determining the relative influ­
ence of bottom-up prediction errors and top-down predictions on our perceptions and 
actions.
Relevance realization (RR) is another emerging framework in cognitive science 
which takes a dynamical systems perspective to explain how the mind separates sig­
nal from noise (Vervaeke et al., 2012; Vervaeke & Ferraro, 2013). RR refers to a 
cognitive agent’s ability to intelligently ignore irrelevant information and zero in on 
those aspects of the world that are relevant to their goals. The RR framework sug­
gests that the brain achieves this feat by attempting to balance the competing goals 
of remaining efficient in the current environment while also being resilient in the 
face of environmental perturbations. By self-organizing around a set of opponent-
processing relationships related to this efficiency-resiliency tradeoff, the brain is able 
to zero in on relevant information. Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) identified three 
lower-order tradeoffs related to the higher-order efficiency-resiliency tradeoff, which 
are the exploration-exploitation tradeoff, specialization-generalization tradeoff, and 
focusing-diversifying tradeoff.
In this paper we will provide evidence for a continuum of individual differences 
related to the diametric model of autism and psychosis (Andersen, 2022; Crespi & 
Badcock, 2008; Crespi & Dinsdale, 2019; Del Giudice et al., 2014; Dinsdale et al., 
2013) and show that differences along this autism-schizotypy continuum are related 
to all three of these lower-order tradeoffs. Importantly, we will show that individual 
differences in the way that people handle these tradeoffs can be explained through 
individual differences in the way that precision is assigned to sensory input (e.g., 
Andersen 2022; Van de Cruys et al., 2014). This example will serve to demonstrate 
that the tradeoffs described by the RR framework are also inherent to precision-
weighting, indicating that these different frameworks are pointing to the same under­
lying process.
Precision-weighting is sometimes said to be at risk of becoming a “magic modu­
lator”, a variable that can be adjusted without constraints to fit every explanation 
(Litwin & Miłkowski, 2020; Miller & Clark, 2018). By showing that precision-
weighting simply is the PP account of RR, this concern should be largely alleviated. 
RR describes a set of trade-off relationships that inevitably constrains what an organ­
ism can find relevant. If our thesis is correct, these constraints are also inherent to 
precision-weighting. Thus, connecting these frameworks should serve to enrich the 
PP story by describing the tradeoffs that influence how an organism’s perceptual sys­
tem assigns precision to select sensory inputs and top-down predictions. On the other 
hand, by connecting RR to precision-weighting, RR can be integrated into a large 
and growing framework which has been put forward as a way to unify the cogni­
tive and psychological sciences (Hutchinson & Barrett, 2019). The tradeoff relation­
ships described by RR can thus be used to suggest testable hypotheses to empirical 
researchers investigating cognition within a Bayesian or PP framework. Thus, our 
proposed synthesis between RR and PP should serve to mutually support and enrich 
these disparate frameworks.
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
Our argument is structured as such: In Sect. 1 we introduce RR and describe the 
tradeoffs inherent to RR. In Sect. 2 we introduce PP and explain the role of precision-
weighting in this framework. Section 3 contains the main argument of the paper. 
In Sect. 3 we introduce the diametric model of autism and psychosis, including its 
manifestation in non-clinical populations as the autism-schizotypy continuum. We 
show that the tradeoffs inherent to both precision-weighting and RR manifest along 
this autism-schizotypy continuum and can be understood as differences in precision-
weighting along this continuum. By demonstrating this overlap, we aim to demon­
strate that precision-weighting and RR are different ways of looking at the same 
underlying process. Section 4 shows that the meta-tradeoff inherent to RR (efficiency 
vs. resilience) is the same as the meta-tradeoff inherent to the free energy principle 
(reducing redundancy vs. maximizing degeneracy). In the concluding Sect. 5, we 
detail out the implications of this overlap.
1  Tradeoffs inherent to relevance realization
Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) suggest that there is a constellation of problems 
within cognitive science that can all be considered as specific manifestations of the 
more general problem of relevance realization (RR). Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) 
put forward a theory of how intelligent systems achieve this feat through the ongo­
ing pursuit of competing goals which are traded off against each other. Vervaeke 
and colleagues (2012) argue for the existence of three important tradeoffs which are 
inherent to RR. These tradeoffs result from a cognitive system’s pursuit of compet­
ing goals which are in an opponent processing relationship with each other such that 
“the mechanism behind relevance realization is ultimately the process that enables 
the brain to balance these competing goals” (Vervaeke et al., 2012, p. 12). The auto­
nomic nervous system provides an example of opponent processing that may serve to 
clarify the concept. The two parts of the autonomic nervous system – the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic systems – are in an opponent-processing relationship with each 
other. The sympathetic nervous system activates the fight or flight response, putting 
the body in a state of high alert when necessary. The parasympathetic nervous system 
is involved in returning the body to a state of calm. Thus, two systems which are (in 
some sense) pitted against each other are necessary for the regulation of arousal. Dys­
function in either system leads to dysregulated arousal. The regulation of what we 
find relevant is similar to this process in that RR also entails systems and goals which 
are pitted against each other in an opponent processing relationship.
The tradeoffs inherent to RR are (a) the tradeoff between exploration and exploita­
tion, (b) the tradeoff between specialization and generalization, and (c) the tradeoff 
between focusing and diversifying. There is also a higher-order tradeoff between 
efficiency and resiliency which encompasses the three lower-order tradeoffs.
1.1  Exploration-Exploitation
A pervasive problem faced by all organisms consists of deciding whether or not to 
exploit current opportunities or search for better ones (Carver & Scheier, 1998; Del 
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
Giudice & Crespi, 2018; Mehlhorn et al., 2015). Should I continue to eat from the 
current patch of berries or leave to search for a better one? Should I marry my current 
partner or keep dating? Should I buy the house being advertised to me or keep search­
ing? These exploration-exploitation tradeoffs are ubiquitous in nature (Mehlhorn et 
al., 2015). Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) argue that a system which is optimizing 
for the dynamic balance between exploration and exploitation is engaging in rel­
evance realization.
1.2  Specialist-generalist
Another problem faced by all organisms consists of whether they should devote 
resources towards creating special-purpose machinery or general-purpose machinery 
(Chen et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2005). Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) refer to this 
as the problem of cognitive scope. Should an organism focus on the particularities 
of specific situations (as in a ‘microscope’) or zoom out to produce more generaliz­
able machinery (as in a ‘telescope’)? The optimal solution to this tradeoff depends 
on the volatility of the environment. Whereas specialists will tend to thrive in highly 
stable environments, generalists will do (relatively) better in highly volatile situa­
tions (Chen et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2005). However, an intelligent system must 
find a way to balance between the competing goals of being highly specialized for a 
particular environment and producing generalizable solutions that will be useful even 
if the environment shifts.
1.3  Focusing-diversifying
All complex organisms have multiple motivational systems which they must find a 
way to balance. For example, Schaller and colleagues (2017) posit the existence of 
fundamental motivations in people related to disease avoidance, status-seeking, mate 
acquisition/retention, and achieving basic physiological needs such as getting an 
adequate amount of food. Given limited time and resources, people will necessarily 
have to focus on one or more of these domains at the expense of others (Del Giudice 
et al., 2015). Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) suggest that RR entails an opponent-
processing relationship between devoting efforts towards satisfying multiple motiva­
tional systems (i.e., diversifying) and focusing efforts on one or a few motivations.
1.4  Efficiency-resiliency
The three trade-offs outlined above can all be considered manifestations of a higher-
order tradeoff between the need to be as efficient as possible in the current economy 
while simultaneously remaining resilient in the face of environmental changes (Ver­
vaeke et al., 2012). In a process that is akin to natural selection, resiliency entails 
increased variation while efficiency involves selection, or a culling of unnecessary 
cognitive structures. The need to be efficient while remaining resilient results in the 
increasing complexification (i.e., integration for efficiency and diversification for 
resiliency) of brain functioning over the course of development (Vervaeke et al., 
2012; Vervaeke & Ferraro, 2013). All of these tradeoffs will be discussed further 
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
below in the context of the diametric model of autism and psychosis. We will now 
introduce PP before showing the convergence between PP and RR.
2  The predictive processing framework
According to this popular new theory emerging from computational neuroscience, 
the brain might best be described as a prediction error minimizing engine (Bubic et 
al., 2010; Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013; Nave et al., 2020). These sorts of engines, if 
we’re on the right track, are endlessly proactive – continually attempting to predict 
their own streams of sensory stimulation before they arrive. Predictive brains go 
about generating our rich perceptual experiences and adaptive behaviors by continu­
ally learning about the temporal and spatial regularities that underlay the changing 
environment, and leveraging this information to generate increasingly better pre­
dictions about the hidden causes that underlay our ongoing experiences. When top-
down predictions match the bottom-up signals well enough, a perceptual experience 
occurs. When it doesn’t, the discrepancy between the prediction and the actual signal 
(referred to as “prediction errors’’) either moves forward through the system help­
ing to refine future predictions (e.g., that the hose alongside the house isn’t a snake), 
or it provokes actions aimed at making the sensory stream better fit the predictions 
(e.g., placing my coffee cup back in its regular place on my desk). And so, when you 
see that steaming coffee-cup on the desk in front of you, your perceptual experience 
reflects the multi-level neural guess that best reduces visual prediction errors. To 
visually perceive the scene, if this story is on track, your brain attempts to predict the 
scene, allowing the ensuing error (mismatch) signals to refine its guessing until a kind 
of equilibrium is achieved.
A novel feature of this framework is the tight link it establishes between knowl­
edge, perception, and action. The brain here uses prior knowledge to make probabi­
listic predictions about the structure of the environment, which cashes out as both 
perception and world-altering action. In the process of continually attempting to pre­
dict the next sensory input, and using any errors to update those predictions, the brain 
learns about the actionable world. This partnership between knowledge, perception, 
and action allows the human brain to leverage a lifetime’s worth of learning in order 
to respond to the newsworthy aspects of an otherwise chaotic stream of data.
The whole predictive system is further nuanced by ongoing second order expec­
tations it makes about the reliability of its own predictions in any given situation. 
In other words, part of what such systems are predicting moment to moment is the 
reliability of their own prediction errors. Precision weighting, formally the inverse 
variance of the prediction error signal, can be used to hone in on those streams of 
information that are most likely to yield adaptive predictions. Our experiences and 
active engagements with the world are not only a matter of the generative model 
instantiating a layered model of the causal structure of the world, it is also inflected 
at every level with constantly updating estimates about the reliability of those 
predictions.
The system uses these second-order estimates, or what is known as precision-
weighting, to flexibly adjust the impact of prediction errors throughout the system. 
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
This variable weighting allows the system to highlight useful sources of reliable data 
in the world (high signal to noise ratio), and to adjust the degree to which the system 
relies on its own bottom-up sensory information or top-down predictions (Friston, 
2009, 2010). Attention, according to this framework, is an active sampling of sensory 
information that has high precision (Feldman & Friston, 2010, p. 17). However, pre­
dictions about precision direct attention in at least two distinct ways: first, attention 
is directed to those aspects of the scene where there is a high signal to noise ratio. 
Attentional processes here work to select information that is informative about the 
underlying causal structure of the world, highlighting data that has a high probability 
for leading to a more adaptive predictive model. The second process deploys atten­
tion to opportunities to gain new useful information. This second type of process has 
been related to “salience”. Precision is weighting on beliefs about actions that are 
likely to improve the system’s predictive grip of a scene. Notice that if some piece of 
information is already highly predicted then it becomes less valuable as a source to 
improve predictions. In this second set of processes, precision is deployed on policies 
that are likely to harvest unambiguous information that is not yet well predicted. For 
example, attending to the sudden barking of a nearby dog is likely to generate useful 
(prevent being attacked), but yet unknown (is the dog restrained by a fence of leash), 
information. Salience in this context can be thought of as relating to a reduction in 
uncertainty – by attending in this way I become more confident about the causal 
structure underlying my environment (for a full account, see Parr & Friston 2019).
While there are marked differences between these aspects of attention, they are 
reconcilable within this account. We need only appreciate that both processes repre­
sent beliefs about what sensory information is likely to help improve one’s predictive 
grip on a scene. The major difference being the former concerns available data that 
are predicted in the here and now, while the later relates to data yet to be harvested.
To play this role, precision estimation must be delicately tuned to a wide variety 
of information coming from both outside and inside the predictive system (Miller & 
Clark, 2018). Getting the balance right between high-level predictions and low-level 
sensory information, and between more habitual and more goal-directed behaviors, is 
highly context dependent (e.g., time pressures, degree of danger, metabolic resources, 
etc.). Precision plays the role of delicately influencing the impact of every aspect of 
the prediction error signals in ways that reflect the brain’s best predictions given the 
task and context. It is this spectacular fluidity that has led to some worry. Precision 
weighting allows the predictive processing framework to accommodate every con­
ceivable perceptual and behavioral outcome from the simplest habitual reflex to the 
most complex and well-planned behaviors. Some worry that we may have inadver­
tently imported an unexplanatory free variable into our explanatory schema (Litwin 
& Miłkowski, 2020; Miller & Clark, 2018). We don’t agree, but we do appreciate 
the need to further explore and explain the various ways that precision is estimated 
within the framework. In many ways this is the current frontier of this research para­
digm. In what follows we suggest that the relevance realization literature may help us 
to further explore and refine the nature of precision estimations.
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
3  Precision-weighting and relevance realization
Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) suggest that RR “is a dynamic, self-designing, self-
organizing process that is not equated with an immutable identity” (p. 9). This is 
similar to how Clark (2015) describes the prediction-error minimization framework:
By self-organizing around prediction error, these architectures thus deliver a 
multiscale grip upon the organism-salient features of the world—a grip whose 
signature is the capacity to engage that world in ongoing cycles in which per­
ception and action work together to quash high-precision prediction error. (p. 
271)
What is the connection between prediction error and relevance realization? Clark 
(2015) suggests, the functional role of a prediction error signal is “to guide fluent 
engagements with those aspects of the world relevant to our current needs and proj­
ects” (p. 272). In particular, however, it is high-precision prediction errors which tend 
to drive perception and action. By assigning a higher precision to a sensory prediction 
error, a perceptual system is increasing the effect it will have on downstream process­
ing. Assigning high precision is thus the perceptual system’s way of labelling an error 
signal as being particularly relevant and thus in need of greater attention. Assigning 
low precision to an error signal is a way of deeming it irrelevant. Thus, less weight 
will be given to that signal such that it will not have a large effect on subsequent 
action and perception. All of this suggests that precision-weighting simply is how 
relevance is realized within the PP framework.
One of the central contributing factors for how precision is set on action policies is 
changes in the rate at which error is reduced over time relative to expectations (Hesp 
et al., 2021; Kiverstein et al., 2019; Van De Cruys, 2017). In other words, changes in 
how fast or slow prediction errors are being reduced (relative to expectations) helps 
to inform the system about how confident it should be in any particular action policy 
selection. If we suddenly do much better at reducing prediction error, those actions 
are good candidates for future successes in similar contexts. These changes in the 
rate of error reduction (also known as “error dynamics”) are expressed as changes 
in affective states of the body. The result is that when we improve our predictive 
grip we feel good, and those good feelings help to tune the system to opportuni­
ties to improve. And when we fail to achieve a good predictive grip (i.e., errors are 
amassing at unexpected rates) this feels bad, and those negative feelings readjust our 
confidence in our selected behaviors. As we have already outlined above, precision 
weighting determines to what degree we rely on habits (i.e., exploiting what we have 
already learned about the environment) or go about exploring the environment in 
search of new information that may increase our ability to reduce error in the future. 
Error dynamics plays an important role here as well, helping to balance the agent’s 
selection of pragmatic and epistemic action policies (Kiverstein et al., 2019).
If precision is affected by changes in how well or poorly we are able to reduce 
error over time then we will naturally find ourselves attracted to opportunities for 
improving our predictive abilities. We will be slope-chasers: motivated to seek out 
and benefit from opportunities to improve the slope of prediction error minimiza­
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
tion. That affective drive towards opportunities to improve our predictive grip will 
inevitably lead such agents to frequent those spaces that are just beyond their current 
capabilities. If some task or context is too well known, then it will cease to produce 
those prediction errors that are interesting for the agent to attempt reducing; and if the 
task is too complex, then the agent will not be well suited to manage the prediction 
errors. In both cases the agent will fail to reduce error at their expected rate. When 
there is too little error we feel bored and when there is too much we feel frustration 
and anxiety. Agents that are tuned by error dynamics in this way will naturally find a 
so- called “goldilocks zone” - places with just the right mixture of predictability and 
novelty or uncertainty and what is already well-predicted, thereby allowing them to 
make the most learning progress (and feel the best; Kidd et al., 2012; Kiverstein et 
al., 2019; Van De Cruys, 2017). Error dynamics will often lead agents to destroy their 
own fixed policies for exploiting what is already highly predictable, in favor of more 
itinerant wandering policies for exploration (Friston et al., 2012; Miller et al., 2021). 
As we will see in the sections to come, a non-typical sensitivity to these dynamics 
plays a special role in characterizing many of the differences in relevance realization 
between people high in autistic-like traits and people high in positive schizotypy.
3.1  Precision, reliability, and relevance
Precision-weighting is generally construed as a neural estimate of the ‘reliability’ of 
select sensory inputs (Clark, 2015; Hohwy, 2013). A more reliable input is one with 
a greater ratio of signal to noise, relative to the predictions of the agent (Feldman & 
Friston, 2010). This construal, however, has given rise to some confusion in the PP 
literature. For example, Ransom and colleagues (2020) claim that neural estimations 
of the reliability of sensory input cannot explain why we would pay attention to an 
unexpected occurrence, such as a dog barking at us while we walk down the street. 
Unexpected events are unreliable by definition, so how can estimations of reliability 
explain why we orient our attention towards them? This objection, however, results 
from a confusion about what precisely ‘reliability’ means within the PP framework. 
As Clark (2013, 2017) has repeatedly argued, ‘reliability’ and ‘relevance’ are equiva­
lent within the PP framework. Indeed, the very concept of signal and noise doesn’t 
make sense outside of an agent with goals. What constitutes signal? Everything that 
is relevant to my goals. What constitutes noise? Everything that is irrelevant to my 
goals. In the PP framework, goals are understood as high-precision proprioceptive 
predictions (Clark, 2013). The estimation of reliability in relation to these predictions 
(i.e., the signal to noise ratio of sensory input) is therefore equivalent to the estima­
tion of relevance. Why would we direct our attention towards a barking dog? Because 
we have some high-precision proprioceptive prediction which states something like 
‘I will avoid bodily injury’ and the barking dog (and any other unexpected loud noise) 
reliably provides information which is likely to be relevant to that prediction (see 
Parr & Friston 2019 for a full discussion of this point). In other words, precision-
weighting simply is the PP account of RR.
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
3.2  Tradeoffs inherent to precision-weighting and RR
If precision-weighting is the account of how relevance is realized in the PP frame­
work, we would expect to find that the tradeoffs inherent to RR are also inherent to 
precision-weighting. For example, if there are differences among individuals in the 
relative weight given to sensory input, we would expect to find concomitant individ­
ual differences that reflect these underlying tradeoff relationships. It has recently been 
hypothesized that autism spectrum disorders (ASD) result from giving an inflexibly 
high weight to sensory input such that people with ASD are unable to intelligently 
ignore small, irrelevant prediction errors (Lawson et al., 2017; Van de Cruys et al., 
2014; Cruys et al., 2017). Autism-related deficits in executive functioning, theory of 
mind, and central coherence are all argued to flow naturally from this core underly­
ing mechanism. Andersen (2022) has recently extended this hypothesis by positing 
a continuum of individual differences in both clinical and non-clinical populations 
characterized by people who give a relatively high weight to sensory input on one 
side and people who give a relatively low weight to sensory input on the other side. 
Building on the diametric model of autism and psychosis (Crespi & Badcock, 2008), 
recent research has provided evidence that autistic-like traits and positive schizo­
typy are constructs that represent the opposite ends of this continuum in non-clinical 
populations (Andersen, 2022; Del Giudice et al., 2014; Dinsdale et al., 2013). This 
is referred to as the autism-schizotypy continuum. Autistic-like traits include being 
highly detail oriented (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009), preferring predictable routines 
(Del Giudice, 2018), having narrow interests in specialized topics (Baron-Cohen, 
2006; Happé, 1999), having a reduced capacity for imagination (Crespi et al., 2016), 
having highly developed systemizing abilities (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009), and hav­
ing a narrow, focused attention style (Abu-Akel et al., 2018; Robertson et al., 2013; 
Song et al., 2015). Positive schizotypy is associated with an increased propensity 
for exploration (Andersen, 2022; Andersen et al., 2021; Del Giudice et al., 2014), 
increased imagination (Abu-Akel et al., 2020; Crespi et al., 2016; Holt, 2019), hyper-
mentalizing (Abu-Akel et al., 2015; Crespi & Badcock, 2008; Wastler & Lenzenwe­
ger, 2019), and having a more diffuse, distractible attention style (Abu-Akel et al., 
2018).
Building on the thesis put forward by Van de Cruys and colleagues (2014), 
Andersen (2022) has argued that all of these cognitive-perceptual difference along 
the autism-schizotypy continuum can be understood as differences in the relative 
weight given to sensory input. People high in autistic-like traits give a relatively 
inflexibly high weight to sensory input while people high in positive schizotypy give 
a relatively inflexibly low weight to sensory input. These differences are not to be 
understood in terms of pathology or dysfunction, but rather in terms of a continuum 
that everyone (clinical or non-clinical) falls along, and in which there are cognitive-
perceptual strengths and weaknesses on both sides of the continuum. We therefore 
use the autism-schizotypy continuum (rather than an alternative framework) because 
there is already a published exposition of how the tradeoffs inherent to precision-
weighing manifest along this continuum (Andersen, 2022). Our goal in this paper is 
to show that these tradeoffs are the same as the ones inherent to RR.
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
In the following sections we will describe how the three tradeoffs inherent to RR 
manifest along this autism-schizotypy continuum and how they can all be explained 
according to differences in the weight given to sensory input.
3.3  Autism-schizotypy and exploration-exploitation
People with ASD and people high in autistic-like traits are known to have a preference 
for routine, predictable situations and an aversion to novelty and uncertainty (Boul­
ter et al., 2014; Del Giudice, 2018; Neil et al., 2016). Del Giudice and colleagues 
(2014) extracted an autism-schizotypy variable using principal component analysis 
from measures of autistic-like traits and positive schizotypy in which higher levels of 
the variable indicate high positive schizotypy and low levels indicate higher autistic-
like traits. They found that the autism-schizotypy variable was positively correlated 
with the Big Five traits of Openness and Extraversion. Openness and Extraversion 
are reliably correlated with each other and their shared variance forms a higher-order 
factor of the Big Five called Plasticity (DeYoung et al., 2002; Digman, 1997). Plastic­
ity has been characterized as representing the general tendency towards exploration 
(DeYoung, 2015). Del Giudice and colleagues (2014) also found that the autism-
schizotypy variable was positively associated with sensation-seeking, which has 
also been associated with a general exploratory tendency (DeYoung, 2013). These 
findings indicate that autistic-like traits are associated with a reduced propensity for 
exploration1 while positive schizotypy is associated with an increased propensity for 
exploration (Del Giudice et al., 2014). Del Giudice and colleagues’ (2014) findings 
are not the only indicator of differences in exploratory tendency along the autism-
schizotypy continuum. Latent inhibition is the ability or tendency to screen from con­
scious awareness information which has been previously deemed irrelevant (Carson, 
2010). Positive schizotypy is associated with reduced latent inhibition (Carson, 2018; 
Gray et al., 2002; Kumari & Ettinger, 2010) and one small study has found abnor­
mally high latent inhibition (the authors refer to it as “learned irrelevance”) to be 
associated with ASD (Maes et al., 2011). Reduced latent inhibition is also associated 
with increased Plasticity (Peterson et al., 2002; Peterson & Carson, 2000), indicating 
that reduced latent inhibition is related to a general exploratory tendency. Finally, it 
was recently found that positive schizotypy is correlated with intentions and desires 
to migrate, which was hypothesized by the authors to reflect an increased propensity 
for exploration (Andersen et al., 2021).
How might differences in the weight given to sensory input lead to differences in 
the propensity to explore? Agents are motivated to explore large, resolvable error 
signals because large error signals offer the greatest potential information gain (DeY­
oung, 2013; Kiverstein et al., 2019). If people with high positive schizotypy give a 
relatively low weight to sensory input, this means that their perceptual system will 
only pay attention to relatively large prediction errors and that they will tend to ignore 
1  This is not to say that people with ASD are never curious, but rather that their curiosity tends to be 
within more highly structured (predictable) domains. The result is that they may tend to be more comfort­
able exploring within particular domains rather than moving between domains (e.g., the focus on special 
interests that occurs in people with ASD). Thanks to Sander Van de Cruys for highlighting this nuance.
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
smaller prediction errors (Andersen, 2022). This will necessarily make people with 
high positive schizotypy less detail-oriented (since smaller prediction errors are the 
equivalent of details), but it will also make exploration a more enticing option since 
they will be better at seeing where the largest information gains are available. In other 
words, people high in positive schizotypy trade off the ability to notice very small dif­
ferences between prediction errors (i.e., details) for the ability to notice the larger dif­
ferences between errors which should motivate them to explore. On the other hand, 
if high autistic-like traits are associated with an inflexibly high weight being given 
to sensory input, their perceptual system will be more likely to pay attention to even 
relatively small deviations from predictions. While this means that people with high 
autistic-like traits will be highly attuned to small details, the uniformly high weight 
given to prediction errors means that they will have a harder time noticing where the 
greatest information gains can be had (Van de Cruys et al., 2014). This may motivate 
the autistic type person to stay with their current endeavors rather than explore other 
options since there will always be ever-greater levels of detail to attend to within 
their current endeavors. Resolving the prediction errors associated with these details 
will often be more subjectively enticing to a person with high autistic-like traits than 
resolving the potentially larger prediction errors outside of the current endeavor. 
Thus, the narrow and highly specialized interests associated with autism can be seen 
as a consequence of reduced exploration (Del Giudice, 2018).
3.4  Autism-schizotypy and specialization-generalization
Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) suggest that there is a cognitive tradeoff between 
producing special purpose machinery and general purpose machinery. To illustrate 
this tradeoff, they use the example of an algorithm used to train neural networks, 
which can be set up so that the network will be precisely fitted to the particular data 
that it is trained on (meaning that it will be highly specialized for a particular data 
set) or so that the network’s performance will be able to generalize to new datasets. 
Interestingly, they suggest that without introducing a ‘weight decay’ term to the algo­
rithm, the network will be overfitted, meaning that the network’s performance will 
not generalize to new situations. This is exactly what Van de Cruys and colleagues 
(2013, 2014, 2017) suggest is happening in autism. Because people with ASD give an 
inflexibly high weight to sensory input, their predictive models will often be overfit­
ted to the input they are trained on and so will not generalize to new situations (e.g., 
Plaisted 2001). This is especially evident when the input is noisy or unreliable, as is 
often the case in social situations. Multiple studies have shown that people with ASD 
have trouble picking up on patterns when there is noise mixed in with the signal, 
holding other factors like IQ constant (Alcántara et al., 2004; Park et al., 2017; Sche­
linski & von Kriegstein, 2020; Zaidel et al., 2015). On the other hand, people with 
high positive schizotypy are not reported to have any difficulty generalizing from 
noisy signals. Giving a relatively low weight to sensory input is the equivalent of 
introducing a ‘weight decay’ term, as suggested by Vervaeke and colleagues (2012). 
This will allow people with high positive schizotypy to more effectively ignore irrel­
evant details in order to find the underlying pattern in noisy input. Figure 1 provides 
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
a simplified visual demonstration of how differences in the weight given to sensory 
input could result in different abilities to generalize from noisy signals.
On the other hand, people with ASD or high autistic-like traits often have excellent 
systemizing abilities, meaning that they are easily able to master lawful, rules-based 
systems like a computer programming language (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009). Techni­
cally, overfitting occurs when unrepeated noise is incorporated into a model. In a 
truly lawful, rules-based system, there is no noise to be incorporated, so overfitting is 
simply not an issue. Thus, the highly precise cognitive-perceptual style afforded by 
giving a high weight to sensory input will allow people high in autistic-like traits to 
easily master complex rules-based systems, but this comes at the cost of an inability 
to generalize from noisy signals. People high in positive schizotypy, however, may 
tend to underfit their predictive models when confronted with highly complex, low-
noise input. In data analysis, underfitting occurs when strong assumptions (e.g., the 
assumption that a linear model best fits the data) are brought to bear on the data to 
be analyzed such that the data is made to fit the assumptions rather than vice-versa. 
For people high in positive schizotypy, giving less weight to bottom-up sensory input 
necessarily means that (on average) more weight will be given to their top-down 
prior predictions since the weight given to bottom-up or top-down influences is 
always relative. For example, Crespi & Dinsdale (2019) review evidence that posi­
tive schizotypy and psychosis is associated with increased susceptibility to the rubber 
hand illusion, which is thought to be facilitated by the influence of top-down priors 
on perception (Hohwy, 2013). They also show that people with ASD or with high 
autistic-like traits are less susceptible to this illusion, indicating reduced influence 
of top-down priors (Crespi & Dinsdale, 2019). In trying to understand rules-based 
systems, the greater influence of top-down priors may lead people high in positive 
schizotypy to impose simplifying assumptions onto the input, which will result in 
them missing out on important details and treating signal as if it’s noise. Figure 2 
provides a simplified visual representation of how differences in the weight given to 
sensory input, and thus differences in the influence of top-down assumptions (in this 
example, the top-down assumption is that a linear model best fits the data), could 
result in different systemizing abilities.
Figure 1
 
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
In sum, by giving a relatively high weight to sensory input, people high in autistic-
like traits are able to construct highly precise predictive models which are useful 
for mastering specialized technical systems, but this ability is traded off against the 
ability to generalize from noisy signals. Because people high in positive schizotypy 
give a relatively low weight to sensory input, they don’t have the same difficulty with 
generalization, but they also don’t tend to develop specialized systemizing abilities to 
the same extent as people high in autistic-like traits (Andersen, 2022).
3.5  Autism-schizotypy and focusing vs. diversifying
As discussed above, there is a fundamental tradeoff between focusing one’s efforts on 
one or a few motivations and diversifying one’s efforts across multiple motivational 
systems. There is evidence which suggests that the way people handle this tradeoff 
depends in part on where they fall along the autism-schizotypy continuum (Del Giu­
dice et al., 2010; Giudice et al., 2014). People high in positive schizotypy tend to 
be more impulsive (Del Giudice et al., 2010; Giudice et al., 2014). Positive schizo­
typy is also correlated with bipolar disorder and hypomanic traits, both of which 
are associated with increased impulsivity (Carter et al., 2019; Mahon et al., 2013; 
Rybakowski & Klonowska, 2011). Impulsivity can be thought of as a diversifying 
strategy because impulsive people will not tend to suppress any particular motiva­
tional system. If a particular motivation becomes salient to them through affect, they 
will be more likely to immediately attempt to bring about sensory states that will 
satisfy it. People high in autistic-like traits, on the other hand, are less impulsive (Del 
Giudice et al., 2010; Giudice et al., 2014) and autism has even been associated with 
living an ascetic lifestyle in which certain motivational systems (e.g., mate acquisi­
tion) are completely ignored at the expense of others (Annus, 2018). For example, 
Temple Grandin, a successful author and architect who is on the autism spectrum, 
has said that she has remained celibate and focused on her career because of the 
complexity and risk associated with romantic relationships (Grandin & Sacks, 2006). 
Figure 22
2  This figure originally appeared as Fig. 2 in Andersen 2022
 
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
This low impulsivity, more ascetic lifestyle can be thought of as a focusing strategy, 
in which some motivational systems are given high priority while others may be 
ignored completely.
We can also understand how differences in the weight given to sensory input 
would lead to differences in managing the focusing-diversifying tradeoff. People with 
high autistic-like traits will be more sensitive to small prediction errors (Van de Cruys 
et al., 2014). A corollary of this view is that they will also be more sensitive to the 
rate of error accumulation (Hesp et al., 2021; Kiverstein et al., 2019; Van de Cruys et 
al., 2017; Wilkinson et al., 2019). If somebody is highly sensitive to errors, a viable 
strategy to maintain the subjective feeling of having a grip on the world (that is, keep­
ing themselves in that optimal Goldilocks Zone) would be to focus on one or a few 
motivational domains while ignoring or downplaying the importance of other moti­
vations. By focusing on one domain (e.g., career) and ignoring others (e.g., romance), 
a person may be able to limit the volatility they experience to a tolerable amount. This 
is likely not the only factor at play though. It may also be that certain domains (e.g., 
certain careers like being an architect) have clear, discernible rules that once learned 
can simply be followed to be successful. Other domains (e.g., human relationships) 
are more volatile and require the ability to flexibly adjust one’s high-level predictions 
on the fly, which people high in autistic-like traits may be relatively poor at doing 
(Van de Cruys et al., 2014). This may lead people with more autistic-like traits to 
focus on domains with clear expectations at the expense of more volatile domains. 
However, the point remains that people high in autistic-like traits appear to be more 
likely to focus on certain motivational systems at the expense of others.
On the other hand, a person high in positive schizotypy who gives a relatively low 
weight to sensory prediction errors will be less sensitive to volatility. This means that 
in the same situation in which a person high in autistic-like traits would see unbear­
able risk and complexity, the person high in positive schizotypy will be more likely 
to see opportunity (this tendency is taken to the extreme during a manic episode). 
Potential opportunities for error reduction will be more salient to somebody high in 
positive schizotypy because the low weight given to sensory input means they are not 
as averse to temporary increases in the rate of error production. Because the person 
high in positive schizotypy is likely to see the world as a place of opportunity rather 
than unbearable complexity and risk, they may be more likely to impulsively seek 
to reduce error for any motivational system that makes itself salient to them. In the 
extreme, this tendency could result in the mania characteristic of bipolar disorder.
4  Meta Trade-Off: minimizing redundancy for efficiency and 
maximizing degeneracy for Resilience
We argued above that the three lower-order trade-offs inherent to RR are particular 
manifestations of a higher-order tradeoff between efficiency and resiliency. In this 
section we will show that the PP framework has also recognized this higher-order 
tradeoff using a different set of concepts. It has recently been argued that active infer­
ence and free-energy minimization necessarily entail the minimization of redundancy 
and the maximization of degeneracy (Sajid et al., 2020). A redundant architecture has 
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
multiple structures that perform the same function. Redundancy is inefficient because 
not all of these structures will be needed in the current environment. A prediction-
error minimizing agent will therefore tend to minimize redundancy in the pursuit 
of increased efficiency. The highly detailed, highly specialized predictive models 
associated with autism can be thought of as a manifestation of the attempt to mini­
mize redundancies. Why? Because if you have a model that is moderately good for 
many situations (i.e., a more generalizable model), that model is largely redundant 
because you will never encounter the vast majority of situations for which the model 
might apply. A specialized model can be more detailed (and therefore more efficient) 
because it is only applicable to a narrower range of situations. The specialized model 
increases efficiency by reducing the number of situations to which it must apply (i.e., 
its generalizability). In this way, we can say that people high in autistic-like traits lean 
towards reducing redundancies in the redundancy-degeneracy tradeoff.
Degeneracy, on the other hand, entails an architecture in which multiple path­
ways are available to fulfill the same function. A degenerate architecture is highly 
resilient in the face of environmental perturbations because if one type of structure 
becomes obsolete, another structure may be able to take over its functionality (Whita­
cre & Bender, 2010). A prediction-error minimizing agent will also tend to maximize 
degeneracy, which (in terms of beliefs) can be thought of as “keeping one’s options 
open” (Sajid et al., 2020, p. 5752). This “keeping one’s options open” is related to the 
more generalizable models of the person high in positive schizotypy. As discussed 
above, a more generalizable model will necessarily be less detailed (and therefore 
less efficient), but this lack of detail allows it to apply to many different situations, 
affording a greater resilience to environmental changes. A person with more gener­
alizable models will therefore have more behavioral “options” available to them. 
People high in positive schizotypy therefore lean towards maximizing degeneracy in 
the redundancy-degeneracy tradeoff.
An increase in degeneracy will simultaneously result in an increase in redundancy. 
Thus, the imperatives to minimize redundancy and maximize degeneracy are in an 
opponent-processing relationship with each other (Sajid et al., 2020; Vervaeke et 
al., 2012). The redundancy-degeneracy tradeoff therefore appears to be a different 
way of talking about the efficiency-resiliency tradeoff proposed in the RR framework 
(Vervaeke et al., 2012).
Importantly, within the PP framework it is variation in the precision-weighting 
of select prediction errors (i.e., exogenous and endogenous attention) which pro­
vides the mechanism by which predictive models that properly balance the need to 
minimize redundancy and maximize degeneracy can be selected over others (Clark, 
2015). Thus, the need to minimize redundancy (i.e., be efficient) and maximize 
degeneracy (i.e., be resilient) provides another example of how precision-weighting 
simply is the PP account of RR.
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
5  Conclusion
In this paper we have demonstrated substantial overlap between the RR framework 
and predictive processing. We have shown, using empirical research surrounding the 
diametric model of autism and psychosis, that the tradeoffs involved in giving more 
or less weight to sensory input (i.e., precision weighting) are the same as the oppo­
nent-processing tradeoffs that Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) hypothesized were at 
the core of RR. What does this overlap mean?
First, it provides evidence that both of these frameworks are on the right track. 
When two frameworks that were developed with different backgrounds and assump­
tions converge on such a similar answer, it increases the plausibility of that answer. 
In this case, we have used empirical research on autism and positive schizotypy in 
conjunction with the hypothesis that these psychological dispositions are caused by 
individual differences in the relative weight given to sensory input in order to demon­
strate that the predictive processing account of precision-weighting entails the same 
kind of opponent-processing relationships that Vervaeke and colleagues (2012) sug­
gest are at the core of RR. We also showed that the higher-order tradeoff between 
efficiency and resiliency that characterizes RR is the same as the tradeoff between 
minimizing redundancy (for efficiency) and maximizing degeneracy (for resiliency) 
that is implicit in the free energy principle (Sajid et al., 2020). These convergen­
ces increase the plausibility that opponent-processing relationships like these are 
involved in the process by which cognitive agents like us separate signal from noise.
Furthermore, both the PP framework and RR stand to benefit from this synthesis. 
Within PP, precision-weighting has occasionally been characterized as a “magic mod­
ulator” (Litwin & Miłkowski, 2020; Miller & Clark, 2018). In other words, critics of 
PP have argued that the way precision is assigned is relatively unconstrained and can 
be used to fill in the gaps when the PP framework could otherwise not account for a 
particular phenomenon. However, this concern should be largely alleviated by show­
ing that precision-weighting is characterized by tradeoff relationships such as the 
ones described in this paper. These kinds of tradeoffs will constrain the way precision 
is assigned. For example, precision cannot be assigned in such a way that maximizes 
both efficiency and resiliency at the same time.
The RR framework stands to benefit by being integrated with a large and growing 
cognitive science literature. Demonstrating the overlap between these frameworks 
may help in designing empirical studies to test hypotheses derived from the RR 
framework. Again, research surrounding the diametric model of autism and psycho­
sis may be ideal for this purpose. If the autism-schizotypy continuum is really char­
acterized by differences in the way sensory input is weighted (Andersen, 2022; Van 
de Cruys et al., 2014), this also means that this cognitive-perceptual continuum can 
serve as an empirical demonstration of the tradeoffs inherent to RR. Although we 
have reviewed evidence in this paper that this is indeed the case, there is room for an 
empirical research program with this explicit purpose in mind.
Conflict of interest statement  The authors whose names are listed above certify that they have no affilia­
tions with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial or non-financial interest in the 
subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
References
Abu-Akel, A., Apperly, I., Spaniol, M. M., Geng, J. J., & Mevorach, C. (2018). Diametric effects of autism 
tendencies and psychosis proneness on attention control irrespective of task demands. Scientific 
Reports, 8(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26821-7
Abu-Akel, A., Webb, M. E., de Montpellier, E., Von Bentivegni, S., Luechinger, L., Ishii, A., & Mohr, 
C. (2020). Autistic and positive schizotypal traits respectively predict better convergent and diver­
gent thinking performance. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 36, 100656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tsc.2020.100656
Abu-Akel, A., Wood, S. J., Hansen, P. C., & Apperly, I. A. (2015). Perspective-taking abilities in the 
balance between autism tendencies and psychosis proneness. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 282(1808), 20150563. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.0563
Alcántara, J. I., Weisblatt, E. J. L., Moore, B. C. J., & Bolton, P. F. (2004). Speech-in-noise perception in 
high-functioning individuals with autism or Asperger’s syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 45(6), 1107–1114. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.t01-1-00303.x
Andersen, B. P. (2022). Autistic-like traits and positive schizotypy as diametric specializations of the pre­
dictive mind. Perspectives on Psychological Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916221075252
Andersen, B. P., Al-Shawaf, L., & Bearden, R. (2021). Positive schizotypy predicts migration inten­
tions and desires. Personality and Individual Differences, 182, 111096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paid.2021.111096
Annus, A. (2018). Asceticism in Ancient Mesopotamia and Syria: A Study of Autism in Antiquity 
(pp. 521–539)
Baron-Cohen, S. (2006). The hyper-systemizing, assortative mating theory of autism. Progress in 
Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 30(5), 865–872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pnpbp.2006.01.010
Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Ashwin, C., Tavassoli, T., & Chakrabarti, B. (2009). Talent in autism: Hyper-
systemizing, hyper-attention to detail and sensory hypersensitivity. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1522), 1377–1383. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0337
Boulter, C., Freeston, M., South, M., & Rodgers, J. (2014). Intolerance of Uncertainty as a Framework 
for Understanding Anxiety in Children and Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 44(6), 1391–1402. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-013-2001-x
Bubic, A., von Cramon, D. Y., & Schubotz, R. I. (2010). Prediction, Cognition and the Brain. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00025. 4
Carson, S. H. (2010). Latent inhibition and creativity. Latent inhibition: Cognition, neuroscience and 
applications to schizophrenia (pp. 183–198). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511730184.010
Carson, S. H. (2018). Creativity and psychopathology: A relationship of shared neurocognitive vulner­
abilities. The Cambridge handbook of the neuroscience of creativity (pp. 136–157). Cambridge Uni­
versity Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316556238.009
Carter, C., Hass, R. W., Charfadi, M., & Dinzeo, T. J. (2019). Probing Linear and Nonlinear Relations 
Among Schizotypy, Hypomania, Cognitive Inhibition, and Creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 
31(1), 83–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2019.1580091
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the Self-Regulation of Behavior (1st ed.). Cambridge University 
Press
Chen, A. G., Benrimoh, D., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2020). A Bayesian Account of Generalist and Special­
ist Formation Under the Active Inference Framework. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 3, https://
doi.org/10.3389/frai.2020.00069
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. 
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind (Reprint edition). 
Oxford University Press
Clark, A. (2017). Predictions, precision, and agentive attention. Consciousness and Cognition, 56, 115–
119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.06.013
Crespi, B., & Badcock, C. (2008). Psychosis and autism as diametrical disorders of the social brain. Behav­
ioral and Brain Sciences, 31(3), 241–261. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x08004214
Crespi, B., & Dinsdale, N. (2019). Autism and psychosis as diametrical disorders of embodiment. Evolu­
tion Medicine and Public Health, 2019(1), 121–138. https://doi.org/10.1093/emph/eoz021
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
Crespi, B., Leach, E., Dinsdale, N., Mokkonen, M., & Hurd, P. (2016). Imagination in human social cogni­
tion, autism, and psychotic-affective conditions. Cognition, 150, 181–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cognition.2016.02.001
Del Giudice, M. (2018). Evolutionary Psychopathology: A Unified Approach. Oxford University Press
Del Giudice, M., Angeleri, R., Brizio, A., & Elena, M. R. (2010). The Evolution of Autistic-Like and 
Schizotypal Traits: A Sexual Selection Hypothesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 41. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00041
Del Giudice, M., & Crespi, B. J. (2018). Basic functional trade-offs in cognition: An integrative frame­
work. Cognition, 179, 56–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.06.008
Del Giudice, M., Gangestad, S. W., & Kaplan, H. S. (2015). Life History Theory and Evolutionary Psy­
chology. In The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (pp. 1–27). American Cancer Society. https://
doi.org/10.1002/9781119125563.evpsych102
Del Giudice, M., Klimczuk, A. C. E., Traficonte, D. M., & Maestripieri, D. (2014). Autistic-like and 
schizotypal traits in a life history perspective: Diametrical associations with impulsivity, sensation 
seeking, and sociosexual behavior. Evolution and Human Behavior, 35(5), 415–424. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.05.007
Dennett, D. (1987). Cognitive Wheels: The Frame Problem of AI. In K. M. Ford & Z. W. Pylyshyn (Eds.), 
The Robots Dilemma Revisited: The Frame Problem in Artificial Intelligence (2nd edition). Praeger
DeYoung, C. G. (2013). The neuromodulator of exploration: A unifying theory of the role of dopamine in 
personality. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00762
DeYoung, C. G. (2015). Cybernetic Big Five Theory. Journal of Research in Personality, 56, 33–58. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2014.07.004
DeYoung, C. G., Peterson, J. B., & Higgins, D. M. (2002). Higher-order factors of the Big Five predict 
conformity: Are there neuroses of health? Personality and Individual Differences, 33(4), 533–552. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(01)00171-4
Digman, J. M. (1997). Higher-order factors of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
73(6), 1246–1256
Dinsdale, N. L., Hurd, P. L., Wakabayashi, A., Elliot, M., & Crespi, B. J. (2013). How Are Autism and 
Schizotypy Related? Evidence from a Non-Clinical Population. PLOS ONE, 8(5), e63316. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0063316
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Frontiers in Human Neu­
roscience. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215. 4
Friston, K., Breakspear, M., & Deco, G. (2012). Perception and self-organized instability. Frontiers in 
Computational Neuroscience, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2012.00044
Friston, K. J. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
13(7), 293–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Grandin, T., & Sacks, O. (2006). Thinking in Pictures, Expanded Edition: My Life with Autism (Expanded 
ed. edition). Vintage
Gray, N. S., Fernandez, M., Williams, J., Ruddle, R. A., & Snowden, R. J. (2002). Which schizotypal 
dimensions abolish latent inhibition? The British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41(Pt 3), 271–284. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/014466502760379136
Happé, F. (1999). Autism: Cognitive deficit or cognitive style? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(6), 216–
222. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01318-2
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Deeply Felt Affect: 
The Emergence of Valence in Deep Active Inference. Neural Computation, 33(2), 398–446. https://
doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01341
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind (1 edition). Oxford University Press
Holt, N. J. (2019). The expression of schizotypy in the daily lives of artists. Psychology of Aesthetics Cre­
ativity and the Arts, 13(3), 359–371. https://doi.org/10.1037/aca0000176
Hutchinson, J. B., & Barrett, L. F. (2019). The Power of Predictions: An Emerging Paradigm for Psy­
chological Research. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 28(3), 280–291. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0963721419831992
James, W. (1890). The stream of thought. In W. James (Ed.), The principles of psychology, Vol I (pp. 
224–290). Henry Holt and Co. https://doi.org/10.1037/10538-009
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). The Goldilocks Effect: Human Infants Allocate Atten­
tion to Visual Sequences That Are Neither Too Simple Nor Too Complex. PLOS ONE, 7(5), e36399. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0036399
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Rietveld, E. (2019). The feeling of grip: Novelty, error dynamics, and the 
predictive brain. Synthese, 196(7), 2847–2869. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-017-1583-9
Kumari, V., & Ettinger, U. (2010). Latent inhibition in schizophrenia and schizotypy: A review of the 
empirical literature. In I. Weiner & R. Lubow (Eds.), Latent Inhibition: Cognition, Neuroscience and 
Applications to Schizophrenia (pp. 417–447). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511730184.018
Lawson, R. P., Mathys, C., & Rees, G. (2017). Adults with autism over-estimate the volatility of the sen­
sory environment. Nature Neuroscience, 20(9), 1293–1299. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4615
Litwin, P., & Miłkowski, M. (2020). Unification by Fiat: Arrested Development of Predictive Processing. 
Cognitive Science, 44(7), e12867. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12867
Maes, J. H. R., Eling, P. A. T. M., Wezenberg, E., Vissers, C. T. W. M., & Kan, C. C. (2011). Attentional 
set shifting in autism spectrum disorder: Differentiating between the role of perseveration, learned 
irrelevance, and novelty processing. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 33(2), 
210–217. https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2010.501327
Mahon, K., Perez-Rodriguez, M., Gunawardane, N., & Burdick, K. (2013). Dimensional endophenotypes 
in Bipolar Disorder: Affective Dysregulation and Psychosis Proneness. Journal of Affective Disor­
ders, 151(2), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2013.08.003
McCarthy, J., & Hayes, P. J. (1969). Some Philosophical Problems from the Standpoint of Artificial Intel­
ligence. In B. Meltzer, & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine Intelligence 4. Edinburgh University Press
Mehlhorn, K., Newell, B. R., Todd, P. M., Lee, M. D., Morgan, K., Braithwaite, V. A., Hausmann, D., 
Fiedler, K., & Gonzalez, C. (2015). Unpacking the exploration–exploitation tradeoff: A synthesis of 
human and animal literatures. Decision, 2(3), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1037/dec0000033
Miller, M., & Clark, A. (2018). Happily entangled: Prediction, emotion, and the embodied mind. Synthese, 
195(6), 2559–2575. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-017-1399-7
Miller, M., Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). The Predictive Dynamics of Happiness and Well-Being. 
Emotion Review, 17540739211063852. https://doi.org/10.1177/17540739211063851
Nave, K., Deane, G., Miller, M., & Clark, A. (2020). Wilding the predictive brain. WIREs Cognitive Sci­
ence, n/a), e1542. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1542
Neil, L., Olsson, N. C., & Pellicano, E. (2016). The Relationship Between Intolerance of Uncertainty, Sen­
sory Sensitivities, and Anxiety in Autistic and Typically Developing Children. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 46(6), 1962–1973. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2721-9
Park, W. J., Schauder, K. B., Zhang, R., Bennetto, L., & Tadin, D. (2017). High internal noise and poor 
external noise filtering characterize perception in autism spectrum disorder. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 
17584. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17676-5
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Attention or salience? Current Opinion in Psychology, 29, 1–5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.10.006
Peterson, J. B., & Carson, S. H. (2000). Latent Inhibition and Openness to Experience in a high-achieving 
student population. Personality and Individual Differences, 28(2), 323–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0191-8869(99)00101-4
Peterson, J. B., Smith, K. W., & Carson, S. H. (2002). Openness and extraversion are associated with 
reduced latent inhibition: Replication and commentary. Personality and Individual Differences, 
33(7), 1137–1147. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(02)00004-1
Plaisted, K. C. (2001). Reduced generalization in autism: An alternative to weak central coherence. The 
development of autism: Perspectives from theory and research (pp. 149–169). Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates Publishers
Ransom, M., Fazelpour, S., Markovic, J., Kryklywy, J., Thompson, E. T., & Todd, R. M. (2020). Affect-
biased attention and predictive processing. Cognition, 203, 104370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cognition.2020.104370
Robertson, C. E., Kravitz, D. J., Freyberg, J., Baron-Cohen, S., & Baker, C. I. (2013). Tunnel vision: 
Sharper gradient of spatial attention in autism. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(16), 6776–6781. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5120-12.2013
Rybakowski, J. K., & Klonowska, P. (2011). Bipolar mood disorder, creativity and schizotypy: An experi­
mental study. Psychopathology, 44(5), 296–302. https://doi.org/10.1159/000322814
Sajid, N., Parr, T., Hope, T. M., Price, C. J., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Degeneracy and Redundancy in Active 
Inference. Cerebral Cortex, 30(11), 5750–5766. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhaa148
1 3

Predictive processing and relevance realization: exploring convergent…
Schaller, M., Kenrick, D. T., Neel, R., & Neuberg, S. L. (2017). Evolution and human motivation: A fun­
damental motives framework. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 11(6), e12319. https://
doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12319
Schelinski, S., & von Kriegstein, K. (2020). Brief Report: Speech-in-Noise Recognition and the Rela­
tion to Vocal Pitch Perception in Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Typical Develop­
ment. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 50(1), 356–363. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-019-04244-1
Song, Y., Hakoda, Y., Sanefuji, W., & Cheng, C. (2015). Can They See It? The Functional Field of View 
Is Narrower in Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Plos One, 10(7), https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0133237
Van De Cruys, S. (2017). Affective Value in the Predictive Mind. Philosophy and Predictive Processing. 
https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573253
Van de Cruys, S., de-Wit, L., Evers, K., Boets, B., & Wagemans, J. (2013). Weak Priors versus Overfit­
ting of Predictions in Autism: Reply to Pellicano and Burr (TICS, 2012). I-Perception, 4(2), 95–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1068/i0580ic
Van de Cruys, S., Evers, K., der Hallen, R. V., Eylen, L. V., Boets, B., de-Wit, L. H., & Wagemans, 
J. (2014). Precise minds in uncertain worlds: Predictive coding in autism. Psychological Review, 
121(4), 649–675. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037665
Van de Cruys, S., Van der Hallen, R., & Wagemans, J. (2017). Disentangling signal and noise in autism 
spectrum disorder. Brain and Cognition, 112, 78–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2016.08.004
Vervaeke, J., & Ferraro, L. (2013). Relevance Realization and the Neurodynamics and Neuroconnectivity 
of General Intelligence. In I. Harvey, A. Cavoukian, G. Tomko, D. Borrett, H. Kwan, & D. Hatzina­
kos (Eds.), SmartData (pp. 57–68). Springer
Vervaeke, J., Lillicrap, T. P., & Richards, B. A. (2012). Relevance Realization and the Emerging Frame­
work in Cognitive Science. Journal of Logic and Computation, 22(1), 79–99. https://doi.org/10.1093/
logcom/exp067
Wastler, H. M., & Lenzenweger, M. F. (2019). Self-referential hypermentalization in schizotypy. Personal­
ity Disorders: Theory Research and Treatment, 10(6), 536–544. https://doi.org/10.1037/per0000344
Whitacre, J., & Bender, A. (2010). Degeneracy: A design principle for achieving robustness and evolv­
ability. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 263(1), 143–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2009.11.008
Wilkinson, S., Deane, G., Nave, K., & Clark, A. (2019). Getting Warmer: Predictive Processing and the 
Nature of Emotion. In L. Candiotto (Ed.), The Value of Emotions for Knowledge (pp. 101–119). 
Springer Verlag
Zaidel, A., Goin-Kochel, R. P., & Angelaki, D. E. (2015). Self-motion perception in autism is compro­
mised by visual noise but integrated optimally across multiple senses. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(20), 6461–6466. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1506582112
Zhou, T., Carlson, J. M., & Doyle, J. (2005). Evolutionary dynamics and highly optimized tolerance. Jour­
nal of Theoretical Biology, 236(4), 438–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.03.023
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article 
is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
Authors and Affiliations
Brett P.  Andersen1 · Mark  Miller2,3 · John  Vervaeke4
	
 Brett P. Andersen
bandersen@unm.edu
1	
Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
1 3

B. P. Andersen et al.
2	
Monash Centre for Consciousness and Contemplative Studies, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia
3	
Center for Human Nature, Artificial Intelligence and Neuroscience, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan
4	
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
1 3

