Improved seam carving for structure preservation using
efficient energy function
Ankit Garg1
& Anand Nayyar2,3 & Anuj Kumar Singh1
Received: 4 March 2021 /Revised: 22 July 2021 /Accepted: 4 January 2022
# The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
To reduce the consumption of power and making the handling of display devices easy the
manufacturers are reducing the size of the screen. To fit the visual contents into the small
screen of display devices without any image deformation development of an efficient image
retargeting technique is required. The traditional seam carving technique is widely used to
change the aspect ratio of the image. This technique produces the distortions on the
prominent line segments when the successive optimal seam starts intersecting at the same
location on their structure. In this paper, an improved seam carving technique is proposed
which overcomes the limitation of the traditional seam carving technique. The novelty of the
proposed technique is to restrict the occurrence of intersection by the optimal seams at the
same location on the line structures and bypass them at the nearby locations. To meet this
objective the proposed technique performs the energy enhancement operation at the inter-
section point. To justify the effectiveness of the proposed technique, the obtained results are
compared and analyzed using subjective and objective image quality assessment (IQA)
methods. In the subjective analysis, the observers provide their opinions about deformations
on three quality parameters namely luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). In the objective
assessment, the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) generated various SSIM index
values based on these parameters. After the IQA assessment, it is found that the average
percentage similarly obtained from the traditional seam carving technique is 64.03% while
in the case of the proposed technique it is 70.87%. The high percentage of similarity among
all state of art justify the efficiency of the proposed technique.
Keywords Seam carving . Saliency detection . Edge-detection . Content-aware-retargeting .
Multi-operator . Image quality assessment (IQA)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-12003-1
* Ankit Garg
ankitgitm@gmail.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Published online: 22 February 2022
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924
/

1 Introduction
With the advancement in today’s technology internet users are regularly uploading and
downloading a huge amount of information in the form of images. Internet users exchange useful
stuff in form of images and video to perform their routine activities. Nowadays small screen
display devices are attracting the attention of the users due to their easy handling and less
consumption of power. To display high dimension images on the small screen the images are
required to retarget in a content-aware fashion. To meet this objective a popular seam carving
technique is widely used [3]. To highlight the shortcomings of this technique researchers have
conducted various experiments and comparisons on the obtained retargeted results. After ana-
lyzing the results it is found that the seam carving technique contributes distortions mainly on
luminance, color, and structure [56]. The seam carving technique produces geometric deforma-
tion on the image contain especially on the images that contains line structures [5]. To suppress
the deformation on the prominent line structures researchers have contributed their efforts to
explore new techniques [28]. To obtain the aesthetic retargeted results and accelerate the
computational time of seam carving technique the new strategies have been incorporated by
the researchers [8]. To minimize the deformation of the geometry of line structures the proposed
technique focuses on the intersection point that is obtained from the smashing of line structures
by the optimal seam. In the proposed approach the energy of the local neighborhood presented
at the intersection point is increased to restrict the other seams to be travel at the same
intersection point.
Nowadays researchers contributing their endeavor to integrate the existing seam carving
technique with other image retargeting operators such as Scaling [2], Cropping [67], Warping
[21], and Multi-Op [69, 70]. In the Multi-op-based image retargeting technique the limitations
associated with the seam carving technique also affect the performance of the other retargeting
operators. To improve the recent Multi-Op image retargeting operator the seam carving
technique is required to be improved by considering three main image components namely
luminance, chrominance, and structure.
Furthermore, to reduce the geometric deformation of the prominent line segments it is
required to detect them in the initial phase of image retargeting operation. Hence, the seam
carving technique can be integrated with line detection and edge detection algorithms [60].
The accurate detection of several line structures and edges the strategy behind the seam
carving technique reduces the geometric deformation of these objects. To generate the
aesthetically pleasing image retargeting results from the seam carving energy map plays its
major role. The energy map of the image provides information about the directional change
of intensity of the pixels present in the image [47]. The high energy pixels present in the
saliency map are considered as the most important regions that are required to be preserved
while retargeting the images [55]. In the strategy behind the seam carving technique, the
optimal seams ignore the high energy pixels and travel on the least energy pixels present in
the image. Moreover, to highlight the salient regions several saliency detection techniques
can be integrated with the seam carving technique [53]. The researchers in their study [16,
17] have analyzed that the least energy pixels present over the line structure can be
encountered in the optimal seam path. In the elimination of such pixels, the nonadjacent
pixels become the neighbors. To minimize the effect of the aliasing on the line structures,
the seam carving technique can be integrated with advanced antialiasing techniques. The
incorporation of the antialiasing technique with the seam carving can improve the spatial
information of the misplaced pixels of the line structures due to the elimination of optimal
12884
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

seam. The proposed technique produces a low aliasing effect on the line structures by
restricting the intersection of the optimal seam at the same location on the line structures.
The computational time and quality of the retargeted image obtained from the seam carving
also get affected by the complexity of the image contents. The spatial complexity of the
pixels available in the scene and integration of new techniques increase the computational
time of the seam carving technique and provide visually pleasing image retargeting results.
The major contributions of the proposed work can be summarized as follows:
1.
The proposed work contributes to present the integrated approach in which the
prominent edges are detected using canny edge detection operator. The proposed
functions such as hyst() and D_thresh() perform the edge linking operation based on
the defined thresholds. These functions provide the solution to the unordered set of
edge pixels obtained from the canny edge detector to form the ordered list of pixels into
meaningful edges.
2.
The proposed work gives its special contribution in proposing two functions namely
Inst_Detect () and Modify_energy (). The Inst_Detect () function contributes to detect-
ing the occurrence of intersection between the optimal seam and prominent line
structures. The Modify_Energy () function increases the energy of the local neighbor-
hood of the intersection point in such a manner that no other optimal seams can pass on
the same intersection point. The execution of these functions provides a concrete
solution to prevent the loss of visual quality of prominent line structures present in
the image. Moreover, the proposed Modify_energy () function also provides a solution
for the conventional seam carving technique by suppressing the effect of aliasing over
the prominent line segments.
3.
To justify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm the research work conducts the
subjective and objective image quality assessments of retargeted results based on lumi-
nance, color, and structure. To compare the results 5 traditional schemes such as Shift-map
(SM) [48], Stretch-and-scale (SNS) [51], Seam carving (SC) [3], Warp [22], and Multi-
operator (Multi-Op) ([13]; Garg & Negi, 2020) have been selected. The research work
contributes to uncover some shortcomings of the proposed scheme based on the values
obtained from the image quality assessment methods and also provide solutions to them.
In this paper, section 2 provides the literature review that mainly focuses on the proposed
work, the novelty of the research work, and experimental results. In section 3 some
terminologies are discussed to improve the understanding of the reader concerning the
proposed research work. Section 4 firstly reveals the limitations of the conventional seam
carving technique that are responsible for the content distortion. Secondly, the section
addresses the importance of the edge detection technique integrated with the proposed
technique. Finally, the section presents the mathematical modeling and details of the major
operations of the proposed technique. Section 5 provides a detailed discussion on the
dataset and procedure of the experimentation. In addition to this, the retargeted results
are compared using subjective and objective image quality assessment methods. To justify
the efficiency of the proposed technique the results are analyzed based on three parameters
such as luminance, contrast, and structure. The experimental study uncovers various factors
that are responsible for content distortions while retargeting the image using the proposed
technique. Lastly, the experimental study highlights how the computational time of the
proposed technique can be reduced by integrating it with other image processing
12885
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

techniques. Section 6 concludes the entire research work and findings. In this section,
various improvements are identified that can be incorporated to improve the effectiveness
of the proposed techniques.
2 Literature review
In this section, an intensive literature review is carried out on various existing image
retargeting techniques i.e. scaling, cropping, warping, seam carving, and Multi-Op. Different
important and relevant papers are selected based on some specific keywords such as seam
carving, saliency detection, edge detection, content-aware-retargeting, Multi-Operator, and
image quality assessment (IQA). To select relevant papers, certain important factors such as
initial development, problem definition, and the latest research work are considered. In this
literature review, the papers are selected and summarized from the year 2001 to 2021. In this
section, a detailed review of image retargeting is presented that is based on scaling, cropping,
warping, and Multi-Op. Moreover, the literature review focuses on the significant contribution
of the researchers, the novelty of the proposed work, and experiment results. This literature
review can provide a deep insight to researchers who are contributing their significant efforts
and improvements in the field of image retargeting to develop some advanced retargeting
techniques.
2.1 Scaling operator
Scaling is the image retargeting technique to alter the aspect ratio of the image based on
some scaling factors that can be integer and non-integer. In the retargeting process, both
uniform and non-uniform scaling can be applied to the size of the image. Scaling based on
non-uniform scaling factors can produce information loss in the content of the image. The
scaling technique produces deformation on the image contents if the value of scaling factors
is very low [30].
[42] proposed an optimal spline-based algorithm to change the aspect ratio (magnification
or reduction) of the images using non-integer scaling factors. The novelty of the proposed
technique is that the scaling factors do not play a significant role in the complexity at the
output point. The proposed work focuses on the algorithmic solutions for basis functions other
than B-splines. The results obtained from the proposed technique minimizes the effect of
aliasing and blocking and also make its contribution to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. [31]
proposed a scaling technique that utilizes an area pixel model to perform scale up and scale
down operations. The usage of four pixels of a reference image to compute one pixel present in
the scaled image is the novelty of the proposed technique. Furthermore, the algorithm has good
characteristics such as fine-edge and changeable smoothness. The result obtained from the
proposed technique are aesthetically pleasing scaled images and the incurred hardware cost is
very low. [2] proposed a novel scaling technique. The linear area model exploits source pixels
using a mask of a maximum of four pixels. To obtain the luminosity of each pixel in the scaled
image two major factors such as the percentage of area covered by the mask and the variation
in luminosity between the pixels present in the source image are considered. The proposed
technique is capable to change the aspect ratio of the grayscale and colored image in a fast
manner. Finally, the performance of the proposed technique is measured and found suitable
from the traditional scaling techniques. [57] proposed a scaling technique that is based on
12886
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

morphological edge interpolation. In this technique, morphological opening-closing operations
are applied to eliminate the noise present in the image. The novelty of the proposed technique
is to use the “probing” effect of morphology to work on the various types of edges. The
morphological operation used in the proposed technique minimizes the blurry effect in the
scaled image. After the experiment, it is found that the proposed technique can suppress the
high amount of noise as compared to the conventional image interpolation techniques. The
results obtained from the proposed technique are found less blur and provide useful
information about the prominent edges. [27] proposed an improved edge-adaptive scaling
technique to magnify or reduce the size of images. To preserve the structure of edges the
proposed algorithm firstly detects the edges using edge detectors. Furthermore, to apply the
interpolation with the direction of detected edges the source image is divided into four
blocks. After the comparison of results based on two parameters, it is justified that the
proposed technique produces high-quality scaled images in less computational time and
outperforms the traditional scaling technique. [36, 37] proposed a patch-wise scaling
technique that considers the global visual effects of the image while changing the aspect
ratio of the image. The novelty of the proposed technique is the optimization of image
distance in the process of image resizing. The proposed technique utilizes the saliency map
to segregate the image into important and unimportant patches and for each small patch, the
scaling factors are computed. The results obtained after the experiments locally and
globally preserves the most prominent region of interest (ROIs) in the shrinking and
enlargement process [7, 18].
Conclusion In the above study it is stated that different techniques can be integrated to
improve the traditional scaling technique, still, researchers have found some areas in which
future improvements can be possible. The area that is needed to focus more on the reduction of
computational time and image artifacts that are observed in the scaled image.
2.2 Cropping operator
In the field of image retargeting researchers have contributed their efforts to improve the
traditional cropping techniques. The cropping technique produces aesthetic image retargeting
results if the salient objects are present at the center of the image. The shrinking and
enlargement operations on the images using the cropping technique distort the structure of
salient regions present on the border of the cropping window.
[54] proposed a non-photorealistic technique to resize the image. The novelty of the
algorithm is to perform several operations such as segmentation, identification, and elimination
of ROIs, gap filling, reinserting, and retargeting in its entire resizing process. The results from
the proposed techniques are obtained with less structural deformation, loss of information, and
relationship among the prominent regions and image features. [32] proposed a new adaptation
system to display web pages on a variety of screens. The proposed technique integrates various
techniques such as face detection, text detection, contrast-based saliency maps, and seam
carving which shows its novelty. These algorithms are used to identify relevant and non-
relevant regions and combine them into the image ROIs. To assess the quality of the
adaptation system user studies have been carried out. The feedbacks with regard to the
integration and generation of metadata depicts the sound quality of the adaptation system.
[58] proposed two automatic cropping schemes. The novelty of the proposed technique is
12887
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

the integration of the saliency model and face detection technique. In the proposed
technique, the saliency model is used to find the most salient regions. To prevent the
distortion on these regions face detection technique is used that utilizes the semantic
information to improve the process of thumbnail cropping. After experiments, good
cropped results are obtained with minimal distortions [34, 35].
Conclusion From the above literature it is can be observed that the integration of saliency
model and image processing techniques such as face detection, and image segmentation can
improve the traditional process of image cropping. The detection of accurate spatial informa-
tion related to salient regions in the image can prevent distortions.
2.3 Seam carving operator
Seam carving is an image retargeting technique that is being used to change the size of the
image in a content-aware fashion. The optimal seam computed in the technique search for the
least energy pixels to define their paths. After the elimination of the optimal seams, the size of
the image can be changed with fewer structural deformations. To improve the efficiency of the
traditional seam carving technique researchers are integrating various image processing
techniques with it.
[65] proposed an image resizing technique. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the
utilization of seam searching and pixel fusion operations. The seam searching operation is
performed to segment the image based on the importance map and then performs inter-row
coherence filtering to maintain the coherence of the pixels to obtain the saliency map. The
effective fusion of saliency map with pixels produces aesthetically pleasing image retargeting
results. The results obtained from the proposed technique minimizes image artifacts and
preserves the local and global features present in the image. [49] proposed a content and
shape-aware image retargeting technique that focuses more on significant image features and
their domain transformation. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the utilization of the
concept of seam segment carving notion of bhv_convex shapes. In the proposed technique, the
cost function considers the image content and its shape as an input to identify and eliminate a
sequence of seam segments that do not affect the contents of the image. The obtained results
are tested on the smart camera-projector system and found aesthetically pleasing as compared
to the traditional technique. [28] proposed an image resizing technique based on seam carving.
The novelty of the proposed scheme is its integration with line detection techniques and energy
enhancement operation at the local neighborhood of the intersection point. The strategy behind
the proposed technique is to suppress the repeated occurrence of intersection points at the same
location on the line structure. To meet this objective the energy present at the local neighbor-
hood of the intersection point is increased within a certain radius to scatter the optimal seam at
some nearby place. In the obtained results the structure of the line segments is completely
preserved with minimum aliasing effects. [47] proposed an image retargeting technique that
accelerates the process of seam carving technique. The novelty of the proposed technique is to
eliminate or insert the optimal seams that are generated by selecting multiple least energy
pixels in their paths. The computational time of the proposed technique is low and is based on
the width factor. The results obtained from the proposed technique are structurally preserved
with minimal distortions as compared to the traditional seam carving technique. [71] proposed
a novel improved image retargeting technique that changes the aspect ratio of the image. The
12888
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

novelty of the proposed technique is to resize the images in a compressibility content-aware
fashion by taking edge details, ROIs, and compressibility factors into consideration. In the
obtained result the loss of the spatial information is very low as compared to other states of art.
[40] proposed an adaptive image resizing technique based on saliency-based continuous seam
carving (SCSC). The novelty of the proposed technique is the usages of saliency-based
continuous seam carving (SCSC) and continuous seam carving (CSC) in the retargeting
process. The resized version of the image is allocated to the continuous seam carving (CSC)
to analyze the obtained curve of energy and obtained optimal seams. In the obtained results the
salient objects are preserved completely.
Conclusion From the above study it can be observed that the efficiency of the traditional seam
carving technique can be enhanced by integrating various image processing techniques such as
saliency detection, line detection, feature extraction, and energy enhancement. The researchers
have suggested some reasons for distortions such as optimal seam intersection, segmentation,
color uniformity, and loss of color information.
2.4 Non-homogeneous warping operator
The image warping operator is used to transform the size of digital images effectively so that
the geometry of the portrayed structures in the image can be preserved from distortions. This
technique can also be used to correct the geometrical distortion and also for some specific
creative purposes. This technique usage two operations as mapping and sampling. In image
mapping operation the functions related to the forward and reverse mapping are used to
identify the accurate locations of pixels in the source and destination image. To minimize
the effect of aliasing at various pixel resampling techniques are applied with the use of
filtering.
[39] proposed a technique that utilizes a non-linear fish-eye-view warp to pay attention to
the salient regions of the image. The novelty of the proposed technique is the preservation of
low and high-level features present in the single ROI using a non-linear image warping
function. The results obtained from the proposed technique preserve the salient objects better
than the other retargeting techniques. [45] proposed a technique that ignores local rotations and
minimizes visual distortion of image contents. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the
reduction of warping energies and also guarantees the influence of bijectivity constraints. The
experiments show that the obtained retargeting results are smooth and robust. The line
structures that are not axis aligned are deformed. [36, 37] proposed a patch-wise scaling
method for resizing the images. The novelty of the proposed technique is the inclusion of a
strategy to partition the patches and an optimal scaling factor assignment algorithm. The
patches are created based on the visual saliency map and are labeled according to their
importance in the image. After computing the scaling factors using patch-based image
similarity measures, they are applied to the most significant patches while unimportant patches
are used to obtain the target size. The obtained retargeted results have fewer distortions on the
geometry of lines/edges and foreground objects. [4, 24] proposed a grid-based image
retargeting approach to change the aspect ratio of the image. The novelty of the proposed
technique is to obtain the importance map using image gradients to obtain the salient regions.
The shape of the important and unimportant contents is balanced using the spatial distribution.
Moreover, to protect the deformation on the line structures a Laplacian regularization term is
12889
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

used. The results obtained in the subjective and objective assessment are well preserved in
terms of shape and structure. [15] proposed a technique for nonhomogeneous texture mapping.
In the proposed technique feature mask is used to protect the prominent regions. The novelty
of the proposed technique is to formulate the Laplacian editing method that is best suited to
incorporate the constraints on parts of the domain. The obtained results show that the
technique is useful for texture mapping, image retargeting. [62] proposed a warping technique.
The novelty of the proposed technique is the computation of scaling factors for the local
regions to obtain the warped image. The obtained deformations are computed using a
significance map and visual properties of pixels. In the obtained results the deformations are
distributed on the significant regions to reduce the effect of deformation.
Conclusion The above literature related to non-homogeneous warping identifies the rea-
sons for image deformation in traditional warping techniques. To rectify the limitations
researchers have incorporated saliency detection technique, image segmentation, and
image gradient operators to the new improvements. The aesthetic image retargeting results
can be obtained by putting some constraints to limit the deformations in the retargeted
image.
2.5 Multi-operator (Multi-Op)
In the field of image retargeting, the researchers have contributed a lot to the improvement of
the single operator-based image retargeting technique. To improve the image retargeting
techniques researchers are integrating several image retargeting operators. In the hybrid
sequence of retargeting operators take high computation time and produce good aesthetic
image retargeting results.
[50] proposed a hybrid sequence of image retargeting operators such as cropping, scaling,
seam carving, warping, and Multi-Op. The novelty of the proposed technique is the optimized
integration of resizing operators in resizing space, incorporate Bi-Directional Warping (BDW),
and dynamic programming to obtained retargeted results. The obtained image retargeting
results are highly improved in terms of structural deformations as compared to the single
operator that is used in the hybrid sequence. [11] proposed an image retargeting technique that
is guided by the image similarity measure. The novelty of the proposed technique is the
applicability of the combined approach in the process of image retargeting using seam carving,
scaling, and cropping. To execute the resizing operation using hybrid sequence dynamic
programming is used. The obtained results are better than the traditional hybrid sequences
and other single image retargeting operators. [63] proposed a hybrid sequence of image
retargeting operators such as seam carving and warping. The novelty of the proposed
technique is to identify the saliency map to distribute the optimal seams using a weighted
seam carving approach up to a defined threshold. Furthermore, to assess the deformations a
content-aware image distance (CAID) function is used. To obtain the final retargeted image a
grid-based warping technique is applied in continuation. The results obtained from the
proposed approach astutely minimizes the image artifacts in the salient regions present in
the image. [69, 70] proposed a technique namely seam warping. The novelty of the proposed
method is the integration of seam carving and warping techniques. The seam carving is used to
detect the focused areas present in the image and then apply warping transformation based on
the recognized optimal seam. The results obtained from the proposed technique provide
12890
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

subjective satisfaction of the human visual system in less computational time as compared to
other states of arts. [69, 70] proposed a hybrid image retargeting technique to preserve the
information loss in the image. The novelty of the proposed scheme is the combination seam
carving and scaling technique with the contribution of importance map, saliency map, skin
map, and Canny operator. The obtained results from the experiment present that the proposed
method can produce more aesthetic retargeting results. After analysis of the results, it is found
that the proposed technique can resize high dimensional images that comprise lots of useful
spatial details. [29] proposed a technique in which seam carving and cropping operators are
combined. The novelty of the proposed technique is the utilization of seam carving up to a
defined threshold to suppress the visual artifacts. Later on, a variable-size cropping window is
selected to repeatedly perform the retargeting operation. The obtained results contained well-
structured important contents and the effect of” squeezing” is not occur that are being observed
in the traditional approaches.
Conclusion In the above literature, researchers have contributed their efforts to integrate
various image retargeting operators to define the hybrid sequence. From the literature, it is
analyzed that the position of the operator in the hybrid sequence plays a significant role to
obtain good quality retargeted results. The incorporated switching point mechanism among
the operators can also improve the quality of obtained results. The computational efficiency
of the Multi-operator based retargeting schemes can be improved by optimizing the
switching point.
3 Related terminologies
In the proposed research work various terminologies have been used to connect various
concepts. The subsequent subsections elaborate on the terminologies used in the research
work. The detailed discussion of the terminologies helps the reader and researchers to
easily understand the novelty of the proposed research work.
3.1 Traditional seam carving algorithm
The traditional seam carving algorithm is a well-known technique among the various existing
image retargeting operators. In this technique, the image is convoluted by image filters to
obtain the energy map of the image. The obtained energy map is further utilized by the
algorithm for the elimination and duplication of optimal seams to change the aspect ratio of the
image. The energy map of the image represents the directional change in the intensity of the
pixels. The optimal seams are eliminated and introduce to decrease and increase the size of the
image respectively.
Figure 1 presents the algorithm of the conventional seam carving technique. In this
technique, firstly Resizing_Vertical () function is called to perform the image retargeting
operation. In this function, two parameters such as the original image and scale factor have
been passed. The supplied scale factor is used to change the aspect ratio of the original image
after the image retargeting operation. In this function, a new function Retarget_Vertical () is
called to obtain the final retargeted image. Further, the Min_Optimal_Seam () function is called
to compute the possible optimal seams. The function Calc_Energy () is used to compute the
12891
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

gradient of the input image both in horizontal and vertical directions using convolution
operation.
To perform convolution operation two 3 × 3 Sobel filters for each direction have
been used. After that, the addition of directional change of intensity is computed using
Eq. (1).
f
0 IMG
ð
Þ ¼
∂
∂x IMG

 þ
∂
∂y IMG


ð1Þ
The obtained energy map that is computed by the convolution operation is further utilized to
compute the cost of the optimal seam using Eq. (2).
C IMGs
ð
Þ ¼
Xm
i¼1f IMG SeamVi
ð
Þ
½

ð2Þ
To compute the minimum cost of the optimal vertical seam Eq. (3) is used.
Sov ¼ min
s C IMGs
ð
Þ ¼ min
s
Xm
i¼1f IMG SeamVi
ð
Þ
½

ð3Þ
In Min_Optimal_Seam () function the second row of the energy map is selected. In this row,
the energy of the first-pixel p(x, y) is compared with its three neighbors (left, top, right) that are
present in the first row. The cumulative sum of the energy is computed using Eq. (4) by adding
the minimum energy that is obtained from the three neighboring pixels.
Fig. 1 Algorithm: conventional seam carving technique
12892
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

Energymin i; j
ð
Þ ¼ f i; j
ð
Þ þ min Energymin i  1; j  1
ð
Þ; Energymin i  1; j
ð
Þ; Energymin i  1; j þ 1
ð
Þ
½

ð4Þ
The backtrack matrix is updated based on the values of the least energy pixel p(x, y). The
function finally returns the modified energy map M and backtrack to the Retarget_Vertical ()
function. In Retarget_Vertical () function a 2D mask is initialized to zero. The last row of the
cumulative energy map is selected to obtain the least energy pixel. The entire energy map is
traced from bottom to top with the help of the backtrack matrix to obtain the optimal seam both
in horizontal and vertical directions using Eqs. (5) and (6) respectively.
SeamH ¼
Sy
Hj
n
on
j¼1 ¼
j; yðjÞ
ð
Þ
f
gn
j¼1
Such that
8j; yðjÞ  y j  1
ð
Þ
j
j  1
ð5Þ
SeamV ¼
Sx
Vi
n
om
i¼1 ¼
xðiÞ; i
ð
Þ
f
gm
i¼1
Such that
8i; xðiÞ  x i  1
ð
Þ
j
j  1
ð6Þ
Finally, to obtain the retargeted image a reshape operation is performed. In this operation, the
pixels are shifted from right to left after the elimination of the optimal seams from the original
image.
To eliminate optimal seams from left, right, and vertical direction Eqs. (7), (8), and (9) are
used respectively.
Removal of the left optimal seam:
CL i; j
ð
Þ ¼ IMG i; j þ 1
ð
Þ  IMG i; j  1
ð
Þ
j
jþ j IMG i  1; j
ð
Þ  IMG i; j  1
ð
Þ j
ð7Þ
Removal of the right optimal seam:
CR i; j
ð
Þ ¼ IMG i; j þ 1
ð
Þ  IMG i; j  1
ð
Þ
j
jþ j IMG i  1; j
ð
Þ  IMG i; j þ 1
ð
Þ j
ð8Þ
Removal of the vertical optimal seam:
CV i; j
ð
Þ ¼ jIMG i; j þ 1
ð
Þ  IMG i; j  1
ð
Þj
ð9Þ
To retarget the image in a horizontal direction a function Resizing_Horizontal () is used. In this
function, a rotation operation is performed with an angle of 90°. After rotating the image the
same procedure that is applied for vertical seam carving can be repeated. After the elimination
of horizontal optimal seams, an inverse rotation operation is performed to obtain the final
retargeted image.
While retargeting images using the existing seam carving algorithm it is observed that the
distortions can be easily noticeable while optimal seams intersect on the prominent line
structures. Figure 2 shows the intersection of multiple optimal seams in the same location
on the line structure. The line structures present in the image start converting into curve-shaped
objects and produce an aliasing effect that is highly noticeable in the image retargeting results.
To observe the deficiency of the existing seam carving algorithm 5 types of images are
selected that contain multiple line structures at different locations in the image.
12893
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

3.1.1 Technical gaps in traditional seam carving technique
The existing seam carving algorithm can be combined with other algorithms to improve its
efficiency. For detecting the prominent regions of the image saliency detection algorithm can
be integrated so that the ROIs of the image can be protected while retargeting. The saliency
maps obtained from the saliency detection algorithms give higher importance to the contents of
the image which are visually prominent. Content preservation using the saliency map can be
achieved by computing the global saliency of pixels [25]. Similarly, line and edge detection
algorithms can also be integrated to obtain the prominent line structures from the image [28].
Following are some drawbacks of the conventional seam carving algorithm that should be
mainly focused on its improvement.
(a)
In the traditional seam carving technique energy map of the image only represents the
edges of the objects and ignores the color composition of the image.
(b)
When straight lines present in the image are being smashed by optimal seams.
(c)
No clear distinction between the background and foreground objects.
Fig. 2 Distortion on prominent line structures due intersection of multiple seams at the same location
12894
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

(d)
Distortion of objects occurs when seams intersect in a single row or column and cover a
large number of pixels in the horizontal and vertical direction beyond the threshold [19].
The proposed algorithm focuses on the preservation of prominent line structures present in the
image that can be smashed by optimal seams in the horizontal and vertical direction. To
preserve the structure of the lines the proposed algorithm is combined with the edge detection
algorithm to obtain better results.
3.2 Edge detection operators
To obtain the number of prominent edges present in the image several edge detection operators
such as Sobel [26], Canny [43], Prewitt [72], Laplacian [12], etc. are widely used. In the
description of the traditional seam carving technique presented in section 3.1, it is mentioned
that the two 3 × 3 Sobel filter is applied to the input image to perform the convolution
operation. After that, the addition of directional change of intensity is computed. The high
directional change in the intensity represents the image pixels that contain high energy. The
incorporation of the Sobel operator in the conventional seam carving technique helps to find
out the low-energy pixels present in the image. The traditional seam carving technique finds
out the optimal seam paths by connecting these pixels in both vertical and horizontal
directions. Moreover, in the proposed research work the Canny operator is used to find out
the prominent edges that define the structural properties of the image contents. The proposed
research work performs various steps such as smoothing, computation of image gradient, Non-
max suppression, Double thresholding, and Edge identification using hysteresis while using
the Canny operators.
3.3 Aliasing and antialiasing
In image processing, the aliasing effect is the staircase effect that generally occurs in the
rasterized image when scan conversion of objects is performed at low-frequency Yang et al.
[66]. In the case of traditional seam carving technique aliasing or jaggies effects can be
produced due to the intersection of multiple successive optimal seams on the prominent line
structures at the same location [28].
The elimination of multiple least energy pixels from the line structures forces the nonad-
jacent pixels to become neighbors. In this entire process, the line structures start transforming
their shape into curve-shaped objects. To restrict the undesirable transformation in the shapes
of prominent line structures and to suppress the effect of aliasing effect the proposed algorithm
applies three major operations. Firstly, it detects happening of the intersection between line
structures and optimal seams. After finding out the intersection the proposed technique
increases the energy of 8 local neighborhoods present at the intersection point. The energy
enhancement operation bypasses the successive optimal seam to travel at the previous
intersection point. Hence, the shape of the line structures can be preserved completely and
the problem aliasing can be reduced to some extent.
3.4 Saliency detection
In the traditional seam carving technique, the visual quality of the retargeted results depends
upon the energy map. The energy map supplied to the traditional seam carving technique can
12895
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

be obtained from various methods such as Entropy, Gradient, and HoG [46]. The energy map
highlights the high-energy pixels that are required to be preserved while eliminating the
optimal seams from the image. A low-quality energy map may announce the presence of
only a few high-energy pixels in the image, which can damage the structure of the salient
regions present in the image. To overcome this problem, the proposed algorithm utilizes the
Canny edge detector to find out several prominent edges and other line structures that are
needed to be preserved while retargeting the image. In the field of image processing
researchers have suggested many saliency detection algorithms that can be used to find out
salient regions present in the image. An efficient saliency detection algorithm declares multiple
image regions as ROIs so that their structure is not affected during the image retargeting
operation. The integration of the saliency map obtained from the efficient algorithms can
reduce the image deformation and improve its performance.
4 Improved seam carving algorithm
The proposed image retargeting algorithm is based on the conventional seam carving
algorithm which optimizes its efficiency. The three main objectives of the proposed seam
carving technique are (1) restricting intersection of single optimal seam over the line
structures; (2) restricting intersection of multiple optimal seams at the same location over
the line segments; (3) removing aliasing effect due to shifting of the pixel that is present
over the line segments. After analyzing the existing seam carving algorithm it is found that
the prominent edges especially line structures are distorted while retargeting an image. The
main reason for such types of distortions is the intersection of a single optimal seam with
line structures. It may be possible that multiple optimal seams can intersect at the same
location over the line segment. After the elimination of pixels from the line segment, the
nonadjacent pixels of the line segment becomes the neighbor. The shifting of the pixels in
this manner can occur with the aliasing effect that can be easily noticeable to the human
eye. To overcome these problems the main objective of the proposed algorithm is to
preserve the line structures by increasing the energy at the intersection point in a certain
radius. The enhancement of the energy in this manner can bypass the single or multiple
optimal seams from the intersection point. Bypassing seams from intersection point results
in less distortion while retargeting image. The process of energy enhancement at the
intersection point does not guarantee that the other optimal seams do not intersect the
straight structures with adjacent pixels locations.
4.1 Workflow of proposed seam carving algorithm
According to the literature ([28]; Chang et al., 2010; [60]) distortions on the line structures can
be easily noticeable. After considering this research gap the proposed technique is integrated
with edge detection techniques to identify the prominent line structures. Through analysis of
the conventional seam carving algorithm, it has been observed that the structure of straight
lines present in the image can be distorted if two or more two successive optimal seams
intersect at the same location on the line structure.
The intersection of the optimal seams in this way can distort the shape of the straight
lines. The prominent line structures can start to be transformed into curves and disconti-
nuity can be observed over line structures in the obtained results. The proposed algorithm
12896
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

focuses on the preservation of prominent line structures by utilizing a function of energy
modification. This function performs the seam bypassing operation by increasing the
energy of the local neighborhood of the intersection point up to a certain radius. The
increment in the associated energy of the local neighborhood slightly diverts the other
optimal seams to the nearby objects or some different location on the line structures.
Figure 3 shows the workflow of the proposed image retargeting algorithm. The complete
process is divided into two parts. In Part-1 possible optimal seams are computed based on
the energy map and in Part-2 edge detection and linking operation is integrated with the
proposed scheme. Firstly, in Part-1 the gradient of all the pixels in the image is computed
using convolution operation in both the horizontal and vertical directions. After computa-
tion of directional change in the intensity an energy map of the image is obtained which is
further utilized for computation of possible optimal seams. The energy map can be used
both for image enlargement and image shrinking depend upon the choice of the user.
Secondly, in Part-2 the obtained edges are detected using convolution operation with the
Canny operator. Further, edge linking operations are performed using local processing i.e.
direction of the gradient. For every line structure, the proposed algorithm computes the
intersection point with the optimal seams if any occur. After detecting the intersection the
proposed energy modification function increases the energy at the intersection point up to a
certain predefined radius. For each successive intersection, the distribution of the energy in
such a way prevents the shape of the line structure and suppresses the aliasing effect.
Finally, the optimal seams removal process eliminates the optimal seams from the image to
obtain the retargeted image. Based on the user’s choice the size of the retargeted image is
tested again in Part-1 for any further computation. In the subsequent sections, each step of
both Part-1 & Part-2 is explained in detail.
Fig. 3 Process of proposed seam carving technique
12897
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

4.1.1 Finding gradient using the mask
In the proposed algorithm firstly, for the input source image, the directional change of the
intensity for each pixel is computed. To compute the gradient in both the horizontal and
vertical direction convolution operation is performed using a Canny mask. After convolution
operation, the energy map is obtained which is further utilized in the computation of possible
optimal seams that are needed to eliminate. The computed energy map is capable to highlight
the ROIs of the image that is needed to be preserved while inserting and eliminating optimal
seams from the image.
Let Img be m × n image and for each of its pixels, energy can be computed which is the
directional change in the intensity. To obtain the directional change in the intensity both in
horizontal (x) and vertical (y) directions Eq. (10) is used.
@Img
@x
x; y
ð
Þ & @Img
@y
x; y
ð
Þ
ð10Þ
To compute the gradient in the x and y-direction Eq. (11) is used. The directional change in the
intensity occurs due to the presence of multiple color components having different intensities.
The image gradient is denoted by ∇Img.
rImg x; y
ð
Þ ¼
@Img
@x
x; y
ð
Þ; @Img
@y
x; y
ð
Þ


ð11Þ
Equation (1) is used to compute the energy of every pixel of the image that can be used in the
optimal seam generation and elimination operation. The energy function f′is used to add the
directional change of intensity in the horizontal and vertical directions.
Equation (12) is used to obtain the energy map of the input image. To compute the energy
map the convolution operation is performed using a Canny operator. In Eq. (12), Em is the
energy map obtained from the convolution operation, k is the coefficient of convolution kernel,
B is the data value of the pixel. Sl is the sum of the coefficient of the kernel and its dimension.
Em ¼
Pd
i¼1
Pd
j¼1 vijBij
sl


ð12Þ
4.1.2 Computing optimal possible seams
After computing the energy map of the image, the next step is to compute the possible optimal
seams that can be removed from the image. The optimal seams can be computed both in
horizontal and vertical directions. The horizontal and vertical seams can be defined using Eqs.
(5) and (6), respectively. In these equations, SeamH & SeamV are the horizontal and vertical
seams respectively, (x, y) are the mappings of image (m × n) to (n × m) and SVi & SHj are the
vertical and horizontal seam locations at i and j, respectively. The cost of seam plays a vital
role in the selection of the optimal path of the seam. In the seam removal process, optimal
seams having the least cost are eliminated first. The cost of the seam can be computed using
Eq. (3). In this equation, C(IMGs) denotes the cost of the optimal seam. To obtain the optimal
vertical seam (Sov) that has minimum cost can be obtained using Eq. (4). The cumulative
minimum energy Energymin is computed for all the possible seams. The minimum energy can
12898
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

be obtained using Eq. (5). In this equation, the left pixel is represented by Energymin(i −1, j −
1), upper and right pixels are represented by Energymin(i −1, j) and Energymin(i −1, j + 1)
respectively.
4.1.3 Edge detection and edge linking
The proposed technique is combined with the edge detection algorithm to obtain the prominent
line structures present in the image. From the experiment, it has been observed that the main
reason for content distortions is due to the intersection of too many optimal seams at the same
location on the straight line. The prominent edges present in the image are detected using a
canny operator that computes the directional change in the intensity and rate of change in a
particular direction of each pixel.
Figure 4 shows the workflow of edge detection and edge linking operation. In the
process of edge detection using canny operator 5 basic operations are performed (i) Noise
reduction (ii) Computation of image gradient (iii) Non-max suppression (iv) double
thresholding (v) edge identification using hysteresis [64]. After edge detection operation
edge linking operation is performed in which edges are formed using local processing based
on its two main properties: (i) magnitude, (ii) direction of the gradient vector. Through the
edge linking operation, an unordered set of edge pixels can be arranged into a meaningful
ordered set of pixels. Eq. (13) is used when a pixel in the neighborhood of the pixel ∇F(x, y)
is linked to the pixel (x, y).
rF x; y
ð
Þ  rF x
0; y
0



  T
ð13Þ
Where T is the non-negative threshold.
For computing the strength of gradient, the Canny operator is applied to the image.
Similarly, the direction of the gradient is computed from Eq. (14).
 x; y
ð
Þ ¼ tan1
Fx
Fy


ð14Þ
Where Fx and Fy are the gradients of the image in both horizontal and vertical directions
respectively. Using Eq. (15) a pixel in the neighborhood of pixel α(x, y) is linked to the pixel
Fig. 4 Detection of prominent line structures based on threshold
12899
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

P(x, y) if they have a similar angle.
a x; y
ð
Þ  a x
0; y
0



  A
ð15Þ
Where A is the non-negative threshold.
Finally, after checking all the 8 neighborhoods of pixel P(x, y) they are linked together
based on the two conditions under local processing.
In the last step of Fig. 4, a 3D array is created which is initially set to zero. The locations of
the linked neighborhood along with the pixel itself are marked as True in the corresponding
location of the 3D array. The complete process of edge detection and linking operation returns
the 3D array which is used to find out the intersection of optimal seams with the prominent line
structures while the seams travel in both the horizontal and vertical direction. For each
successive optimal seam, all the pixels in the occurance of optimal seam path are tested with
the corresponding location of the 3D array. If the corresponding location of the 3D array is
already found TRUE that results in the intersection on the line structure. Figure 5 shows the
complete process of edge detection and linking operation. In the algorithm total of 5 functions
are defined for each step of the edge detection and linking process using the Canny operator. In
Function-1 the Gaussian blur is applied to the initial image for smoothing as the obtained
results of edge detection operation are very sensitive to noise. For the image smoothening
process, the convolution operation is performed using the Gaussian Kernel of dimension 5 ×
5. The reason for selecting this dimension is to reduce the blue effect on the image. Eq. (16) is
used to generate the Gaussian Kernel.
Hij ¼¼
1
2σ2 exp  i  k þ 1
ð
Þ
ð
Þ2 þ j  k þ 1
ð
Þ
ð
Þ2
2σ2
 
!
; 1  i; j  2k þ 1
ð
Þ
ð16Þ
In Function-2 gradient is computed using convolution operation by Canny operator both in
the horizontal and vertical directions. After the convolution operation, both the magnitude of
gradient and slope of the gradient is computed using Eqs. (13) and (14) respectively. After
obtaining the gradient of the image, the variations in the thickness of the obtained edges are
observed. In Function-3 to reduce the variations on the thickness of the edges, non-max
suppression operation is applied. To perform this operation, a 2D matrix is prepared which is
initialized by zero. The size of the matrix is the same as the Gradient intensity matrix. From the
angle matrix, the direction of edges is identified. In each iteration, the pixels that are having
high intensity in a similar direction are identified. In Function-4, after applying the non-max
suppression process double thresholding operation is applied to recognize high-intensity
pixels, low-intensity pixels, and non-relevant pixels. In the double thresholding process, two
thresholds are defined to identify strong pixels and non-relevant pixels. All other pixels which
are having the intensity in between the two thresholds are considered to be as weak pixels with
intermediate intensity. In Function-5, the hysteresis mechanism is applied to the image to
transform low-intensity pixels into high-intensity pixels.
12900
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

4.1.4 Detection of intersection point & construction of modified energy map
In section 4.1.2 it has been stated that in the edge detection and edge linking operations, the
locations of the linked neighborhood along with the pixel itself are marked as True in the
corresponding location of the 3D array. The appropriate locations of neighborhood based on
Fig. 5 Proposed algorithm for edge detection using canny operator
Fig. 6 Detection of intersection point and energy enhancement
12901
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

the defined threshold are further utilized in the detection of intersection point that encountered
on the prominent line structures present in the image. Figure 6 shows the workflow of
intersection point detection operation both for horizontal and vertical seams. Firstly, the energy
map obtained from the convolution operation is further used to obtain the intersection point of
the optimal seams on the prominent line structures. Secondly, the locations of the pixels
obtained from the edge detection and linking operation are used to detect the intersection point.
Thirdly, based on the intersection point the proposed algorithm defines a radius for energy
modification operation. Under the defined radius the local neighborhoods are selected for
energy enhancement.
Fourthly, the energy filling process of the proposed energy modification function selects the
8 local neighborhood of the intersection point and update their energy. The abstraction of the
proposed energy modification function is the inclusion of the stack data structure for the
selection of the local neighborhood in each recursive call. Finally, after the energy enhance-
ment of the local neighborhood, the modified energy map is obtained that can be further use.
Energy enhancement in such a manner restricts the other optimal seams to be passed on to the
same location.
In Fig. 7 function Inst_Detect () is used to detect the intersection between line structures and
the optimal seams. The 3Dmask in the function is used to preserve the locations of the edges
present in the image. The dimension of the 3Dmask is the same as the dimension of the source
image taken for the retargeting. For each successive optimal seam, the locations of pixels on
the seam path are matched with the corresponding locations of the 3Dmask. If the correspond-
ing locations in the 3Dmask already hold the TRUE means the intersection has occurred.
When the intersection of the optimal seam is found on the prominent line structures the
proposed Modifiy_Energy () function is activated to increase the energy of the intersection
point. After increasing the energy of intersection point 8 neighborhoods are selected for energy
filling operation.
To perform this operation, a stack of pixels i.e. a 1D array is used to maintain the local
neighborhoods of the intersection point. In each recursive call of the function, the topmost
pixel location is traced from the stack. The energy of the obtained location from the stack is
Fig. 7 Proposed functions used to detect intersection and energy modification
12902
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

increased by the energy filling operation. To increase the energy of the neighborhoods
maximum energy is inserted into the pixels. After energy enhancement, the topmost location
of the stack is deleted and the next location of the stack is selected for further computation. In
this manner, all 8 neighborhoods of the intersection point are selected for energy enhancement.
When the stack is empty the modified energy map is supplied to the image retargeting
operation i.e. Part-1 of the 8 neighborhoods of the topmost pixel are stored again in the stack.
The energy modification function recursively called up to a certain predefined radius. After
energy modification, the proposed energy enhancement function returns the modified energy
map of the image for further processing of image retargeting operation.
For horizontal and vertical seam intersection detection operation Eqs. (17) and (18) are used
respectively.
InstVertical i; j
ð
Þ ¼
if img i; j
ð
Þ ¼ 3DMask i; j
ð
Þ ¼ 1
otherwise;
j ¼ j þ 1; i ¼ i  1
i ¼ 1; 2; 3n
j ¼ 1; 2; 3n
8
>
<
>
:
ð17Þ
InstHorizontal i; j
ð
Þ ¼
if img i; j
ð
Þ ¼ 3DMask i; j
ð
Þ ¼ 1
otherwise;
j ¼ j  1; i ¼ i þ 1
i ¼ 1; 2; 3n
j ¼ 1; 2; 3n
8
>
<
>
:
ð18Þ
In Eqs. (17 and 18) 3Dmask (i, j) is the location of intermediate pixels of the detected line
segment, img (i, j) is the location of the pixel on the optimal seam path, InstVertical(i, j) and
InstHorizontal(i, j) are the locations of the intersection between the straight line and optimal seam
in the vertical direction and horizontal direction respectively.
After detection of intersection points on the straight lines present in the image, the energy
modification function increases the energy of the local neighborhoods using Eq. (19). In this
way, the enhancement in the energy bypasses the successive optimal seams towards other
locations on the same straight line or the nearby objects completely.
Ic ¼
255;
if Icintensity < 255
Selection of 8 neighbourhoods;
otherwise
	
ð19Þ
To select the local neighborhoods of the center pixel or intersection point Eq. (20) is used,
where i and j are the locations both in horizontal and vertical direction respectively, Each
location of the neighborhood is represented by img (i, j), Ic _ neigh is the location of the selected
neighborhood; Icintensity is the predefined intensity of the intersection point on the straight line
before the clash of the optimal seam.
Using Eq. (20) insertion and deletion of the local neighborhoods is performed in the stack.
In each recursive call of the proposed energy function, the highest intensity is applied on the
neighborhood which is deleted from the stack. The process of energy enhancement completely
stops after the coverage of predefined radius of the pixels.
12903
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

Ic neigh ¼
img i þ 1; j
ð
Þ
img i  1; j
ð
Þ
img i; j þ 1
ð
Þ
img i; j  1
ð
Þ
img i  1; j  1
ð
Þ
img i  1; j þ 1
ð
Þ
img i þ 1; j  1
ð
Þ
img i þ 1; j þ 1
ð
Þ
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
8
I cintensity
ð20Þ
Figure 8 presents the image retargeting operation using the existing and proposed seam carving
technique. From Fig. 8a the distortion in the retargeted result can be observed as the two
successive optimal seams are intersected at the same location on the line structures. Similarly
in Fig. 8b, it is evident that when the intersection of the optimal seam with line structure occurs
the proposed energy function modifies the energy of the intersection point. The energy
modification in such a manner restricts the other seams to travel on the same intersection
point. The energy filling operation preserves the shape of the line structures and also prevents
them to be converted into curve shape objects. To observe the results of the existing and
proposed algorithm, a zoom function is used. The zoom function first obtains the zero
interlaced image and then replicates each row and column of the image using a 4× 4 replication
mask. To observe the distortion and intersection closely the defined zoom function enlarges
the image according to the zoom factor given by the user. From Fig. 8 it is evident that the
proposed scheme produces better results as compared to the existing seam carving technique.
For better analysis and comparison of the results, the proposed algorithm is compared with the
other state-of-art. To compare the results obtained from the proposed scheme, the widely
known structural similarity index measure (SSIM) is used.
Fig. 8 a Optimal seams intersection and distortion of prominent line structures using existing seam carving, b
Optimal seams intersection and preservation of prominent line structures using proposed energy modification
function in proposed seam carving technique
12904
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5 Results and analysis
To analyze the results obtained from the proposed algorithm 5 types of images having different
structural properties are selected such as symmetry, foreground & background, face, land-
scape, and building. According to the literature [41], most of the experiments have been carried
out on these image types. The reason for selecting these image types is that the distortion and
aliasing effect can be easily visible while image retargeting. After conducting experiments and
comparison in the subsequent sections different types of distortions can be observed such as (a)
distortions on symmetry property on prominent edges of Tajmahal (b) structure of foreground
and background get affected (c) The distortions on curved shaped objects can be easily
noticeable (d) objects come closer and distance among them reduced up to an undesirable
level (e) The shape of prominent line structures start converting into the curve-shaped objects
[41].
5.1 Dataset
The dataset RetargetME [9] is used for image quality assessment (IQA). In this database, the
images are resized using 8 retargeting operators such as seam carving (SC) [3], non-
homogeneous warping (WARP) [22], scale-and-stretch (SNS) [51], multi-operator (Multi-
Op) [13, 16, 17], shift-maps (SM) [48], streaming video (SV) [33], uniform scaling (SCL)
[61], and manual cropping (CR) [6].
The retargeting results obtained from the proposed techniques and 5 state of art are
compared to analyze the effectiveness and limitations of the proposed technique. In the
literature [38, 47] the researchers have selected the RetargetME dataset to compare the results
obtained from their proposed technique. In the literature review following reasons and
properties of the dataset are found that influence the researchers to select this dataset in their
research.
&
Properties
&
The dataset contains a total of 80 high-resolution images of different sizes and image
attributes.
&
The size of the dataset is 580 MB and all the images and results are supplied in a lossless
format. Each image resides in a different directory with the image name, under which the
source and retargeting results are stored.
&
Reasons
&
The dataset contains images having different properties such as line structures, curve-
shaped objects, foreground and background objects, objects with shadow, and objects
having symmetry property which are sufficient to justify the effectiveness of the proposed
technique.
&
In previous research work [10] the results obtained from the existing image retargeting
techniques are compared and analyzed based on the above-mentioned properties of image
contents. These properties of image contents are available in the images stored in the dataset.
&
The dataset contains source images as well as the results of various state of art. The
availability of the standard retargeting results provides a benchmark that influences the
researchers to explore innovative ideas in the development of effective image retargeting
techniques.
12905
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5.2 Experimentation
In the literature [20, 38] it is found that the image retargeting operators generate distortions on
the three main attributes of the image such as luminance, contrast, and structure. These
attributes define the overall structural property of the image. In the experiment, subjective
IQA and objective IQA are performed to compare the results obtained from the proposed
technique and state of arts. The values obtained from both the analysis are observed to justify
the performance of the proposed technique.
5.2.1 Subjective analysis
At the beginning of the experiment, several aspects are taken into consideration to create the
environment for subjective IQA.
&
Setup viewing conditions
The viewing conditions are set up according to the standard IQA requirements to produce
reliable results. Most of the guidelines mentioned in the international standard ITU-T P.910
[41] are followed for creating a controlled viewing environment. To obtain the accurate and
reliable outcome of subjective evaluation 6 observers are selected based on their professional
expertise to obtain the statistically accurate voting.
&
Selection of test Sequence
In the initial phase of the subjective experiment, the nature and characteristics of the test
sequences are defined in a good manner. To generate the test sequence three major factors such
as luminance, contrast, and structural information are considered. At the time of evaluation, the
prepared test sequences are presented to the observers with different types of impairment.
&
Organization of Test Session
In the subjective assessment, the duration of a single test session is defined as approximately
15 min. The observers are given a break of 2 min before the start of the next test session. In the
initial phase of the experiment at least 3 presentations of the test, sequences are presented to the
observer to stable their behavior of voting. The obtained scores are recorded for statistical
analysis.
Fig. 9 Origination of test session
12906
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

In addition to this, some test sessions are also executed in the initial phase to provide
an understanding of the assessment procedure to the observers. In the training session,
written instructions are presented to the observer about the purpose of experiments, test
score methodology, user interface, and type of score scale. In the training sessions, the
queries are handled carefully to improve their knowledge about every phase of the
subjective assessment procedure. To avoid fatigue the maximum duration of all the
training sessions is considered not longer than one hour. The entire process of the test
session is shown in Fig. 9.
&
Outlier detection and elimination
The collected subjective scores from the observers are verified and processed to detect the
outliers. The evaluation scores are also checked whether the distribution of scores is normal or
not. The abnormal distribution of scores obtained from the subjects is rejected as an outlier. In
the entire process of outlier selection and rejection, two categories of data are checked. In the
first category, the scores with high variation are selected and compared with the average
response obtained from the subjects. In the second category, the variation of scores is observed
that is obtained from the subjects due to their inconsistent behavior.
&
Subjective Score Predictors
After the collection of subjective scores from the observer, the data is statistically processed to
transform it into a meaningful form. In addition to this, the statically biased data is eliminated
from the test. In subjective IQA the subjective scores of displayed stimuli are obtained from
the observers using the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) which is also known as Absolute
Category Rating (ACR) [59]. To evaluate the relationship between two stimuli the average
of obtained opinions is computed on a 5-grade impairment scale.
5.2.2 Objective image quality assessment
In the initial phase of experiment three well known objective image quality assessment
metrics such as peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR) [52], Mean score error (MSE) [14], and
structural similarity index measure (SSIM) [1] are selected to check the validity of the
assessment. In the experiment, it is found that the traditional IQA methods such as PSNR
and MSE are not best suited to generate the assessment values about the loss of correlation,
contrast, and luminance distortion [23, 44]. Finally, SSIM is selected to obtain the valid and
reliable assessment values with the agreement of values obtained from the subjective image
quality assessment.
&
Assessment based on SSIM index
To generate the full reference SSIM metric all the three functions of its individual components
are integrated to obtain the desired form of SSIM index. The unimpaired (reference) images
and impaired (test) images are supplied as parameters to the defined SSIM function. The
function collectively generates the different SSIM index values for each retargeted image
12907
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

typically in the range [0–1]. In the assessment, it is observed that for all the image types the
obtain values from SSIM are less than one and non-negative.
&
Assessment based on local values of SSIM index
In the experiments, the output arguments obtained from SSIM are further analyzed based on
two types of SSIM maps. To identify the non-uniform regions from the retargeted images
local SSIM maps are generated. After observing the local SSIM map it is found that the
small values of the local SSIM map are used to observe the variations in the similarity of
image contents present in both stimuli. The observed dark regions in the local SSIM map
are used to identify the regions where less similarity is found. Similarly, high values of the
local SSIM map are considered to obtain the similarity between the image contents. In the
local SSIM map, the obtained bright regions present the similarity between the unimpaired
and impaired images. After the experiment, it has been observed that the high value of the
local SSIM map with the global SSIM value shows more similarity between the reference
and retargeted image.
Fig. 10 Input images of different categories
12908
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5.3 Performance comparison
To compare the performance of the state of arts and proposed technique subjective and
objective image quality assessments are carried out. To conduct the objective quality assess-
ment 5 reference images (See Fig. 10) are chosen from the dataset that contains some specific
properties of the image that are enough to justify the performance of operators. The results of 5
state-of-art and the proposed algorithm are shown and analyzed in Figs. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Fig. 11 a Shift-Map; b Scale and stretched; c Warping; d Seam Carving; e Multi-Op; f Proposed Technique
Fig. 12 SSIM index for image type-1
12909
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5.3.1 (a) Landscape (image Type-1)
Figure 11 presents retargeted results obtained from various operators. To observe the varia-
tions in the test image the local SSIM maps are analyzed. To highlight the distortions on the
prominent regions of the image several darks regions available in the local SSIM maps are
considered. For better understanding and visibility of these regions, rectangular boxes are used
in the above-retargeted images.
To present the overall distortion on each component of the SSIM namely luminance (l),
contrast (c), and structure (s) the SSIM is applied on the retargeted results. After objective
assessment of the visual quality of retargeted images, the values of SSIM are found in the
range of [0–1]. After analyzing the SSIM index values presented in Fig. 12, it can be observed
Fig. 13 a Shift-Map; b Scale and stretched; c Warping; d Seam Carving; e Multi-Op; f Proposed Technique
Fig. 14 SSIM index for image type-2
12910
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

that the degradation of the image in the case of Multi-Op and the proposed scheme is almost
the same. The SSIM index value for Warp and SC are almost similar. For image type-1 the
other state-of-arts such as SM and SNS produces high distortion as compared to the other
retargeting operator. After performance comparison, it is found that the result produced by the
proposed technique contains fewer impairments as compared to the other retargeting operator.
In this case, it can be predicted that the energy enhancement and seam bypassing operation
associated with the proposed algorithm performs well.
Fig. 15 a Shift-Map; b Scale and stretched; c Warping; d Seam Carving; e Multi-Op; f Proposed Technique
Fig. 16 SSIM index for image type-3
12911
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5.3.2 (b) Face (image Type-2)
Figure 13 present the retargeted results for the face-type image. In the objective image quality
assessment, the SSIM value of each retargeted image is obtained and analyzed for comparison.
In Fig. 14 it can be observed that the SSIM index value obtained for the results of the
proposed technique is (0.88) which is maximum than other operators. The other operators such
as SM, SNS, Warp, and SC produce high distortion on the three parameters of comparison.
From Figs. 12 and 14 it is observed that the result obtained from Multi-Op and the proposed
technique are almost the same. The main reason behind this is the presence of multiple
operators in the hybrid sequence of Multi-Op. In this case, the performance of the proposed
technique is justifiable as the SSIM index value is higher than the recent Multi-Op technique.
Fig. 17 a Shift Map; b Scale and stretched; c Warping; d Seam carving; e Multi-Op; f Proposed Technique
Fig. 18 SSIM index for image type-4
12912
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

5.3.3 (C) Building (image Type-3)
In Fig. 15 the retargeted results obtained for image type-3 are presented. To identify the
uniform regions of the image bright regions in the local SSIM maps are observed. After
considering the dark regions present in the local SSIM maps the distortions are highlighted
using black rectangular boxes in the above-retargeted images.
From Fig. 16 it can be observed that the SSIM index values obtained for SM, SNS, Warp,
SC, and Multi-Op are less than the proposed technique. The high SSIM value obtained from
the result of the proposed technique indicates that it produces fewer distortions among all the
other image retargeting operators. The high percentage of dissimilarity indicates that the
proposed algorithm does not perform well on the image type-3 as it is expected to it. The
Fig. 19 a Shift Map; b Scale and stretched; c Warping; d Seam Carving; e Multi-Op; f Proposed Technique
Fig. 20 SSIM index for image type-5
12913
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

proposed algorithm produces an aliasing effect when the line segments transform their shape
into curve-shaped objects. Keeping this issue in view, it can be predicted that the efficiency of
the proposed scheme can be further increased by integrating other image processing algorithms
other than line detection. Nevertheless, from the computed SSIM values, it is predicted that the
proposed technique prevents the structure of the line segments more efficiently than the other
image retargeting operators.
5.3.4 Foreground/ background (image Type-4)
To perform the performance comparison the image having foreground and background objects
are supplied to the image retargeting operators and proposed technique. The retargeted results
are compared based on a single SSIM value that represents the deformation on contrast,
luminance, and structure.
From Fig. 18, it is observed that the SSIM index value obtained from the Multi-Op and
proposed algorithm are .6519 and 0.65 respectively. The performance of the Multi-Op is
slightly better than the proposed technique due to the utilization of other image retargeting
operators in the hybrid sequence. The proposed technique performs well as compared to the
SM, SNS, and Warp. The deformation on luminance (l) and contrast (c) cannot be easily
noticeable to the human eye. To observe the deformation on these parameters local SSIM
maps are observed for image retargeted image. The structural deformations can be easily
observed in the retargeted image which is highlighted in Fig. 17.
5.3.5 Symmetry (image Type-5)
In Fig. 19 the performance of the proposed technique is observed on symmetry image type.
The SSIM index function computes the separate value for each parameter and generates a
single value to define the level of deformation.
From Fig. 20 it can be observed that the SSIM index value obtained for the proposed
technique is lower than the SC and Multi-Op. In this case, the reason for low efficiency is
found due to the closeness of objects and overlapping image structures. To preserve the objects
the incorporated seam bypassing operation bypasses the optimal seam to the nearby location
where they again start interesting on other prominent structures and make an adverse effect on
three specified parameters (luminance, color, and structure). The SSIM index value of SM,
SNS, and Warp are lower than the proposed technique.
5.4 Percentage similarity analysis
In this section, the percentage similarity analysis is carried out to evaluate the results obtained
from the proposed algorithm and other state of art such as SM, SNS, Warp, SC, and Multi-Op.
For evaluating the similarity among the obtained results structural similarity (SSIM) index is
used. SSIM measures the quality of the image being processed with that of the input or the
reference image. From Fig. 21, it can be observed that the obtained results from the proposed
seam carving algorithm produce fewer distortions on all the image types which are considered
for the experiment. Firstly, from the figure, it is evident that the proposed scheme produces less
similarity variation in image type-1 (landscape) as compared to the results obtained from the
Multi-Op. For this image type, SNS and SM produce more distortion in the image. The results
obtained from the Warp and SC are similar up to some extent. For image type-1 it is concluded
12914
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

that the proposed scheme produces a high percentage of similarity i.e. 77% among all other
chosen retargeting operators. Secondly, for the image type-2 (Face), both Multi-Op and the
proposed scheme produce a similar percentage of similarity i.e. 87.25% and 88% respectively.
The high percentage of similarity indicates that the result obtained from the proposed
algorithm is aesthetically pleasing as compared to SM, SNS, Warp, and SC. After analysis
of the results, it is found that the proposed algorithm is capable of preserving lines and curve-
shaped objects present in the image. For image type-2, SNS and Warp produce a similar
percentage of similarity i.e. 61.39%. The percentage of similarity obtain from SM and SC is
65.72% and 67.87 respectively that is greater than SNS and Warp operators. Thirdly, for image
type-3 (building) and type-4 (Foreground & background), similar kinds of results are obtained
from all the state of art. In image type-3 the proposed scheme produces a high percentage of
similarity i.e. 67% which is greater than all the selected operators. Similarly, in the case of
image type-4, the proposed technique produces a similar percentage of similarity as found in
the case of Multi-Op i.e. 65.19%. After analyzing the percentage similarity obtained for image
type-3 it can be predicted that the proposed scheme performs also produces distortions due to
the presence of too many line structures that are very much close to each other. The reason for
the high similarity percentage is found due to the integration of the energy modification
function to the proposed algorithm. Moreover, increasing the energy of the local neighborhood
at the intersection point diverts the optimal seam to the nearby objects. In the case of image
type-4, the reason for a similar percentage of similarity is due to shifting of the optimal seam to
the nearby objects that can be very much closed or overlapping each other. Finally, for image
type-5, the percentage of similarity obtained from the proposed algorithm is 57.35% that is
similar to the Multi-Op and greater than SM, SNS, and Warp. The percentage of similarity
obtained from the SC and Multi-Op is higher than among all the operators i.e. 61.28% and
58.18% respectively. The other retargeting operator such as SM, SNS, and Warp produce a
high percentage of distortion as compared to SC, Multi-Op, and the proposed scheme.
From the similarity percentage analysis, it is concluded that the proposed scheme produces
less percentage distortion for all the image types except the image type-5. The proposed
scheme produces a similar percentage of similarity as found in the case of Multi-Op for all the
Fig. 21 Comparative analysis of state-of-art and proposed scheme based on percentage similarity
12915
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

image types except image type-3 which predicts the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
The proposed scheme is also tested on other images having various patterns of objects present
in the image such as overlapped curved shaped objects and diagonal overlapped line structures.
After testing the performance of the proposed scheme on all such image types it is evident that
the proposed scheme produces remarkable results in comparison to other image retargeting
operators. The results obtained for such types of images are not presented in section 5.3 due to
space constraints.
5.5 Average percentage similarity
In Fig. 22 the different state-of-art and their corresponding results are compared, based on
average similarity. From the results obtained from the chosen image retargeting operators, the
proposed scheme produces a high percentage of image similarity. From the analysis, it is
evident that the difference in the percentage of similarity obtained from the proposed scheme
and Multi-Op is only 2.75%. In the field of image retargeting the advanced Multi-operator
Fig. 22 Comparison based on state-of-art
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
Lanscape
Face
Building
  Foreground
& Background
Symmetry
72.11
71.94
56.59
64.21
56.62
E
G
A
T
N
E
C
R
E
P
Y
T
I
R
A
L
I
M
I
S
IMAGE TYPES
AVERAGE SIMILARITY BASED ON IMAGE TYPE
Fig. 23 Comparison based on image type
12916
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

(Multi-Op) technique is based on the hybrid sequence of the retargeting operators. The highest
percentage of similarity obtained from the proposed scheme presents the efficiency of the
proposed technique in comparison to the advanced Multi-Op technique. From the analysis, it
can be also observed that SNS produces less percentage of similarity for all the selected image
types. The percentages of similarity obtained from SM and Warp are almost the same. The
difference of percentage of similarity between the traditional seam carving technique (SC) and
the proposed technique is 6.84% that justifies the effectiveness of the proposed technique.
Figure 23 presents the comparison of all the image types based on their similarity to their
original image. After analysis, the results it can be observed that all the schemes produce high
percentage similarity on the type-1 (Landscape) and type-2 (Face) images. The high percent-
age of distortion can be easily observed on the image type-3 (Building) and type-5 (Symme-
try). For image type-4 (foreground & background) the percentage of similarity is greater than
the image type-3 and type-5 but less than image type-1 and type-2.
5.6 Subjective analysis
To justify the performance of the proposed technique the obtained results are assessed using
subjective image quality assessment. In the subjective assessment, the test sequences are
generated and presented to the observers to obtain subjective scores for retargeted images.
In the analysis of visual quality, a comparison scale is used to evaluate the relationship
between two stimuli. Typically, the pair of images are shown one after another. The stimuli
may be also presented simultaneously. The participant compares stimuli presented to them
based on the three quality parameters such as luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). In the
experiment, MOS for each test image is computed using the Eq. (21) [68].
MOSðjÞ ¼ 1
n
X
n
i¼1
S i; j
ð
Þ
ð21Þ
Fig. 24 Subjective image quality assessment
12917
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

Where n denotes the number of subjects involved in the subjective experiment and S(i, j) the
subjective score given by the ith subjects for image j.
Figure 24 presents the subjective analysis of 5 different image types obtained after the
retargeting operation. The subjective scores of each quality parameter are taken from the
observer to obtain the final score by averaging them. From the values plotted in the graph, it
can be observed that the prediction of the visual quality of the image in the subjective
assessment is similar to the objective assessment. After observing the subjective scores it
can evident that the SSIM performs well in providing the objective scores in the agreement of
the human visual system.
Figure 25 presents the final values mean opinion score (MOS) computed to predict the level
of distortion on each image type. The analysis present in the above graph presents almost a
similar type of analysis as it has been performed in the objective quality assessment. The
prediction on the visual quality of the retargeted results is almost the same. After conducting
the subjective analysis it is found the maximum distortions are observed on image type-3 and
type-5 while in the case of Image type-1 and type-2 the analysis presents low distortions. For
image type-4 the high image deformation is observed as compared to image type-3 and type-5.
After the subjective analysis is concluded that the presence of a high number of straight lines,
overlapping objects, curved shaped objects, and their closeness are the main reason for
structural deformations. Moreover, the elimination of the least energy pixels from the image
also affects the luminance and color components of various regions and objects present in the
image.
5.7 Critical analysis based on experimental study
From the experiments, it is analyzed that the quality of image retargeting results depends upon
the type of contents present in the image. After the experiment, it is observed that for Image
type-1 (Landscape) the proposed technique and Multi-Op produce an almost similar type of
retargeting results. The percentage of dissimilarity found in Multi-Op is 23.78% while in the
case of the proposed technique it is found 23%. The main reason behind the similarity of
results is the presence of a conventional seam carving technique in a hybrid Multi-Op
Fig. 25 Subjective image quality assessment based on MOS
12918
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

sequence. The Landscape image generally contains curved-shaped objects and line segments.
The elimination of even a single low-energy pixel over these structures can distort the entire
shape of the object. In the experiment on the Image type-1 (Landscape) it is found that many
pixels on curve-shaped objects and line structures are overlapped. In such a case the seam
bypassing and energy distribution mechanism of the proposed technique fails and produces
distortions. From the comparison of retargeting results for Image type-2 (Face), it is analyzed
that the results obtained from the Multi-Op and proposed algorithm are similar when compared
with the corresponding reference images. In the experimental analysis of this image type, it is
found that the face objects contain lots of curved-shaped objects. The prominent curved-
shaped objects that define the structure of the image contents are scattered in the image. In the
proposed algorithm when seam diversion operation is applied to Image type-2 it has been
observed that the optimal seams start diverting themselves to the nearby locations. The high
distance between the curved-shaped objects forces the optimal seams to select the least energy
pixels in their optimal paths which do not lie on the nearby objects. The other state-of-arts
image retargeting operators such as SNS and Warp produce a similar percentage of dissimi-
larity i.e. 37.08% and 26.54% respectively which is less than the SM.
After analyzing the retargeted results for Image type-3 (Building) it is found that the
percentage of similarity obtained from all the retargeting operators is almost similar. The main
reason behind the similar results is the presence of prominent line structures in the image.
From the experiment, it is revealed that the aesthetic retargeting results can be obtained from
the proposed technique if the distance among the prominent line structures is high. To protect
the line structures present in the image the distribution of energy to the neighboring pixels and
execution of seam bypassing operation restrict the intersection of optimal seams at the same
location. The distribution of energy at the intersection point within a predefined radius can
divert the successive optimal seams to nearby locations. In this case, the optimal seams can
again travel on the other nearby line structures if the distance among them is very low. From
the experimental study, it is found that the proposed technique produces a similar type of
retargeting results for Image type-4 (foreground & background). The overall percentage of
dissimilarity obtained from chosen image retargeting operators is found up to 35.79%. The
main reason behind dissimilarity in retargeting results is the overlapping of image contents.
The energy enhancement and seam bypassing operation of the proposed technique applied on
the foreground object also affect the luminance, contrast, and structural properties of the
background objects. A similar type of distortion is observed in the case of seam carving and
Multi-Op. After conducting the objective image quality assessment it is found that seam
carving, Multi-Op, and proposed algorithm produce more distortion on the image contents if
the number of overlapped objects in the image is very high.
Finally, for Image type-5, it can be observed that less image degradation can be obtained
from the seam carving technique. From Image type-5 it can be observed that the image
contains both line and curved shaped objects. From the experiment on the image, it is found
that the distance among these objects is very low which can be the main cause of distortion.
From the experimental image retargeting result obtained from the seam carving it is evident
that the absence of the energy enhancement and seam diversion operation in the seam carving
technique produces a high percentage of similarity that is 61.28% among all the operators. The
hybrid Multi-Op technique also produces an aesthetic retargeting result as compare to the
proposed technique. The main reason behind this is the execution of other retargeting operators
in the hybrid sequence. The switching mechanism in the hybrid sequence minimizes the
adverse effect of one image retargeting operator by executing other operators in continuation.
12919
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

The proposed algorithm tries to serve well and produces 57.35% similarity which is found less
to the multi-Op and seam carving techniques (SC). In the proposed technique, the main reason
for the dissimilarity is observed due to the increment of energy at the local neighborhood found
at the intersection point. The inclusion of high energy at the intersection point diverts the
optimal seam to the other nearby location where they again start smashing the prominent
structures present in the image. The other image retargeting operators such as SM, SNS, and
Warp produce significant distortions on the prominent structures of the image. The percentage
of dissimilarity obtained from the SNS and SM is 45% while in the case of Warp it is found
47.12%.
To justify the efficiency of the proposed technique and finding out the main reason for
distortion subjective image quality assessment is conducted. For each retargeted result the
mean opinion scores (MOS) are obtained from the observers. During the test session, the
observers are also asked about the location of distortion that they are observing. In the phase of
interaction, it has been found that most distortions are found on curved-shaped objects, line
segments, and overlapped objects. The subjective scores obtained from the observers are also
used to analyze the deformations on luminance and color information present in the image.
The results obtained from the subjective analysis are almost similar to the objective assess-
ment. Finally based on the MOS it is predicted that most of the deformations are observed on
the image type-3 (Building). Moreover, the proposed algorithm performs well for all the image
types except the image type-5 (symmetry).
From the critical experimental study, it is concluded that the proposed algorithm also
produces image distortions especially on the image type that contains a large number of
curve-shaped objects and line segments. The other reasons for the distortions are found due to
the presence of high overlapping and less distance among the image objects. The proposed
algorithm performs well when the objects in the image are scattered and the distance among
them is high. Moreover, the additional operations of the proposed algorithm namely, energy
enhancement and seam diversion also increases the computational time in the generation of the
retargeted results. From the experiment, it is found that the proposed technique takes several
attempts to perform its two major operations such as energy enhancement at the intersection
point and seam diversion. The proposed technique takes high computational times if the salient
regions of the image are not clearly defined in the initial stage. To minimize the number of
execution calls in the proposed technique it can be integrated with the efficient saliency
detection technique. The energy map obtained from the integrated saliency detection algorithm
can highlight several significant image ROIs in the initial phase. The detection of the
maximum number of ROIs reduces the number of least energy pixels in the image which
significantly reduces the number of recursive calls to increase the energy at the local neigh-
borhood of the intersection point which automatically reduces the number of calls for seam
bypassing operation.
6 Conclusion and future scope
In the field of image retargeting, various techniques have been suggested by the researchers
which are used to minimize the image distortion while retargeting the image. In the paper, a
technique of image retargeting has been developed for resizing the image in a content-aware
fashion. After analysis of the conventional seam carving technique, it is found that the
intersection of the optimal seam at the same location on line structures and curve-shaped
12920
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

objects distorts their shape. In the case of the conventional seam carving technique, the salient
contents start changing their shape if the aspect ratio of the images changes up to a great extent.
To overcome the above-stated problem an edge detection operation is required to be performed
to detect the prominent line structures in the initial stage that are needed to be preserved. To
preserve the structure the proposed recursive energy modification function is applied at the
location where optimal seams are intersecting with the line structures. The recursive function
increases the energy of the 8 local neighborhoods found at the intersection point to perform the
seam bypassing operation. The seam bypassing operation is performed in such a way that no
further optimal seam can intersect the same location on the line structures. The inclusion of the
energy modification function in the proposed scheme preserves various line structure proper-
ties such as parallelism, Collinearity, and Orientation. The main contribution of the research
work can be broadly presented as (i) detection of prominent line structures; (ii) energy
modification at the intersection point, (iii) seam bypassing operation (iv) subjective and
objective image quality assessment. The proposed technique is tested and analyzed based on
various image types having different properties.
In subjective image quality assessment, the mean opinion scores (MOS) are obtained from
the observers to justify the effectiveness of the proposed technique. In the objective image
quality assessment, SSIM is used to obtain various SSIM index values for each retargeted
result. The performance comparison carried out in the research work highlights various factors
that are responsible for the distortion of the image contents in the retargeted results. To justify
the effectiveness of the proposed technique the obtained results are compared with the existing
state-of-the-arts which are widely used in the field of image retargeting. After various
experiments on the obtained results, it is concluded that the proposed technique can produce
image distortion when the image contain a large number of prominent line structures and the
distance among them is very less. The performance of the proposed algorithm can be further
optimized by integrating it with a highly efficient saliency detection algorithm. Furthermore,
the proposed algorithm can be improved to prevent distortions, especially in non-rectangular-
shaped images. After integration of other image processing techniques, the various image
ROIs can be preserved in the retargeted results. In the performance comparison, it is found that
the proposed algorithm also produces distortion on the prominent line structures and produces
an aliasing effect when the line segments transform their shape into curve-shaped objects. To
minimize the effect of aliasing the proposed scheme can be integrated with the antialiasing
technique to minimize the staircase effects over the line structures. There is no doubt that the
integration of the multiple-image processing algorithm with the proposed technique will
increase its computation time. Despite this, the proposed algorithm will be proven to be
effective in generating better image retargeting results. After the subjective and objective
image quality assessment, it is observed that the elimination of the least energy pixels is also
responsible for the deformation on two quality parameters such as color and luminance. Two
prevent the loss of sensitive information the salient regions should be defined accurately in
advance. The incorporation of recent technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) with the proposed technique can enhance its performance and auto-
mate the process of pixel elimination. Through these recent technologies the adverse effects on
the visual quality of the image especially on the luminance and color components can be
observed easily.
12921
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

References
1. Afshar F, Mansouri A, Zandi M (2017) Image retargeting quality assessment using structural similarity and
information preservation rate. In: 2017 10th Iranian conference on machine vision and image processing
(MVIP). IEEE, pp 58–63
2. Andreadis I, Amanatiadis A (2005) Digital image scaling. In: 2005 IEEE instrumentation and measurement
technology conference proceedings, vol 3. IEEE, pp 2028–2032
3. Avidan S, Shamir A (2007) Seam carving for content-aware image resizing. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2007
papers, pp 10–es
4. Bansal M, Kumar M, Kumar M, Kumar K (2021) An efficient technique for object recognition using Shi-
Tomasi corner detection algorithm. Soft Comput 25(6):4423–4432
5. Chang CH, Chuang YY (2012, June) A line-structure-preserving approach to image resizing. In: 2012 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. IEEE, pp 1075–1082
6. Chen J, Bai G, Liang S, Li Z (2016) Automatic image cropping: a computational complexity study. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 507–515
7. Chhabra P, Garg NK, Kumar M (2020) Content-based image retrieval system using ORB and SIFT
features. Neural Comput & Applic 32(7):2725–2733
8. Choi J, Kim C (2016) Sparse seam-carving for structure preserving image retargeting. Journal of Signal
Processing Systems 85(2):275–283
9. Cui J, Cai Q, Lu H, Jia Z, Tang M (2020) Distortion-aware image retargeting based on continuous seam
carving model. Signal Process 166:107242
10. Dong W, Zhou N, Paul JC, Zhang X (2009) Optimized image resizing using seam carving and scaling.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 28(5):1–10
11. Dong WM, Bao GB, Zhang XP, Paul JC (2012) Fast multi-operator image resizing and evaluation. J
Comput Sci Technol 27(1):121–134
12. Fan P, Zhou RG, Hu WW, Jing N (2019) Quantum image edge extraction based on Laplacian operator and
zero-cross method. Quantum Inf Process 18(1):1–23
13. Fang Y, Fang Z, Yuan F, Yang Y, Yang S, Xiong NN (2016) Optimized multioperator image retargeting
based on perceptual similarity measure. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems
47(11):2956–2966
14. Fang Y, Yan J, Liu J, Wang S, Li Q, Guo Z (2017) Objective quality assessment of screen content images
by uncertainty weighting. IEEE Trans Image Process 26(4):2016–2027
15. Gal, R., Sorkine, O., & Cohen-Or, D. (2006). Feature-aware texturing Rendering techniques, 2006 (17th), 2.
16. Garg A, Negi A (2020) A survey on content aware image resizing methods. KSII Transactions on Internet
and Information Systems (TIIS) 14(7):2997–3017
17. Garg A, Negi A (2020) Structure preservation in content-aware image retargeting using multi-operator. IET
Image Process 14(13):2965–2975
18. Garg D, Garg NK, Kumar M (2018) Underwater image enhancement using blending of CLAHE and
percentile methodologies. Multimed Tools Appl 77(20):26545–26561
19. Garg A, Negi A, Jindal P (2021) Structure preservation of image using an efficient content-aware image
retargeting technique. Signal, Image and Video Processing 15(1):185–193
20. Guo Y, Hao Y, Yu M (2018) Image retargeting quality assessment based on content deformation
measurement. Signal processing: image communication 67:171–181
21. Han D (2005) Real-time digital image warping for display distortion correction. In: International conference
image analysis and recognition. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 1258–1265
22. Hashemzadeh M, Asheghi B, Farajzadeh N (2019) Content-aware image resizing: an improved and
shadow-preserving seam carving method. Signal Process 155:233–246
23. Hore A, Ziou D (2010) Image quality metrics: PSNR vs. SSIM. In: 2010 20th international conference on
pattern recognition. IEEE, pp 2366–2369
24. Hu W, Luo Z, Fan X (2014) Image retargeting via adaptive scaling with geometry preservation. IEEE
Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 4(1):70–81
25. Huo L, Jiao L, Wang S, Yang S (2016) Object-level saliency detection with color attributes. Pattern Recogn
49:162–173
26. Israni S, Jain S (2016) Edge detection of license plate using Sobel operator. In: 2016 international
conference on electrical, electronics, and optimization techniques (ICEEOT). IEEE, pp 3561–3563
27. Jiang W, Xu H, Chen G, Zhao W, Xu W (2009) An improved edge-adaptive image scaling algorithm. In:
2009 IEEE 8th international conference on ASIC. IEEE, pp 895–897
28. Kiess J, Kopf S, Guthier B, Effelsberg W (2010) Seam carving with improved edge preservation. In:
Multimedia on Mobile devices 2010, vol 7542. International Society for Optics and Photonics, p 75420G
12922
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

29. Kiess J, Guthier B, Kopf S, Effelsberg W (2012) SeamCrop for image retargeting. In: Multimedia on
Mobile devices 2012; and multimedia content access: algorithms and systems VI, vol 8304. International
Society for Optics and Photonics, p 83040K
30. Kiess J, Kopf S, Guthier B, Effelsberg W (2018) A survey on content-aware image and video retargeting.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM) 14(3):1–28
31. Kim CH, Seong SM, Lee JA, Kim LS (2003) Winscale: an image-scaling algorithm using an area pixel
model. IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology 13(6):549–553
32. Kopf S, Guthier B, Lemelson H, Effelsberg W (2009) Adaptation of web pages and images for Mobile
applications. In: Multimedia on mobile devices 2009, vol 7256. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, p 72560C
33. Krähenbühl P, Lang M, Hornung A, Gross M (2009) A system for retargeting of streaming video. In: ACM
SIGGRAPH Asia 2009 papers, pp 1–10
34. Kumar M, Chhabra P, Garg NK (2018) An efficient content based image retrieval system using BayesNet
and K-NN. Multimed Tools Appl 77(16):21557–21570
35. Kumar A, Kumar M, Kaur A (2021) Face detection in still images under occlusion and non-uniform
illumination. Multimed Tools Appl 80(10):14565–14590
36. Liang Y, Liu YJ, Luo XN, Xie L, Fu X (2012a) Optimal-scaling-factor assignment for patch-wise image
retargeting. IEEE Comput Graph Appl 33(5):68–78
37. Liang Y, Su Z, Luo X (2012b) Patchwise scaling method for content-aware image resizing. Signal Process
92(5):1243–1257
38. Liang Y, Liu YJ, Gutierrez D (2016) Objective quality prediction of image retargeting algorithms. IEEE
Trans Vis Comput Graph 23(2):1099–1110
39. Liu F, Gleicher M (2005) Automatic image retargeting with fisheye-view warping. In: Proceedings of the
18th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology, pp 153–162
40. Liu Z, Yan H, Shen L, Ngan KN, Zhang Z (2010) Adaptive image retargeting using saliency-based
continuous seam carving. Opt Eng 49(1):017002
41. Mohammadi, P., Ebrahimi-Moghadam, A., & Shirani, S. (2014). Subjective and objective quality assess-
ment of image: a survey . arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.7799.
42. Muñoz A, Blu T, Unser M (2001) Least-squares image resizing using finite differences. IEEE Trans Image
Process 10(9):1365–1378
43. Othman Z, Abdullah A (2017) An adaptive threshold based on multiple resolution levels for canny edge
detection. In: International conference of reliable information and communication technology. Springer,
Cham, pp 316–323
44. Palubinskas G (2017) Image similarity/distance measures: what is really behind MSE and SSIM? Int J
Image Data Fusion 8(1):32–53
45. Panozzo, D., Weber, O., & Sorkine, O. (2012). Robust image retargeting via axis-aligned deformation. In
Computer Graphics Forum (Vol. 31, No. 2pt1, pp. 229–236). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
46. Patel D, Raman S (2018) Object proposals-based significance map for image retargeting. In: Proceedings of
2nd international conference on Computer Vision & Image Processing. Springer, Singapore, pp 89–101
47. Patel D, Raman S (2019) Accelerated seam carving for image retargeting. IET Image Process 13(6):885–
895
48. Pritch Y, Kav-Venaki E, Peleg S (2009) Shift-map image editing. In: 2009 IEEE 12th international
conference on computer vision. IEEE, pp 151–158
49. Qi S, Chi YTJ, Peter AM, Ho J (2016) CASAIR: content and shape-aware image retargeting and its
applications. IEEE Trans Image Process 25(5):2222–2232
50. Rubinstein M, Shamir A, Avidan S (2009) Multi-operator media retargeting. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) 28(3):1–11
51. Rubinstein M, Gutierrez D, Sorkine O, Shamir A (2010) A comparative study of image retargeting. In:
ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2010 papers, pp 1–10
52. Sara U, Akter M, Uddin MS (2019) Image quality assessment through FSIM, SSIM, MSE and PSNR—a
comparative study. Journal of Computer and Communications 7(3):8–18
53. Senturk ZK, Akgun D (2019) Seam carving based image retargeting: a survey. In: 2019 1st international
informatics and software engineering conference (UBMYK). IEEE, pp 1–6
54. Setlur V, Takagi S, Raskar R, Gleicher M, Gooch B (2005) Automatic image retargeting. In: Proceedings of
the 4th international conference on Mobile and ubiquitous multimedia, pp 59–68
55. Shafieyan F, Karimi N, Mirmahboub B, Samavi S, Shirani S (2017) Image retargeting using depth assisted
saliency map. Signal Process Image Commun 50:34–43
56. Shamir A, Avidan S (2009) Seam carving for media retargeting. Commun ACM 52(1):77–85
12923
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

57. Shi Z, Yao S, Zhao Y (2008) A novel video image scaling algorithm based on morphological edge
interpolation. In: 2008 international conference on neural networks and signal processing. IEEE, pp 388–
391
58. Suh B, Ling H, Bederson BB, Jacobs DW (2003) Automatic thumbnail cropping and its effectiveness. In:
Proceedings of the 16th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology, pp 95–104
59. Tomaszewska AL (2016) Scene reduction for subjective image quality assessment. Journal of Electronic
Imaging 25(1):013015
60. Tsai YJ, Lin HJ, Li YS (2013) A straight line preserving seam carving technique. In: Applied mechanics
and materials (Vol. 385, pp. 1453-1456). Trans Tech Publications Ltd
61. Vaquero D, Turk M, Pulli K, Tico M, Gelfand N (2010) A survey of image retargeting techniques. In:
Applications of digital image processing XXXIII (Vol. 7798, p. 779814). International Society for Optics
and Photonics
62. Wang YS, Tai CL, Sorkine O, Lee TY (2008) Optimized scale-and-stretch for image resizing. In: ACM
SIGGRAPH Asia 2008 papers, pp 1–8
63. Wu L, Cao L, Xu M, Wang J (2014) A hybrid image retargeting approach via combining seam carving and
grid warping. J Multimed 9(4):483
64. Xuan L, Hong Z (2017) An improved canny edge detection algorithm. In: 2017 8th IEEE international
conference on software engineering and service science (ICSESS). IEEE, pp 275–278
65. Yan B, Li K, Yang X, Hu T (2014) Seam searching-based pixel fusion for image retargeting. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 25(1):15–23
66. Yang, L., Liu, S., & Salvi, M. (2020). A survey of temporal antialiasing techniques. In Computer graphics
forum (Vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 607-621).
67. Zeng H, Li L, Cao Z, Zhang L (2019) Reliable and efficient image cropping: a grid anchor based approach.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 5949–5957
68. Zhai G, Min X (2020) Perceptual image quality assessment: a survey. SCIENCE CHINA Inf Sci 63(11):
211301
69. Zhang L, Li K, Ou Z, Wang F (2017a) Seam warping: a new approach for image retargeting for small
displays. Soft Comput 21(2):447–457
70. Zhang Y, Sun Z, Jiang P, Huang Y, Peng J (2017b) Hybrid image retargeting using optimized seam carving
and scaling. Multimed Tools Appl 76(6):8067–8085
71. Zhou B, Wang X, Cao S, Xiang K, Zhao S (2016) Optimal bi-directional seam carving for compressibility-
aware image retargeting. J Vis Commun Image Represent 41:21–30
72. Zhou RG, Yu H, Cheng Y, Li FX (2019) Quantum image edge extraction based on improved Prewitt
operator. Quantum Inf Process 18(9):1–24
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Affiliations
Ankit Garg1 & Anand Nayyar2,3 & Anuj Kumar Singh1
1
Amity University, Gurugram, Haryana 122413, India
2
Graduate School, Duy Tan University, Da Nang 550000, Vietnam
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Duy Tan University, Da Nang 550000, Vietnam
12924
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022) 81:12883–12924

