Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
Daniel Williams1,2
Accepted: 13 August 2021 / Published online: 7 September 2021
 The Author(s) 2021
Abstract Two striking claims are advanced on behalf of the free energy principle
(FEP) in cognitive science and philosophy: (i) that it identiﬁes a condition of the
possibility of existence for self-organising systems; and (ii) that it has important
implications for our understanding of how the brain works, deﬁning a set of process
theories—roughly, theories of the structure and functions of neural mechanisms—
consistent with the free energy minimising imperative that it derives as a necessary
feature of all self-organising systems. I argue that the conjunction of claims (i) and
(ii) rests on a fallacy of equivocation. The FEP can be interpreted in two ways: as a
claim about how it is possible to redescribe the existence of self-organising systems
(the Descriptive FEP), and as a claim about how such systems maintain their
existence (the Explanatory FEP). Although the Descriptive FEP plausibly does
identify a condition of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems, it has
no important implications for our understanding of how the brain works. Although
the Explanatory FEP would have such implications if it were true, it does not
identify a condition of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems. I
consider various ways of responding to this conclusion, and I explore its implica-
tions for the role and importance of the FEP in cognitive science and philosophy.
Keywords Free energy principle  Predictive processing  Predictive coding 
Active inference  Process theories  Mechanism
& Daniel Williams
dw473@cam.ac.uk
1
Early Career Research Fellow, Corpus Christ College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK
2
Associate Fellow, Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
123
Philos Stud (2022) 179:1693–1714
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-021-01722-0

‘‘…the free energy principle (and the predictive processing this entails) must necessarily be in play for
any person or system we care to study’’ (Friston, 2019a, p.184).
1 Introduction
Among recent ideas in cognitive science and philosophy, none are more
simultaneously ambitious, interesting, and enigmatic than the free energy principle
(FEP) developed primarily by Karl Friston (2010, 2013), according to which all
self-organising systems—or, in more recent formulations, all physical systems that
persist over time (Friston, 2019a)—obey an imperative to minimise variational free
energy, an information-theoretic quantity that roughly scores the improbability of an
observation conditional on a model of its causes (see Buckley et al., 2017; Colombo
& Wright, 2018; Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2020a).
Much of the current interest and controversy surrounding the FEP arises from two
striking claims: (i) that it identiﬁes a condition of the possibility of existence for self-
organising systems, such that self-organising ‘‘systems that do not minimise free
energy cannot exist’’ (Friston, 2013, p.2; see also Friston, 2010, 2013, 2019a, 2019b;
Hohwy, 2013; 2014; 2020b); and (ii) that it has important implications for our
understanding of how the brain works, providing ‘‘a uniﬁed brain theory’’ (Friston,
2010) and ‘‘grand unifying principle for cognitive science and biology’’ (Hohwy,
2020b, p.1). In conjunction with each other, such claims thus present the FEP as ‘‘an
attempt to explain the structure and function of the brain, starting from the very fact
that we exist’’ (Friston, 2009, p.293, my emphasis). Speciﬁcally, proponents of the
FEP allege that it deﬁnes a set of ‘‘process theories’’—roughly, theories of the
structure and functions of neural mechanisms—consistent with the free energy
minimising imperative that it derives as a necessary feature of all self-organising
systems (Allen & Friston, 2018; Friston, 2019a; Hohwy, 2018, 2020a, 2020b).
My primary aim in this article is to argue that the conjunction of claims (i) and
(ii) rests on a fallacy of equivocation. The FEP can be interpreted in two ways: as a
claim about how it is possible to redescribe the existence of self-organising systems
(the Descriptive FEP), and as a claim about how such systems maintain their
existence (the Explanatory FEP). Although the Descriptive FEP plausibly does
identify a condition of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems, it has
no important implications for our understanding of how the brain works. Although
the Explanatory FEP would have such implications if it were true, it does not
identify a condition of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems. Thus,
the only interpretation of the FEP on which it plausibly establishes a necessary
imperative for all self-organising systems provides no reason for thinking that free
energy minimisation is implemented in the brain.
My second aim is to explore the implications of this conclusion. Nothing in this
article is intended to challenge the value of the FEP and the evolving formal
apparatus surrounding it when it comes to generating or inspiring process theories in
cognitive science. Nevertheless, once one abandons the idea that such work has a
ﬁrst principles justiﬁcation, I argue that it becomes difﬁcult to see what could
motivate some of the most ambitious claims advanced on its behalf.
1694
D. Williams
123

I structure the article as follows. Section 2 outlines the attempt to derive the FEP
from ﬁrst principles. Section 3 describes the FEP’s alleged relationship to process
theories and broader theoretical frameworks in cognitive science. Section 4 then
argues that there is no interpretation of the FEP on which it establishes both a
necessary imperative for all self-organising systems and the computational
scheme by which the brain works, and Sect. 5 considers two objections. I conclude
in Sect. 6 by summarising the article’s conclusions and exploring their implications
for questions about the scientiﬁc and philosophical importance of the FEP.
2 The transcendental argument for the free energy principle
It is widely held by proponents of the FEP that the imperative to minimise free
energy can be derived from transcendental reﬂection on conditions of the possibility
of existence for self-organising systems (Friston & Stephan, 2007; Friston,
2010, 2013, 2019a; Hohwy, 2020a). Thus, Friston (2019a, p.175) writes that what
I will call the transcendental argument for the FEP ‘‘starts by asking fundamental
questions about the necessary properties things must possess, if they exist’’ (see
Colombo & Wright, 2018, p.3; Friston & Stephan, 2007; Hohwy, 2020a, p.9).
Applied to self-organising living systems,1 the transcendental argument involves
three core stages succinctly captured in Buckley et al.’s (2017, p.56) summary:
[1] …[A]ll (viable) biological organisms [must] resist a tendency to disorder
as shown by their homoeostatic properties… [2] [They] must therefore
minimise the occurrence of events which are atypical (‘surprising’) in their
habitable environment… [3] Because the distribution of ‘surprising’ events is
in general unknown and unknowable, organisms must instead minimise a
tractable proxy, which according to the FEP turns out to be ‘free energy’.
In this section I expand on this chain of reasoning, postponing broader
philosophical questions about its epistemic status until Sects. 4 and 5. My overview
is brief, non-technical, and geared only towards a basic understanding of those
features of the FEP relevant to evaluating the arguments that I advance in later
sections.
2.1 Nonequilibrium steady states and markov blankets
The ﬁrst stage of the transcendental argument notes that living systems must
maintain themselves within those states consistent with their survival if they are to
survive. Drawing on dynamical systems theory, proponents of the FEP claim that
one can formalise this truism in terms of a state space whose dimensions range over
the possible states of a living system. As per the second law of thermodynamics,
closed systems inevitably tend towards a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. By
1 In more recent formulations the FEP is intended to apply not just to living or biological systems but to
all bounded systems that preserve their structure and organisation over some time period (Friston 2019a;
2019b).
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1695
123

contrast, living systems are open systems that exchange matter and energy with their
environments to maintain themselves in a nonequilibrium steady state, often
described in biological terms as homeostasis (Friston, 2010, 2013).
It is implicit in this description that living systems conserve a boundary that
distinguishes them from their environments. Proponents of the FEP allege that this
boundary can be formalised as a Markov blanket, a set of states that constitute ‘‘a
surface or boundary that deﬁnes the thing that exists (e.g., a cell membrane)’’
(Friston, 2019a, p.176). First introduced to capture certain conditional independen-
cies that obtain in statistical networks, the FEP draws on Markov blankets to
partition a set of states into states internal to a system {I}, states external to it {E},
and states of the system’s boundary, which can in turn be decomposed into sensory
states {S} directly inﬂuenced by external states but not internal states and active
states {A} directly inﬂuenced by internal states but not external states (Friston,
2013). Those states necessary for maintaining survival within a given environment
can then allegedly be understood in terms of a subset of sensory states, ‘‘which
mediate the inﬂuence of the external world upon the system’’ (Hohwy, 2020b,
pp.3–4; see also Friston, 2010, 2019a, 2019b).
2.2 Survival as surprisal avoidance
The second stage of the transcendental argument notes that if we observe living
systems when they are alive, we will therefore ﬁnd that there is a high probability that
they will be in survival-consistent sensory states and a low probability that they will
be in states inconsistent with their survival (Friston, 2010; Hohwy 2016). Thus, for
any living system, one can deﬁne a probability distribution over its possible states that
captures this fact, grounded in the probability of ﬁnding the system in different states
when sampled at random (Friston, 2013).2 Relative to this probability distribution,
survival can then be understood in terms of the avoidance of improbable states. The
negative logarithm of the probability a state, S, given a model or probability
distribution, M, P(S|M), is known in information theory as surprisal (Friston, 2010).
Thus, surprisal is large if the probability of the observed data given the model is low,
which implies that ‘‘existence entails minimizing surprise,’’ such that ‘‘any self-
organizing system that is at nonequilibrium steady-state with its environment must
minimize surprise, given a model’’ (Hohwy, 2020b, p.4). Equivalently, minimising
surprising sensory states can be thought of as ‘‘maximising the sensory evidence for
the agent’s existence, if we regard the agent as a model of its world’’ (Friston, 2010,
p.128), a process often referred to as ‘‘self-evidencing’’ (Hohwy, 2016).
2.3 Avoiding surprises by minimising free energy
The third stage of the transcendental argument involves two central claims: that
evaluating surprisal directly is impossible, and that systems can nevertheless
2 I will use ‘‘distribution’’ to subsume both probability distributions over discrete states and density
functions over continuous states throughout.
1696
D. Williams
123

approximate the minimisation of surprisal by minimising free energy, a quantity that
places an upper bound on surprisal. As Friston (2010, p.128) writes,
‘‘A system cannot know whether its sensations are surprising and could not
avoid them even if it did know. This is where free energy comes in: free
energy is an upper bound on surprise, which means that if agents minimise
free energy, they implicitly minimise surprise.’’
‘‘Free energy’’ here (and henceforth) refers to variational free energy, an
information-theoretic quantity that roughly scores the improbability of an obser-
vational conditional on a model of its causes (Friston, 2010).
To get an intuition for how this works, it is useful to approach it from the
perspective of Bayesian inference. Speciﬁcally, its driving assumption is ‘‘that the
log probability of being in a particular (sensory) state is the marginal likelihood or
Bayesian model evidence of that state’’ (Friston, 2019a, p.177). The marginal
likelihood is the denominator in Bayes’ theorem, which can be interpreted as a
method for inferring the probability of external states from the sensory states that
living systems have access to:
(Bayes’ Theorem)
p EjS
ð
Þ ¼ p E
ð Þp SjE
ð
Þ
p S
ð Þ
However, calculating this denominator p(S) requires calculating the sum of the
product of the priors p(E) and likelihoods p(S|E) for all possible environmental
states, P
E p SjE
ð
Þp E
ð Þ (for continuous probability distributions, the summation is
replaced with the integral,
r
p SjE
ð
Þp E
ð ÞdE). This calculation is often intractable.
Thus, Friston’s (2009, p.294) claim that living systems cannot evaluate surprisal
directly because ‘‘this would entail knowing all the hidden states of the world
causing sensory input’’ rests on the connection that he draws between sensory
surprisal and (the negative of) this marginal likelihood, p(S). Crucially, this con-
nection then enables him to draw on methods of variational inference established in
physics and machine learning for replacing exact Bayesian inference with
approximation methods that rest on optimisation (Bishop, 2007). As Gershman
(2019, p.1) puts it, ‘‘The basic idea of the FEP is to convert Bayesian inference into
an optimization problem.’’
The technical details here are not relevant to my argument. The underlying
intuition is relatively straightforward, however. Assume that a living system
somehow encodes a generative model (or G-density) capturing the joint probability
of sensory states {S} and hidden environmental causes {E}, p(S, E), factored into
the prior p(E) and likelihood p(S|E) distributions in Bayesian inference. Rather than
trying to compute the exact Bayesian posterior directly, p(E|S), variational inference
involves optimising a recognition model (or R-density), q(E), in such a way as to
minimise its divergence from p(E|S). Crucially, variational free energy is a quantity
that enables a system to evaluate this divergence without access to the true posterior
because it depends on three things that the system allegedly can access: (1) data (i.e.
sensory states), (2) the aforementioned generative model p(S, E), and (3) the
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1697
123

approximate recognition model q(E) over the parameters of this generative model
that it is free to optimise (Buckley et al., 2017; Friston, 2013; Hohwy, 2020a).3
Further, because variational free energy is mathematically constructed to place an
upper bound on surprisal, minimising variational free energy provides a compu-
tationally tractable means of approximating the minimisation of surprisal. Thus, the
claim that living systems must minimise surprisal can be replaced with the FEP
itself, according to which ‘‘any ‘thing’ that attains nonequilibrium steady-state can
be construed as performing an elemental sort of Bayesian inference,’’ namely,
variational free energy minimisation (Friston et al., 2020, p.2; see also Friston,
2010, 2013, 2019a, 2019b).
3 From the FEP to predictive processing
The FEP does not say anything speciﬁcally about the brain. Nevertheless, it is
widely held that it has important implications for neuroscience. Speciﬁcally,
Friston’s (2009, p.293) remark that ‘‘the free-energy principle is an attempt to
explain the structure and function of the brain, starting from the very fact that we
exist,’’ highlights two such implications. The ﬁrst concerns the brain’s function,
objective, processing aim, or imperative (Friston, 2010, 2013, 2019a; Hohwy,
2013).4 As Friston (2009, p.300) puts it, the FEP provides a ‘‘mathematical
speciﬁcation of ‘what’ the brain is doing.’’ Speciﬁcally, it implies that ‘‘everything
we do serves to minimise surprising exchanges with the environment’’ (Friston &
Stephan, 2007, p.417), such that ‘‘all neuronal processing (and action selection) can
be explained by… minimising variational free energy’’ (Friston et al., 2017, p.1).
The second implication concerns the brain’s structure. Minimising variational
free energy implicates a distinctive computational scheme involving probabilistic
models and variational Bayesian inference. Applied to the brain, the FEP is thus
taken
to
imply
that
neural
mechanisms
implement
this
scheme
(Friston,
2009, 2010). Speciﬁcally, it is taken to deﬁne a set of process theories that describe
‘‘concrete algorithmic implementations of the overall computational scheme set out
by FEP’s use of variational Bayes, often given various assumptions’’ (Hohwy, 2018,
p.164; see Allen & Friston, 2018; Clark, 2017; Friston, 2019a). Process theories are
3 Technically, the distance between q(E) and p(E|S) is given by the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence:
DKLðq E
ð Þ jjp EjS
ð
ÞÞ ¼ R dH qðEÞ ln q E
ð Þp EjS
ð
Þ.
The denominator in the right-hand side of the equation requires knowledge of p(E|S), however.
Nevertheless, one can rewrite this equation as.
DKLðq E
ð Þ jjp EjS
ð
ÞÞ ¼ F þ ln p S
ð Þ.
Here, F is known as variational free energy or (more commonly) the negative of the evidence lower
bound (see. Bishop 2007):
F ¼ dH  q E
ð Þln  q E
ð ÞpðS; E)
Here, F is known as variational free energy or (more commonly) the negative of the evidence lower
bound (Bishop 2007), which can be computed solely from the recognition and generative models (see
Buckley et al., 2017 for a review).
4 Different formulations of this claim are used in the neuroscientiﬁc and philosophical literature.
1698
D. Williams
123

thus mechanistic theories, albeit—like mechanistic theories generally—theories that
can be pitched at multiple levels of detail and abstraction (Luce 1995).5 That is, they
purport to describe how the process of free energy minimisation is implemented in
the brain’s mechanisms: their constituent parts, properties, and activities, and the
way in which these parts, properties, and activities are causally, spatially,
temporally, and hierarchically organised (see Kaplan & Craver, 2011). As Friston
(2019a, p.179) puts it, to explain ‘‘neurobiology…one has to move from variational
principles to particular process theories that conform to those principles.’’
The role of assumptions in connecting the FEP to process theories is important
(see Hohwy, 2018, 2020a). Free energy minimisation is consistent with multiple
‘‘different generative models, different algorithmic approximations, and different
neural implementations’’ (Gershman, 2019, p.4). Individual process theories,
including inﬂuential theories such as predictive coding (Bastos et al., 2012) and
active inference (Friston et al., 2017), thus map free energy minimisation onto
neural mechanisms by means of certain assumptions about these characteristics. For
example, predictive coding assumes that the generative model is hierarchically
structured, that probability distributions are Gaussian and encoded by their means
and precisions (i.e., inverse variance), and that the approximate posterior factorises
across hidden states both within and between levels of the model, such that non-
adjacent levels of the hierarchy are conditionally independent (Friston, 2005).
Further, it is associated with an evolving implementational theory in which this
speciﬁc process of variational Bayesian inference (understood as hierarchical
precision-weighted prediction error minimisation) involves canonical cortical
microcircuits, cortical hierarchies, and the role of various neuromodulators in
realising precision-weighting (Bastos et al., 2012).
Thus, the FEP does not logically imply any speciﬁc process theory. Rather, it
deﬁnes a set of process theories where membership within the set is determined by a
theory’s consistency with the objective function and computational scheme of free
energy minimisation. Any speciﬁc process theory within this set then involves
assumptions about the shape of the distributions, the algorithmic approximations,
and the mapping from this computational scheme onto the component parts,
operations, and organisation of the brain’s mechanisms (see Allen & Friston, 2018;
Clark, 2017; Friston, 2019a; Hohwy, 2018). Because there is no canonical
interpretation of the term ‘‘predictive processing’’ in the neuroscientiﬁc and
philosophical literature, I will stipulate that it can be understood as that theoretical
framework in cognitive science deﬁned by its commitment to drawing exclusively
from this set of process theories that conform to the FEP.6
5 Process theories that attempt ‘‘to explain some aspects of underlying… mechanisms and how they give
rise to behaviour’’ are thus classically distinguished from phenomenological models that merely ‘‘attempt
to characterize aspects and patterns of behavior without asking about the underlying, internal mechanisms
that give rise to the behavior’’ (Luce 1995, pp.1–3; see also Kaplan and Craver 2011).
6 As Hohwy (2018, p.166) puts it, ‘‘The philosophical literature often uses the notion ‘predictive
processing’ as shorthand for the suite of solutions offered by FEP.’’.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1699
123

4 There is no high road to predictive processing
Summarising Sects. 2 and 3, the FEP seems to derive a cognitive-scientiﬁc
framework from ﬁrst principles concerning the nature of self-organisation in
general. If successful, this is remarkable. As Buckley et al., (2017, p.74) note, it
suggests that the FEP ‘‘draws conclusions about neurocognitive mechanisms from
extremely general statistical considerations regarding the viability of organisms’
survival in unpredictable environments.’’ Speciﬁcally, it implies that the FEP
derives a substantive constraint on theories of neurocognitive mechanisms—
namely, that they must describe how such mechanisms implement free energy
minimisation—from transcendental reﬂection on conditions of the possibility of
existence for self-organising systems.7
In recent work, Friston (2019a) describes this chain of reasoning spanning ﬁrst
principles concerning self-organisation in general to a substantive cognitive-
scientiﬁc framework as the ‘‘high road’’ to predictive processing, in contrast to a
‘‘low road’’ that takes more conventional empirical means. ‘‘The high road,’’ he
writes,
stands in for a top-down approach that starts by asking fundamental questions
about the necessary properties things must possess, if they exist. Using
mathematical (variational) principles, one can then show that existence is an
embodied exchange of a creature with its environment—that necessarily
entails predictive processing as one aspect of a self-evidencing mechanics
(Friston, 2019a, p.175; my emphasis).
In this way the high road ‘‘takes us on a top-down journey from near existential
nihilism to the riches of predictive processing’’ (Friston, 2019a, p.175).8
I will now argue that this high road to predictive processing is illusory.
Speciﬁcally, the claim that the FEP implies a substantive constraint on process
theories in cognitive science—namely, that they must describe how the brain’s
mechanisms implement free energy minimisation—rests on a fallacy of equivoca-
tion. There are two importantly different ways of interpreting the claim that all self-
organising systems—or, more precisely, all systems that can be described in terms
of nonequilibrium steady states and Markov blankets in the manner outlined in
Sect. 2—must minimise variational free energy. On what I will call the Descriptive
FEP, it states that the existence of all self-organising systems can be redescribed as
if it involves the minimisation of free energy. On what I will call the Explanatory
FEP, it states that the computational scheme of free energy minimisation is
implemented in the mechanisms by which all self-organising systems maintain their
7 The reference to a ‘‘substantive’’ constraint here is intended to highlight that this constraint goes
beyond the trivial constraint that process theories must describe how a system maintains its existence;
instead, such theories must explain this capacity by appeal to some form of free energy minimisation.
8 Unfortunately, it is not clear exactly what Friston means by ‘‘predictive processing’’ here, and it may be
that he has an unconventional understanding of the concept of necessary entailment. Nevertheless, for the
reasons returned to in Sect. 5. 2, the interpretation that I have assumed here—which is consistent with
much else that is written about the FEP by Friston and others—seems the most likely.
1700
D. Williams
123

existence. Although the Descriptive FEP plausibly does identify a condition of the
possibility of existence for self-organising systems, it does not imply that
mechanisms in the brain implement free energy minimisation. Although the
Explanatory FEP would imply this if it were true, it does not identify a condition of
the possibility of existence for self-organising systems. Thus, the only interpretation
of the FEP on which it plausibly identiﬁes a necessary imperative for all self-
organising systems provides no reason for thinking that free energy minimisation is
implemented in the mechanisms by which the brain works.
In characterising these different interpretations of the FEP as descriptive and
explanatory, I am embracing Kaplan and Craver’s (2011, p.601) claim that
‘‘dynamical and mathematical models… explain (rather than redescribe) a
phenomenon only if there is a plausible mapping between elements in the model
and elements in the mechanism for the phenomenon’’ (my emphasis). Thus,
although the Explanatory FEP and Descriptive FEP both target the same
phenomenon—namely, the capacity of bounded systems to maintain a nonequilib-
rium steady state with their environment—they differ in their commitments
concerning the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon. Speciﬁcally, the Descrip-
tive FEP has no such commitments: it is silent on how self-organising systems
maintain their existence over time. By contrast, the Explanatory FEP assumes the
existence of a mapping between the computational scheme of free energy
minimisation and the mechanisms underlying self-organisation. Speciﬁcally, it
claims that the capacity of bounded systems to maintain themselves within the
narrow range of states consistent with their existence is underpinned and maintained
by mechanisms that implement the probabilistic models and variational inference
involved in free energy minimisation.
In this section I clarify, expand upon, and defend these conclusions, before
considering two objections in Sect. 5.
4.1 The explanatory FEP
According to the Explanatory FEP, the claim that all self-organising systems must
minimise free energy implies that free energy minimisation is implemented in the
mechanisms by which all bounded self-organising systems maintain a nonequilib-
rium steady state with their environments. That is, the explanatory FEP purports to
explain—at least in an abstract and schematic way—how self-organising systems
achieve this feat. Of course, as noted above (S3), variational free energy
minimisation can take different forms at the level of speciﬁc probabilistic models
and algorithms and such models and algorithms are in turn multiply realisable. In
this sense the Explanatory FEP itself is silent on how the mechanisms of speciﬁc
self-organising systems implement free energy minimisation. Nevertheless, it is
committed to the claim that all such mechanisms do.
If the Explanatory FEP is true, it obviously would imply a substantive constraint
on process theories in cognitive science. That is, if all self-organising systems
maintain their existence by means of free energy minimising mechanisms, this must
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1701
123

be true of the brain as well.9 The Explanatory FEP is not true, however: it is not a
condition of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems that they
maintain their existence by means of mechanisms that implement free energy
minimisation.
First, it is easy to conceive of bounded systems that persist over time by means of
mechanisms that do not implement any form of variational Bayesian inference.
Thus, there is no conceptual connection between free energy minimising
mechanisms and self-organisation. Further, there are many actual systems for
which the Explanatory FEP is false. Consider simple regulatory mechanisms to
which the FEP is supposed to apply such as thermostats and the Watt governor. Our
knowledge of how such mechanisms work is sufﬁciently detailed that we can build
them. In the case of the Watt governor, for example, a simple homeostatic
mechanism involving interactions among a handful of parts and operations (e.g., the
angle of the spindle arms, the rotation of the ﬂywheel, the engine output, etc.)
enables it to regulate the output of steam from a steam engine (see Van Gelder,
1995). Nowhere in this simple mechanism is there anything involving the
implementation of variational Bayesian inference (Baltieri et al., 2020). Similarly,
we can—and often do—build artiﬁcial intelligence systems that persist over time as
bounded systems without implementing algorithms involving any form of
variational Bayesian inference.10
This should not be surprising. The attempt to establish the FEP from ﬁrst
principles does not and could not establish the Explanatory FEP. The transcendental
argument outlined in Sect. 2 is almost completely free of empirical content.11 As
Hohwy (2020b, p.8) puts it, its reasoning ‘‘moves a priori—via conceptual analysis
and mathematics—from existence to notions of rationality (Bayesian inference) and
9 An important qualiﬁcation here is that this depends on whether the transcendental argument is correct
to assume that self-organisation can be described in terms of Markov blankets and nonequilibrium steady
states (see Colombo and Palacios 2021).
10 Importantly, the point here is not that the FEP trivialises the notions of modelling and variational
inference by extending them to extremely simple systems (see Van Es 2020). It is possible that some of
free energy minimisation is implemented in the mechanisms by which all self-organising systems—from
the simple to the most complex—self-organise. The point is simply that this possibility does not obtain.
Further, I am also not arguing that some speciﬁc process theory associated with the FEP such as predictive
coding is absent from the mechanisms by which certain systems work (e.g., Colombo and Wright 2018,
p.20). Again, the point is that there are many systems—both possible and actual—that maintain
themselves within those states consistent with their existence by means of mechanisms that do not
implement any form of free energy minimisation.
11 When establishing the a priori status of the transcendental argument, it is important to distinguish
between two different claims: namely, the conditional claim that if a system can be described in terms of
Markov blankets and nonequilibrium steady states, then it must minimise free energy; and the additional
claim that all self-organising systems satisfy the antecedent of the conditional (i.e., can be described in
terms of Markov blankets and nonequilibrium steady states). Although the justiﬁcation of the conditional
claim is a priori, one might question Friston’s (2019a) assumption that the additional claim can be
justiﬁed by a priori reﬂection on self-evident conditions that a system must satisfy to exist (see Colombo
and Palacios 2021). I ignore this subtlety in the main text because my arguments hold even if one
concedes that all self-organising systems can be described in terms of nonequilibrium steady states and
Markov blankets. Speciﬁcally, even if it is ultimately an empirical fact that all self-organising systems can
be described in terms of nonequilibrium steady states and Markov blankets, this fact alone is insufﬁcient
for establish anything about the mechanisms by which they come to be describable in this way.
1702
D. Williams
123

epistemology (self-evidencing)’’ (Hohwy, 2020b, p.8). It thus purports to ‘‘derive a
normative, a priori ﬁrst principle from a provable deﬁnition of living systems’’
(Allen & Friston, 2018, p.2473). For this reason, proponents of the FEP are clear
that the principle is unfalsiﬁable and ‘‘must necessarily be in play for any person or
system we care to study’’ (Friston, 2019a, p.184; my emphasis; see also Hohwy,
2020b). By contrast, the Explanatory FEP is neither a priori nor necessary. It is a
substantive empirical claim about the causal structure of the natural world. Given
this, it is not the sort of claim that could be justiﬁed by such a priori reasoning.
To illustrate this, consider the three stages of the transcendental argument: the
ﬁrst purports to formalise two self-evident conditions of existence for self-
organising systems; the second draws on information theory to describe the
satisfaction of these conditions in probabilistic terms; and the third draws on
variational calculus to clarify how such conditions as represented in probabilistic
terms can be satisﬁed in a way that is computationally tractable. As Friston (2012,
p.2101) puts it, such reasoning thus ‘‘connects probabilistic descriptions of the states
occupied by biological systems to probabilistic modelling or inference as described
by Bayesian probability and information theory.’’ Probabilistic descriptions of
biological systems are just that, however: a description of such systems, and not—or
at least not necessarily—a feature of the systems themselves (Van Es, 2020). Thus,
any connection between such probabilistic descriptions and variational approxima-
tions to Bayesian inference does not—and on its own could not—have any direct
implications for our understanding of the mechanisms underlying their behaviour.
To assume that it does is to confuse properties of a possible description of a system
with properties of the system being described.
More generally, which features of a representation map onto its target is always
an empirical question. Thus, even if—as the transcendental argument purports to
establish—one can model self-organisation in terms of a probability distribution
deﬁned over an abstract state space, this does not imply that the properties,
constraints, and implications relevant to this description will map onto the
mechanisms by which such systems self-organise (Chater & Oaksford, 2000;
Colombo & Wright, 2018, p.12). That is, the fact that one can describe the dynamics
of a system in terms of free energy minimisation does not itself imply the existence
of a mapping between this description and the concrete parts and operations that
constitute the mechanisms that underlie and maintain such dynamics (Kaplan &
Craver, 2011). Of course, such a mapping might exist in speciﬁc cases. For example,
more limited versions of the Explanatory FEP might be true, such as those restricted
to information-processing mechanisms in the neocortex (e.g., Friston, 2005).
Nothing that I write in this article is intended to challenge empirical hypotheses
such as this (see S6 below). The point is rather that such hypotheses are empirical:
they are not implied or in any way justiﬁed by a priori reﬂection on conditions of the
possibility of existence for self-organising systems.
This suggests a general lesson: insofar as the FEP is interpreted as a claim about
all possible self-organising systems, it must be restricted to a claim about how such
systems can be described or interpreted. That is, it suggests that the transcendental
argument for the FEP at best establishes what I have called the Descriptive FEP.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1703
123

4.2 The descriptive FEP
The Descriptive FEP does not explain, purport to explain, or constrain explanations
of how bounded systems maintain a nonequilibrium steady state with their
environment. Instead, it assumes the existence of this behaviour and contends that it
can be redescribed as involving the minimisation of free energy (see, e.g.,
Gładziejewski, 2019; Klein, 2018).12 At least in more recent presentations of the
FEP, the Descriptive FEP often seems to be the intended interpretation. In
describing the FEP, for example, Friston (2019b, p.24) writes that ‘‘the position
taken here is not to ask how self-organisation emerges; rather, what properties do
self-organising systems exhibit?’’ (my emphasis). Similarly, Kirchhoff et al. (2018,
p.2) write of the FEP that ‘‘this teleological (Bayesian) interpretation of dynamical
behaviour… allows us to think about a system that possesses a Markov blanket as
some rudimentary (or possibly sophisticated) ‘agent’ that is optimizing something’’
(my emphasis).
Further, this interpretation is supported by frequent claims according to which all
self-organising systems merely behave as if they minimise free energy. Thus, we are
told that the FEP implies that ‘‘you will appear to sample your world as if you were
trying to maximize the evidence for your own existence’’ (Friston, 2019a, 2019b,
p.179; my emphasis) and that ‘‘the states internal to a Markov blanket look as if they
perform variational Bayesian inference’’ (Parr et al. 2020, p.11; my emphasis). Such
claims bring the FEP in line with how other optimising ‘‘as if’’ principles are
understood in the biological and social sciences: namely, to indicate that although a
system’s behaviour can be described as maximising some objective, the mechanism
underlying the system’s behaviour need not work by maximising the objective. For
example, the individual-as-maximising agent principle in evolutionary biology
holds that organisms can be described as if they seek to maximise ﬁtness, where ‘‘as
if’’ indicates that this principle is silent on the mechanisms underlying such ﬁtness-
maximising behaviour (Del Giudice, 2018, p.50). Similarly, rational choice models
in the social sciences typically describe agents only as if they seek to maximise
expected utility, where, again, ‘‘as if’’ is used to indicate that such models are silent
on the mechanisms by which actions are generated (Chater & Oaksford, 2000).
Most importantly, if one interprets the FEP in terms of the Descriptive FEP, it
plausibly does identify a necessary imperative for all self-organising systems.
Speciﬁcally, although a priori reﬂection on conditions of the possibility of existence
for self-organising systems cannot establish how self-organising satisfy these
conditions, it is much more plausible that it can establish a way of redescribing
them. In fact, as noted in the previous sub-section, this seems to be exactly how the
transcendental argument works: it ﬁrst redescribes the existence of self-organising
systems in terms of nonequilibrium steady states and Markov blankets, it then
redescribes a system’s maintenance of a nonequilibrium steady state and Markov
12 Klein (2018, p.2551) suggests that ‘‘talk about minimization of free energy and an organism’s
expectations is meant to be something like a description of how whole organisms behave,’’ and
Gładziejewski (2019, p.661) claims that the ‘‘FEP stands as an ingenious technical redescription of what
adaptive or self-organising behavior is, rather than an explanation of it.’’.
1704
D. Williams
123

blanket in terms of the avoidance of surprising sensory states, and then it redescribes
the avoidance of surprising sensory states as if it involves the minimisation of free
energy. Because such reasoning restricts itself to redescriptions of the fact that self-
organising systems maintain their existence over time, it is intelligible how it could
be justiﬁed by purely a priori reﬂection on this fact, and thus why the principle that
results from this reasoning is unfalsiﬁable. That is, on this interpretation the reason
that self-organising ‘‘systems that do not minimise free energy cannot exist’’
(Friston, 2013, p.2) is because minimising free energy is simply a redescription of
the fact that they exist.
One might object that this interpretation is at odds with the third stage of the
transcendental argument. As described in Sect. 2, the imperative to minimise free
energy is introduced in this argument on the grounds that evaluating and minimising
surprisal directly is impossible. Variational free energy minimisation is then alleged
to solve this problem because it approximates the minimisation of surprisal based on
information that a self-organising system can access (see Hohwy, 2020a; Friston,
2010, 2013). This reasoning suggests that free energy minimisation is invoked not
merely to redescribe the fact that self-organising systems exist but to explain this
fact. Thus, Friston et al.’ (pp.5–6) write that ‘‘the free-energy principle is not a
surprise-principle. A principle of minimum surprise is a tautological truism—the
free-energy principle explains how that truism is realised’’ (my emphasis).
I am not arguing that the Descriptive FEP is the interpretation of the FEP that its
proponents intend to establish from ﬁrst principles, however. Although some of the
quotes highlighted above do suggest this intended interpretation, others—such as
this one—do not.13 My argument is rather that the Descriptive FEP is the only
interpretation of the FEP licensed by the transcendental argument. Thus, to the
extent that proponents of the FEP think that the transcendental argument licenses
any claims about the causal structures that produce, underlie, or maintain self-
organisation, they are mistaken. The fact that free energy minimisation provides a
computationally tractable means of approximating the minimisation of surprisal
cannot on its own establish that the mechanisms underlying self-organisation
implement free energy minimisation for the reasons already enumerated: not only
do many bounded systems maintain their existence by means of mechanisms that do
not implement any form of free energy minimisation, but the imperative to minimise
surprisal in the ﬁrst place reﬂects a decision about how to describe such systems,
and not necessarily a problem that they confront themselves (see Colombo &
Wright, 2018, p.12).
There is a more charitable way of interpreting the third stage of the
transcendental argument, however. To see this, it is helpful to distinguish between
how actually and mere how possibly models in science (Kaplan & Craver, 2011).
Whereas the latter ‘‘save the phenomena’’ and accurately describe and predict the
system’s dynamics, the former aim to capture the causal structure responsible for
13 For example, the literature on the FEP contains ubiquitous references to the idea that the FEP ‘‘tries to
explain the ability of biological systems to resist a natural tendency to disorder’’ (Friston 2012, p.2101;
my emphasis; see also Friston 2013; Ramstead et al., 2018), all of which are strongly in tension with the
Descriptive FEP.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1705
123

producing and sustaining those dynamics. In Weisberg’s (2007) terminology, mere
how possibly models exhibit dynamical ﬁdelity but not representational ﬁdelity. To
achieve the latter, there must be a mapping between the model and the causal
structure responsible for producing its target phenomenon (Kaplan & Craver, 2011;
Weisberg, 2007). As argued above, however, one cannot establish such a mapping a
priori. Thus, the transcendental argument cannot on its own establish that self-
organising systems maintain their existence by minimising free energy. Neverthe-
less, it plausibly can establish a schematic how possibly model. This is simply to
return to the Descriptive FEP, however. On this reading, the transcendental
argument establishes that self-organising systems can be redescribed as if they
minimise free energy. It does not establish that this description maps onto the
mechanisms by which they self-organise.14
In summary, to the extent that the FEP identiﬁes a condition of the possibility of
existence for self-organising systems, it must be interpreted in terms of the
Descriptive FEP. Crucially, however, on this interpretation the FEP provides no
reason to believe that free energy minimisation is implemented in the mechanisms
underlying self-organisation. Thus, even if this version of the FEP is true, it provides
no reason for thinking that process theories in cognitive science must describe how
mechanisms in the brain implement free energy minimisation.
5 Two objections
I have argued that the only interpretation of the FEP on which it plausibly identiﬁes
a necessary imperative for all self-organising systems provides no reason for
thinking that free energy minimisation is implemented in the mechanisms by which
the brain—or any other self-organising system—works. Before exploring the
implications of this conclusion, I will consider two objections: that the foregoing
arguments rest on dubious assumptions about the nature of scientiﬁc explanation
and a priori reasoning (S5.1), and that they neglect the crucial role of auxiliary
assumptions in connecting the FEP to speciﬁc process theories in cognitive science
(S5.2).
5.1 Scientiﬁc explanation and the a priori
I have argued that the a priori justiﬁcation of the FEP cannot explain how self-
organising systems maintain their existence but can at best establish a way of
redescribing this phenomenon. An anonymous reviewer objects that this argument
rests on dubious assumptions about the nature of scientiﬁc explanation and the
limits of a priori reasoning. Speciﬁcally, they point to the fact that highly idealised
explanatory models justiﬁed by a priori mathematical reasoning are ubiquitous in
14 For this reason, simulations of self-organisation drawing on free energy minimisation (e.g., Friston
2013) are also of limited relevance: although simulations can demonstrate how a given phenomenon
could be generated, on their own they cannot establish how a phenomenon is in fact generated (see
Kaplan and Craver 2011; Weisberg 2007).
1706
D. Williams
123

the sciences. For example, Fisher’s principle seeks to explain why the sex ratio in
most sexually reproducing species is 1:1 by drawing on mathematical (game-
theoretic) reasoning to derive this ratio as the equilibrium point that ﬁtness-
maximising organisms will settle on for a wide range of initial conditions.
According to some philosophers, the explanatory value of equilibrium explanations
like this inherits not from capturing the actual causal processes that underlie,
produce, or maintain the explanandum phenomenon in speciﬁc cases, but rather
from establishing a universality class of systems that will exhibit the same
behaviour (e.g., sex ratio) despite differences in their concrete physical details and
initial conditions, which are thus shown to be explanatorily irrelevant (e.g., Rice,
2015, 2018).
This suggest two lessons: ﬁrst, that some models can genuinely explain a
phenomenon without informing our understanding of the mechanisms by which it is
produced or underpinned in speciﬁc cases; and second, that the status of such
models as successful explanations can be justiﬁed in substantial part by a priori
mathematical reasoning alone (see Rice, 2015). If so, then perhaps the arguments
advanced in the previous section rests on mistaken assumptions about scientiﬁc
explanation and the irrelevance of a priori reasoning in scientiﬁc research.
This objection misconstrues my arguments. First, to the extent that the a priori
reasoning involved in the transcendental argument for the FEP explains certain
aspects of self-organisation without informing our understanding of the mechanisms
by which it is achieved (see, e.g., Colombo & Wright, 2018), this concedes the very
thing at issue: namely, that such reasoning does not support the claim that free
energy minimisation is implemented in the mechanisms underlying self-organisa-
tion. That is, like the Descriptive FEP, this interpretation provides no reason to
believe that process theories in cognitive science must identify how the brain
implements free energy minimisation.
More importantly, the transcendental argument for the FEP is fundamentally
different in its epistemic status to the justiﬁcation of Fisher’s principle and other
optimality explanations in the special sciences. Although the game-theoretic
reasoning behind Fisher’s principle—as with almost all optimality and equilibrium
explanations—is highly idealised and rests on all sorts of simplifying but strictly
false assumptions (see Rice, 2015), it nevertheless seeks to explain why the sex ratio
in most sexually reproducing species is 1:1, and its applicability to real-world
populations depends on substantive and contingent assumptions about the natural
world’s causal structure—most obviously, that the reproductive strategies of
organisms are selected in accordance with their contribution to ﬁtness (Rice, 2015).
The transcendental justiﬁcation of the FEP is fundamentally different from this. It is
more radically a priori, applying to all possible bounded systems that exist over
time, and it does not purport to explain—even in an extremely schematic and
idealised way—why or how such systems maintain their existence. As Hohwy
(2020a, p.18) puts it, it aims rather ‘‘to analyse existence in terms of surprise
minimization, rather than naturalistically explain one by appeal to the other’’ (my
emphasis). Speciﬁcally, it restricts itself to redescribing the existence of self-
organising systems, and redescriptions are not explanations.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1707
123

Thus, the arguments advanced in Sect. 4 do not depend either on the view that
scientiﬁc explanations must inform our understanding of mechanisms or on dubious
assumptions about the irrelevance of a priori reasoning in science. Instead, their
basis is more speciﬁc: namely, that the distinctive form of a priori reasoning
involved in the transcendental justiﬁcation of the FEP at best establishes a
redescription of the capacity of self-organising systems to maintain their existence,
and that redescribing this phenomenon as if it involves free energy minimisation
provides no reason for believing that free energy minimisation is implemented in
the mechanisms by which it is achieved.
5.2 Auxiliary assumptions and process theories
In Sect. 4, I quoted Buckley et al.’s (2017, p.74) claim that the FEP ‘‘draws
conclusions about neurocognitive mechanisms from extremely general statistical
considerations regarding the viability of organisms’ survival in unpredictable envi-
ronments.’’ In a previous version of this article, an anonymous reviewer objected
that I had left out the sentence that follows this one: ‘‘Under certain assumptions…it
entails a hierarchical predictive processing model geared towards the inference and
control of the hidden causes of sensory inputs…’’ (Buckley et al., 2017, p.74, my
emphasis). The rebuke highlights a general objection: namely, that proponents of
the FEP do not claim that it is the FEP alone that has important implications for our
understanding of the mechanisms by which self-organising systems maintain their
existence. Instead, it is only ever the FEP in conjunction with certain auxiliary
assumptions about speciﬁc systems that carries such implications.
This
response
constitutes
a
natural
interpretation
of
Hohwy’s
(2018, 2020a, 2020b) recent work exploring the epistemic status and implications
of the FEP. Speciﬁcally, Hohwy (2020a) acknowledges that the FEP is a priori and
impervious to empirical disconﬁrmation. In this sense his interpretation conforms
closely to what I have called the Descriptive FEP. Nevertheless, Hohwy also argues
that the FEP should function as a ‘‘regulatory principle’’ for the construction of
process theories in cognitive science, noting that ‘‘even if it is misguided to ask for
empirical evidence for FEP itself, empirical evidence can be had for the process
theories under FEP’’ (Hohwy, 2020a, p.9). Importantly, however, Hohwy (2020b,
p.6) stresses that ‘‘process theories can be said to conform with FEP but are not
entailed by it since… various assumptions are needed to get to process theories for
particular systems’’ (my emphasis). For this reason, Hohwy (2020a, p.20, fn.24)
explicitly denies that the ‘‘FEP itself implies cognitive architecture’’: ‘‘Notions of
architecture,’’ he writes, ‘‘will need to build on assumptions about the particular
system in question.’’
As noted in Sect. 3, Hohwy is correct that auxiliary assumptions are needed to
translate the generic computational scheme of free energy minimisation into process
theories for speciﬁc systems. Nevertheless, this fact does not threaten the conclusion
of this article. The issue is not whether the FEP implies the truth of a speciﬁc
process theory in cognitive science, but whether there is an interpretation of the FEP
on which it establishes both a condition of the possibility of existence for self-
organising systems and a substantive constraint on process theories in cognitive
1708
D. Williams
123

science: namely, that such theories must describe how mechanisms in the brain
implement free energy minimisation. For the reasons outlined in Sect. 4, I have
argued that there is not. The only interpretation of the FEP on which it plausibly
establishes a necessary imperative for all self-organising systems—namely, what I
have called the Descriptive FEP—does not imply that free energy minimisation of
any form is implemented in the mechanisms by which they self-organise. Appealing
to auxiliary assumptions about how the generic scheme of free energy minimisation
maps onto the mechanisms of a speciﬁc system does not address this argument. As
far as the Descriptive FEP is concerned, there is no reason for assuming that any
such mapping exists.
Hohwy might respond that the justiﬁcation of auxiliary assumptions about how
speciﬁc systems implement free energy minimisation is empirical and does not
derive from the FEP itself. As noted above (S4.1), however, nobody denies or could
deny that there could be an empirical justiﬁcation of the hypothesis that some form
of free energy minimisation is implemented in the mechanisms by which a speciﬁc
system works. The question is what the FEP—understood as the claim that all self-
organising systems must minimise free energy—adds. If I am right, it adds nothing:
the fact that all self-organising systems can be redescribed as if they minimise free
energy provides no reason for assuming that free energy minimisation is
implemented in the mechanisms by which they self-organise. Speciﬁcally, it
provides no reason for searching for auxiliary assumptions about how self-
organising systems implement a speciﬁc form of free energy minimisation.
Thus, the appeal to auxiliary assumptions does not challenge the conclusion of
this article. Perhaps Hohwy’s appeal to auxiliary assumptions is not intended to
challenge this conclusion, however. Speciﬁcally, perhaps the appeal to auxiliary
assumptions is intended to concede that the FEP itself implies no interesting
constraints on process theories in cognitive science. For example, an anonymous
reviewer objects to the treatment of process theories in this article on the following
grounds:
‘‘Although under the FEP it is true that ‘‘non-process theories’’, in so far as
they are an accurate description of behaviour in self organising systems, will
also act ‘‘as-if’’ they are minimising free energy, this is not the point of
process theories. The point of process theories is to derive testable theories
that describe dynamics that explicitly self-organise to a free energy minimum’’
(my emphasis).
This interpretation of the FEP and its relationship to process theories concedes
the central thesis of this article: namely, that the fact that all self-organising systems
must minimise free energy provides no reason to believe that process theories in
cognitive science must describe how mechanisms in the brain implement free
energy minimisation. That is, it concedes that the FEP is consistent with—and
provides no basis for rejecting—process theories within which the concepts of free
energy minimisation and variational Bayesian inference do not play any role, and
thus it abandons the idea that there is a ﬁrst principles justiﬁcation of work in the
cognitive sciences that draws on such concepts to explain psychological and
neurocognitive phenomena.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1709
123

This concession seems to be strongly at odds with much that is written about the
FEP by its proponents in the cognitive-scientiﬁc and philosophical literature. For
example, it is inconsistent with the idea that the FEP constitutes ‘‘an attempt to
explain the structure and function of the brain, starting from the very fact that we
exist’’ (Friston, 2009, p.293, my emphasis), with the idea that there is a ‘‘high road’’
to predictive processing, with frequent claims that process theories are ‘‘entailed’’
by the FEP (see Friston, 2010, 2019a), with the idea that ‘‘for an organism to resist
dissipation and persist as an adaptive system…it must embody a probabilistic model
of the statistical interdependencies and regularities of its environment’’ (Ramstead
et al., 2018, p.2; my emphasis), and with Friston’s (2010, p.136) assertion that ‘‘if
the arguments underlying the free-energy principle hold, then the real challenge is to
understand how it manifests in the brain’’ (Friston, 2010, p.136). All such ideas
presuppose that the FEP’s claim that all self-organising systems must minimise free
energy provides a reason to believe that free energy minimisation must be
implemented in the mechanisms by which they self-organise. Once one abandons
this—that is, once one concedes that the fact that all self-organising systems must
minimise free energy provides no reason for favouring process theories that posit a
form of free energy minimisation—all such ideas must be rejected.
Beyond this dialectical point, however, why does such a concession matter? I
take up this question in the concluding section.
6 Conclusion: Summary and implications
I have argued that there is no ﬁrst principles justiﬁcation of the claim that
mechanisms in the brain implement free energy minimisation. The idea of such a
‘‘high road’’ to predictive processing—that is, a derivation of a substantive
constraint on process theories in cognitive science from transcendental reﬂection on
conditions of the possibility of existence for self-organising systems—rests on a
fallacy of equivocation. The FEP can be interpreted as a redescription of the
capacity of self-organising systems to maintain their existence, or as a causal
explanation of this capacity. Although the former interpretation plausibly can be
derived from ﬁrst principles, it does not imply that free energy minimisation is
implemented in the brain. Although the latter interpretation would imply this if it
were true, it cannot be derived from ﬁrst principles. Thus, the only interpretation of
the FEP on which it plausibly establishes a necessary imperative for all self-
organising systems provides no reason for thinking that free energy minimisation is
implemented in the mechanisms by which the brain works, and thus no reason for
favouring process theories in cognitive science that draw on the concepts and formal
tools of free energy minimisation or variational Bayesian inference to explain
psychological phenomena.
Interestingly, the idea that there is a distinction between models that posit free
energy minimisation as explanations of worldly phenomena and the principle that
all self-organising systems must minimise free energy was acknowledged in an early
article by Friston et al., (2006, p.71):
1710
D. Williams
123

‘‘Previous treatments of free energy in inference (e.g., predictive coding) have
been framed as explanations or mechanistic descriptions. In this work, we try
to go a step further by suggesting that free energy minimisation is mandatory
in biological systems and therefore has a more fundamental status’’ (my
emphasis).
Whether or not the principle that free energy minimisation is mandatory in
biological systems has a more ‘‘fundamental’’ status than mechanistic explanations
of biological capacities, it has a fundamentally different epistemic status. If I am
right, free energy minimisation can only be viewed as mandatory in this way—that
is, as a condition of the possibility of existence for biological systems—if
interpreted as a means of redescribing the existence of biological systems. When
viewed in this way, however, it ceases to inform or constrain our understanding of
the mechanisms underlying the behaviour of such systems. Speciﬁcally, the only
connection that that it bears to models that posit free energy minimisation as causal
explanations of worldly phenomena is a formal connection in the mathematics used.
Why does this matter? In some important respects, it does not. For example,
nothing that I have written in this article is intended to challenge the utility of using
the FEP as a modelling framework in the cognitive sciences (see Andrews, 2021).
The evolving formal apparatus surrounding the FEP has proven highly fecund when
it comes to generating process theories describing psychological phenomena such as
learning, perception, sensorimotor control, and decision-making (see Hohwy,
2020b). My thesis is simply that the fact that all self-organising systems must
minimise free energy provides no support for this research programme. Its
success—as with the success of all research programmes in the cognitive sciences—
is ultimately an empirical matter.
In at least two other respects, however, the conclusion of this article does matter.
First, extraordinary claims are advanced on behalf of the FEP in cognitive science
and philosophy: for example, that it provides a ‘‘uniﬁed brain theory’’ (Friston,
2010) and ‘‘grand unifying principle for cognitive science and biology’’ (Hohwy,
2020a) that is allegedly ‘‘widely recognised in neuroscience as a unifying theory of
the brain and biobehaviour’’ (Ramstead et al., 2018, p.1) and that establishes that
‘‘all neuronal processing (and action selection) can be explained by… minimising
variational free energy’’ (Friston et al., 2017, p.1; my emphasis). Although such
claims might be justiﬁed in part by appeal to empirical evidence for the process
theories formally associated with the FEP (see Clark, 2016; Hohwy, 2020a), they
are often connected with the idea that process theories drawing on variational free
energy minimisation are somehow distinctive in the cognitive sciences in their
connection to ﬁrst principles concerning life or existence more generally (see, e.g.,
Friston, 2010, 2019a; Friston et al., 2017; Hohwy, 2016; Ramstead et al., 2018).
Thus, Buckley et al., (2017, p.74) write that the FEP
‘‘is an ambitious project, spanning a chain of reasoning from fundamental
principles of biological maintenance essential for sustainable life, to a
mechanistic brain theory that proposes to account for a startling range of
properties of perception, cognition, action and learning.’’
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1711
123

If I am right, such a claim is extremely misleading: there is no chain of
reasoning—no ‘‘high road’’—that takes one from ﬁrst principles concerning life or
existence to a mechanistic brain theory or framework for generating such theories.
Once one recognises this, it is reasonable to ask what could justify even a moderate
degree of conﬁdence in some of the most ambitious claims associated with the FEP
of the sort highlighted above. Even focusing just on the limited domain of
perception, for example, the empirical evidence for variational free energy
minimisation as an explanation of how the brain works remains highly controversial
(see Walsh et al. 2020), and critics have raised worries that many FEP-based models
in cognitive science involve post hoc ‘‘just so’’ stories that—like the Descriptive
FEP more generally—redescribe psychological and neurocognitive phenomena as
involving free energy minimisation without validating such models against
competing explanations (Litwin & Miłkowski, 2020). These worries might not be
as pressing if such work had a principled theoretical justiﬁcation of the sort provided
by the ‘‘high road’’ to predictive processing. If the conclusion of this article is
correct, however, there is no such justiﬁcation. Thus, I hope that the present article
adds additional pressure on some of the most ambitious claims advanced on behalf
of the FEP and related ideas in the cognitive sciences.
Second, there is currently a large and growing literature exploring the epistemic
status and scientiﬁc and philosophical implications of the FEP (Bruineberg et al., 2018;
Colombo & Wright, 2018; Friston, 2019a; Hohwy, 2020a; Van Es, 2020). I hope that
this article demonstrates the importance of disambiguating between different interpre-
tations of the FEP in pursuing these questions (see also Andrews, 2021). Although the
hypothesis that information-processing mechanisms in the human brain implement a
process of variational Bayesian inference (Friston, 2005) and the claim that all self-
organising systems must minimise free energy are often referred to as ‘‘the FEP’’ (e.g.,
Friston, 2010, 2013; Ramstead et al., 2018), they are in fact radically different claims
not just in terms of their scope but in terms of their theoretical commitments. Failure to
acknowledge this fact will result in inevitable confusion. For example, Ramstead et al.,
(2018) write that ‘‘the FEP… describes, formally, the… dynamics of all living systems’’
(p.8, my emphasis), and also that the FEP ‘‘has been extended beyond the brain to
explain the dynamics of living systems, and their unique capacity to avoid decay’’ (p.1,
my emphasis). Such claims illustrate the confusions that I have sought to highlight in
this article. The claim that all living systems must minimise free energy is not an
extension of the claim that mechanisms in the brain work by minimising free energy but
a completely different kind of claim, and a formal description of the capacity of living
systems to avoid decay is not an explanation of that capacity.
Similarly, there is currently a large and growing literature exploring the
implications of the FEP for foundational questions in the philosophy of mind and
cognitive science, including the representational and inferential status of psycho-
logical phenomena such as perception (e.g., Bruineberg et al., 2018; Kiefer &
Hohwy, 2018; Van Es, 2020; Williams, 2018). In addressing such questions, it is
crucial not to draw lessons about free energy minimisation-based explanations of
psychological phenomena (e.g., Friston, 2005) from consideration of the principle
that all self-organising systems must minimise free energy, and vice versa. The
empirical hypothesis that variational Bayesian inference is implemented in the
1712
D. Williams
123

mechanisms by which the brain works will have radically different theoretical and
philosophical implications to the claim that all self-organising systems can be
redescribed as if they minimise free energy. Thus, one cannot simply generalise
lessons extracted from one proposal to the other. I hope that the current article
illustrates and emphasises this point, and therefore contributes to clarifying future
discussions about the theoretical and philosophical importance of the FEP.
Acknowledgements For helpful comments, corrections, and criticisms, I would like to thank several
anonymous reviewers, Andrew Corcoran, Stephen Gadsby, Marcella Montagnese, Matteo Colombo,
Maxwell Ramstead, and Jakob Hohwy.
Funding This work was supported by an Early Career Research Fellowship at Corpus Christi College,
University of Cambridge.
Declarations
Conﬂicts of interest No conﬂicts of interest or competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational framework
for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle. Biology &
Philosophy, 36(3), 1–19.
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020,). Predictions in the eye of the beholder: an active
inference account of Watt governors. In: Artiﬁcial Life Conference Proceedings. pp. 121–129.
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012). Canonical
microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4), 695–711.
Bishop, C. M. (2007). Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-
energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444.
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., Mcgregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle for action and
perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81, 55–79.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (2000). The rational analysis of mind and behavior. Synthese, 122(1–2), 93–131.
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017). Predictions, precision, and agentive attention. Consciousness and Cognition, 56,
115–119.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2018). First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy principle,
organicism, and mechanism. Synthese, 19(S14), 3463–3488.
Colombo, M., & Palacios, P. (2021). Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle in
biology. Biology & Philosophy, 36(5), 1–26.
Es van, T. (2020). Living models or life modelled? On the use of models in the free energy principle.
Adaptive Behavior, 29(3), 315–329.
Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation?
1713
123

Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 360(1456), 815–836.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
13(7), 293–301.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475.
Friston, K. (2019b). A free energy principle for a particular physics. ArXiv, 1906, 10184.
Friston, K. (2019a). Beyond the Desert Landscape. In M. Colombo, E. Irvine, & M. Stapleton (Eds.),
Andy Clark and His Critics (pp. 174–190). Oxford University Press.
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2020). Some interesting observations on the free energy principle.
ArXiv Preprint, 2002, 04201.
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: A
process theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain. Journal of Physiology-
Paris, 100(1–3), 70–87.
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese, 159(3), 417–458.
Gershman, S. J. (2019). What does the free energy principle tell us about the brain? ArXiv Preprint, 1901,
07945.
Gładziejewski, P. (2019). Mechanistic unity of the predictive mind. Theory & Psychology, 29(5), 657–675.
Giudice Del , M (2018) Evolutionary psychopathology: A uniﬁed approach Oxford University Press
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Nouˆs, 50(2), 259–285.
Hohwy, J. (2020b). Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle. Synthese, 10, 1–25.
Hohwy, J. (2020a). New directions in predictive processing. Mind & Language, 35(2), 209–223.
Hohwy, J. (2018). Prediction error minimization in the brain. In M. Sprevak & M. Colombo (Eds.),
Handbook to the Computational Mind (pp. 159–173). Routledge.
Kaplan, D. M., & Craver, C. F. (2011). The explanatory force of dynamical and mathematical models in
neuroscience: A mechanistic perspective. Philosophy of Science, 78(4), 601–627.
Kiefer, A., & Hohwy, J. (2018). Content and misrepresentation in hierarchical generative models.
Synthese, 195(6), 2387–2415.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blankets of life:
Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 15(138), 20170792.
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195(6), 2541–2557.
Litwin, P., & Miłkowski, M. (2020). Uniﬁcation by ﬁat: arrested development of predictive processing.
Cognitive Science, 44(7), e12867.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets, information geometry and stochastic
thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 378(2164), 20190159.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schro¨dinger’s question: A free-
energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.
Rice, C. (2015). Moving beyond causes: Optimality models and scientiﬁc explanation. Nouˆs, 49(3),
589–615.
Rice, C. (2018). Idealized models, holistic distortions, and universality. Synthese, 195(6), 2795–2819.
Van Gelder, T. (1995). What Might Cognition Be, If Not Computation? Journal of Philosophy, 92(7),
345–381.
Walsh, K. S., McGovern, D. P., Clark, A., & O’Connell, R. G. (2020). Evaluating the neurophysiological
evidence for predictive processing as a model of perception. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1464(1), 242.
Weisberg, M. (2007). Who is a Modeler? The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 58(2),
207–233.
Williams, D. (2018). Predictive processing and the representation wars. Minds and Machines, 28(1), 141–172.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
1714
D. Williams
123

