Performance analysis of seam diversion based image
retargeting technique based on edge
detection operators
Ankit Garg1
& Anuj Kumar Singh1
Abstract
Nowadays various resizing algorithms are being used to resize the images in a
content-aware fashion. The seam diversion-based image retargeting (SDIR) algo-
rithm improves the process of the existing seam carving technique. In this paper, the
performance of the SDIR algorithm is analyzed based on a number of search and
seam diversion operations. Further, the performance of the algorithm is analyzed
based on the type of edge detection operators. To analyze the performance two
experimentations are conducted. In experimentation-1, different edge detection op-
erators are used to produce an importance map of the image. Further, the computa-
tional time of the SDIR algorithm is tested based on the identified line structures and
other image objects. In experimentation-2, the performance of the algorithm is
analyzed based on the visual quality of retargeted results and the quality of impor-
tance maps. To achieve this objective an objective image quality assessment (IQA)
is carried out based on the structural similarity index measure (SSIM). The obtained
results from phase-2 experimentation show that the distortions on the prominent
regions can easily be noticeable to the human eyes when the algorithm performs
many seam diversion operations. After experiment-2, a comparative analysis is
conducted to justify its performance among the existing state of the arts. To meet
this objective a total of 5 types of importance map is supplied to the algorithms to
obtain the objective and subjective scores. After both analyses, the SDIR algorithm
outperforms the other state of arts and minimize the structural deformations on the
prominent objects of the image.
Keywords Seamcarving.Edgedetection.Saliencydetection.Energymap.Edgemap.Content-
aware resizing
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-14157-4
* Ankit Garg
ankitgitm@gmail.com
1
School of Computing, University of Engineering & Technology (UETR), Roorkee, Uttarakhand
247667, India
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250
Received: 21 February 2022 /Revised: 20 June 2022 /Accepted: 27 October 2022
# The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022
Published online: 16 November 2022
/

1 Introduction
With the advancements in display devices, the visual contents are being displayed on varying
screen sizes. The objective of every image retargeting technique is to change the aspect ratio of
the image and preserve the salient objects. The seam carving algorithm reduces the size of the
image by identifying the optimal seams that usually contain the least energy pixels [6]. In the
field of image retargeting various existing image retargeting operators such as Scaling [27],
Cropping [37], Warping [26], Stretch-and-Scale (SNS) [40], and Multi-Op [38] are being used
to produce aesthetically pleasing image retargeting results. Moreover, to improve the process
of existing seam carving techniques various other image algorithms such as line detection [2],
saliency detection [3], and shadow detection [35] can be integrated. The existing seam carving
technique usually produces deformations on the line structures, curved-shaped objects, fore-
ground and background objects, and symmetry objects [3, 24]. To identify the problems in the
existing seam carving technique the available literature is intensively studied [13]. After
carefully examining the process of conventional seam carving technique some limitations
are identified which are listed below [28].
1.
The computation methods of energy maps incorporated in the conventional seam carving
technique only focused on the prominent edges of the objects present in the image. These
methods do not provide information about the color composition of the pixels.
2.
The conventional seam carving technique distorts the shape of prominent objects in the
image. The structural deformation mainly occurs due to the loss of structural information
while the aspect ratio of the image reduces up to some extent.
3.
The structural deformation can be easily visible when the objects are highly overlapped
and the color composition among them is almost the same. After eliminating the least
energy pixels from the foreground regions the shape of background objects can also
distort.
4.
The visual quality of the retargeted image can be poor due to the generation of false edges.
The degradation can occur on other objects of the image after the removal of a large
portion of the image [14].
1.1 Problem definition
After carefully examining the process of conventional seam carving technique 2 new cases are
identified that are required to be resolved to generate aesthetically pleasing retargeted results.
The problems that are identified during the analysis are listed below [18].
1.
The loss of structural information mainly occurs due to the intersection of the optimal
seam in both horizontal and vertical directions.
2.
The structure of the salient objects is distorted due to the coverage of a number of pixels
by the optimal seams in both horizontal and vertical directions.
After the observations of the above problems, Garg et al. [18] proposed a seam diversion-
based image retargeting algorithm. The SDIR algorithm resolves the occurrence of optimal
seam intersection by replacing the highest energy present in a particular row and column. The
replacement of the highest energy at the intersection point diverts the optimal seam to the
23208
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

nearby location. The process of replacing energy is repeated for every optimal seam intersec-
tion that occurs in the image. Further to suppress the coverage of a number of least energy
pixels from row and column, a threshold is defined in the SDIR algorithm. To divert the
optimal seam to nearby regions the SDIR algorithm searches the location of the high energy
pixels and replaces its energy at the entry point. The entry point is the location in the image
from where optimal seams start traveling in a particular row and column.
1.2 Motivation
The performance of the seam carving algorithm depends upon the quality of the energy map.
The energy map of the image highlights the prominent regions that are needed to preserve
while retargeting the images. From the literature [11] it is found that the performance of the
seam carving algorithm can be improved by integrating saliency map, edge map, and shadow
map. The SDIR algorithm utilizes the gradient map method to highlight the prominent regions
of the image. The gradient map method is a very basic method that can not provide
information about the composition of the color component. The loss of information about
the color component can also affect the visual quality of the retargeted results. To improve the
performance of the SDIR algorithm it is required to integrate a number of energy map
generation methods. After focusing on this requirement the entire analysis is highly influenced
by two major motivation factors.
1.2.1 Motivation-1
The SDIR algorithm distorts the shape of line structures when the optimal seam intersects each
other at a similar location successively. As a result, the line structure can transform its shape
into a curved-shaped object. Therefore, it is required to identify the line structures in an
efficient manner after integrating the edge map. The integration of the edge map with the SDIR
algorithm can increase its computational time. The computational time of the retargeting
algorithm depends upon the complexity of the edge map. Therefore, after identifying the
aforementioned requirement it is essential to observe the computational time of the SDIR
algorithm. Further, the entire performance analysis provides future directions to the readers to
integrate more efficient energy maps to improve the performance of the SDIR algorithm.
1.2.2 Motivation-2
The SDIR algorithm is also utilized to generate a hybrid sequence of image retargeting
operators. The existing seam carving technique can be eliminated from the hybrid
sequence to improve the efficiency. Fang et al. [20] proposed a hybrid sequence of
retargeting operator in which seam carving plays siginificant role to change the aspect
ratio of the image. The efficiency of the hybrid sequence can also be increased after the
improvement of the SDIR algorithm. The performance analysis carried out in this paper
supports the readers to find out appropriate solutions to integrate other image processing
techniques to generate high-quality importance maps that can be further utilized in the
Multi-Op-based hybrid sequence.
After formulating the problem statement the SDIR algorithm is developed. The
novelty of the SDIR algorithm is to identify the 4 cases that are mainly responsible for
the deformations of important contents present in the image. The identified four cases are
23209
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

not earlier focused on in the conventional seam carving technique. In the first two cases,
the SDIR algorithm suppresses the occurrence of optimal seam intersection in a single
row and column. To achieve this objective, the algorithm increases the energy of the
pixel encountered at the intersection point to divert the optimal seams at a nearby
location. In the remaining two cases the algorithm traces the number of pixels that are
being covered by the optimal seams. The optimal seams are diverted to the nearby
locations to protect the structure of salient objects when the number of least energy
pixels in a single row and column are found beyond the defined threshold. The incor-
poration of seam bypassing operation in the SDIR algorithm supports in the generation
of highly aesthetically pleasing image retargeting results. Moreover, the performance of
the SDIR algorithm can be increased by integrating edge detection operators such as
Canny, Sobel, Prewitt, Robert, and Zerocross [5]. These edge detection operators detect
the variation of intensity at the pixels level. A pixel may be considered as the edge pixel
when its intensity variation is high. In the input, image edges can be defined as a set of
connected pixels that form a boundary between two disjoint regions. The computational
time and the quality of retargeted images generated by the SDIR algorithm depend upon
the type of integrated edge detection operator. The performance of the SDIR algorithm
can be low when the integrated operator detects a low number of prominent edges from
the image. In this case, the algorithm identifies a high number of least energy pixels
present in the image. Therefore, the algorithm requires a high number of search and seam
diversion operations to preserve the structural deformation of the salient regions of the
image. The deformations on the important contents of the image can be highly noticeable
to the human eyes due to the elimination of a high number of least energy pixels from
the image. At the time of optimal seam elimination, there may be a high probability of
obtaining the least energy pixels in the nearby regions of the image to join the two
disjoint sets of the image. Hence, the possibility of optimal seam intersection in a single
row or column and coverage of pixels in both horizontal and vertical directions beyond
the defined threshold can be high. The computational time of the SDIR algorithm also
depends upon the number of seam diversion and search operations that are performed to
search high-energy pixels from the image. The computational time mainly depends upon
the search operation. The computational time of the algorithm is found significantly low
when the high energy pixel is identified near the intersection point or entry point of the
optimal seams. The efficiency of the algorithm can also be analyzed through a visual
quality assessment of the retargeted results. In this paper, the structural similarity index
metric (SSIM) is used to conduct the objective quality assessment. The SSIM is a
perceptual metric that computes the visual quality degradation of the images caused by
their processing such as data compression, data transmission, and retargeting. It is a
known as full reference metric that assesses the quality of two images such as a reference
image and a processed image [31]. From the objective image quality assessment (IQA) it
is observed that the deformations on the salient regions are low when the importance
map that is supplied to the algorithm is produced by the edge map that identifies a high
number of prominent edges from the image. In this case, there may be a high possibility
of obtaining the high energy pixels from the nearby locations due to the presence of a
high number of edges while eliminating the optimal seams. The objective IQA of the
retargeted images obtained from the SDIR algorithm justifies that the deformations on
the salient regions of the image can also depend upon the attributes of the image and
their complexity.
23210
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

1.3 Novelty of proposed analysis
The novelty of this analysis is to observe the computational time of the SDIR algorithm based
on the number of seam diversion and search operations which are the most important
operations of the SDIR algorithm. The analysis also computes the performance of the SDIR
algorithm based on the edge detection operator and attributes of the image. Researchers are
integrating various maps of the image such as edge maps, shadow maps, saliency maps,
gradient maps, and skin maps with their proposed technique to improve performance. The
computation time of any improved version is highly proportional to the complexity of the
integrated importance map. In the available literature, authors are usually justifying the
performance of the proposed techniques based on the objective and subjective image quality
assessment. Further, the run time analysis is computed based on the execution time of the
algorithm. The performance of the improved version of the retargeting schemes is required to
be justified based on the complexity of the importance map. The execution time of the
algorithm is directly proportional to the quality of the importance map. Hence, in the initial
stage of the development of improved schemes, a suitable importance map is firstly considered
based on computational time and the visual quality of the retargeted results. In the proposed
analysis a simple importance map is generated by combining the edge map and gradient map
of the image. The complexity of the proposed importance map is not so high as the integrated
maps are very less in number. The proposed work carried out in this paper provides the
directions to the readers to carry out a detailed analysis of the retargeting algorithm based on
the below-mentioned factors.
1.
Performance analysis based on the major operations
2.
Performance analysis based on the complexity of the importance map
3.
Performance analysis based on the loss of structural information.
1.4 Literature review
The literature review presents a number of literature that are required to be explored to
identify the research gaps in the field of image retargeting. In the literature review, the
relevant papers are selected from the year 2016 to 2022. The literature review has two
sections to categorize the papers in an organized manner. To search the papers on google
scholar few keywords are used such as seam carving, saliency detection, multi-operator,
multi-operator hybrid sequence, etc.
1.4.1 Retargeting based on single operator
In this category of image retargeting, only a single operator is used to change the aspect ratio of
the input image in a content-aware fashion. The retargeting process based on a single operator
takes a significant amount of time to generate the results. The visual quality of results obtained
from single operator-based image retargeting is not aesthetically pleasing as compared to the
multi-operator-based image retargeting. The relevant literature that is related to single operator-
based image retargeting is discussed below.
Qi et al. [21] proposed a content and shape-aware image retargeting technique that focuses
more on significant image features and their domain transformation. The novelty of the
23211
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

proposed algorithm is the utilization of the concept of seam segment carving notion of
bhv_convex shapes. Lin et al. [16] proposed a seam carving technique to preserve the ROIs
of the image based on identified saliency. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is to classify
the image into two parts based on the saliency map. Each classified image utilizes different
methods to protect the energy of the image. The utilized saliency map is based on the global
contrast. Guo et al. [36] proposed a method to preserve the shape of prominent contents of the
image. The novelty of the proposed technique is to combine the gradient graph and the
significant graph to redefine the energy of the image. The combined approach significantly
identifies the important contents of the image that are needed to protect from the distortions.
Solanki et al. [17] proposed a retargeting technique that utilizes an energy gradient function. In
the energy map and cumulative map, the least value of the three neighborhoods is computed
and then added to obtain the value of the pixel to form a new cost matrix. Guo et al. [29]
proposed an improved seam carving technique based on image blocking. The novelty of the
proposed technique is to segment the image into protected and non-protected blocks. After
segmentation, each block is assigned to the corresponding carving seams. To maintain the
balance in the carving process the proposed technique fuses blocking with the seam carving
(SC) method. Patel et al. [28] proposed an image retargeting technique that accelerates the
process of seam carving technique. The novelty of the proposed technique is to eliminate or
insert the optimal seams that are generated by the selection of multiple least energy pixels in
their paths. The computational time of the proposed technique is low and is based on the width
factor. The results obtained from the proposed technique are structurally preserved with
minimal distortions as compared to the conventional seam carving technique. Patel et al.
[30] proposed an algorithm that accelerates the process of the conventional seam carving
algorithm. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the elimination of multiple optimal seams
from the image in one go. The elimination of multiple pixel-wide seams from the image in a
single iteration minimizes the computational time. The visual contents found preserved while
the retargeted images are compared with the other state-of-the-art. Patel et al. [4] proposed an
efficient image retargeting technique that preserves the reflection symmetry present in the
image. The novelty of the proposed technique is to identify the symmetry regions using
symmetry axis detection and object proposals. After that, optimized reflected optimal seams
are identified using the seam carving approach. In the obtained results the symmetry axis and
the symmetric object are completely protected from any kind of structural deformations. To
assess the visual quality of the results qualitatively a comparison is made among existing
techniques. Arai [15] proposed an improved seam carving technique that incorporates a
mechanism to efficiently switch from the traditional method to resizing method based on the
size of the objects. The novelty of the proposed technique is to preserve the shape of the
dominant objects present in the image using the resizing method. In the proposed technique
video data compression based on the seam carving in the time domain is presented. In the
obtained results the quality of the video is maintained without degradation. Garg et al. [18]
proposed a seam diversion-based image retargeting (SDIR) technique that mainly preserves
the structure of the prominent objects present in the image. The novelty of the proposed
algorithm is the identification of four cases that are responsible for the content deformations.
To minimize the deformations the seam bypassing operation is utilized to divert the optimal
seams to the nearby locations through energy enhancement. The obtained results are pleasing
with fewer deformations. Garg et al. [49] proposed an improved seam carving algorithm based
on efficient energy function. The novelty of the proposed technique is the incorporation of
edge detection and linking operation to obtain the prominent edges present in the image. The
23212
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

energy filling process of the proposed technique generates the modified energy map that can
be further used to find the optimal seams. The modified energy map restricts the occurrence of
optimal seam intersection at the same location on the line structure. The diversion of the
optimal seam to the nearby regions preserves the shape of the prominent line structure to be
transformed into the curve-shaped objects. Garg et al. [28] performed an analysis of the seam
carving technique to disclose its limitations and possible advancements. In the analysis firstly,
an experiment is conducted to identify a suitable energy map generation method that can
highlight prominent features of the image. After that, the gradient energy map generation
method is integrated with the proposed algorithm to obtain aesthetically pleasing image
retargeting results. The performance of the proposed technique is justified after comparing
the results with the existing seam carving technique. After conducting an objective image
quality assessment it is found that the efficiency of the proposed technique is 10% higher than
the existing seam carving algorithm.
After the literature review, some advantages and limitations of existing single operator-
based image retargeting algorithms are analyzed which can provide a deep insight to the
researchers contributing their endeavors in the field of image retargeting. The advantages and
limitations associated with the existing image retargeting techniques are presented in Table 1.
1.4.2 Retargeting based on multi-Op
To improve the efficiency of the single oprator-based image retargeting the researchers are
integrating a number of retargeting operators to generate a hybrid multi-operator sequence.
Therefore, the entire retargeting process can be optimized by taking the advantage of operators
over other operators in the hybrid sequence successively. The incorporated switching point in
the hybrid sequence optimizes the process of retargeting by changing the operator after a
specific duration of time. The literature related to multi-operator image retargeting techniques
are discussed below.
Fang et al. [20] proposed a multi-op-based image retargeting technique that combines the
widely known image retargeting operators such as seam carving, cropping, warping, and
scaling iteratively. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the utilization of an optimal
switching point mechanism to take the advantage of all the integrated operators to retarget
the image. The visual quality of the obtained results is measured using structural similarity
(SSIM). Further, in the image quality assessment, a scale-invariant feature transform flow is
used due to the variation in the aspect ratio of reference and retargeted image. Zhou et al.
[45] proposed a novel improved image retargeting technique that changes the aspect ratio of
the image. The novelty of the proposed technique is the integration of seam carving with a
scaling image retargeting operator. The proposed algorithm resizes the images in a com-
pressibility content-aware fashion by taking the details of edges and image ROIs. Zhang
et al. [46] proposed a hybrid sequence of operators to retarget the images. The novelty of the
proposed technique is the utilization of seam caving in the combination with a warping
operator. In the proposed technique the focused area of the image remains intact using
warping. The seam finding scheme of the proposed technique addresses the problem of
focus detection. The computational complexity of the proposed technique is considerably
high due to the computation of a high-energy seam array. Zhang et al. [43] proposed a multi-
Op-based image retargeting technique that utilizes scaling and seam carving to preserve the
visual appearance of the objects present in the image. The novelty of the proposed technique
is the enlargement of the source image both in the vertical and horizontal directions using
23213
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Table 1 Advantages and limitations of single operator-based image retargeting techniques
S.No. Year
Author
Advantages
Limitations
1
2016 Qi et al.
[21]
• The proposed algorithm is capable to
retarget a large family of
non-rectangular-shaped images.
• The proposed algorithm provides the
solution to project the images on a
non-rectangular display area.
• The algorithm produces deformations
when the complexity in the shape of the
boundary is considerably high.
• The computational time of the algorithm
can be high due to the presence of
multiple segments on the
non-rectangular boundary of the image.
2
2017 Lin
et al.
[16]
• The time complexity of the proposed
technique greatly influences the
requirement of the human visual system
(HVS).
• The proposed algorithm limits its
performance due to classification errors.
• The proposed algorithm produces
deformations when the focus of the
object is too big and the energy is
concentrated in a narrow image region
of interest (ROI)
3
2017 Guo
et al.
[36]
• The proposed algorithm utilizes the
gradient graph and significant graph of
the image to obtain more salient regions
of the image.
• The presence of highly complex objects
present in the image increases the
complexity of the proposed algorithm.
4
2017 Solanki
et al.
[17]
• The proposed algorithm utilizes an
efficient energy map generation method
to effectively highlight the most
prominent regions of the image.
• The structural deformation is minimum
as compared to the existing seam
carving technique
• The computation time of the algorithm is
high due to the computation of a
number of salient regions of the image.
• The deformation can be highly visible
due to the closeness of the objects
present in the image.
5
2018 Guo
et al.
[29]
• The proposed algorithm produces a
proper balance between foreground and
background objects.
• The efficiency of the proposed algorithm
is high due to the incorporation of an
optimized cumulative energy map.
• The computational time of the proposed
algorithm is high as compared to the
seam carving technique due to
segmentation operation.
6
2019 Patel
et al.
[28]
• The computational time of the proposed
algorithm is high due to the selection of
multiple least energy pixels into the
optimal seam paths.
• The proposed algorithm does address any
constraint on the selection of multiple
connected pixels which hampers the
performance of the proposed algorithm.
7
2019 Patel
et al.
[30]
• The proposed algorithm is faster than the
conventional seam carving technique as
multiple optimal seams are eliminated
in a single iteration.
• The proposed algorithm produces false
edges when the intensity variation is
very tremendously high in the local and
global features of the image ROIs.
8
2019 Patel
et al.
[4]
• The proposed algorithm mainly preserves
the structural deformation of objects
exhibiting reflection symmetry.
• The proposed algorithm does not focus
on the preservation of other types of
symmetries such as rotation and
translation.
9
2019 Arai
[15]
• The proposed technique considers the
image both in space and time domain to
preserve the loss of structural
information.
• The data compression ratio of the
proposed technique is higher than the
conventional seam carving technique.
• The proposed algorithm performs well
when the size of salient objects is
dominant in the image.
• The proposed technique produces
deformations when multiple dominant
size objects are highly overlapped and
the color composition is almost the
same.
• In the proposed algorithm no mechanism
is defined to preserve the structural
properties of other salient objects such
as shadow objects and reflection
symmetry objects.
10
2021 Garg
et al.
[18]
• The proposed technique efficiently
minimizes the structural deformations
on the image ROIs.
• The performance of the algorithm can be
affected due to the limited distance of
the objects present in the image.
23214
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

the scaling and seam carving algorithm. The proposed algorithm computes the saliency map
of the image to identify the prominent areas that are needed to protect it from distortion. The
gradient vector flow (GVF) method is used in the seam carving to restrict the selection of
pixels in the optimal seam paths.
Wei et al. [8] proposed a multi-operator-based hybrid sequence in which existing image
retargeting techniques such as cropping, seam carving, and scaling are combined to change the
resolution of the video frames in a content-aware fashion. The novelty of the proposed
technique is the utilization of simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) scheme to compute
the boundaries of salient objects present in the image. To crop the significant area from each
video frame a saliency map is computed. To identify the moving objects and preserve their
structure in the video frame a motion feature map is computed. For static shots seam carving,
scaling, and cropping techniques are applied to obtain the desired aspect ratio while for non-
static video frames only scaling and cropping are applied.
Chai et al. [19] proposed a novel framework to generate stereoscopic thumbnails using
warping and cropping techniques. The novelty of the proposed technique is to generate a
thumbnail by adjusting the disparity uniformly so that sense can be totally neglected in low-
resolution images. The six scaled images are obtained using the warping technique and the
disparity is adjected using just noticeable depth difference (JNDD) model. Kajiura et al. [42]
proposed a fast multi-operator-based image retargeting technique that incorporates the concept
of reinforcement learning to obtain the optimal sequence of operators. The novelty of the
proposed algorithm is dealing with high variance in the bi-directional warping (BDW) score.
The incorporated self-play reinforcement-learning normalizes the obtained assessment values
and a local optimum. Further to improve the efficiency of the proposed method a self-play-
Table 1 (continued)
S.No. Year
Author
Advantages
Limitations
• Strictly preserves the deformation on the
line structures.
• The algorithm takes a high computational
time to perform the seam diversion
operation.
11
2022 Garg
et al.
[49]
• The proposed technique initially
searchers the prominent line structures
before performing the retargeting
operation.
• In the proposed technique the salient
objects are obtained based on the
successive energy enhancement
operation.
• The integration of other image processing
techniques such as line detection
increases the computational time of the
algorithm.
• The energy enhancement operation
performs recursive push and pop
operations on the stack. These
operations are also highly responsible to
increase the time complexity of the
algorithm.
12
2022 Garg
et al.
[28]
• The analysis determines the efficiency of
the existing energy map generation
methods.
• The analysis presents a comprehensive
comparision based on various image
attributes.
• The analysis provides possible future
advancements that are needed to
incorporate into the existing seam
carving technique.
• The analysis only focuses on basic
energy map generation methods.
• The comparision is made only based on a
single objective image quality metric
i.e. structural similarity index measure
(SSIM).
• The analysis is performed based on a few
parameters. The analysis does not
provide a detailed discussion on the
variation of the color RGB components.
• In the analysis images having shadow
objects are not considered.
23215
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

based reward and a frequency-aware weighted to select the retargeting operators in balance.
Wang et al. [12] suggested a multi-operator-based video retargeting algorithm that incorporates
seam carving and scaling in the hybrid multi-Op sequence. The novelty of the proposed
algorithm is to process the video sequence in a group and the scaling operator prevents the
deformation of the salient objects that occurs due to excessive elimination of optimal seams.
The proposed algorithm is capable to preserve the temporal and spatial coherence in the
sequence of video frames. The proposed algorithm serves well when the location of the
moving objects changes rapidly in the adjacent video frames.
Garg et al. [39] proposed a multi-operator-based image retargeting technique that integrates
cropping, warping, and SDIR technique to generate pleasing image retargeting results. The
novelty of the proposed technique is the integration of the SDIR algorithm with other image
retargeting operators such as cropping and warping. To test the efficiency of the hybrid
sequence an objective function is formulated that utilizes image Euclidean distance (IMED)
and dominant color descriptor (DCD) to analyze the deformations on the image contents. The
obtained results have good visual quality as compared to other hybrid sequences. Balderas
et al. [38] proposed an efficient multi-operator-based image retargeting technique which
combines warping and cropping operator. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is the
generation of an optimized importance map that integrates a number of image maps such as
gradient map, context-aware saliency map, skin map, and Canny edge map. The other
modernity of the proposed technique is the systematic usage of seam carving and scaling
operators so that a good balance can be maintained between the deformations and image
stretching. Tang et al. [41] proposed a multi-operator-based image retargeting algorithm in the
discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain. The novelty of the proposed technique is the
incorporation of direct and indirect seam carving along with similarity transformation. To
identify the path of optimal seams the properties of a gradient vector flow (GVF) method are
utilized to perform image resizing operations. The incorporated similarity transformation
minimizes the aliasing effects over the prominent regions of the image. To preserve the aspect
ratio of the prominent objects inverse DCT can be directly applied to the outcome of the
retargeting operation. After the literature review, some advantages and limitations of existing
multi-operator-based image retargeting algorithms are analyzed. The identified advantages and
limitations associated with these techniques are given in Table 2.
1.5 Inferences on literature review
After an intensive literature review, it is found that no single image retargeting operator is best
suited to retargeted images in a content-aware fashion. Therefore, to produce more aestheti-
cally pleasing image retargeting results it is required to generate a hybrid sequence of image
retargeting operators such as scaling, cropping, and warping. Researchers have already
proposed a number of hybrid sequences of operators in which the conventional seam carving
technique contributes to its significant role [1, 50]. The SDIR algorithm is the improved
version of the conventional seam carving technique, therefore to imporve the efficiency it can
be integrated with other image retargeting algorithms. The recent image retargeting techniques
do not consider shadow regions as a prominent feature of the image. The shape of the shadow
can be distorted in the retargeting operation which can be easily noticeable to the human eye.
Therefore, the shadow detection technique can be integrated with the existing image
retargeting algorithms to preserve the shape of the shadow objects present in the image [2].
The existing techniques are only capable to retarget rectangular images in a content-aware
23216
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Table 2 Advantages and limitations of multi-operator-based image retargeting techniques
S.No. Year
Author
Advantages
Limitations
1
2016 Fang
et al.
[20]
• The proposed algorithm is capable to
measure the local structural
deformations accurately due to
utilization of SIFT flow and SSIM.
• The proposed algorithm generates the
optimal sequence of operators by
utilizing perceptual similarity
measures.
• The computational time of the proposed
algorithm is high due to the use of SIFT
flow algorithm.
• The proposed algorithm takes high
computational time to match the points
between reference and retargeted
images.
2
2016 Zhou
et al.
[45]
• The proposed algorithm combines a
saliency map, gradient map, and edge
gradient map to highlight the most
prominent feature of the image.
• The efficiency proposed technique is
more robust due to the integration of
multiple operators such as seam
carving and scaling.
• The proposed multi-operator-based al-
gorithm produces significant structural
deformation when the reference image
contains a number of complex back-
ground and foreground objects.
• The proposed combined significance
map is not capable to determine the
salient image features due to the
complexity of the image contents.
3
2017 Zhang
et al.
[46]
• The time complexity of the proposed
seam warping technique is less as
compared to the seam carving.
• The proposed algorithm accurately
recognizes the focus area of an image.
• The proposed technique preserves the
integrity among various salient objects
present in the image.
• The proposed algorithm sometimes fails
to identify the focused area due to the
complexity of the image.
• The computational complexity of the
proposed technique is high up to some
extent due to the computation of a
high-energy seam array.
4
2017 Zhang
et al.
[43]
• The proposed algorithm minimizes the
deformation by adopting scaling and
seam carving operators.
• The proposed technique utilizes the
gradient vector flow (GVF) method
instead of the direct seam.
• The computation time is high as the
number of added cut seams is
considered based on the size of the
salient region.
• The proposed algorithm can produce
deformation, especially in the
background regions due to stretching
operation.
5
2018 Wei
et al.
[8]
• The proposed scheme saliency of the
video frame is firstly computed to
decide the limit of cropping.
• The proposed algorithm utilizes the line
detection algorithms to obtain the line
structures having weak gradients.
• The proposed algorithm minimizes the
loss of image information at the
boundary using seam carving that
limits the degree of cropping.
• The computational load of the proposed
scheme is high due to the inclusion of
different image process algorithms
such as line detection, blur detection,
cropping, seam carving, shot
classification, motion detection, and
saliency detection.
6
2019 Chai
et al.
[19]
• The proposed method takes a moderate
time cost as compared to existing
schemes.
• The proposed method incorporates a
cropping technique that is not present
in the existing methods to adjust the
location of objects.
• The proposed method is a tradeoff
between content-persistent cropping
(CPC) and object-aware cropping
• The proposed technique can be
improved for real-time applications.
• The proposed algorithm does not take
advantage of the parallel computing
techniques to generate six-scale
thumbnails.
• The semantic loss in the proposed
algorithm may lead to an incorrect
object mask.
23217
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

fashion. Therefore, some advancements can be explored by the researchers to retarget non-
retangular-shaped images. The visual quality of the image retargeting operation depends upon
the quality of the image maps. The conventional gradient-based method is not sufficient to
produce an accurate energy map of the image. Therefore, it is now essential to pay attention to
other useful information about the salient regions of the image. To meet this objective the
Table 2 (continued)
S.No. Year
Author
Advantages
Limitations
(OAC) OAC [1], therefore it can gen-
erate aesthetically pleasing thumbnails.
7
2020 Kajiura
et al.
[42]
• The proposed algorithm utilizes
reinforcement learning to develop a
faster hybrid sequence of operators.
• The proposed algorithm selects the
retargeting operators in balance to
overcome the problem of overfitting.
• The proposed algorithm normalizes the
high variance in the BDW score using
self-play reinforcement learning
• The performance of the proposed
algorithm can be affected while the
incorporated self-play-based reward
ignores the high variance in the as-
sessment scores.
8
2020 Wang
et al.
[12]
• The proposed algorithm is capable to
preserve the temporal and spatial
coherence in the sequence of video
frames.
• The proposed algorithm performs well
when the location of the moving
objects is changing very rapidly.
• The run complexity of the algorithm is
high as compared to the existing
multi-operator sequences.
• The proposed algorithm can generate a
significant loss of structural
information when in the adjacent video
frames the location of the object is
changing very rapidly beyond the
expected rate.
9
2020 Garg
et al.
[39]
• The proposed hybrid technique
retargates the images after considering
the variations in color. Components
and structural deformations.
• The proposed hybrid sequence
minimizes the deformations on the
prominent line structures present in the
image.
• The time complexity of the proposed
technique is higher as compared to
other states of the arts due to the
inclusion of search and seam bypassing
operations.
• The algorithm takes high computation
time when the highest energy is found
at the end of a particular row and
column.
10
2021 Balderas
et al.
[38]
• The proposed algorithm significantly
reduces the warping distortions.
• The proposed algorithm incorporates a
switching point to individually perform
warping and copping.
•The run time complexity of the proposed
algorithm is high as compared to the
recent retargeting techniques.
• The importance map generation model
of the proposed algorithm is not so
accurate and slow to determine the
prominent regions of the image.
11
2022 Tang
et al.
[41]
• The proposed algorithm minimizes the
effects of aliasing due to the
incorporation of similarity
transformation at the pixel level.
• The proposed algorithm adopts the most
efficient method i.e. Gradient Vector
Flow (GVF) to obtain the optimal path
of the seams.
• The proposed scheme is capable to
decode the retargeted image using
conventional inverse DCT.
• In the proposed algorithm the utilization
of Gradient Vector Flow (GVF) is not
enough to obtain the optimal seam
paths. Therefore, the information pro-
vided by the GVF can be integrated
with other energy maps of the image to
obtain accurate information about the
salient regions of the image.
23218
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

researchers are integrating various kind of map such as skin map, edge map, gradient map, and
slaiency map to obtain information about the other salient regions those defines the local and
global image features [48]. The efficiency of the proposed retargeting techniques can be
improved by adopting parallel computing. The computational complexity of the multi-
operator-based sequence can be improved by the execution of different threads related to
retargeting operators simultaneously. Further, it is also observed that the single and multi-
operator-based image retargeting produces significant structural deformation in the highly
focuses image regions. The main reason is due to an inaccurate energy map and elimination of
optimal seams from the image region of interest (ROIs). Therefore, in the case of the multi-
operator-based image retargeting technique, the advanced version of the existing seam carving
technique can be adopted that prevents the traveling of optimal seams in the image region
where a number of high-energy pixels are present. Moreover, it is required to adopt recent
technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) to automate the
process of the selection of the right operator in the hybrid sequence to obtain the aesthetically
pleasing image retargeting results [47].
1.5.1 Contribution and paper organisation
The paper offers the following significant contributions.
&
The paper provides a comprehensive study on existing image retargeting algorithms.
&
The paper explains the SDIR algorithm and its mathematical modeling.
&
The paper addresses the user and technical requirements related to the development of the
SDIR algorithm.
&
The paper focuses on the various useful decisions that are taken into consideration at the
design level of the SDIR algorithm.
&
The paper elaborates on the experimentations that are conducted to observe the perfor-
mance of the SDIR algorithm.
&
The paper contributes to presenting the run-time analysis of the SDIR algorithm based on
integrated edge detection operators.
&
The paper contributes to presenting the efficiency of the SDIR algorithm based on the edge
detection operators.
&
The paper presents the objective image quality assessment of the retargeted results using
the structural similarity index metric (SSIM).
&
The paper presents the user study to assess the visual quality of the retargeted images based
on mean opinion scores.
&
The paper contributes to revealing the superiority of the SDIR algorithm among different
existing image retargeting techniques.
&
In the end, the paper contributes to identifying a number of limitations associated with the
SDIR algorithm and also provides future directions to the readers and researchers to
improve its process.
After focusing on the problem definition, motivation factors, novelty of the analysis, and
literature review the paper is further organized to provide the detail of the proposed
performance analysis. In section-2 the detailed description of the SDIR algorithm and its
mathematical modeling is given. Further, various decisions are considered at the design
level of the SDIR algorithm, and its user and technical requirements are elaborated.
23219
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Section 3 presents the detail of the dataset that is being used in the experimentations.
Section 4 presents the flow and complete process of two-phase experimentation. This
section provides the finding and results of both the experimentation phases. In this
section, the performance of the SDIR algorithm is computed based on the number of
search operations, seam diversion operations, computational time, and content deforma-
tions. Section 5 provides the critical analysis of both the experiment phases. Section 6
presents the comparative analysis of the SDIR algorithm with existing state-of-arts to
justify its performance. In this section, the objective image quality assessment of the
retargeted results is carried out based on the SSIM. Further, a user study is carried out to
obtain the subjective scores from the participants to justify the performance of the SDIR
algorithm. Section 7 provides detail about the reasons that make the SDIR algorithm
superior to the existing sate-of-arts. Section 8 explores various limitations of the SDIR
algorithm and also provides the knowledge and future directions to the readers to
contribute efforts to improve the process of the SDIR algorithm. Section 9 provides
the summary of the proposed performance analysis. Finally, at the end Section 10
concludes the entire work by highlighting the major aspects of the proposed analysis.
2 SDIR algorithm
The seam diversion-based image retargeting technique is the improved version of the conven-
tional seam carving technique. This algorithm preserves the content of images from the
distortion by suppressing the intersection of optimal seams at a single point in both horizontal
and vertical directions. To restrict the coverage of multiple pixels from a single row and
column a threshold is defined. The seam diversion operation is performed at the entry point
when the number of covered pixels is found beyond the defined threshold.
To improve the image retargeting operation the SDIR algorithm can be combined with
other retargeting operators such as cropping and warping. The obtained hybrid sequence
produces pleasing retargeting results with minimal deformations. To find the least energy
pixels from the image SDIR algorithm utilizes the concept of dynamic programming.
The performance of the SDIR algorithm depends upon the number of seam diversion
operations. A high number of search and seam diversion operations can distort the
structure of prominent objects present in the image. Therefore, the computational time
of the algorithm also increases. Figure 1 shows the pseudocode of the SDIR
algorithm.The performance of the SDIR algorithm is based on the quality of the energy
map that can be obtained from the convolution operation. Therefore, to perform the
convolution operation two 3 × 3 image filters for each direction have been used. The
directional change of intensity can be measured using Eq. (1) [9].
energy1 Ið Þ ¼
∂
∂x I

 þ
∂
∂y I


ð1Þ
To compute the path of optimal seams in vertical direction Eq. (2) is used [19].
Seamx ¼
Seamx
i

n
i¼1 ¼
x ið Þ; i
ð
Þ
f
gn
i¼1; s:t: ∀i; x ið Þ−x i−1
ð
Þ
j
j≤1
ð2Þ
23220
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

To compute the path of optimal seams in horizontal direction Eq. (3) is used [25].
Seamy ¼ Seamy
i
f
gm
i¼1 ¼
j; y jð Þ
ð
Þ
f
gm
j¼1; s:t: ∀j; y jð Þ−y j−1
ð
Þ
j
j≤1
ð3Þ
The elimination of seams depends upon their cost. The cost of the optimal seam is computed
from Eq. (4) [19].
S* ¼ min
s
∑n
i¼1e I Si
ð Þ
ð
Þ
ð4Þ
To obtain the cumulative minimum energy M for all possible seams for each entry (i, j) Eq. (5)
is used [25].
M i; j
ð
Þ ¼ e i; j
ð
Þ þ min

M i−1; j−1
ð
Þ; M i−1; j
ð
Þ; M i−1; j þ 1
ð
Þ
ð5Þ
To eliminate seams from left, right, and vertical direction Eqs. (6), (7), and (8) are used
respectively [25].
Removal of the left optimal seam:
CL i; j
ð
Þ ¼ I i; j þ 1
ð
Þ−I i; j−1
ð
Þ
j
j þ jI i−1; j
ð
Þ−I i; j−1
ð
Þj
ð6Þ
Removal of the right optimal seam:
CR i; j
ð
Þ ¼ I i; j þ 1
ð
Þ−I i; j−1
ð
Þ
j
j þ jI i−1; j
ð
Þ−I i; j þ 1
ð
Þj
ð7Þ
Fig. 1 Pseudocode of the SDIR algorithm [18]
23221
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Removal of the vertical optimal seam:
CV i; j
ð
Þ ¼ IMG i; j þ 1
ð
Þ−IMG i; j−1
ð
Þ
j
j
ð8Þ
The algorithm diverts the optimal seam from the point of intersection that occurs due to the
clash of optimal seams in a single row and column. It may also be possible that the optimal
seams can clash on the prominent edge structures on a single point and can distort their shape.
To detect the location of intersection encountered in between the optimal seam in both
horizontal and vertical directions Eq. (9) is used [18].
M i; j
ð
Þ ¼ Maxenergy
if Mask1 i; j
ð
Þ ¼ Mask2 i; j
ð
Þ ¼ 1
otherwise; search for least energy

ð9Þ
The energy modification operation of the algorithm selects the pixels from the corresponding
row and column to obtain the high-energy pixel. After that, the energy found at the intersection
point gets replaced with the obtained high energy to divert the seam at a nearby location.
The optimal seams can be restricted to trace multiple pixels from a single row and column
beyond the defined threshold. The seam diversion operation is performed at the entry point
based on the count of least energy pixels in the path of optimal seams. To count and divert the
optimal seams to nearby location Eqs. (10 and 11) are used [18].
Rpixelscount ¼ M j  T


m  n
ð
Þ
M i; j
ð
Þ ¼ Maxenergy
if Rpixelscount > T
otherwise; j ¼ j þ 1

where
j ¼ 1; 2; 3…n
ð10Þ
Cpixelscount ¼ Mi  T
ð
Þ
m  n
ð
Þ
M i; j
ð
Þ ¼ Maxenergy
if Cpixelscount > T
otherwise; i ¼ i þ 1

where
i ¼ 1; 2; 3…m
ð11Þ
To test the performance of the SDIR algorithm an experiment is conducted on different images
based on the edge detection operators. The detail of the experimentations and findings are
presented in Section 4.
2.1 User and technical requirements
This section focuses on the user and technical requirements that support the design of the
algorithm. To develop the SDIR algorithm the entire design is divided into different modules.
The basic user and technical requirements are given below.
2.1.1 User requirements
The user requirements are focused on the hardware and software requirements that are needed
to be focused for the development and execution of the SDIR algorithm. The identified user
requirements are discussed below in detail.
&
Dataset requirement
23222
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

To obtain the retargeted results the input images are selected from the specific dataset. The
dataset is required to identify different types of images with various attributes. It is further
required that the applicable dataset comprises the results of retargeting operations that are
carried out by the widely known state-of-arts. The available results can be used for the
assessment of the proposed algorithm and its improvement. To test the efficiency of the SDIR
algorithm RetargetMe [10] dataset is used.
&
Hardware requirements
The hardware requirement focuses on the type of hardware that is needed for the execution of
the SDIR algorithm. To generate the results from the SDIR algorithm the system should be
equipped with the Intel Core i5-8250U clocked at 1.60 GHz 1.80 GHz, 8 GB DDR4 memory,
and 64-bit operating system with an X64-based processor.
&
Software requirements
The implementation of the SDIR algorithm requires Python 3.7.1 or any advanced version
with an Anaconda3 environment.
2.1.2 Technical requirements
The technical requirements mainly focus on the libraries and their associated functions that
support the development process of the SDIR algorithm. The discussion on the specific
libraries and inbuilt functions is given below.
(a)
Python libraries
In the development of the SDIR algorithm mainly the following libraries are used. The usage
of the libraries is briefly discussed below.
&
scikit-image: It is a python package that can work with the Numpy to perform various
image processing operations on the image matrix. After utilizing this package the SDIR
algorithm can perform the image convolution operation using different filters to obtain the
directional change in the pixel intensity. In the SDIR algorithm, this package is used to
generate the energy map of the image to identify the least energy pixels.
&
Numpy: It is a general-purpose array-processing package. In the development of the SDIR
algorithms, an array class called ndarray is used to convert the image information into the
form of a 2D array. The associate functions in this library are used to execute convolution
operations, and other basic operations on the image matrix after conversion.
&
Imageio: This python library is basically used to provide an interface for the user to read
and write input and out images. The imread() and imwrite() functions associated with this
library are mainly used to input the source image and store the retargeted image in the
secondary memory. In the SDIR algorithm both the functions support a variety of image
data such as still and animated images.
&
The SciPy: This package supports a number of inbuilt functions to perform multi-
dimensional image processing. The functions associated with the package perform faster
N-dimensional array manipulation. Scipy.ndimage.filters.convolve is basically used for
23223
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

multidimensional convolution. The image information in the form of a 2D array is
convolved through a given linear and non-linear image filter.
In the development of the SDIR algorithm a number of other functions such as stack(),
absolute(), convolved(), reshape(), etc. are used to support various operations. Similar python
libraries are also used in the implementation of the conventional seam carving algorithm [28].
(b)
Modules in the SDIR algorithm
The entire SDIR algorithm is divided into various modules. These modules focus on the most
prominent features of the SDIR algorithm. A brief description of the modules is given below.
&
Module-1: Computation of energy map using the convolution operation
&
Module-2: Finding optimal seams
&
Module-3: Finding intersection and computing coverage of image pixels
&
Module-4: Search for high energy and seam diversion operation
&
Module-5: Optimal seam elimination and result generation
2.2 Decisions at design level
In the development of the SDIR algorithm few below-mentioned decisions are made that are
useful to improve its efficiency.
2.2.1 Decision on design approach
In the design of the SDIR algorithm a top-down approach is followed. After identifying the
problem, the main modules are identified which are further decomposed into sub-modules to
obtain the optimal solutions.
2.2.2 Decision on type of algorithm
At the design level the decision is made on the type of algorithm. Initially, at the
beginning of algorithm design, the design is made to develop an iterative SDIR algo-
rithm. After analyzing the requirements, the design of the SDIR algorithm is modified.
Finally, the design of the algorithm is changed to convert it into a recursive algorithm.
The main reasons for modification in design are found due to the existence of optimal
seam search operation and removal of least energy pixels from the image. In both the
operations recursive procedure is required to retarget the input image. Moreover, at the
design level, it is decided that the SDIR algorithm is the exact algorithm as it produces
the optimal solution to the complex problem.
2.2.3 Decision on the execution
At the design level the decisions are also made on the environment in which the SDIR
algorithm is executed. The SDIR algorithm is a serial algorithm in which a single statement
is executed at a time. Therefore, a single processor is sufficient to execute its associated
23224
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

modules. At the design level, it is also decided that in the future the efficiency of the algorithm
can be increased by modifying the design that supports parallel processing.
2.2.4 Decision on programming approaach
At the design level it is observed that the SDIR algorithm supports the dynamic programming
approach to find the optimal seam path recursively. The back tacking technique is also
implemented to obtain the optimal seam paths that contain the least energy pixels from the
input image.
2.2.5 Decision on searching mechanism
The SDIR algorithm searches high-energy pixels to divert the optimal seam to a nearby
location. The operation is mainly performed to minimize the loss of structural information
from the image. Therefore, in the SDIR algorithm, a basic linear search approach is designed to
replace high energy at the intersection point and the entry point.
2.2.6 Decision on energy map generation method
At the design level decision are made for the selection of gradient map generation
method that is used to generate the energy map of the image. The process of energy
map generation is designed based on the efficiency of the gradient method. In the
design phase of the algorithm, the process of convolution is determined based on the
Sobel operator.
2.2.7 Decision on the threshold
In the design phase the decision is made for the determination of the threshold. After the
analysis of the conventional seam carving technique, it is finally decided that the seam
diversion operation is required to perform while the optimal seam cover at least 30% pixels
in a single row and column. After looking at the aforementioned requirement finally it is
decided to incorporate a threshold that reduces the structural deformation on the prominent
regions of the image.
2.3 SDIR algorithm: Cases & operations
The SDIR algorithm is an improved version of the existing seam carving technique that
resolves the limitations of the existing seam carving technique. To SDIR algorithm identifies
four below-mentioned cases which are highly responsible for the loss of structural information
from the image.
&
Case-I: Intersection of optimal seams in a single row multiple times.
&
Case-II: Intersection of optimal seams in a single column multiple times.
&
Case-III: Selection of a number of least energy pixels into the seam path from a single row
beyond the threshold.
&
Case-IV: Selection of a number of least energy pixels into the seam path from a single
column beyond the threshold.
23225
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

To deal with all the above cases, the SDIR algorithm performs two major operations that are
given below.
&
Search operation: The search operation searches for the highest energy in a single row and
column. This operation is applicable in all the above cases.
&
Replacement operation: The highest energy is replaced at the intersection point of the
optimal seams and at the entry point from where the optimal seams select a number of least
energy pixels in their optimal paths.
&
Seam diversion operation: This operation diverts the optimal seam to a nearby location so that
the effect of structural deformation can be minimized as much as possible. The seam diversion
operation restricts the other optimal seams to be clashed successively at similar locations.
The above-mentioned operations are the main features of the SDIR algorithm which are not
implemented in the existing seam carving technique to suppress the loss of structural
information.
3 Dataset
To test the performance of the SDIR algorithm various types of images are selected from the
RetargetMe [32] dataset. The dataset comprises 80 original images having different attributes.
A total of 11 retargeting techniques such as nonhomogeneous warping (WARP), seam carving
(SC), scale-and-stretch (SNS), multi-operator (MULTI-OP), shift-maps (SM), streaming video
(SV), uniform scaling (SCL), manual cropping (CR), energy-based deformation (LG), qua-
dratic programming (QP) and object size-adjusted (OSA), respectively [23] are applied on
each reference image. From the experiments conducted in literature [41], it has been observed
that the retargeting operation performed on the images produces deformations on the salient
objects such as line/edge structures (type-1), curved shaped/face objects (type-2), overlapped
objects (type-3), texture (type-4), and symmetry objects (type-5). To justify the performance of
the SDIR algorithm in experimentation phases 1 & 2 a total of 5 different types of images are
selected from the RetargetMe dataset. Similar images are further used to assess the perfor-
mance of the SDIR algorithm with state-of-arts. The input images selected for the experimen-
tation and comparision are shown in Fig. 2. The experimentations to measure the performance
of the SDIR algorithm are presented in the subsequent section.
4 Experimentations
The experiment contains two main phases. In the first phase, the performance of the algorithm
is observed based on the number of search and seam diversion operations. Therefore, the
Fig. 2 Input images with different attributes
23226
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

energy map of the original image is generated using a convolution operation. To perform this
operation Sobel operator is used in both horizontal and vertical directions. The obtained energy
map is then integrated with the edge map successively to produce the importance map of the
image. The computational time of the algorithm is measured and analyzed based on the
number of operations associated with the SDIR algorithm. In the second phase of experimen-
tation, the performance of the SDIR algorithm is analyzed based on deformations in the
retargeted results. To analyze the deformations an objective image quality assessment is
carried out based on different types of importance maps generated by the integration of edge
maps and energy maps of the reference images.
4.1 Experimentation: Phase-1
In the initial phase of the experiment, different edge detection operators are applied to the input
images to compute the edge maps. Further, the number of prominent edges is counted from
each map. The results obtained from edge detection operators are shown in Fig. 3. After
analyzing the results it is found that the number of edges detected by the Canny edge detection
operator for image type-1 is high among all the operators. The number of edges detected by the
Robert operator is significantly low as compared to others. For image types-2, 3, and 5
Zerocross operator detects a high number of prominent edges from the image. Similarly, for
Image Type
Edge Detection Operators
Robert
Canny
Sobel
Zerocross
Prewitt
Line 
Structures
(a)
Curved 
shaped/
face objects
(b)
Overlapped 
objects
(c)
Texture
(d)
Symmetry 
Objects
(e)
Fig. 3 Results obtained from various edge detection operators
23227
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

image type-4 Prewitt operator produces a high number of edges as compared to other
operators. To analyze the performance of the SDIR algorithm the energy map that is obtained
from the gradient method is integrated with the edge map of the image. The edge map of the
image can be generated from different edge detection operators such as canny, Prewitt, Robert,
Sobel, and Zercross.
The obtained importance map of the image is supplied to the SDIR algorithm for its
execution. To reduce the aspect ratio of the images a total of 200 optimal seams are eliminated
in the horizontal direction. The total number of search operations and seam diversion opera-
tions is counted to test the performance of the SDIR algorithm during the execution. In the
SDIR algorithm, the optimal seams are generated and eliminated based on the energy of the
pixels. The performance of the SDIR algorithm is computed based on the number of seam
diversion and search operations that are performed when the optimal seams are being clashed
on a single point and cover a high number of pixels in a single row and column. The flow of
phase-1 experimentation is shown in Fig. 4.
After experimenting, it is observed that an image having fewer edges may contain a high
number of least energy pixels. In this case, the SDIR algorithm performed a high number of
search and seam diversion operations. After the elimination of the optimal seams, it is found
that the nonadjacent pixels that become neighbors contain the least energy by which the
successive optimal seams can follow almost a similar path to eliminate the least energy pixels
from the image. In this situation, the optimal seams can be again intersected on a single point
in the horizontal direction.
Similarly, after the elimination of multiple least energy pixels from a single row and column
it is observed that multiple non-adjacent pixels having the least energy become neighbors. The
shifting of multiple least energy pixels in both directions deviates the successive optimal seams
in a single row and column to select multiple pixels in their path. In both situations, the number
of search and seam diversion operations can be high. In the experiment, it is observed that the
computational time of the algorithm can be significantly reduced when a high number of edges
are detected from the image. In this case, the probability of getting the high-energy adjacent
pixels is high while eliminating the optimal seams from the image. Further, the shifting of
high-energy pixels by the algorithm restricts the successive optimal seams to follow almost the
same path, and coverage of multiple pixels from a single row and column can be suppressed.
Therefore, the time to search the high-energy pixels from the image and energy modification
operation at the intersection point or entry point of the optimal seam can be drastically
minimized. In the experiment, it is found that the count of search and seam diversion
Input 
image
Count no. of 
edges
Opmal seam 
selecon and 
removal
Generaon of 
importance map
(Edge map + energy 
map)
Count seam 
diversion/ search 
operaons
Compute 
execuon me
Analysis of SDIR 
algorithm 
Retargeted 
results
Experimentation: Phase-1
Fig. 4 Flow of experimentation phase-1
23228
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

operations also affects the visual quality of the retargeted results. The different obtained values
such as the number of prominent edges, number of seam diversion operations/search opera-
tions, and execution time of the SDIR algorithm are shown in Table 3.
4.2 Discussion on experimentation: Phase-1
In Fig. 5 the performance of the SDIR algorithm is analyzed based on the number of prominent
edges, search operations, and seam diversion operations. From the figure, it is evident that for
image type-1, the Canny edge detection operator detects 6746 prominent edges from the image
which is higher than other edge detection operators. Therefore, the number of search and seam
diversion operations that are performed by SDIR algorithms is 150 which is less than other
operators. The importance map that is produced by the integration of the Canny edge map and
energy map of the image significantly reduces the number of operations carried out by the
SDIR algorithm. Similarly, the Robert edge detection operator detects 1824 important edges
from the image. In this case, the number of search and seam diversion operations is signifi-
cantly high as the no-adjacent least energy pixels become neighbors after the elimination of
optimal seams from the image. The number of edges detected by Sobel and Prewitt operators is
almost the same hence the variation in the number of operations carried out by the SDIR
algorithm is significantly low.
For image type-2 the Zerocross operator performs well and detects a total of 1497
prominent edges from the image. In this case, the required operations that are being performed
by the SDIR algorithm are 360 which is less than in comparison to other operators. Similarly,
Table 3 Different values obtained from the experimentation (phase-1)
Image type
Resolution
Operators
No. of edges
No. of seam diversion/
search operations
Time to generate
retargeted images (Sec)
Type-1
(Line/edges)
1024×757
Canny
6746
150
0.3678
Prewitt
5118
180
0.9584
Robert
1824
1210
4.5802
Sobel
5124
210
0.5949
Zerocross
4580
176
1.2654
Type-2
(Face/People)
500×375
Canny
473
1020
3.8608
Prewitt
944
734
2.7782
Robert
1297
574
2.1726
Sobel
1058
630
2.3846
Zerocross
1497
360
1.3626
Type-3
(Background)
500×375
Canny
1175
650
1.9738
Prewitt
1093
680
2.5738
Robert
1401
598
1.249
Sobel
1163
655
2.1595
Zerocross
1680
498
0.7343
Type-4
(Texture)
1024×752
Canny
3090
800
3.028
Prewitt
3711
326
1.2339
Robert
3274
770
2.9145
Sobel
3331
760
3.1025
Zerocross
3260
794
3.0053
Type-5
(Symmetry)
615×422
Canny
842
922
3.4898
Prewitt
1275
758
2.8691
Robert
1464
498
1.8849
Sobel
1440
514
1.2854
Zerocross
2648
306
1.9582
23229
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

the number of edges detected by the Canny operator is 473 and the number of operations
performed by the SDIR algorithm is 1020. For image type-3 Zerocross operator detects a high
number of edges from the image i.e. 1680. As the number of detected edges is high the number
of operations performed by the SDIR algorithm is significantly low as compared to other
operators i.e. 498. The difference between the number of edges detected by Sobel and Canny
operators is almost the same i.e. 1163 & 1175 respectively. For image type-3, the performance
of SDIR is founds low when the importance map is generated by the Prewitt operator. For
image type-4 Prewitt operator performs well as the number of detected edges is 3711. Hence,
the total number of operations carried out by the SDIR algorithm is 326. The number of edges
detected by Robert and Zerocross operators is almost the same i.e. 3274 & 3260 respectively.
For image type-4 the SDIR algorithm performs a high number of operations i.e. 800 when the
importance of the image is produced by the Canny edge detection operator. For image type-5
Zerocross operator serves well as compared to other operators to detect the prominent edges
from the image i.e. 2648. As the high number of edges are being detected by the Zerocross
operator the number of seam diversion operations and search operations are less i.e. 306. The
importance map produced by Robert snd Sobel operators when supplied to the SDIR algorithm
the number of operations performed by the SDIR algorithm is almost the same. The SDIR
algorithm performs a high number of operations i.e. 922 when the importance map is produced
by the Canny edge detection operator. From Fig. 5, it is concluded that the edge map with a
high number of prominent edges when integrated with the energy map of the image then the
number of seam diversion and search operations can be significantly low. In this case, after the
elimination of optimal seams from the image, there may be a high probability of getting the
high-energy pixels in the nearby locations. The computational time of the algorithm can be
reduced when the non-adjacent high-energy pixels become neighbors after the elimination of
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Type-1
(Line/edges)
Type-2
(Face/People)
Type-3
(Overlapped
Objects)
Type-4
(Texture)
Type-5
(Symmetry)
No. of seam diversion/ search operaons
No. of Edges
IMAGE TYPES
No. of edges
No. of seam diversion/Search operaons
Fig. 5 Performance analysis of SDIR algorithm based on number of edges and associated operations
23230
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

optimal seams from the image. The computational time of the SDIR algorithm drastically
increases when the edges detection operators detect fewer edges from the image. In this case,
there may be a high chance of getting the least energy pixels from the nearby locations when
the two disjoint sets of the image are joined together. The number of seam diversion and search
operations can be significantly increased when the non-adjacent least energy pixels become
neighbors after the removal of optimal seams from the image. From the figure, it can be
observed that the importance map generated by Zerocross operators serves well for image
type-2, 3, and 5. The importance maps produced by Canny and Prewitt operators perform well
for image type-1&4 respectively.
In Fig. 6 the performance of the SDIR algorithm is justified based on the computation time
that is required to generate retargeted results. The SDIR algorithm consumes less computa-
tional time for image type-1 when the importance map supplied to the algorithm is produced
by the integration of the Canny edge map i.e. 0.3678 seconds. The computational time of the
SDIR algorithm depends upon the number of search and seam diversion operations. In the case
of the Canny edge detection operator, the count of operations is 150 which is less than other
operators. For image type-2 the number of operations carried out by the SDIR algorithm is low
i.e. 360 when the importance map is produced by the Zercross operator. In this case, the
computational time that is required to generate the retargeted image is 1.3626 seconds which is
drastically less than other operators. For image type-3 again the importance map that is
generated by integrating the Zerocross operator serves well and the computational time of
the SDIR algorithm is 0.7343 seconds. The algorithm requires high computational time i.e.
2.5738 when the importance map is generated by integrating the Prewitt operator. For image
type-4 the importance map that is produced by integrating of Prewitt edge map performs well
as the computational time of the SDIR algorithm is 1.2339 seconds. From the figure, it can also
be observed that though the number of operations carried out by the algorithm is high when the
importance map is produced by the Zerocross edge map still algorithm requires low compu-
tational time. The main reason behind this is the time required to search for high-energy pixels
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Canny
Prewi
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Type-1
(Line/
edges)
Type-2
(Face/
People)
Type-3
(Overlapped
Objects)
Type-4
(Texture)
Type-5
(Symmetry)
Time to generate retargeted images (Sec)
s
n
oit
a
r
e
p
o
h
cr
a
e
s
/
n
oisr
e
vid
m
a
e
s
f
o
.o
N
IMAGE TYPES
No. of seam diversion/Search operaons
Fig. 6 Performance analysis of SDIR algorithm based on execution time
23231
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

from the image. The algorithm obtains high-energy pixels near to intersection point when the
importance map is generated by integrating the Zerocross edge map. The intersection of
optimal seams occurs due to the clash of optimal seams in a single row and column. A similar
type of case is also observed while the importance map is produced by integrating the Robert
operator. In this case, the algorithm requires low computational time i.e. 2.9145 seconds as
compared to the Sobel operator.
For image type-5 it is observed that the number of operations performed by the SDIR
algorithm is 306 when the importance map is produced by integrating the Zerocross operator.
In this case, though the number of operations is significantly low as compared to Robert and Sobel
operators still the computational time of the SDIR algorithm is high. In this case, the algorithm
requires a high amount of time to search for high-energy pixels from the nearby regions. After
finding the high energy pixel the algorithm replaces the energy at the intersection or entry point of
the optimal seams. Moreover, the algorithm takes high computational time i.e. 3.4898 seconds
when the importance map is produced by integrating the Canny operator. From the performance
analysis, it is revealed that the performance of the SDIR algorithm not only depends upon the
number of research operations and seam diversion operations. There is another factor that is
mainly responsible to increase and decrease the computational time of the algorithm. In the case of
search operation of the algorithm if the high energy pixels are being found near the location of the
intersection or entry point of the optimal seams then the algorithm takes less computational time.
From the above performance analysis, it is concluded that the number of search operations, seam
diversion operations, and time required to search the high-energy pixels from the image are some
major factors that affect the performance of the SDIR algorithm.
4.3 Experimentation: Phase-2
In the second phase of the experiment, the performance of the SDIR algorithm is analyzed
based on the visual quality of retargeted results. The retargeted results that are obtained from
phase-1 experimentation are further used in the experimentation phase-2. The flow of phase-2
experimentation is shown in Fig. 7.
The obtained retargeted results are used to perform an objective image quality assessment.
In the objective IQA different local SSIM maps are produced by the SSIM metric successively.
The similarity between reference and target images is computed based on the global SSIM
value for each local SSIM map. The obtained global SSIM values are analyzed and compared
to observe the deformations in the salient regions of the image. The performance of the SDIR
Retargeted results
Compute Local SSIM 
Maps
Compute global SSIM 
values based on local 
SSIM maps
Objecve IQA 
Performance analysis 
of SDIR algorithm
Analysis of global SSIM 
values
Experimentation: Phase-2
Fig. 7 Flow of experimentation phase-2
23232
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

algorithm is analyzed based on the importance map supplied to the algorithm which is
generated by the integration of different edge maps obtained from the edge detection operator.
In Fig. 8 the results obtained from the SDIR algorithm in experiment phase-1 are presented.
From the figure, different types of deformations can be observed in the prominent regions of
the image. In image type-1 the line structures are deformed and start converting their shape
into curved-shaped objects. In image type-2 the curved-shaped objects are distorted due to the
elimination of optimal seams. In image type-3 deformations on the three parameters can be
easily noticeable. Similarly, in image types 4 and 5 similar types of deformations can be
observed in the salient regions on the image. The small variations in luminance (l) and color (c)
can not easily be visualized by the human eyes hence to quantify and evaluate the performance
of the SDIR algorithm an objective image quality assessment (IQA) is carried out. In objective
IQA the visual quality of retargeted results is observed based on three prominent parameters as
luminance (lu), color (c), and structure (s).
Image 
Type
Retargeted Results
Robert
Canny
Sobel
Zerocross
Prewitt
Line 
Structures
(a)
Curved 
shaped/
face objects
(b)
Overlapped 
objects
(c)
Texture
(d)
Symmetry 
Objects
(e)
Fig. 8 Retargeted results obtained from the SDIR algorithm
23233
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

To assess the visual quality a structural similarity index (SSIM) is used. To compare the
reference and retargeted images scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) flow [22, 23] is used
as the size of both stimuli is not the same. The SIFT flow matches SIFT descriptors instead of
raw pixels available in reference and distorted images. Hence, this technique has been proven
to be efficient to compute the dense correspondence between two images. To assess the visual
quality of retargeted results a subjective image quality assessment can also be carried out. For
each retargeted image a local SSIM map is generated to observe the similar and dissimilar
regions that are present in reference and retargeted images. To observe the visual quality of
results global values of each SSIM map are calculated. In the experiment, it is observed that
the visual quality of results can be degraded when the number of search and seam diversion
operations is significantly high. Therefore, the deformations on the salient regions can be
easily noticeable to the human eye. A high variation in the values of parameters justifies the
low performance of the SDIR algorithm. The selected quality assessment metric presents the
variation on parameters in the form of numbers ranging from [0–1]. The different global SSIM
values obtained for different image types are shown in Table 4. From the obtained values it is
predicted that high deformations on the visual quality of retargeted results are observed when
the global value of the local SSIM map is near 0. On contrary to this, the global value of the
local SSIM map near 1 shows the high visual quality of the retargeted results obtained from the
SDIR algorithm. To analyze the performance of the SDIR algorithm a total of 200 optimal
seams are eliminated from each type of image in the horizontal direction.
The obtained local SSIM maps for each image type are shown in Fig. 9.
In Fig. 9, the non-uniform regions obtained in the local SSIM map of the retargeted results
are presented with dark portions. The obtained dark portions in the results signify the less
similar regions present in the retargeted images. The small values of global SSIM obtained for
each local SSIM map present the high variations of similarity in both stimuli. In contrary to
this, the obtained high global SSIM values of the local SSIM map present the similarity among
the image contents. The bright regions present in the local SSIM map show the similarity
between the reference and target images.
4.4 Discussion on experiment phase-2
In Fig. 10, the performance of the SDIR algorithm is observed based on the deformations of
the parameters such as luminance (l), color (c), and structure (s). To analyze the performance
of the SDIR algorithm an objective image quality assessment of the retargeted results is carried
out. To obtain the different values of objective assessment SSIM metric is used. To observe the
deformations an SSIM function is being used that takes reference and retargeted images as
Table 4 Different global SSIM values obtained from each local SSIM map
Image Type
Global SSIM values
Canny
Prewitt
Robert
Sobel
Zerocross
Line Structures
0.44125
0.37808
0.29655
0.39044
0.30642
Curved shaped/face objects
0.33727
0.37254
0.40191
0.37354
0.42191
Overlapped objects
0.51337
0.50539
0.6615
0.509
0.67118
Texture
0.55442
0.63468
0.5739
0.62846
0.57053
Symmetry Objects
0.55793
0.57484
0.62659
0.57895
0.64502
23234
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Image Type
Edge detection operators
Robert
Canny
Sobel
Zerocross
Prewitt
Line 
Structures
(a)
Curved 
shaped/
face objects
(b)
Overlapped 
objects
(c)
Texture
(d)
Symmetry 
Objects
(e)
Fig. 9 Local SSIM map of each image type with global SSIM values
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Robert
Canny
Sobel
Zerocross
Prewi
Global SSIM Values Based on Local SSIM Map
0.29655
0.44125
0.39044
0.30642
0.37808
0.40191
0.33727
0.37354
0.42191
0.37254
0.6615
0.51337
0.509
0.67118
0.50539
0.5739
0.55442
0.62846
0.57053
0.63468
0.62659
0.55793
0.57895
0.64502
0.57484
SSIM Index
Line Structures
Curved shaped/face objects
Overlapped objects
Texture
Symmetry Objects
Fig. 10 Performance analysis of SDIR algorithm based on global SSIM values
23235
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

parameters. The function generates the global values of each local SSIM map corresponding to
each image type. The obtained global SSIM values of each local SSIM map range from [0–1]
as mentioned in Table 4. From the figure, it is observed that the global SSIM value for image
type-1 is significantly low i.e. 0.29655 when the importance map supplied to the SDIR
algorithm is generated by integrating the edge map obtained from the Robert operator. The
global SSIM values are almost the same in the case of the Sobel and Prewitt operator i.e.
0.39044 and 0.37808 respectively. In this case, the importance map is produced by integrating
the corresponding edge maps with the energy map of the image when supplied to the algorithm
then similar types of deformations are observed in the retargeted results. The global SSIM
value is high in the case of the Canny operator as compared to others. Therefore, the SDIR
algorithm produces fewer deformations on the salient region of the image when the supplied
importance map is produced by integrating the Canny edge map with the energy map of the
image. The SDIR algorithm also performs well when the importance map is generated by the
Zerocross operator and the energy map of the image as compared to the Robert operator.
The global SSIM value for image type-2 is significantly low i.e. 0.33727 when the
importance map supplied to the SDIR algorithm is produced by integrating the Canny edge
map and energy map of the image. The global SSIM values are almost the same in the case of
the Sobel and Prewitt operator i.e. 0.37354 and 0.37254 respectively. Therefore, the SDIR
algorithm produces a similar type of distortion on the important contents of the image when the
importance map is obtained from these operators. Moreover, the obtained global SSIM value
of the local SSIM map is considerably high in the case of the Zerocross operator i.e. 0.42191.
Hence, the SDIR algorithm produces fewer distortions when the supplied importance map is
generated by integrating the Zerocross edges map. Overall, the SDIR algorithm performs well
when the obtained importance map is generated by integrating the Robert edge map as
compared to the Canny, Sobel, and Prewitt operators.
The global SSIM value for image type-3 is significantly low i.e. 0.50539 when the
importance map supplied to the SDIR algorithm is obtained by integrating the Prewitt edge
map. The global SSIM values are almost the same in the case of Sobel i.e. 0.5090 when the
corresponding edge map is integrated with the energy map of the image. In this case, the SDIR
algorithm produces a similar type of deformations on the parameters. Moreover, the global
SSIM value obtained from the Zerocross operator i.e. 0.67118 is high among all the operators.
The importance map that is generated by integrating the Zerocross edges map and energy map
of the image when supplied to the SDIR algorithm only fewer deformations are observed on
the salient regions. The SDIR algorithm performs well when the importance map is generated
by the Robert edge map as compared to the Canny operator. The global SSIM value for image
type-4 is significantly low i.e. 0.55442, when the importance map supplied to the SDIR
algorithm, is produced by integrating the Canny edge map and energy map of the image. In
this case, the algorithm produces high deformations on the salient regions of the image. The
global SSIM values are almost the same in the case of Robert and Zerocross operators i.e.
0.57390 and 0.57053 respectively. Therefore, the algorithm produces a similar type of content
deformations when the importance map is produced by integrating edge maps from these
operators. The obtained global SSIM value is significantly high in the case of the Prewitt
operator i.e. 0.63468. Therefore, the supplied importance map is produced by integrating the
Prewitt edges map and energy map of the image. The SDIR algorithm produces fewer
deformations on the salient regions of the image. The SDIR algorithm performs well when
the supplied importance map is generated by integrating the Sobel edge map as compared to
Robert, Canny, and Zerocross operators. The global SSIM value for image type-5 is
23236
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

significantly low i.e. 0.55793 when the supplied importance map is integrated with the Canny
edge map. In this case, the algorithm produces a high number of deformations on the
parameters. The deformations on the prominent regions can be easily noticeable to human
eyes. The obtained global SSIM values are almost the same in the case of Sobel and Prewitt
operators i.e. 0.57895 and 0.57484 respectively. Therefore, the SDIR algorithm produces a
similar type of deformations on the parameters. The global SSIM value of the local SSIM map
is high in the case of the Zerocross operator i.e. 0.64502 among all the operators. Hence, the
algorithm produces fewer deformations when the supplied importance map of the image is
generated by integrating the Zerocross edges map and energy map. The SDIR algorithm also
performs well when the importance map is generated by integrating the Robert edge map as
compared to Sobel and Prewitt operators.
From the objective quality assessment of the retargeted results, it can be concluded that
the deformations on the parameters also depend upon the type of contents present in the
image. If the image contains highly complex objects the deformations can be significantly
high. The SDIR algorithm performs well on image types 2, 3, and 5 when the supplied
importance map is obtained by the integration of the Zerocross edge map and energy map of
the image. The main reason behind fewer deformation is due to the integration of the
Zerocross edge map that detects a high number of prominent edges from the image. After
the elimination of the optimal seam, the shifting of pixels is performed to join two disjoint
sets of the image. In this operation, the algorithm founds a high probability of getting high-
energy adjacent pixels to stitch two disjoint segments. Similarly, the algorithm produces
promising retargeted results when the supplied importance map is produced by integrating
the Canny and Prewitt edge map with the energy map of image types 1 and 4 respectively.
The detection of a high number of prominent edges in the edge map suppresses the seam
diversion operations. The considerable reduction in seam diversion operation drastically
suppresses the deformations on the image region of interest (ROI) and improves the
performance of the algorithm. In contrary to this, the high deformations can be observed
when the algorithm performs a high number of successive seam diversion operations at the
intersection and entry point of the optimal seams in a single row and column.
5 Critical analysis of experimentations
To evaluate the performance of the SDIR algorithm based on the edge detection operator two-
phase experimentation has been carried out. In experimentation phase-1 the performance of the
SDIR algorithm is observed based on the search, seam diversion, and computational time.
From the experiment is revealed that the number of operations associated with the SDIR
algorithm depends upon the complexity of the input image and its attributes. The edge
detection operators detect a high number of prominent edges when multiple objects such as
line structure, overlapped objects, and curved-shaped objects are present in the image. The
overlapping of these objects produces significant edges in different salient regions of the
image. The energy maps of such types of images are also highly complex due to the high
variation in the intensity of the pixels. The complexity of the importance map supplied to the
SDIR algorithm is also high which is generated by the integration of a highly complex edge
map and energy map of the image. The SDIR algorithm performs a low number of search and
seam diversion operations when a high complex importance map is supplied to the algorithm.
In this case, the computational time of the SDIR algorithm is significantly low as the
23237
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

importance map contains a high number of high-energy pixels. The SDIR algorithm performs
fewer seam diversion operations as the number of optimal seam intersections in a single row
and column is minimum. The possibility of the selection of multiple pixels in a single row and
column is also minimized. Contrary to this the SDIR algorithm requires high computational
time when the supplied importance map is generated by the integration of an edge map with a
minimum number of edges. Therefore the algorithm finds a high number of least energy pixels
in the image.
The seam diversion and corresponding search operations are also high when the least
energy pixels are eliminated by the optimal seams from the image. The performance of the
algorithm is also tested based on the visual quality of retargeted results. The retargeted results
obtained from different importance maps are further used to perform objective image quality
assessment. The different local SSIM maps are their corresponding global SSIM values are
generated using the SSIM metrics. From the obtained global SSIM values it is found that the
SDIR algorithm performs well when the supplied importance is generated by the integration of
an edge map in which the number of prominent edges is significantly high. The algorithm
produces less deformation on the important contents of the image. The utilization of a high
complex importance map minimizes the seam diversion and search operations in the
retargeting process. The deformations on the image contents are directly proportional to the
number of seam diversion and search operations. A high number of seam diversion and search
operations presents a high occurrence of intersection between the optimal seams in a single
row and column. Similarly, the possibility of selecting multiple least energy pixels from a
single row and column can also be high. Therefore, the deformations on the image contents are
also high.
6 Comparion with state-of-arts
The performance of the SDIR algorithm is evaluated with other state-of-arts. To assess the
performance other existing techniques are selected such as nnonhomogeneous warping
(WARP), seam carving (SC), scale-and-stretch (SNS), and multi-operator (Multi-Op). From
the literature [35], it found that researchers are selecting these techniques as a state-of-arts to
justify the performance of their research work.
Warp: non-homogeneous warp; SC: seam carving; SNS: stretch-and-scale; Multi-Op:
Multi-operator; SDIR: Seam diversion based image retargeting.
Therefore, in this section, these techniques are chosen to evaluate the performance of the
SDIR algorithm based on the edge detection operator. In the flow of experimentation phase-1
shown in Fig. 4, an importance map is supplied to the SDIR algorithm to obtain the prominent
regions of the images that are needed to protect while retargeting the image. The edge map
incorporated in the importance map highlights the edges present in the image. Similarly, the
importance map which is a combination of edge map and energy map of the image is supplied
to other existing techniques to obtain different types of retargeted results. Therefore, a total of 5
types of importance maps can be generated from each edge detection operator. In the
comparison as the 5 different types of existing techniques are selected along with the SDIR
algorithm, therefore, a total of 25 image retargeting results can be generated. The representa-
tion of each result obtained from the existing and the SDIR algorithm is not possible in this
paper due to space constraints. Therefore, in this section, only a few global SSIM values are
considered that justify the high performance of the SDIR algorithm as compared to the state-
23238
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

of-the-art. After obtaining the retargeted results from different retargeting operators it is found
that the reference and retargeted image have different sizes. Therefore, a SIFT is used to
compute the pixel-wise dense correspondence between reference and retargeted image which
can be predicted by optimizing the function [48]. Further, to fulfill this requirement the global
SSIM values for image type-1 are considered that are obtained after integrating the Canny
operator with the energy map of the image. For image types (2, 3) the global SSIM values are
obtained after intergrading the Zerocross operator with the energy map of the image. Similarly,
for image types (4, 5) the global SSIM values are obtained after integrating Prewitt and
Zerocross operator with the energy map of the image respectively. Figure 11 shows the values
obtained from the global SSIM values from the retargeted results. To evaluate the performance
of the SDIR algorithm based on the importance map a percentage similarity analysis is carried
out. The detail of the analysis is shown in Section 6.1.
6.1 Percentage similarity analysis
In experimentation phase-1 (See Section 4.1) the importance map is generated by integrating
the energy map and edge map of the input image. The importance map supplied to the SDIR
algorithm highlights the most prominent regions of the image that are needed to be preserved
while retargeting. In this performance analysis, a total of 5 different importance maps are
generated to evaluate the performance of the SDIR algorithm. The obtained importance maps
are supplied to the existing techniques to generate various retargeted results. To assess the
visual quality of the results global SSIM values are computed based on the perceptual
 
0.30545
0.38718
0.40132
0.39545
0.44125
0.38344
0.39292
0.34625
0.41354
0.42191
0.5114
0.689
0.51353
0.70353
0.67118
0.5739
0.62846
0.55442
0.63053
0.63468
0.57895
0.62659
0.55793
0.65484
0.64502
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Type-1
(Line/
edges)
Type-2
(Face/
People)
Type-3
(Overlapped Objects)
Type-4
(Texture)
Type-5
(Symmetry)
Canny
Zerocross
Zerocross
Prewi
Zerocross
ANALYSIS OF INFORMATION LOSS
Fig. 11 Comparison of SDIR technique with state-of-arts based on importance map
23239
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

structural similarity index measure (SSIM) [7, 34]. The local SSIM map of each image type
can be based on three comparison components such as luminance (lu), contrast (c), and
structure (s). The functions for each SSIM component are given in eq. (12, 13, and 14) [33].
l x; y
ð
Þ ¼
2μxμy þ C1
μ2x þ μ2y þ C1
ð12Þ
c x; y
ð
Þ ¼
2σxσy þ C2
σ2x þ σ2y þ C2
ð13Þ
s x; y
ð
Þ ¼ σxy þ C3
σxσy þ C3
ð14Þ
In the above equations, x and y are the reference and retarget image respectively. The average
of x is μx, the average of y is μy, the variance of x is σ2x, the variance of y is σ2y, and the
covariance of x, y is σxy. C1 = (k1L)2, C2 = (k2L)2 are the two variables to stabilize the division.
L is the dynamic range of the pixels present in the image. The values of k1 and k2 can be 0.01
and 0.03 respectively.
To obtain the global SSIM values different local SSIM maps are generated from each
retargeted result. The performance of the SDIR algorithm is evaluated for image type-1 by
integrating the canny edge detection operator with the energy map of the input image. After
obtaining different values of the global SSIM index it is found that the SDIR algorithm
performs well as the percentage of similarity is found at 44% which is higher as compared
to state-of-arts. For image type-1 the highest loss of information is observed in the case of
Warp operator i.e. 70%. The performance of SNS and multi-Op is similar as the percentage of
similarity is found at 40% and 39% respectively. In the case of SC, the percentage of similarity
is 38% which is less than the SDIR algorithm. Further, the performance of the SDIR algorithm
is tested when the importance map is generated using the Zerocross operator. For image type-2
again it is observed that the percentage similarity of the SDIR algorithm is higher than other
state of the arts. In the case of the SDIR algorithm, the similarity percentage is 42%. The
highest percentage of deformation is observed in the case of Warp operator i.e. approximately
62%. After observing the global SSIM values for image type-2 it is analyzed that the Multi-Op
technique serves well as compared to Warp, SNS, and SC. The SC technique produces a
percentage of similarity i.e. 39% which is higher than the Warp and SNS image retargeting
operators. For image type-2 SNS operator produces the highest structural deformation as
compared to other retargeting operators i.e. approximately 66%. Further, the percentage
similarity is carried out for image type-3. In this case, the Multi-Op technique produces the
highest percentage similarity i.e. 70% as compared to other retargeting operators. The SC
operator produces a percentage similarity i.e. 68% which is almost similar to the similarity
percentage obtained from the SDIR technique. For image type-3 the reason behind the low
efficiency of the SDIR technique is observed due to the presence of highly overlapped objects
in the image. The seam diversion operation of the SDIR algorithm diverts the optimal seams to
nearby locations where prominent objects are also available. The elimination of least energy
pixels from the nearby regions distorts their shape and produces the loss of structural
information. In addition to this Warp and SNS operator produces a similar type of similarity
23240
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

percentage i.e. 51% which is less than other image retargeting operators. For image type-4 the
percentage of similarity in the case of Multi-Op and the SDIR operator is almost similar i.e.
63%. Therefore, both the operators perform equally well when the input image contains
texture. The SC operator performs well as compared to the Warp and SNS as the similarity
percentage is found at 62%. The SNS operator produces a high percentage of deformation for
image type-4 i.e. approximately 46%. The performance analysis is further carried out for
image type-5. In this case, the percentage of similarity is almost similar to the case of Multi-Op
and the SDIR algorithm. In the case of the SC operator, percentage similarity is found at 62%
which is higher than Warp and SNS operators. In the case of image type-5, the SNS operator
produces a percentage of deformation i.e. approximately 45% which is higher than all the
retargeting operators. The main reason for the low efficiency of the SDIR algorithm is due to
closeness of objects in the input image. The seam diversion operation associated with the
SDIR algorithm diverts the optimal seams to the nearby location where the other prominent
objects are present at a very less distance. The shape of the other objects is distorted when the
least energy pixels are eliminated from these regions recursively. After the objective image
quality assessment based on the importance map and the type of images, it is found that the
SDIR algorithm serves well when the input images are of types 1,2, 4, and 5. The efficiency of
the SDIR algorithm mainly hampers due to the presence of highly overlapped foreground and
background regions. In this case, the elimination of least energy pixels from the foreground
regions can distort the shape of foreground regions. After the comparison, it is found that the
efficiency of the SDIR algorithm is highly increased due to the integration of the Zerocross
operator with the energy map of the image. The importance map is generated using the
Zerocross and the gradient energy generation method produces a high-quality importance
map that is capable to highlight the most prominent regions of the image that are needed to
protect while retargeting the images.
6.2 User study
In the field of image quality assessment (IQA) a number of full reference objective assessment
approaches are available namely mean squared error (MSE), the peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR), and structural similarity (SSIM). The resolution of the reference image can be
changed after retargeting operation. Therefore, a subjective image quality assessment is
required to be carried out to accurately know about the degradation in the visual quality of
the retargeted image. In the subjective analysis, the visual quality of the retargeted image is
determined based on the user’s response. To conduct the user study a total of 5 observers (3
male and 2 female) participated and the analysis is conducted after setting up a sound
environment for the laboratory. The participants are selected based on their professional skills
and previous experience in the field of visual image quality assessment. The sequence of
reference and retargeted images are presented to the observers to obtain the mean opinion
scores on 5 point scale. To obtain accurate ratings from the observers a training session is
conducted to explain the behavior and sensitivity of the test. The participant compares the
visual quality of the presented stimuli based on variation in luminance (lu), color (c), and
structure (s). The overall obtained scores are finally converted into statistical form as shown in
Fig. 12. In the subjective analysis, some outliers are identified in the rating patterns that are
eliminated from the statistical analysis. After observing the similarity in the objective and
subjective image quality assessment it is found that the subjective analysis presents a similar
kind of assessment as compared to objective IQA. Finally, it is concluded that the user study
23241
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

carried out in this section totally agreed with the human visual system (HVS) by considering
local and global features of the image. In the user study, the mean opinion scores (MOS) for
each image type are calculated using Eq. (15) [44]. In the equation, k represents the total
number of participants, and S _ S(m, n) provides the ratings from the kth observer for
retargeted image n.
M Op S n
ð Þ ¼ 1
k ∑k
m¼1S S m; n
ð
Þ
ð15Þ
From the user study, it is found that the obtained MOS score for image type-1 in the case of
the SDIR algorithm is comparatively high i.e. 2.2 to the other retargeting operators. Therefore,
it can be predicted that for image type-1 the visual quality of the retargeted results obtained by
the SDIR algorithm is high due to the integration of the edge map produced by the canny edge
detection operator. In the case of SC, and Multi-Op, the value of obtained MOS is almost
similar. The SNS operator performs equally well as the SDIR algorithm.
The efficiency of the warp operator is significantly low as compared to others as the
MOS is 1.5. After that, the retargeted results obtained from image type-2 are presented to
the observers. The retargeted results are produced by the importance map which is
produced by the integration of the Zerocross operator. After obtaining the different
values of MOS it is found that the value of MOS for the SDIR algorithm is higher than
the state of the arts. In the case of the SDIR algorithm, the obtained MOS is 2.1. The
highest percentage of deformation is observed in the case of the SNS operator as the
MOS is 1.7. The Multi-Op technique serves well as compared to Warp, SNS, and SC.
The MOS for SC technique is higher than Warp and SNS image retargeting operator. For
image type-2 SNS operator produces the highest structural deformation as compared to
other retargeting operators. To retarget image type-3 the importance map is produced by
the integration of the Zerocross operator. Further, the retargeted results obtained from
image type-3 are presented to the observers. These results are produced by the
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Type-1
(Line/
edges)
Type-2
(Face/
People)
Type-3
(Overlapped Objects)
Type-4
(Texture)
Type-5
(Symmetry)
Canny
Zerocross
Zerocross
Prewi
Zerocross
USER STUDY
Fig. 12 Subjective analysis based on observer’s ratings
23242
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

importance map which is produced by the integration of the Zerocross operator. In this
case, the MOS for the Multi-Op technique is higher than other operators i.e. 3.5. The
MOS for SC and SDIR operators are almost similar. The visual quality of the retargeted
results is found similar in the case of warp and SNS. These operators produce a high
structural deformation on the prominent regions of the image. To obtain the results for
image type-4 Prewitt operator is integrated with the energy map of the image. In the case
of image type-4, the MOS for SDIR and Multi-Op is similar i.e. 3.15. Therefore, SDIR
and Multi-Op produce minimum structural deformation as compared to warp, SC, and
SNS. The SNS operator produces a significant loss of the structural information as the
obtained MOS is 2.75 which is less than as compared to all the other operators. To
obtain the results for image type-5, a Zerocross operator is integrated with the energy
map of the image. The MOS for SDIR and Multi-Op is almost similar and also higher
which justifies their performance among other retargeting operators. The visual quality of
the results in the case of SNS is low among all other operators as the MOS is 2.75. The
performance of the SC is marginally low as compared to SDIR as the obtained MOS is
3.1. After conducting the user study it is observed that the visual quality of the retargeted
results depends upon the quality of the importance map. The content of the image and its
complexity also play a crucial role in the degradation of spatial information of the image.
From the study, it is observed that closeness of objects, overlapping of objects, highly
focused object, and different orientation of the objects are some major factors that are
responsible for the image degradation while retargeting the image.
7 The superiority of the SDIR algorithm
After the objective and subjective image quality assessment, it is found that the SDIR
algorithm performs well when the retargeting operation is performed on image types-1, 2, 3,
and 5. After keenly observing the performance various below-mentioned factors are observed
that depict the superiority of the SDIR algorithm over the existing state of the arts.
7.1 Superiority over the warp
In the Warping operator, the forward and reverse mapping of the pixels is performed to
obtain the relative position of the pixels from the source image to the retargeted image.
The obtained relative positive of the pixels can be floating-point numbers that are further
converted into integer locations. The aliasing effect can be produced over the edges of
the objects due to loss of information while the obtained floating-point locations are
converted into integer form. The SDIR algorithm does not perform any such kind of
computation, therefore in each iteration accurate locations of the pixels are obtained to
preserve the structural properties of the image objects. The SDIR algorithm is faster than
the warping operator as it does not compute the relative mapping of the pixels. The
overall process of the SDIR algorithm depends upon the elimination of the least energy
pixels from the image. The computation of least energy pixels is very simple and
accurate. The aliasing effect in the case of the SDIR algorithm is negligible until the
input image does not contain a high number of prominent line structures. The low
computation time and aliasing effect justify the superiority of the SDIR algorithm over
the Warp image retargeting operator.
23243
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

7.2 Superiority over SC
The existing seam carving technique produces the deformation of the prominent line structure
present in the image. In the case of SC two main reasons for deformation are observed that are
given below.
(a)
Intersection of optimal seams at the same location on the line structures.
(b)
The inclusion of a high number of least energy pixels into the optimal seam path from a
single row and column.
The SDIR algorithm which is the improved version of the existing seam carving
technique suppresses the transformation of line structures into the curve-shaped objects
by the seam diversion operator. The energy at the intersection point of optimal seams is
increased to divert them to a nearby location. The SDIR algorithm restricts the inclusion
of least energy pixels into the seam paths beyond the defined threshold. Hence, the
aforementioned operations in the SDIR algorithm justify its performance over the
conventional seam carving technique.
7.3 Superiority over SNS
The SNS algorithm produces the deformations on the line structures having different types of
orientation. In this case, the quad cannot be aligned properly with the image features. The SNS
operator drastically stretches homogeneous quads to suppress the structural deformations in
the shape of the prominent regions of the image. Therefore the SNS operator performs a linear
interpolation that can produce the image artifacts. The working of the SDIR algorithm is
entirely different than the SNS operator. In the SDIR algorithm, no extra effort is carried out to
obtain the information about the color component and mapping of the image pixels. The linear
interpolation used in the SNS operator may produce the marginally inaccurate values of the
image pixels that are required to be considered to obtain the corresponding locations in the
retargeted image. The marginal error in the obtained location can distort the shape of the
objects present in the image. In the case of the SDIR algorithm, the locations of the pixels are
accurately computed during the shift of pixels.
7.4 Superiority over multi-Op
Multi-Op techniques combine a number of image retargeting operators to get the desired image
retargeting results. Nowadays the available hybrid image retargeting sequences integrated
seam carving techniques with other image retargeting operators such as scaling and non-
homogeneous warp. The inclusion of the existing seam carving technique in the hybrid
sequence produces image distortion over the salient regions of the image. Therefore, the
efficiency of the existing Multi-Op operator can be improved by integrating its improved
version. The hybrid sequences that are mainly based on the seam carving techniques produce
distortion due to two main reasons as mentioned in subsection 7.2. Although the efficiency of
the existing hybrid sequences is low due to the presence of the seam carving algorithm, still,
their efficiency is not so poor due to the inclusion of other image retargeting operators. From
the objective image quality assessment that is carried out in Section 6.1, it is evident that the
performance of the existing hybrid sequence is almost similar to the SDIR algorithm. The
23244
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

performance of multi-Op and the SDIR algorithm is found equally well for all the image types
instead of image type-1.
8 Limitations and future directions
This section highlights some limitations of the SDIR algorithm and also discussed possible
future directions for the readers for its further improvements. The deficiencies of the SDIR
algorithm are given in the below subsection.
8.1 Limitations
1.
The SDIR algorithm takes high computational time to retarget the images which contain a
high number of prominent edges.
2.
The SDIR algorithm does not perform well when the image contains a high number of
salient regions. In this case, the SDIR algorithm performs a high number of seam
diversion operations and increases the complexity of the image retargeting operation.
3.
The computational time of the SDIR algorithm can be drastically increased due to the
integration of other image processing techniques such as edge detection. Therefore, the
computational time of the SDIR algorithm can be increased when multiple energy map
generation methods are combined to detect salient regions of the image.
4.
The SDIR algorithm does not perform well when the input image contains highly
overlapped regions. The other reason for deformation can be the low distance among
the objects present in the image.
After performance analysis of the SDIR algorithm based on edge detection operators, the
above limitations gives directions to the reader and researchers for possible future advance-
ments. The possible future directions are discussed in the subsequent subsection.
8.2 Future directions
In the future, the performance of the SDIR algorithm can be further improved by integrating an
efficient and high complex saliency map of the image. To generate a saliency map of the
reference image various efficient saliency detection algorithms can be integrated with the
SDIR algorithm. These algorithms can detect a large number of high-energy pixels from the
image that are present in local or global features of the image and are needed to protect during
retargeting operation. In the proposed analysis only the edge map is integrated with the energy
map of the image. Hence, to improve the quality of the proposed importance map other maps
such as skin maps and shadow maps can also be integrated [11, 38]. To reduce the compu-
tational time of the algorithm an efficient edge detection operator can be integrated with the
algorithm to find a high number of prominent edges from the image. The other efficient
algorithms can also be used to generate an energy map of the image. The importance map
produced by the integration of a highly complex edge map and energy map of the image detect
the high energy pixels can minimize the deformation on the image ROIs. The SDIR algorithm
comprises a basic searching algorithm to find the high energy in a particular row and column.
The computational time of searching can be improved by utilizing an efficient searching
technique that can be easily applied to the image matrix.
23245
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

9 Summary of proposed analysis
The proposed performance analysis is divided into two experimentation phases. In the
experimentation phase-1, an importance map is proposed by integrating the energy map
and edge map of the image. To obtain the energy map gradient method is used that compute
the variations in the intensity of the image pixels in both horizontal and vertical directions.
To obtain the edge map of the image a total of 5 edge detection operators are applied to the
input image. The efficiency of the edge maps is declared based on the number of edges
detected from the image. A total of 5 types of importance maps are supplied to the SDIR
algorithm to obtain the retargeting results. In the experimentation phase-1, the run time
complexity of the SDIR algorithm is computed based on search and seam diversion
operations. The SDIR algorithm takes a high computational time when the importance
map generates a fewer prominent edges present in the image. In this case, the number of
seam diversion and search operations can be considerably high as compared to the impor-
tance map in which a large number of edges are highlighted. From the experimentation
phase-1, it is found that the SDIR algorithm serves with the importance map that is produced
by integrating the edge map obtained from the canny edge detection operator. Similarly the
SDIR algorithm takes less computational time for image types 2, 3, and 5 when the
importance map is produced by integrating the edge map of the image obtained from the
Zerocross operator. In the end, the computational time of the SDIR algorithm is found less
for image type-4 when the edge map produced by the Prewitt operator is integrated with the
energy map of the image. Further to justify the performance of the SDIR algorithm
experimentation phase-2 is carried out. In this experimentation phase, the global SSIM
index is computed for the retargeted results that are obtained from 5 different types of
importance maps. After the objective image quality assessment (IQA), it is found that the
SDIR algorithm produces fewer deformation for image type-1 when the importance is
generated with the integration of the edge map produced by the canny edge detection
operator. Similarly, for image types-2,3, and 5 the performance of the SDIR algorithm is
justified by the integration of the edge map that is produced by the Zerocross operator.
Finally for image type-4, the Prewitt operator is suitable to obtain the importance map of the
image among other edge detection operators. Therefore, for image type-4 the SDIR algo-
rithm produces less structural deformation in the prominent regions of the image. After
analyzing the performance of the SDIR algorithm based on the edge detection operators a
comparative analysis is carried out to observe its efficiency among other state-of-arts. The
importance maps that are found suitable in experimentation phase-1 and 2 are further
utilized and supplied to the existing retargeting technique to generate different image
retargeting results. After the comparative analysis, it is found that the SDIR algorithm
performs well for all the image types except image type-1. The main reasons for the
superiority of the SDIR algorithm over the existing techniques are mentioned in
Section 7. The performance of the SDIR algorithm is also analyzed by the subjective image
quality assessment. After the experimentation, it is found that the prediction based on the
obtained MOS is similar to the similarity percentage computed in the objective image
quality assessment. Therefore, based on the objective and subjective IQA it can be predicted
that the visual quality of the retargeted results is based on the efficiency of the algorithm and
the quality of the importance map. A high-quality importance map highlights the most
prominent regions of the image that can be ignored while retargeting the image.
23246
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

10 Conclusion
Nowadays various image retargeting techniques are being used in the field of image
retargeting to minimize the size of images in a content-aware fashion. The objective of
every retargeting algorithm is to minimize the deformations in the salient regions of the
image. The quality of retargeted results depends upon the importance map supplied to the
retargeting algorithm. In this paper, the performance of the seam diversion-based image
retargeting algorithm is analyzed based on certain factors such as the number of search
operations, number of seam diversion operations, and computation time. To test the
performance of the algorithm different edge detection operators are used to create the
edge maps of the image. To detect the high-energy pixels from the image the obtained
edge maps are integrated with the energy map of the image. After integration, the
importance map is generated that is supplied to the algorithm to perform the retargeting
operation. To analyze the performance of the algorithm two experiments are conducted.
In the phase-1 experiment, the performance is analyzed based on the number of seam
diversion and search operations. From the experiment, it is found that the algorithm
performs a high number of search and seam diversion operations when the number of
edges detected in the importance map is significantly low. In this case, the SDIR
algorithm requires high computational time to produce retargeted results. From the
phase-2 experimentation, the retargeted results that are obtained from the phase-1
experimentation are supplied to the algorithm. From the experiment, it is revealed that
the visual quality of retargeted results depends upon the quality of the importance map
supplied to the algorithm. The SDIR algorithm produces fewer deformations when a
highly complex importance map is supplied to the algorithm. In this case, the number of
search and seam diversion operations is significantly low. In addition to this when a low-
quality importance map is supplied to the algorithm then there is a high chance of getting
low-energy pixels in each iteration. Therefore the successive optimal seams always select
the least energy pixels in their optimal paths. Hence, the algorithm produces high
deformations on the salient regions of the image as the number of seam diversion are
high. From the experimentation, it can be concluded that the performance of the SDIR
algorithm can be improved by integrating a high-quality edge detection operator that can
identify a high number of prominent edges from the image. The deformations on the
salient regions can be minimized when the importance map that is supplied to the
algorithm is generated by the highly complex edge map and energy map of the image.
In this way, the identification of a large number of global image features preserves the
structure of ROI during the retargeting operation. The SDIR algorithm poorly performs
and generates a high deformation when the resize of the source image is too reduced. In
the objective analysis and subjective analysis is it found that the visual quality of the
retargeted results depends upon two major factors: (1) quality of the importance map; (2)
complexity of local and global features of the image; (3) efficiency of the retargeting
technique. From the user study, it is observed that closeness and high overlapping of
objects are the two main reasons for structural deformation. Further, it is also concluded
that the SDIR algorithm can produce highly distorted image contents when the highly
focused objects are present in the image. The different orientations of the objects such as
line structures can be major factors that are responsible for the image degradation while
retargeting the image.
23247
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

Data Availability In this manuscript, a dataset used in the experimentation and analysis is freely available on
https://people.csail.mit.edu/mrub/retargetme/download.html#analysis. The dataset contains all the source images
having different attributes, retargeted results, and user data for the researchers for further improvement and
investigation.
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
1. Abhayadev M, Santha T (2019) Multi-operator content aware image retargeting on natural images. J Sci Ind
Res 78(4):193–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-021-11376-z
2. Aggarwal N, Karl WC (2006) Line detection in images through regularized Hough transform. IEEE Trans
Image Process 15(3):582–591. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2005.863021
3. Ahmadi M, Karimi N, Samavi S (2021) Context-aware saliency detection for image retargeting using
convolutional neural networks. Multimed Tools Appl 80(8):11917–11941. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-
020-10185-0
4. Arai K (2019) Modified seam carving by changing resizing depending on the object size in time and space
domains. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 10(9):143–150. https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2019.0100919
5. Asheghi B, Salehpour P, Khiavi AM, Hashemzadeh M (2022) A comprehensive review on content-aware
image retargeting: from classical to state-of-the-art methods. Signal Process 195:108496. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.sigpro.2022.108496
6. Avidan S, Shamir A (2007) Seam carving for content-aware image resizing. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007
papers 26(3):10-es. https://doi.org/10.1145/1276377.1276390
7. Bakurov I, Buzzelli M, Schettini R, Castelli M, Vanneschi L (2022) Structural similarity index (SSIM)
revisited: a data-driven approach. Expert Syst Appl 189:116087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.
116087
8. Chai X, Shao F, Jiang Q, Ho YS (2019) MSTGAR: multioperator-based stereoscopic thumbnail generation
with arbitrary resolution. IEEE Trans Multimed 22(5):1208–1219. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2019.
2939707
9. Chen Y, Pan Y, Song M, Wang M (2015) Improved seam carving combining with 3D saliency for image
retargeting. Neurocomputing 151:645–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.05.089
10. Cui J, Cai Q, Lu H, Jia Z, Tang M (2020) Distortion-aware image retargeting based on continuous seam
carving model. Signal Process 166:107242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2019.107242
11. Fang Y, Fang Z, Yuan F, Yang Y et al (2016) Optimized multioperator image retargeting based on
perceptual similarity measure. IEEE Trans Syst Man, Cybern Syst 47(11):2956–2966. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TSMC.2016.2557225
12. Garg A, Negi A (2020) Structure preservation in content-aware image retargeting using multi-operator. IET
Image Process 14(13):2965–2975. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2019.1032
13. Garg A, Singh AK (2022) Analysis of seam carving technique: limitations, improvements and possible
solutions. Vis Comput:1–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-022-02486-2
14. Garg A, Negi A, Jindal P (2021) Structure preservation of image using an efficient content-aware image
retargeting technique. SIViP 15(1):185–193. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-020-01736-x
15. Garg A, Nayyar A, Singh AK (2022) Improved seam carving for structure preservation using efficient
energy function. Multimed Tools Appl 81(9):12883–12924. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-12003-1
16. Guo Z, Zhang J (2017) Seam Carving Algorithm for Maintaining the Shape Structure of Significant Objects.
In: 2nd Int Conf Arti Inte Eng App (AIEA), pp. 651–658. https://doi.org/10.12783/dtcse/aiea2017/14995
17. Guo Y, Liang Y, Yu M, Zhang T (2018) An improved seam carving algorithm based on image blocking and
optimized cumulative energy map. J Electron Inf Technol 40(2):331–337. https://doi.org/10.11999/
JEIT170501
18. Hashemzadeh M, Asheghi B, Farajzadeh N (2019) Content-aware image resizing: an improved and
shadow-preserving seam carving method. Signal Process 155:233–246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.
2018.09.037
19. Kajiura N, Kosugi S, Wang X, Yamasaki T (2020) Self-play reinforcement learning for fast image
retargeting. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 1755-1763.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394171.3413857
23248
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

20. Kumar S, Upadhyay, A K, Dubey P et al (2017) Comparative analysis for Edge Detection Techniques. In:
2021 International Conference on Computing, Communication, and Intelligent Systems (ICCCIS), pp. 675–
681. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCIS51004.2021.9397225
21. Lin W, Zhang F, Lian R et al (2017) Seam Carving Algorithm Based on Saliency. In: Int. Conf. on Smart
Vehi Tech, Trans, Comm App, pp. 282–291. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70730-3_34
22. Liu C, Yuen J, Torralba A et al (2008) Sift flow: Dense correspondence across different scenes. In European
conference on computer vision, pp. 28–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88690-7_3
23. Liu C, Yuen J, Torralba A (2010) Sift flow: dense correspondence across scenes and its applications. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 33(5):978–994. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2010.147
24. Ma WD, Chang HH, Shih TK et al (2012) Seam carving based on improved line detection. In: 2012 Int Sym
on Intell Sig Proc Comm Sys, pp. 498–503. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISPACS.2012.6473541
25. Mei Y, Guo X, Sun D et al (2021) Deep Supervised Image Retargeting. In: 2021 IEEE international
conference on multimedia and expo (ICME), pp. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICME51207.2021.9428129
26. Niu Y, Liu F, Li X, Gleicher M (2012) Image resizing via non-homogeneous warping. Multimed Tools
Appl 56(3):485–508. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-010-0613-0
27. Parsania P, Virparia DPV (2014) A review: image interpolation techniques for image scaling. Int J Innov
Res Comput Commun Eng 2(12):7409–7414. https://doi.org/10.15680/ijircce.2014.0212024
28. Patel D, Raman S (2019) Accelerated seam carving for image retargeting. IET Image Process 13(6):885–
895. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2018.5283
29. Patel D, Shanmuganathan S, Raman S (2019) Adaptive multiple-pixel wide seam carving. In: National
Conference on Communications (NCC), pp. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/NCC.2019.8732245
30. Patel D, Nagar R, Raman S (2019) Reflection symmetry aware image retargeting. Pattern Recogn Lett 125:
179–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2019.04.013
31. Qi S, Chi YTJ, Peter A et al (2016) CASAIR: content and shape-aware image retargeting and its
applications. IEEE Trans Image Proc 25(5):2222–2232. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2016.2528040
32. Qiu Z, Ren T, Liu Y, Bei J et al (2013) Multi-operator image retargeting based on automatic quality
assessment. In: 2013 Seventh Int. Conf. on Image and Grap., pp. 428–433. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIG.
2013.92
33. Rajput V, Ansari IA (2020) Image tamper detection and self-recovery using multiple median watermarking.
Multimed Tools Appl 79(47):35519–35535. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-019-07971-w
34. Setiadi DRIM (2021) PSNR vs SSIM: imperceptibility quality assessment for image steganography.
Multimed Tools Appl 80(6):8423–8444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-10035-z
35. Shilpa M, Gopalakrishna MT, Naveena C (2020) Approach for shadow detection and removal using
machine learning techniques. IET Image Process 14(13):2998–3005. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2020.
0001
36. Solanki P, Bhatnagar C, Jalal AS et al (2017) Content aware image size reduction using low energy maps
for reduced distortion. In: Proceedings of Int Conf Comp Vis Image Proc, pp. 467–474. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-10-2104-6_42
37. Suh B, Ling H, Bederson B B et al (2003) Automatic thumbnail cropping and its effectiveness. In:
Proceedings of the 16th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology, pp. 95–
104. https://doi.org/10.1145/964696.964707
38. Tang Z, Yao J, Zhang Q (2022) Multi-operator image retargeting in compressed domain by preserving
aspect ratio of important contents. Multimed Tools Appl 81(1):1501–1522. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-
021-11376-z
39. Valdez-Balderas D, Muraveynyk O, Smith T (2021) Fast Hybrid Image Retargeting. In: 2021 IEEE
International conference on image processing (ICIP), pp. 1849-1853. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIP42928.
2021.9506584
40. Wang Y S, Tai C L, Sorkine O et al, (2008) Optimized scale-and-stretch for image resizing. In: ACM
SIGGRAPH Asia 2008 papers, pp. 1-8, 2008. https://doi.org/10.1145/1457515.1409071
41. Wang W, Shen J, Yu Y, Ma KL (2016) Stereoscopic thumbnail creation via efficient stereo saliency
detection. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph 23(8):2014–2027. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016.2600594
42. Wang S, Tang Z, Dong W et al (2020) Multi-operator video retargeting method based on improved seam
carving. In: 2020 IEEE 5th Information Technology and Mechatronics Engineering Conference (ITOEC),
pp. 1609-1614. https://doi.org/10.1109/ITOEC49072.2020.9141774
43. Wei D Y, Chou Y C, Su P C (2018) A multi-operator retargeting scheme for compressed videos. In: 2018
IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics-Taiwan (ICCE-TW), pp. 1–2. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICCE-China.2018.8448819
44. Zhai G, Min X (2020) Perceptual image quality assessment: a survey. SCIENCE CHINA Inf Sci 63(11):1–
52. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11432-019-2757-1
23249
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

45. Zhang L, Li K, Ou Z, Wang F (2017) Seam warping: a new approach for image retargeting for small
displays. Soft Comput 21(2):447–457. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-015-1795-1
46. Zhang Q, Tang Z, Jiang H, Chang K (2017) Multi-operator image retargeting with preserving aspect ratio of
important contents. In: Pacific Rim Conference on Multimedia, pp. 306–315. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-77383-4_30
47. Zhang Y, Sun Z, Jiang P, Huang Y, Peng J (2017) Hybrid image retargeting using optimized seam carving
and scaling. Multimed Tools Appl 76(6):8067–8085. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-016-3318-1
48. Zhang D, Yin T, Yang G, Xia M, Li L, Sun X (2017) Detecting image seam carving with low scaling ratio
using multi-scale spatial and spectral entropies. J Vis Commun Image Represent 48:281–291. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2017.07.006
49. Zhou B, Wang X, Cao S, Xiang K, Zhao S (2016) Optimal bi-directional seam carving for compressibility-
aware image retargeting. J Vis Comm Image Rep 41:21–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2016.09.002
50. Zhou Y, Chen Z, Li W (2020) Weakly supervised reinforced multi-operator image retargeting. IEEE Trans
Circuits Syst Vid Technol 31(1):126–139. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2020.2977943
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
applicable law.
23250
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:23207–23250

