Synthese (2022) 200:361
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-022-03832-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Superdeterminism: a reappraisal
Giacomo Andreoletti1
· Louis Vervoort1
Received: 22 March 2022 / Accepted: 26 July 2022 / Published online: 24 August 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022
Abstract
This paper addresses a particular interpretation of quantum mechanics, i.e. superde-
terminism. In short, superdeterminism i) takes the world to be fundamentally
deterministic, ii) postulates hidden variables, and iii) contra Bell, saves locality at
the cost of violating the principle of statistical independence. Superdeterminism cur-
rently enjoys little support in the physics and philosophy communities. Many take it
to posit the ubiquitous occurrence of hard-to-digest conspiratorial and coincidental
events; others object that violating the principle of statistical independence implies
the death of the scientiﬁc methodology. In this paper, we offer a defense to these and
other objections. To counter the conspiracy objection, we draw upon the philosophi-
cal literature on time travel, and conclude that the picture of the world offered by the
superdeterminist does not need to be particularly surprising or conspiratorial. We then
move on to other recent objections, in particular those that focus on the methodology
of science and the nature of the physical laws compatible with superdeterminism. A
key ingredient of our arguments is that the principle of statistical independence may
be violated in theory, but valid for practical purposes. Our overarching goal is to
offer a defense of superdeterminism with respect to its main objections, so that it can
earn its keep as a legitimate contender among the possible interpretations of quantum
mechanics.
Keywords Quantum mechanics · Superdeterminism · Bell’s theorem · Statistical
independence · Counterfactuals · Coincidences · Time travel
B Giacomo Andreoletti
giacomo.andreoletti@protonmail.com
Louis Vervoort
louisvervoort@hotmail.com
1
University of Tyumen, Ulitsa Volodarskogo 6, Tyumen, Russian Federation 625003
123

361
Page 2 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
1 Introduction
Superdeterminism is one of the possible interpretations of quantum mechanics, one
that takes the world to be deterministic and postulates the existence of hidden vari-
ables to explain quantum phenomena. In such a view, the Schrödinger equation is
taken to be incomplete, viz. as not representing fully how reality is. Furthermore, a
superdeterministic theory violates the principle of statistical independence between
the hidden variables and the measurement settings: this can be considered the deﬁning
feature of superdeterministic theories1 (a feature made precise in Eq. 2 below). On
the other hand, superdeterministic theories respect the principle of locality, roughly,
the idea that causation is continuous in space–time and our universe does not feature
“spooky actions at a distance.” The superdeterminist’s strategy emerged as a response
to Bell’s theorem. Whereas many take Bell’s theorem to conclusively show that nature
is non-local, superdeterminists counter this conclusion and argue that there are ways
to resist Bell’s conclusion and consequently save locality.
Superdeterminism enjoys little support in the physics and philosophy communi-
ties. Despite a number of exceptions (e.g. Brans, 1988; Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021;
Elze, 2020; Hossenfelder, 2014; Hossenfelder & Palmer, 2020; Lewis, 2006; Vervoort,
2013, 2019) including a Nobel laureate (‘t Hooft, 2014, 2016, 2021), most people con-
sider superdeterminism a non-starter in the debate about the interpretation of quantum
mechanics. Indeed, some compelling objections have been raised against it. To start,
superdeterminism is criticized because it allegedly requires us to relinquish a standard
metaphysical and epistemic principle, viz. the principle of statistical independence.
This is taken by some to have disastrous consequences, such as the impossibility of
conducting proper science (Baas & Le Bihan, 2021; Chen, 2021; Maudlin, 2019; Shi-
mony et al., 1976). Furthermore, superdeterminism is often dismissed as a “conspiracy
theory”, since, so goes the objection, its truth requires nature to conspire to make it
the case that our empirical evidence matches the predictions of the theory (Shimony
et al., 1976). More recently, Baas and Le Bihan (2021) argue that superdeterminism
requires a suspicious ﬁne-tuning of the initial condition of the universe, which in turn
makes superdeterminism compatible with only one metaphysical account of the laws
of nature, viz. the Humean account.
The overarching goal of this paper is to argue that superdeterminism cannot be so
easily dismissed and that, on the contrary, it deserves the role of a legitimate contender
within the debate on the interpretation of quantum mechanics. To achieve this goal,
in this paper we intend to illustrate how the superdeterminis thas plausible answers to
the charges we mentioned in the previous paragraph. In what follows we ﬁrst recap
Bell’s theorem and the superdeterminist’s response to it (Sect. 2). Next we respond
to the objection that presents superdeterminism as a conspiracy theory (Sect. 3). One
aim of this paper is to press philosophers to have a closer look at the notoriously
controversial concept of “conspiracy” in the context of superdeterminism. Such closer
scrutiny has not yet been done in this context; we offer here one entry into this matter.
1 Since there are no ﬁnalized superdeterministic theories (in the physical sense) yet, i.e. theories that
are based on the statistical dependence expressed in Eq. (2), we will usually term superdeterminism an
“interpretation” (or an assumption) rather than a “theory”. But as will become clear from this article, we
do not exclude that full-blown physical theories based on this assumption could be constructed.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 3 of 20
361
To counter the objection of the alleged conspiratorial nature of superdeterminism, we
will draw upon a different body of literature, viz. the philosophical literature on time
travel and counterfactuals of coincidence. The metaphysical possibility of time travel
raises worries with respect to coincidental events that seem to be bound to happen if
time travel were possible (see, among others, Smith, 1997 and Dowe, 2003). To some,
nature should “conspire” to make unlikely coincidences happen. We will use this
literature to draw a moral on the alleged conspiratorial nature of superdeterminism,
and suggest that there are no conclusive grounds to dismiss the metaphysical and
physical picture of the world provided by superdeterminism as conspiratorial. Then
we move on to the argument from the laws of nature (Sect. 4). Finally, we address the
objections from the impossibility of science (Sect. 5). The main new idea we wish to
introduce in the last sections is that, while superdeterminism does indeed violate the
principle of statistical independence, this may be harmless after all, in a well-deﬁned
sense. Indeed, it is conceivable that ubiquitous statistical dependence exists as a matter
of principle, as would be reﬂected in a—surely elusive—“Theory of Everything” that
describes the Big Bang and every event afterwards, while it is often negligible in
practice. We will show in detail (Sect. 5) how this allows to respond to a challenge
posed by Chen (2021), i.e. how “it is logically consistent for one to claim that statistical
independence is false about microscopic systems but for all practical purposes true of
macroscopic systems”. We will note that our conclusions align with ﬁrst approximate
superdeterministic theories very recently proposed by physicists (notably ‘t Hooft,
2021, Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021). Section 6 will conclude.
A disclaimer may be necessary from the start. As is recalled in the next section,
superdeterminism is an answer to, or “solution” of, Bell’s theorem, saving local causal-
ity by rejecting statistical independence. Now, there are several other options left over
in view of the experimental violation of Bell inequalities (see e.g. Myrvold et al., 2020).
Discussing arguments in favor or against all these positions is outside the scope of
this paper; but in any case, preferring one solution over others is ultimately based on
metaphysical preferences (at least as long as no more fundamental theory for quan-
tum mechanics exists). The metaphysically “lightest” solutions are, perhaps, those
that deny the existence of hidden variables, such as the Copenhagen interpretation or
QBism—which, one might argue, preserve locality and statistical independence with-
out paying the seemingly much heavier metaphysical cost of superdeterminism. Sure,
but for the superdeterminist these solutions cannot even in principle explain quantum
mechanics: for instance, when an electron goes “up” in a Stern-Gerlach magnet, these
interpretations cannot invoke a ground for “up” rather than “down”. Quantum events
such as “spin up” or “down” are then based on nothing, so to speak, in violation of
such celebrated principles as Leibniz’s principle of sufﬁcient reason. Of course, for
the superdeterminist determinism and locality are primordial—and that is also the
reason why she prefers superdeterminism over Bohmian mechanics, which, although
deterministic, is nonlocal. Moreover, at least a part of the superdeterminists hope that
future superdeterministic theories, invoking new degrees of freedom, will allow one to
make new experimental predictions—experiments have been proposed (Hossenfelder,
2014). So the scope of this article is not to weigh metaphysical preferences, but to
focus on the viability of superdeterminism in view of the claims against such viability.
123

361
Page 4 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
2 Bell’s theorem and the superdeterminist’s response
Given that superdeterminism starts out as a response to Bell’s theorem, we use this
section to illustrate Bell’s theorem (Bell, 1964), its implications, and the superdeter-
minist’s response. This section relies heavily on the version of Chen (2021) (which
is itself inspired by Maudlin, 2011, Ch. 1). We chose to follow this reconstruction of
Bell’s theorem because it is one of the clearest in the literature. The reader already
familiar with Bell’s theorem and its implications can skip this section.
Bell’s theorem is almost universally considered as conclusively showing that nature
is fundamentally non-local. To appreciate why Bell’s theorem purportedly shows this,
we recap in what follows a possible way to derive Bell’s conclusion.
Let us assume that we start with a collection of calcium atoms emitting pairs of
photons traveling in opposite directions. Along their paths, we can set up two polarizers
at arbitrary distances, followed by two photon detectors. Each photon can either pass
or be absorbed by the polarizer on its path. We say that two photons from a photon
pair “agree” if they both pass the polarizer or they both get absorbed, otherwise they
“disagree”.
To simplify things, imagine that the polarizers have just 3 possible directions, with
3 angles from the vertical direction, i.e. 0, 30, and 60 degrees. It just so happens, as
a matter of predictions of quantum mechanics and empirical observations, that if you
run a large enough number of experiments with the polarizers at different angles, we
have the following predictions.
Prediction 1. If the two polarizers point in the same direction, 100% of the photon
pairs agree.
Prediction 2. If the left polarizer and the right polarizer differ by 30 degrees, 25% of
the pairs disagree.
Prediction 3. If the left polarizer and the right polarizer differ by 60 degrees, 75% of
the pairs disagree.
Prediction 1 is the most interesting from a philosophical perspective. It predicts that
the two photons will always agree if going through two polarizers pointing in the same
direction. However, two options are possible—either they both pass the polarizer, or
they both get absorbed—and the equations of quantum mechanics are silent about
which option will happen. This means that, if one measures, say, the left photon
and sees that it passed the polarizer, we immediately know the result of the right
photon, even prior to its measurement. With full certainty, the right photon will pass
the polarizer too. As the two polarizers can be set at arbitrary distances, and we can
make it so that the left photon hits its polarizer before the right one does, this seems to
imply the famous “spooky action at a distance.” If the left photon is measured to have
passed the polarizer, this information seems to be instantaneously “sent” to the right
photon, given that the right photon will “have” to pass its polarizer too. This occurs,
and is predicted to occur, independently of the distance among the two polarizers.
Prediction 1 seems then to suggest that there are non-local phenomena, viz. events
that instantaneously have a causal inﬂuence on other events arbitrarily far away in
space.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 5 of 20
361
In discussing a similar scenario thirty years before Bell, Einstein, Podolsky, and
Rosen (1935) came to the conclusion that the mathematical formalism of quantum
mechanics is incomplete. This conclusion was based on the assumption that, in their
judgment, we cannot relinquish locality. Consequently, there must be some hidden
properties that pre-determine whether the pair will pass or be absorbed, given the polar-
izers’ angles. (It is just that, so goes the argument, our current quantum mechanical
formalism does not take into account those hidden properties, hence its incomplete-
ness.) This obviously would explain the results of prediction 1 without violating the
principle of locality. However, Bell’s theorem put an end to this line of thought– and,
according to many, once and for all. For, Bell observes, if photon pairs do have these
pre-determined values that are not currently embedded in the quantum mechanical
formalism, and these values determine the photon behavior with respect to different
positions of the polarizers, then only 8 assignments are possible (see Table 1). Other
assignments are simply not possible, as they would violate prediction 1. In other words,
each photon-pair starts, in this picture, with one of 8 possible ﬁxed states “attached” to
it, which will determine its future behavior. These states can be labelled with a variable
λ, the so-called “hidden variable” (actually, this variable can contain any property that
determines the outcome, not necessarily those that describe the particles proper). Note
that these predetermined states are assumed to determine the outcome of a photon in
a local manner: the outcome on one side does not depend on the one on the other side.
All outcomes are in Bell’s picture assumed to be determined by local states carried by
the photons.
Given that the percentages are non-negative, the following must be true. (This
inequality takes the role of Bell’s inequality in the present model.)
(1) γ + δ + β + γ ≥β + δ
However, it can be shown that if we want to respect predictions 2 and 3, we will violate
the inequality. In fact, if we set the left polarizer to 0 and the right to 30, to respect
prediction 2 we have that
(2) β + γ = 25
And, if we set the left one to 30 and the right one to 60, for the same reasons we have
that
Table 1 The Ps and As refer to
the possible alleged hidden
properties of the photon pairs.
P0 should be read as “the photon
passes if it encounters a polarizer
at 0 degrees”, A30 should be
read as “the photon is absorbed
if it encounters a polarizers at 30
degrees”, and so forth. The
percentage on the right refers to
how many photon pairs of that
kind there are (Chen, 2021)
Left photon
Right photon
Percentage (%)
(1)
(2)
P0, P30, P60
A0, A30, A60
P0, P30, P60
A0, A30, A60
α
(3)
(4)
A0, P30, P60
P0, A30, A60
A0, P30, P60
P0, A30, A60
β
(5)
(6)
P0, A30, P60
A0, P30, A60
P0, A30, P60
A0, P30, A60
γ
(7)
(8)
P0, P30, A60
A0, A30, P60
P0, P30, A60
A0, A30, P60
δ
123

361
Page 6 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
(3) γ + δ = 25
Likewise, if we set the left polarizer at 0 and the right one at 60, then we have to
respect prediction 3. It follows that
(4) β + δ = 75
Equalities (2–4) jointly show that, as a matter of basic arithmetic, (1) is false.
However, (2–4) just follow from the hypothesis that there are hidden variables and
from the predictions (empirically conﬁrmed) of quantum mechanics. Hence we have
a contradiction, the inequality in (1) does and does not hold. The fact that we derive a
contradiction by assuming i) a hypothesis about local hidden states or variables, and
ii) the correctness of the prediction of quantum mechanics (as stressed, empirically
conﬁrmed numerous times) shows that we need to give up either i or ii. Obviously, the
natural decision is to give up the former. If so, Bell’s argument shows once and for all
that no local hidden variables are possible and that nature is fundamentally non-local.
Or so the vast majority believes.
Superdeterminism offers an alternative approach to this. In a nutshell, superdeter-
minism amounts to an attempt to save locality despite Bell’s experiment. Here is how
the superdeterministic solution works. Suppose that you are about to perform a Bell
experiment with sub-collections of 100 photon pairs from a starting group of 100,000
photon pairs. The whole setting is the one described above. There is, in principle, a
way to argue that the possibility of the existence of local hidden variables is not ruled
out by Bell’s interpretation of the experiment. Assume, to respect prediction 1, that
all pairs have one of the 8 assignments of the table above. As before, let us take just
three possible experimental settings. A) the left polarizer at 0 degrees and the right
polarizer at 30 degrees, B) the left polarizer at 30 degrees and the right polarizer at 60
degrees, and C) the left polarizer at 0 degrees and the right polarizer at 60 degrees. We
know, thanks to the predictions, that we need to expect 25% of disagreement in the A
and B set-ups and a 75% disagreement in the C set-up. It is actually possible to obtain
this result. Given the 8 possibilities of the table, we just need to carefully choose the
photon pairs for each sub-collection. For instance, this happens if all of the following
obtains:
– The collection of photon pairs that go through the A set-up (let us call this collection
“a”) is such that 25 pairs are of type 3 and 75 are of type 1.
– The collection of photon pairs that go through the B set-up (let us call this collection
“b”) is such that 25 pairs are of type 5 and 75 are of type 1.
– The collection of photon pairs that go through the C set-up (let us call this collection
“c”) is such that 25 pairs are of type 1 and 75 are of type 3.
That is, the right kind of sub-collections in the experiment get somehow correctly
associated with the right set-up, so that the overall results are in accordance with the
predictions of quantum mechanics. Crucially, if we further assume that α = β = γ =
δ = 25% in the total photon pair collection, Bell’s inequality in (1) is not violated.
As a result, no contradiction ensues by postulating hidden variables and upholding
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 7 of 20
361
locality. In this picture, nature is local and Bell’s experiment fails to show an alleged
non-locality. However, one needs to swallow the idea that, for some reason or another,
when one performs a Bell experiment and sets up the polarizers, the right subset of
photons goes through the experiment. This should not only happen for the particular
choice of polarizers as in the above example, but for any arbitrary choice of polarizers
– and choosing polarizer settings can be done in inﬁnitely many ways. In other terms,
this superdeterministic solution demands that there is a statistical dependence between
the properties of quantum particles and the choices of analyzer settings. This, as noted
by many, seems to imply that nature is conspiring to get the right results, and to hide its
locality from us. In the next section, we shall discuss in detail this conspiracy objection
and offer ways the superdeterminist can respond to this charge.
3 Superdeterminism, conspiracies, and counterfactuals
of coincidence
In this section, we will ﬁrst analyze what the conspiracy objection amounts to, and we
will do so by resorting to a counterfactual analysis of conspiracy. Once the nature of
the objection is made explicit, we will counter the objection by using an analogy from
the literature on conspiracies and time travel.2
To start, it should be noted that superdeterminism does indeed give up the principle
of statistical independence, at least when it comes to the micro-level described by
quantum mechanics (e.g. Lewis, 2006; Myrvold et al., 2020). We acknowledge that this
can be rightly seen as a shortcoming of superdeterminism. In fact, as many observed
(e.g. Baas & Le Bihan, 2021; Chen, 2021; Maudlin, 2019; Shimony et al., 1976),
statistical independence is assumed in virtually all parts of the scientiﬁc enterprise.
That is, whenever we have a large sample and we conduct experiments on a large
enough sub-collection of the initial sample, and we ﬁnd out for instance that 70% of
the elements in the sub-collection have the property P, we are entitled to infer that
the 70% (or a percentage sufﬁciently close to it) of the elements in the large sample
has property P. This inference is granted by the principle of statistical independence.
If the sample was randomly chosen (and it was sufﬁciently large), we are entitled
to think that the sample is representative of the whole in virtue of the principle of
statistical independence: our random choice can be assumed to be independent of the
statistical properties of any collection. So, the principle of statistical independence
does permeate and guide the entire scientiﬁc enterprise.
In the superdeterminist’s interpretation of Bell’s experiment, statistical indepen-
dence is instead violated, as illustrated in the above example: the sub-collections a, b,
and c are not representative of the full collection. For instance, the three sub-collections
are not such that α = β = γ = δ = 25%. So, a superdeterminist needs to give up the
extremely appealing principle of statistical independence. However, by doing so, the
superdeterminist retains the principle of locality. One could then argue that locality
too has the ring of plausibility to it. Locality is, like statistical independence, one of
2 One might note thatin two recent physics publications proposing ﬁrst versions of superdeterministic
theories (‘t Hooft, 2021; Donadi and Hossenfelder, 2021) the authors explicitly claim that those theories
arenot conspiratorial.
123

361
Page 8 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
those metaphysical principles that guide scientiﬁc practice. If we were to observe, for
instance, that everytime someone claps their hand, a dog far away from the clapping
instantaneously dies, we would not even entertain the hypothesis that the clapping and
the death stand in a causal relation, despite the constant correlation. We rule out the
hypothesis, or we do not even consider it, because the hypothesis implies positing a
non-local type of causal relation.
One could then argue that what Bell’s experiment shows us is that we either have
to relinquish locality (as almost all standard interpretations of the experiment do) or
statistical independence (as superdeterminism does). As both are plausible and natural
principles that govern a large part of the scientiﬁc practice and theory, one could
consider that both options are worth pursuing. That is, we would have a situation
where Bell shows that we are forced to give up at least one plausible principle that
supposedly governs our world and it is then a matter of further inquiry which route
one should take. If so, this would be a point in favor of superdeterminism. Instead of
being quickly dismissed, it would become an option worth exploring.
But many authors believe that the charges against superdeterminism are so heavy
that the balance hopelessly tips in favor of non-locality and against superdetermin-
ism. Let us consider again the superdeterministic picture in the context of the Bell
experiment as sketched in the preceding section. To run the experiment, one needs
to choose the set-ups of the two polarizers: this can be done for instance with a ran-
dom number generator or by the free choice of an experimenter. At the same time,
according to superdeterminism, nature would have to select for each set of analyzer
choices, by whatever method they are ﬁxed, the “right” sub-collection of photon pairs.
In the example of the previous section, if the experimenter sets the left polarizer at 0
degrees and the right one at 30 degrees (set-up A), then the sub-collection of photon
pairs that goes through this set-up has to be the sub-collection a; and likewise for B
and b and for C and c. This seems hard to digest, if one assumes that the selection
of these sub-collections and the procedure of setting up the polarizers are statistically
independent.
In order to go further in this analysis, we believe it is instrumental to recast the
argument in terms of counterfactuals. At ﬁrst sight, the superdeterministic picture
seems to require the truth of suspicious counterfactuals. Suppose that as a matter of
fact A and a are selected. It then seems that the following must be the case:
(C) If the set-up B had been chosen, then the sub-collection b would have been selected.
In fact, the set-up B paired with collections a or c is not a possibility within
superdeterminism.3 However, (C), under a standard understanding of the seman-
tics of counterfactuals, seems to be just hard to believe. According to the standard
Lewis-Stalnaker treatment of counterfactuals (Lewis, 1973 and Stalnaker, 1968), a
counterfactual “if it had been the case that P, then it would have been the case that Q”
3 To be more precise, the consequent in (C) should be “b or a sub-collection of the same statistical proﬁle
as b would have been selected”. This is so because other sub-collections could be in accordance with actual
observations and superdeterminism. For instance, in the case of set-up B, the following would do: The
collection of photon pairs that goes through the B set-up (let us call this collection “b*”) is such that 25
pairs are of type 5 and 75 are of type 3. In the remainder of the paper we will ignore such complication, as
the gist of our argument should remain clear without this speciﬁcation.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 9 of 20
361
is true at a world w iff the consequent is true in the possible world most similar to w
in which the antecedent is true.4 If in the actual world A and a had been selected, it’s
unclear why a possible world where B and b are selected is closer to the actual world
than a world where B and a are chosen. On the contrary, the latter B-world, the one
where the consequent is false, seems to be more similar to the actual world—for it
seems natural to assume that the choice of the polarizer angles and the choice of the
sub-collection are two independent events. This in turn naturally inclines us to keep
ﬁxed the actual choice of a when evaluating the counterfactual (C). This would then
make the counterfactual (C) just false, thereby seemingly undermining the superdeter-
ministic strategy. To suppose that the B-b world is more similar to the actual one than
the B-a world is to suppose that, an opponent of superdeterminism would say, nature
conspires behind the scenes. That is, an incredibly numerous series of coincidences
would take place. If we run the Bell experiment multiple times, so the argument goes,
we will always encounter a series of surprising and unexpected coincidences. The
set-up A will always be matched with the sub-collection a, the set-up B with the sub-
collection b, and the set-up C with the sub-collection c. No matter how many times
we run the experiment, these coincidences will always take place.
So, based on these considerations, one might argue that the strategy of rejecting
locality and the strategy of rejecting statistical independence are not, after all, theo-
retically on a par. For, so goes the anti-superdeterminism argument, the strategy of
rejecting statistical independence while upholding locality forces us to accept the truth
of suspicious counterfactuals of coincidence such as (C).
To sum up the argument so far, the superdeterministic strategy of saving locality
comes with a seemingly suspicious implication about nature conspiring behind the
scenes by making coincidences happen on a regular basis. We argue that the charge of
conspiracy against superdeterminism lies precisely in counterfactuals such as (C). That
is, people who ﬁnd superdeterminism a conspiracy theory and hence a non-starter do
it because they think that superdeterminism implies (C) and (C) is just hard to believe.
Certainly it seems more than natural to take such a counterfactual to be false.
However, we think this whole argument is not conclusive. In the remainder of the
section, we will challenge it by drawing upon insights from another area of inquiry,
viz. the philosophical literature on the possibility of time travel. We will argue that
the relevant counterfactual in this debate should not be (C), but rather another one
that we will present shortly. To make our point, we will look at Ted Sider’s work
(2002) on Time Travel, Coincidences, and Counterfactuals, and submit that some of
the arguments used there can be employed in the debate about superdeterminism. To
be explicit, we do not need here to assume that time travel is a physical possibility. We
just want to submit that the current debate on coincidences in the time travel literature
may shed new light on the issue of coincidental conspiracy in the present context.
As it is well known in the time travel literature, time travel cannot result in changes
in the past (see, among others, Lewis, 1976 and Arntzenius & Maudlin, 2002). Sup-
pose a time traveler travels back in time and tries to kill his younger self. We know the
time traveler will not succeed, or else contradictions will ensue. For if the time traveler
4 Lewis’s and Stalnaker’s accounts differ in details, and the deﬁnition used here is imprecise. However, it
captures the spirit of their proposal and it is precise enough for our purposes here.
123

361
Page 10 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
kills his younger self (and we bar resurrection), he will not grow up to later jump back
in time and kill his younger self. Even if time travel were possible, autoinfanticide
by exploiting time travel is not.5 Time travelers who attempt to kill their younger
selves will fail. Why do they fail? The standard answer in the literature is that they
would fail for ordinary reasons: a sudden change of heart, the bullet will surprisingly
miss the target, a bird would just pass through and stop the bullet, failure of nerves,
or (famously) the time traveler would slip on a banana peel. In an interesting twist,
Horwich (1987, ch. 7) discusses a thought experiment devised to cast some doubts
on this idea. What would happen, so goes the thought experiment, if a future Time
Travel Institute for Autoinfanticide were to send back in time thousands of time trav-
elers attempting to kill their younger selves. Despite (we can imagine) their training,
their loaded weapons, their strong motivations, and the easy unprotected targets, they
would all fail—for autoinfanticide is impossible. A big series of coincidences must be
guaranteed to happen to stop their attempts. We would have to believe in the following
counterfactuals of coincidence:
(T1) If time traveler 1 were to attempt to kill his younger self, he would slip on a
banana peel, or his nerves would fail, or…
(T2) If time traveler 2 were to attempt to kill his younger self, he would slip on a
banana peel, or his nerves would fail, or…
(T3) If time traveler 3 were to attempt to kill his younger self, he would slip on a
banana peel, or his nerves would fail, or…
In all attempts, coincidences are guaranteed to happen and the relative counterfactuals
need to be true. However, one might use this thought experiment to run an argument
against the possibility of time travel.6 After all, big series of coincidences do not
happen, so we should not expect them to happen—the same argument we encountered
above against superdeterminism. But that’s what the metaphysical possibility of time
travel seems to imply.
Moreover, the counterfactuals T1-3 just seem false, for in the thought experiment
we imagine that the time travelers have what it takes to kill and that conditions are
ideal. The only thing that stops them must then be a big series of coincidences. But, as
said, we do not expect big series of coincidences to happen. Sider, however, argues that
there is nothing wrong in considering those counterfactuals as true. To show that, he
discusses the following two counterfactuals that have to do with completely ordinary
cases where time travel is not involved.
(W) If Ted were to throw the stone at the window, Ted would slip on a banana peel or
hit a passing bird or…
(W*) If Ted were to throw the stone at the window but the window did not subsequently
break, then Ted would slip on a banana peel or hit a passing bird or....
Suppose Ted’s throwing abilities are just normal so that in ordinary circumstances he
would break a window with a stone. If so, (W) just seems wrong. That is, we have no
5 There is actually nothing special about autoinfanticide. Time travelers can never change the past. They,
for instance, cannot kill Baby Hitler, as Hitler did not die when he was a baby. This does not mean time
travelers cannot affect the past (see Lewis 1976 for a distinction between changing and affecting the past).
6 It should be noted this was not Horwich’s intent.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 11 of 20
361
reason to think that some strange coincidence would happen and stop the breaking. At
most, we can say that they might happen. However, (W*) seems to be of a different
nature. As Sider observes, in (W*) there is some difﬁculty built in the antecedent. In
his words (Sider, 2002: p.123), “we can think of the antecedent of these conditionals
as describing states of affairs that are ‘difﬁcult’ to make true. To include such a state
of affairs, a possible world must include some strange coincidence.” The antecedent
of (W*) is “hard” to make true, as it counterfactually considers circumstances where
Ted throws a stone, Ted has the ability to break the window, conditions are ideal and
he attempts to do so. Yet, he fails. In these counterfactual circumstances, where the
failure is built in the antecedent, it’s normal to expect some coincidental event. In other
words, whereas (W) seems false, (W*) strikes us as true. Crucially, Sider continues,
the counterfactuals (T1-3) are structurally just like (W*). In (T1-3), it is again the case
that the difﬁculty is built into the antecedent. In fact, we consider individuals (our
time travelers) who are perfectly suited and equipped to kill the victim and yet they
fail. Those circumstances are “hard” to make true, and thus it is no wonder that they
require a continued series of coincidences to be true. Moreover, we considered (W*)
as being true. If (T1-3) are structurally just like (W*), then (T1-3) are true as well,
despite initial appearances to the contrary. In other words, there is nothing surprising
nor strange with coincidences “guaranteed to happen” in the case of time travelers
attempting to kill their younger selves.
Why does this have a bearing on the superdeterministic strategy? Let us brieﬂy
recap the superdeterministic strategy. Superdeterminists want to offer a theory that: (i)
is in accordance with the predictions of quantum mechanics, and (ii) saves locality. To
do so, the superdeterminist posits the existence of hidden variables. As the prediction
1 of quantum mechanics (see previous section) needs to be respected, the hidden
variables of the photon pairs can take only one of those 8 possible values. Given the
nature of the other 2 predictions, the superdeterminist needs to posit the “coincidental”
match between the set-up and the sub-set of photons that go through the set-up in a
Bell experiment. Returning to the example given above, this seems to imply that
the superdeterminist has to believe that when, say, set-up A and sub-collection a are
selected, counterfactuals of coincidence such as (C) are to be true.
(C) If the set-up B had been chosen, then the sub-collection b would have been selected.
As said, (C) just seems hard to believe because in the consequent we have a “coinci-
dental event”, namely a sub-collection that differs in nature from the general collection.
Yet the parallel with time travel and the counterfactuals of coincidence now comes to
play. Notice that within the superdeterministic picture we are assuming locality. That
is, the superdeterminist takes the actual world to be a world where locality holds. The
relevant counterfactual to consider is not (C) then, but rather.
(C*) If the set-up B had been chosen and nature is local, then the sub-collection b
would have been selected.
With (C*), we have again a case where the consequent features a “coincidental
event”, i.e. the anomalous sub-collection b. Whereas we think that coincidences might
happen, we do not normally think that they would happen. However, here a difﬁculty
is built into the antecedent of the counterfactual. The antecedent asks us to consider
123

361
Page 12 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
counterfactual scenarios where B is selected and nature is local, while we have to
keep ﬁxed the predictions 1–3 of quantum mechanics. Those described circumstances
require unlikely coincidences to be true. That is, the conditions built in the antecedent
are hard to make true. One of the few ways to make them true is that the sub-collection
b is selected. If so, there is nothing surprising, remarkable, nor suspicious with con-
sidering (C*) as true. (C*) just is true. Counterfactuals of coincidence are sometimes
true, and (C*) is one of those cases.
Notice also that (C*) bears similarities with (W*) and (T1-3). In (W*), the condi-
tions described in the antecedent are difﬁcult to make true: We are asked to consider
a situation where Ted fails to break a window despite the fact that he has the ability to
do so and conditions are ideal. In (T1-3) something similar goes on. The antecedent
requires to consider a situation where people are perfectly equipped to kill, ﬁnd them-
selves in favorable conditions and with the intention to kill, yet they try and fail.
Similarly for (C*). Here the antecedent requires us to consider a situation where local-
ity holds and the predictions of quantum mechanics are ﬁxed. We are also asked to
make it the case that in the counterfactual scenario the set-up B is chosen. To make all
the above facts hold together, only a few circumstances would work. One of the few
is that the sub-collection b is selected. But, we noted that it is very natural to consider
(W*) and (T1-3) as true. If (C*) is indeed similar to them, as we argued, then it seems
natural to say that (C*) is true.
One could reply that by focusing on (C*) rather than (C) we are just assuming what
a superdeterminist wants to show, i.e. that nature is local. But this seems to be a too
hasty conclusion. Remember the initial dialectic. Bell’s experiment shows us that we
need to give up at least one of the two principles: locality or statistical independence.
Both are well-established principles that are largely assumed in all parts of scientiﬁc
practice. One could then think that the options of dropping either of them are on a
par. But, opponents of superdeterminism argue that the option of dropping statistical
independence to save locality comes at a great cost, i.e. the cost of believing that nature
conspires to guarantee that strange coincidences always happen, and hence the two
optionsarenotonapar.However,ifwearecorrect,thingsdonotstandinthatway.Once
the worry about the “coincidental” nature of superdeterminism is spelled out, i.e., once
we realize that the relevant counterfactuals within superdeterminism are those such as
(C*) and that there is nothing remarkable or surprising about (C*) being true, then there
shouldbenoresistanceinaccepting(C*)-typecounterfactualsastrue.Thecoincidental
appearance is just what is required by the fact that it is difﬁcult to make the antecedent
true. If so, the option of rejecting statistical independence (superdeterminism) and the
option of rejecting locality (other interpretations of quantum mechanics) are again on
a par and further inquiry is needed to settle the issue.
In conclusion of this section, we believe superdeterminism cannot be so quickly
dismissed based on the argument that it implies strange and hard to believe coincidental
events. The charge against superdeterminism amounts to rejecting counterfactuals of
coincidence such as (C). But we showed here that counterfactuals of a similar type are
believed to be acceptable by many philosophers. Lastly, note that the superdeterminist
could arguably rely on an argument from physics to tip the balance in her favor:
many physicists believe that non-locality implies a violation of Lorentz invariance
and relativity theory. This point was raised, to start with, by Bell himself (see the
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 13 of 20
361
conclusion of his 1964). The superdeterminist may emphasize that her favorite view
may look counterintuitive, but does not violate any established law of physics proper.
4 Superdeterminism and laws of nature
In this section we address a recent objection by Baas and Le Bihan (2021).7 Baas and
Le Bihan argue that superdeterminism raises a worry related to the laws of nature.
As it is well known, the philosophical literature provides different accounts of the
laws of nature. As they observe, we can count at least four accounts: (1) Primitivism
(cf., among others, Maudlin, 2007) (2) Humeanism (cf., among others, Lewis, 1994)
(3) the Dispositionalist view (cf., among others, Bird, 2005 and Vetter, 2012), and
(4) the Universalist view (cf., among others, Armstrong, 1978, 1983). According to
Baas and Le Bihan, superdeterminism is compatible only with Humeanism. This is
taken to be a disadvantage, since supporters of other views on the laws of nature
would ﬁnd superdeterminism unattractive. Their argument relies on the assumption
that superdeterminism needs to posit an ontological dependence between the laws of
nature and the initial conditions of the universe.
The assumption about ontological dependence relies on the fact that, according
to many, superdeterminism needs to posit a sort of coincidental match between the
initial conditions of the universe and the dynamical laws described by the Schrödinger
equation of quantum mechanics. The idea is that some event (or some collection of
events) in the causal past of the universe, a past that ultimately goes back to the very
initial conditions of the universe, causes both the choice of the polarizers in a Bell-like
experiment and the selection of the sub-collection that goes through the experiment.
This would in turn ensure that the “right” sub-collections always get assigned to the
“right” set-ups.
This, in Baas and Le Bihan’s view, implies a dependence between the laws of nature
(the Schrödinger equation) and the initial state of the universe. In fact, had the initial
conditions been different, so the thought goes, the laws of nature would also have been
different. They then go on observing that this is a counterfactual that only a supporter
of Humeanism about the laws of nature could accept. For, under Humeanism, laws
are not ontologically independent entities. On the contrary, under Humeanism laws
just supervene on the mosaic of facts (Lewis, 1994). It is thus not problematic for a
Humean to argue that different events at a speciﬁc time, including the ﬁrst time, yield
a different set of laws. But, this ontological dependence between initial conditions
and laws is problematic for the other three accounts of laws, as in those accounts laws
7 Baas and Le Bihan raise other worries, but those we treat in this and the next section are considered
the most pressing ones by these authors. Another worry is the a-typicality and/or ﬁne-tuned nature of the
cosmological initial conditions that superdeterministic theories would need (this problem is closely related
to the conspiracy objection and the problem treated in the present section). In any case, we agree with Baas
and Le Bihan that ﬁne-tuning is not speciﬁc to superdeterminism and seems not an ultimate objection. We
believe the same holds for a-typicality. Any deterministic physical theory that makes a prediction “at token
level”, i.e. about detailed facts of the world, needs to use unique initial values (in such deterministic “initial
value problems” unique initial values are mapped on unique solutions). Finally, in (Donadi and Hossenfelder
2021) counterarguments against the charge of a-typicality / ﬁne-tuning are given by explicit construction
of a superdeterministic toy model that is, according to the authors, neither ﬁne-tuned nor conspiratorial.
123

361
Page 14 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
enjoy a degree of independence from what events there are, i.e. the same set of laws
is compatible with different events and in particular with different initial conditions.
We agree that if superdeterminism were compatible only with Humeanism, this
would be a problem for superdeterminism. However, we do not think that this is
the case. It should be noted that a superdeterminist considers the current equations of
quantum mechanics as incomplete. That is, according to a superdeterminist, there must
be deeper laws of nature that take into account what we now temporarily call “hidden
variables” and dictate their dynamical behavior over time. Therefore, it seems too hasty
to claim that under superdeterminism there is a (suspicious) ontological dependence
between initial conditions and laws of nature: we do not know yet how such a theory
would look like.
Proponents of superdeterminism believe it is possible to construct theories with new
variables, while these new variables are very likely not all the variables of all particles
at the Big Bang (this would seemto amount to an intractable phase space)—even if
these variable are assumed to exist and to be superdeterministic. Similar moves are
not rare in physics: for instance, statistical mechanics assumes that detailed mechan-
ical properties of all particles exist even if they cannot be known in all detail; and it
integrates-out these variables by statistical techniques, leading to new tractable vari-
ables such as the partition function. Indeed, this is what happens inarguably the most
solid ﬁrst approach towards a full-ﬂedged superdeterministic theory, ‘t Hooft’s Cellu-
lar Automaton Interpretation of quantum mechanics (‘t Hooft, 2014, 2016, 2021). In
‘t Hooft’s theory the superdeterministic variables are integrated-out,8 and an effective
hidden-variable theory is constructed with effective hidden-variables that play their
usual role. There is no ground to assume an ontological dependence between the ini-
tial values of these variables and the effective laws. In (Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021)
this strategy of building a “higher level” theory by integrating-out hidden variables is
also used.9 As said, such a construction of effective theories is very similar to what
happens in statistical thermodynamics, where the mechanical variables of the ultimate
constituents of matter are integrated-out and give rise to new, effective variables. In
such an effective theory the link between the new variables (and their initial values) and
the laws of statistical thermodynamics is the usual one, even if a gigantic phase-space
of unknowable “deeper” variables is assumed to exist.
One may look at things from a different angle: in a very recent article Hance and
Hossenfelder (2022) emphasize that the outcomes of a Bell experiment are not only
determined by initial conditions but also by an evolution law (acting on the initial
state) which could generate the statistical dependence on which superdeterminism
hinges; the model of (Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021) is invoked as an example. In
this scenario there is no ontological dependence between initial conditions at the Big
Bang and laws of nature. A similar conclusion holds for the explicit “Leibnizian”
model by Ciepielewski et al. (2021). Although the authors admit it may not be a
realistic superdeterministic model, it has for instance the merit to illustrate by explicit
construction that such an ontological dependence is not needed as a matter of principle.
8 See (‘t Hooft, 2021), Eq. (14) and accompanying text.
9 Cf. e.g. (Donadi and Hossenfelder 2021) p. 8.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 15 of 20
361
In sum, the argument by Baas and Le Bihan surely has some traction; but it seems
that already published attempts at providing a superdeterministic theory, or a canvas
for such a theory, point to the conclusion it is not an inescapable problem.
5 The objection from the impossibility of science
The third argument against superdeterminism that is voiced by authors as Shimony
et al. (1976), Maudlin (2019), Baas and Le Bihan (2021), and Chen (2021), boils
down to the idea that the enterprise of doing science would not be possible in a
superdeterministic world. Maudlin (cited by Chen, 2021) phrases it this way (2019):
“If we fail to make this sort of statistical independence assumption, empirical
science can no longer be done at all. For example, the observed strong robust cor-
relation between mice being exposed to cigarette smoke and developing cancer
in controlled experiments means nothing if the mice who are already predisposed
to get cancer somehow always end up in the experimental rather than control
group. But we would regard that hypothesis as crazy.”
Again, the idea is that experimental science is only possible if our choices of testing
conditions are independent of the physical properties that determine experimental
outcomes—an assumption violated by superdeterminism. To be deﬁnite, Chen (2021),
for example, deﬁnes stochastic independence in this way: “we assume that the direction
of the polarizer can be set independently of the collection of incoming photon pairs”.
Now, while we agree that superdeterminism implies some form of statistical depen-
dence, we believe that there are arguments for the idea that this dependence may well
be innocuous, after all. To make our point, it is necessary to deﬁne “statistical indepen-
dence” in a slightly more precise way. Clearly, the statistical independence that is used
in the mathematical proofs of the Bell inequality, is a well-deﬁned concept in probabil-
ity theory, and holds between statistical variables. By deﬁnition, variables x and y are
independent (or “de-correlated”) iff P(x|y)= P(x)(for all values of x and y) where
both x and y may actually represent a series (n-tuple) of variables; if the “ ̸= ” sign
holds (for some values), then x and y are said to be dependent. This deﬁnition is based
on the concept of conditional probability (P(x|y)). Since conditional probabilities
are deﬁned via joint probabilities, it is easy to show that a mathematically equivalent
deﬁnition of independence is: P(x, y)= P(x)P(y). In the context of Bell’s theorem,
the variables between which the supposedly essential independence should hold are,
on the one hand, the left and right analyzer variables, call them θ1 and θ2 respectively,
and, on the other hand, the local hidden variables λ. In a formula, independence boils
down to:
P(λ|θ1, θ2) = P(λ).
(1)
Superdeterminism violates Eq. (1) since it assumes that the properties λ (or slightly
more generally, the properties or states that determine the experimental outcomes, cf.
the toy model of Sect. 2) are somehow statistically dependent on the (choice of) the
analyzer angles. Equation 1 is indeed the mathematical expression that is used in
123

361
Page 16 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
proofs of the Bell inequality (see e.g. Hossenfelder & Palmer, 2020 Eq. 3). So any
superdeterministic theory assumes, by deﬁnition, statistical dependence, i.e.:
P(λ|θ1, θ2) ̸= P(λ).
(2)
First, it is clear that statistical independence is ubiquitous in nature, and an
experimentally well-conﬁrmed assumption in countless experimental situations. For
instance, if θ1 is chosen by Alice, and θ2 by Bob, and if both experimenters have
no pre-established plan, then their random choices of the values of these angles will
clearly be independent. Similarly, random number generators would lead to indepen-
dent angles. This independence can easily be experimentally veriﬁed: it sufﬁces to
determine the probabilities P(θ1, θ2), P(θ1) and P(θ2)(as relative frequencies in an
experiment in which both Alice and Bob choose say 1000 angles), and then to compute
that P(θ1, θ2) = P(θ1)P(θ2) (or, equivalently, P(θ1|θ2) = P(θ1)). This independence
seems so obvious that no-one would even bother to do the experiment! Similarly, there
is independence say between the ﬂuctuations of the terrestrial magnetic ﬁeld in a given
spot in Paris, and the half-life of a radioactive atom in a lab in New York. There is
a ubiquitous independence between the “usual” variables we encounter; and this is
indeed a prerequisite to do science. On the other hand, in certain interesting cases
there is statistical dependence. For instance, in a Bell experiment there is dependence
between the left and right electron spins or photon polarizations, as illustrated in
Sect. 2. As a numerical example, in the case of photons in a “singlet” state the mathe-
matical expression for the joint probability of the left and right polarization (x and y)
is given by:
P(x, y|θ1, θ2) = 1
4[1 + xy cos(θ1 −θ2)]
(3)
This expression covers the examples given in Sect. 2 and accounts for instance
for the fact that if θ1 = θ2 the polarizations are perfectly correlated.10 Note that the
probability in Eq. 3 cannot be factorized in a product of the type P(x)P(y). There is
also correlation between (x, y) and (θ1, θ2):P(x, y|θ1, θ2) ̸= P(x, y).
Now, we submit that the argument that the superdeterminist could invoke to justify
Eq. 2, exploits two ingredients. The ﬁrst is that the dependence relation she contem-
plates involves a highly speciﬁc class of variables λ, not just the “usual” physical
properties. As we will detail a bit further, on the usual reading these variables are part
of a theory that describes the Big Bang (and everything after it), so a (still elusive) the-
ory of quantum gravity, or rather a (still more elusive) “Theory of Everything” (ToE).
The second ingredient of the argument is that empirical veriﬁcation of independence
as in Eq. 1 is subject to empirical uncertainty. Normally, experimentally determined
variables X come with an unavoidable measurement error, so are characterized by a
certain empirical precision limit or “uncertainty” X (this is usually formalized as:
X = X0 ± X, where X0 is the experimentally most likely value of X). Likewise, an
10 Indeed, from Eq. (3) follows that P(x = +1, y = +1|θ1, θ1) = P(+, +) = ½ = P(−, −); and P(+, −)
= P(−, +) = 0, corresponding to perfect correlation.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 17 of 20
361
experimental “probability” P, determined via a ratio of counts, comes with an uncer-
tainty P. This uncertainty varies as 1/N, where N is the number of trials (precise
probability measurements need a large number of trials).
Now, the ﬁrst part of the argument is rather straightforward and well-known.
Typically, superdeterminists justify Eq. (2) by pointing to the logical and physi-
cal possibility that the “free” choice of analyzer angles is itself a physical process
(materialized by a highly complex neural, but ultimately still physical, process in the
experimenter’s brain), and that this process and all the physical properties involved
are themselves causally determined by preceding events. This causal chain between
successive events and processes is assumed to reach from the neural choice event to
the Big Bang. Since events and processes are in this picture all described by physical
properties, i.e. variables, the conclusion is that all variables occurring in theories and
experiments, also θ1 and θ2, are determined by, and therefore statistically dependent
on, the λ-variables that constitute the ToE describing the Big Bang. Ergo, Eq. (2) is the
correct equation after all, or so argues the superdeterminist, if the λ are interpreted as
the variables of the “ab initio” or “ultimate” ToE describing all details of the universe
starting from time = 0.
Importantly, this argument has more traction, we believe, if one realizes that the
λ are truly unique, in the most absolute sense: they are the variables occurring in
the ultimate ToE—not the mundane variables we encounter every day, for which
statistical independence remains obvious. Note that the above argument still holds
even if physicists would never be able to construct such a ToE in practice. One may
assume that it exists, as is usual practice in physics; several physicists are working
on laying the basis for at least effective theories (‘t Hooft, 2014, 2016, 2021, other
examples in Hossenfelder & Palmer, 2020; Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021).
But this argument has a sting to it; it is here we need the second ingredient. Indeed,
if the just sketched picture is correct, then the most natural assumption is, it seems, that
somehow all events (variables) should remain correlated viatheir common causes, the
λ taken at the Big Bang. But as noted above, statistical independence is ubiquitous,
for instance between the freely chosen angles in a usual Bell experiment: P(θ1, θ2) =
P(θ1)P(θ2), as one can verify. But in the superdeterministic picture θ1 and θ2 should
be correlated, since they have common causes. Still, we believe there is a way around
this problem, using our second ingredient: it seems natural to assume that even if this
correlation exists as a matter of principle, it is not measurable in practice—recall that
every measured probability has a measurement error. In order to measure the highly
reﬁned correlation between θ1 and θ2, or the correlation in (Eq. 2), one would need
to have control over the λ, and that seems impossible. In order to detect correlation
between variables, one usually needs tightly controlled experiments, ﬁxing a whole
series of experimental variables.11 For instance, in order to measure the correlations
between the photons in a Bell experiment, one needs extremely draconic control over
a wide range of physical variables constituting the experiment and its environment;
quantum experiments are fragile and de-coherence ubiquitous. Thus, correlation can
only be shown to exist in highly sophisticated experiments, at least when we probe
11 This is especially the case when the two correlated events are in an indirect, distant causal relation,
e.g. when they are widely separated in time and/or space and when they are causally connected via many
intermediate events/causes. This would clearly apply to the correlations in (Eq. 2).
123

361
Page 18 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
quantum variables, let alone the sub-quantum variables λ. In a simple picture: the
correlations between λ and the analyzer angles originate in a past that is so distant that
they become undetectably weak. So the correlations of (Eq. 2) involving the variables
of the ﬁnal ToE exist, but are practically inaccessible.
Note that there is a marked difference with the correlations of Eq. (3) that exist
among the quantum variables (x, y) and the macroscopic angles (θ1, θ2). The values of
these four variables are ‘actualized’ in the Bell experiment: the numerical values that
occur in Eq. (3) are the values of (x, y) and (θ1, θ2) taken at the time of measurement.
In Eq. (2), the values of λ are ‘old’: they are taken at the Big-Bang. That could
explain why we do see Eq. (3) in experiments, while Eq. (2) is practically inaccessible
even if theoretically correct. One could object here that the macroscopic correlations
between θ1 and θ2 should then also be visible, since both angles can be actualized
in experiments. But these variables θ1 and θ2 are surely not part of a fundamental
physical theory (such as quantum gravity or even quantum mechanics). So a complete
argument why we often do not see correlations between macroscopic variables while
we can see them in quantum experiments, must also assume that fundamental degrees
of freedom have a stronger tendency to remain detectably correlated12—if they are
accessible in experiments. In sum, it is conceivable that correlation between variables
is usually only visible if at least one of the correlated variables belongs to a fundamental
theory [e.g. a quantum variable as in Eq. (3)] and if all variables can be actualized in
experiments.13
This concludes our two-tiered argument against the claim that superdeterminism
is at odds with the experimental statistical independence we need to do science.
Superdeterminism boils down to a theoretical, in-principle dependence (on the ab-
initio variables of the ultimate ToE), a dependence which may well be experimentally
undetectable for all practical purposes. Indeed, it is not just any dependence, but a
very unique dependence on the ab-initio variables of the ultimate ToE. In order to
understand what happens in a Bell experiment “under the surface”, one would have to
take these correlations of (Eq. 2) into account (by means of a hypothetical ToE), even
if they are unmeasurable, just as the correlations between many other (e.g. macro-
scopic) variables are undetectable for all practical purposes. Chen (2021) comes to the
conclusion that “it is logically consistent for one to claim that statistical independence
is false about microscopic systems but for all practical purposes true of macroscopic
systems”. We have given here a possible answer to his question what reasons we have
for thinking that this is true in a superdeterministic theory. By the same token, we
have taken up the challenge proposed by Baas and Le Bihan in the conclusion of their
(2021) to “provide an explanation [of why statistical independence is often valid in
the macro-world but not for quantum systems] in order to connect superdeterminism
to the rest of science”.
12 “since their birth at the Big Bang, or closely afterwards”, one might add, somewhat metaphorically.
Note that the idea of universal correlation is very natural in quantum ﬁeld theories, supposedly already
valid shortly after the Big Bang.
13 The exception being macroscopic events that have a recent or strong causal link, say between throwing
a rock and the window breaking, or between the positions of earth and moon.
123

Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Page 19 of 20
361
6 Conclusion
We have argued here that superdeterminism may not be as counterintuitive as often
believed. We provided counterarguments to worries that were recently elaborated in
detail by Chen (2021) and Baas and Le Bihan (2021), relating to the conspiratorial and
coincidental nature of superdeterminism (Sect. 3), its exclusive compatibility with a
restricted Humean account of laws (Sect. 4), and its tension with the usual method-
ology of science (Sect. 5). In the wider literature, the most frequently encountered
charges against superdeterminism concern its conspiratorial nature and its relinquish-
ing of the statistical independence needed for doing science. As to the latter worry,
we argued that statistical dependence may exist in theory (in an elusive ToE), but is
undetectable in many (macroscopic) instances. As to the former worry, one impor-
tant goal of this article was to press philosophers to have a closer look at the notion
of “conspiracy”, a concept that seems heavily subjectively tainted. We opened this
debate by referring to literature from time travel, and argued that in this body of work
similar counterfactuals as those implied by superdeterminism are considered accept-
able. Finally, we brieﬂy noted that our arguments align with the conclusions of recent
models proposed by physicists(‘t Hooft, 2021, Donadi & Hossenfelder, 2021). The
conspiratorial-looking correlations needed for reproducing the quantum results in a
Bell experiment may exist at a deep, fundamental level, but may not be observable,
and the variables describing these all-pervading correlations may not be necessary for
building effective superdeterministic theories.
Acknowledgements Giacomo Andreoletti thanks the project PID2019-108762GB-I00 of the Spanish Min-
istry of Science and Innovation. Louis Vervoort would like to thank the participants of the conference
“Superdeterminism and Retrocausality” (Bonn 2022), and especially the organizers, Sabine Hossenfelder,
Huw Price and Tim Palmer, for helpful discussions.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interest to disclose.
References
Armstrong, D. (1978). A theory of universals. Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. (1983). What is a law of nature? Cambridge University Press.
Arntzenius, F., & Maudlin, T. (2002). Time travel and modern physics. Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplement, 50, 169–200.
Baas, A., & Le Bihan, B. (2021). What does the world look like according to superdeterminism. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1086/714815
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky paradox. Physics, 1(3), 195–200.
Bird, A. (2005). The dispositionalist conception of laws. Foundations of Science, 10, 353–370.
Brans, C. (1988). Bell’s theorem does not eliminate fully causal hidden variables. International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, 27, 219–226.
Chen, E. K. (2021). Bell’s theorem, quantum probabilities, and superdeterminism. In E. Knox & A. Wilson
(Eds.), The Routledge companion to philosophy of physics. Routledge.
Ciepielewski, G. S., Okon, E., Sudarsky, D. (2021). On superdeterministic rejections of settings inde-
pendence. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 74. https://doi.org/10.1086/714819. cf. also
arXiv:2008.00631 [quant-ph].
123

361
Page 20 of 20
Synthese (2022) 200 :361
Donadi, S., & Hossenfelder, S. (2021). A superdeterministic toy model. https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01327v4.
Dowe, P. (2003). The coincidences of time travel. Philosophy of Science, 70(3), 574–589.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete? Physical Review, 47(10), 880.
Elze, H. (2020). Are quantum spins but small perturbations of ontological ising spins? Foundations of
Physics, 50, 1875–1893.
Hance, J. R., & Hossenfelder, S. (2022). The wavefunction as a true ensemble. https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.
02676
Horwich, P. (1975). Asymmetries in time: Problems in the philosophy of science. MIT Press.
Hossenfelder, S. (2014). Testing superdeterministic conspiracy. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 504,
012018.
Hossenfelder, S., & Palmer, T. (2020). Rethinking superdeterminism. Frontiers in Physics, 8, 139.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Harvard University Press.
Lewis, D. (1976). The paradoxes of time travel. American Philosophical Quarterly, 13, 145–152.
Lewis, D. (1994). Humean supervenience debugged. Mind, 103(412), 473–490.
Lewis, P. (2006). Conspiracy theories of quantum Mechanics. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
57, 359–381.
Maudlin, T. (2007). The metaphysics within physics. Oxford University Press.
Maudlin, T. (2011). Quantum non-locality and relativity: Metaphysical intimations of modern physics. John
Wiley & Sons.
Maudlin, T. (2019), Bell’s other assumption(s). Retrieved from youtube.
Myrvold, W., Genovese, M., & Shimony, A. (2020). Bell’s theorem. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy (Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/
bell-theorem/.
Shimony, A., Horne, M. A., & Clauser, J. F. (1976). Comment on ‘The theory of local beables’. Epistemo-
logical Letters, 13(1).
Sider, T. (2002). Time travel, coincidences, and counterfactuals. Philosophical Studies, 110(2), 115–138.
Smith, N. J. J. (1997). Bananas enough for time travel? British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 48(3),
363–389.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N. Rescher (Ed.), Studies in logical theory. Oxford:
Blackwell.
‘t Hooft, G. (2014). Physics on the boundary between classical and quantum mechanics. Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 504, 012003.
’t Hooft, G. (2016). The cellular automaton interpretation of quantum mechanics, Fundamental Theories
of Physics, Vol. 185, Berlin: Springer International Publishing; and arXiv:1405.1548 [quant-ph]
’t Hooft, G. (2021). Fast vacuum ﬂuctuations and the emergence of quantum mechanics. arXiv:2010.02019
[quant-ph]
Vervoort, L. (2013). Bell’s theorem: Two neglected solutions. Foundations of Physics, 43, 769–791.
Vervoort, L. (2019). Probability theory as a physical theory points to superdeterminism. Entropy 21(9), 848
(1–13).
Vetter, B. (2012). Dispositional essentialism and the laws of nature. In A. Bird, B. Ellis, & H. Sankey (Eds.),
Properties, powers and structures. New York: Routledge.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is
solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
123

