Expertise reversal effect and its instructional
implications: introduction to the special issue
Slava Kalyuga Æ Alexander Renkl
Received: 22 July 2009 / Accepted: 3 August 2009 / Published online: 27 August 2009
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009
The formulation of robust and empirically-funded instructional principles is one of the
major goals of instructional science. Research on aptitude-treatment interactions (ATIs)
have, however, shown that instructional principles usually do not apply to any type of
learner. As learners’ prior knowledge is the most important learning pre-requisite, it is
clear that instructional principles should take prior knowledge into account: What could be
beneﬁcial for beginning learners might get detrimental for advanced learners. In recent
years, the concept of the expertise reversal effect—developed within the framework of
cognitive load theory—has inspired a renewed interest on the interactions between levels
of learner prior knowledge and effectiveness of different instructional techniques and
procedures.
The expertise reversal is a reversal in the relative effectiveness of instructional methods
as levels of learner knowledge in a domain change. The effect has been investigated since
mid-1990s (see Kalyuga 2005, 2007; Kalyuga et al. 2003, for available overviews). It has
been replicated in many studies with a large range of instructional materials and partici-
pants either as a full reversal (a disordinal interaction with signiﬁcant differences for both
novices and experts) or, more often, as a partial reversal (with non-signiﬁcant differences
for novices or experts, but with a signiﬁcant interaction). The major instructional design
implication of these studies is the need to adjust instructional methods and procedures as
learners acquire more experience in a speciﬁc domain.
The expertise reversal effect ﬁts well some empirical ﬁndings obtained in ATIs studies
initiated in mid-1960s (Cronbach and Snow 1977). However, although learners’ prior
knowledge was recognized as an essential aptitude within the ATI approach (e.g., see
Tobias 1976, 1989 for overviews), aptitudes and instructional treatments were investigated
without taking into account underlying cognitive processes, and psychometric measure-
ment tools used in ATI studies were not suitable for realistic instructional systems that
could tailor instructional methods to individual learners.
S. Kalyuga (&)
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
e-mail: s.kalyuga@unsw.edu.au
A. Renkl
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
123
Instr Sci (2010) 38:209–215
DOI 10.1007/s11251-009-9102-0

Cognitive load theory is based on an established model of human cognitive architecture
that includes working memory with very limited duration, as well as storage and pro-
cessing capacities for novel information, and effectively unlimited long-term memory as a
knowledge base (see Sweller 2004; van Merrie¨nboer and Sweller 2005, for recent over-
views of the theory). The limitations of working memory lead to the necessity to avoid
cognitive overload, for example, by excessive amounts of interacting elements of infor-
mation that have to be processed by the learners. The theory distinguishes between pro-
ductive (intrinsic, germane) cognitive load that makes learning possible and wasteful
(extraneous) cognitive load that interferes with learning. For example, cognitive effort
involved in comprehending novel information in text and pictures is required for successful
learning as learners need to make connections between associated elements of presented
information and their knowledge base (productive load). However, when related text and
pictures are separated in space or time, the additional effort required for visual search
processes and their co-referencing is expected to increase extraneous cognitive load.
Physically integrating verbal and pictorial representations (placing them next to each other
or synchronizing them in time) may reduce or eliminate this load (split-attention effect in
cognitive load theory). A similar effect could be achieved by narrating the text rather than
presenting it in a visual form (modality effect).
It was demonstrated that procedures and techniques designed to reduce extraneous
cognitive load such as integrating textual explanations into diagrams to minimize split-
attention, replacing visual text with auditory narration, or using worked examples to
increase levels of instructional guidance and reduce unproductive search processes, were
more effective for novice learners (see Sweller et al. 1998 for a review of original studies
of major cognitive load effects). However, further studies with more advanced learners
indicated that with the development of learner knowledge in a domain, such procedures
and techniques often became unnecessary or even detrimental (Kalyuga et al. 1998, 2000,
2001; Renkl 1997; Renkl and Atkinson 2003; Renkl et al. 2002). For example, for more
advanced learners, eliminating redundant representations or detailed worked-out steps was
more effective than providing them. For these learners, processing redundant material
could induce unnecessary working memory load and may distract from the central con-
cepts and principles yet to be learned (see Renkl and Atkinson 2007; Wittwer and Renkl
2008). Especially, if more knowledgeable learners could not avoid or ignore redundant
sources of information, those sources might impose an additional cognitive load resulting
in negative rather than positive or neutral effects. A cognitive load interpretation of the
effect was supported by measures of mental load (using subjective rating scales).
Knowledgeable learners found it more difﬁcult to process instructional formats and pro-
cedures involving redundant components because of additional, unnecessary information
that they had to attend to and integrate with their available knowledge structures to ﬁnd
congruity between prior knowledge and incoming instruction.
Thus, in cognitive load theory, the effect is generally explained by imbalances between
learner organized knowledge base and provided instructional guidance. Such imbalances
could be caused by an insufﬁcient learner knowledge base that is not compensated by
appropriate instructional guidance (especially at the initial stages of learning) or by
overlaps between available knowledge of more advanced learners and provided instruc-
tional guidance. In the ﬁrst case (knowledge gaps), novice learners have to engage into
unsupported search processes that may cause excessive levels of extraneous cognitive load.
On the other hand, the need for higher knowledge learners to integrate and cross-reference
redundant instructional guidance with available knowledge structures may also consume
210
S. Kalyuga, A. Renkl
123

additional cognitive resources. A minimal instructional guidance would allow these
learners to take advantage of their knowledge base in the most efﬁcient way.
Thus, instructional guidance that is essential for novices may inhibit learning for more
experienced learners by interfering with retrieval and application of their available
knowledge structures, especially if these learners cannot ignore or otherwise avoid pro-
cessing the redundant explanations. In order to optimize cognitive load, appropriate
instructional support should be provided to novice learners, while unnecessary guidance
removed as the learners acquire higher levels of proﬁciency in a speciﬁc domain. Adaptive
learning environments that dynamically tailor levels of instructional support to changing
individual levels of learner expertise in a domain have the best potential for optimizing
cognitive load.
Issues of managing cognitive load by adapting instructions to individual learners are
generally difﬁcult to tackle because of the involvement of many learner characteristics.
Studies of expert-novice differences in cognitive science have clearly demonstrated that
learner knowledge base is the most important and fundamental cognitive characteristic that
inﬂuences learning and performance (e.g., Bransford et al. 1999). A focus on the learner
knowledge base may provide evidence-based procedures for the design of efﬁcient
adaptive learning environments.
The papers in this special issue present recent signiﬁcant advances in research on the
expertise reversal effect. The single contributions will be introduced in the next section.
Nevertheless, some examples for new insights should be shortly mentioned at this point. It
is shown in this special issue that the expertise reversal effect (a) holds not only in well-
structured domains such as mathematics but also in such ill-structured domains as literary
interpretation (Oksa et al., this issue); (b) it holds not only for learning results but also if
the outcome variables refer to the employment of learning strategies and to motivation for
learning (Nu¨ckles et al., this issue); (c) it interacts also with the developmental level of the
learners (Homer and Plass, this issue); (d) it can be applied to ‘‘real-life’’ learning settings
(Blayney et al., this issue); (e) it can be used to fruitfully inform adaptation schedules in
intelligent tutoring systems (Salden et al., this issue).
Two commentaries conclude the issue. The ﬁrst discussion paper is authored by a
prominent researcher in the area of Aptitude Treatment Interactions and their instructional
implications (Tobias 1976, 1989). The second discussion paper is authored by one of the
leaders in the ﬁeld of cognitive load theory and multimedia learning (Schnotz 2002;
Schnotz and Ku¨rschner 2007).
Structure of the special issue
Recent reviews of the expertise reversal studies (e.g., Kalyuga 2007) identiﬁed some
directions for further research in this area. The effect needs to be extended from well-
deﬁned technical areas in which most of the studies have been conducted, to relatively
poorly deﬁned tasks and domains. Identifying a broader range of instructional methods and
procedures that are optimal for learners with different levels of expertise also remains an
essential direction for research, as well as determining effective approaches to dynamic
tailoring of instruction to individual learners. Accordingly, the sequence of papers in the
current special issue follows these research directions. The issue includes ﬁve empirical
papers. The ﬁrst two papers report on experimental studies of the expertise reversal effect
in two non-technical areas of reading classical Shakespearean texts and writing journals in
psychology courses. The following two papers present recent results demonstrating the
Expertise reversal effect and its instructional implications
211
123

expertise reversal effect with different instructional techniques using instructional visu-
alizations in science education and spreadsheets in training accountants. The ﬁfth and
(partially) second papers investigate issues related to applying the effect to the design of
learner-tailored environments based on adaptive fading techniques. The discussion papers
focus on relations between the expertise reversal effect and ATI studies, theoretical
problems related to the effect, instructional implications, and directions for future research.
The ﬁrst paper ‘‘Expertise reversal effect in using explanatory notes for readers of
Shakespearean text’’ by Oksa et al. (this issue) investigates the effects of explanatory notes
on reader comprehension of Shakespearean text. Such texts are usually ﬁlled with classical
references communicated through a language that is different from Modern English.
Traditional methods of learning such texts may impose high levels of cognitive load. The
design of instructional materials that assist in comprehending Shakespearean plays was
based on interpretations of play extracts in Modern English that were physically integrated
line by line with Shakespeare’s original text. Experiment 1 presented an extract from a play
to a novice group of Grade 10 students who had no prior knowledge of the text. The results
demonstrated that the explanatory condition group reported a lower cognitive load and
performed better in a comprehension test than the control group that studied the original
extract. In Experiment 2, the same material was presented to a group of Shakespearean
experts, and a reverse effect occurred: the control group outperformed the experimental
group. The test performance data along with verbal protocols indicated that the explana-
tions became redundant for these high-knowledge readers. Experiment 3 investigated
whether the results of Experiment 1 could be replicated using a different Shakespearean
text, with a group of Grade 10 high school novice-level students. In addition to test
performance data, verbal protocols were also recorded. Similar to Experiment 1, results
indicated advantages of explanatory text. The experiments showed that the relative
effectiveness of instructions depended on learner levels of prior knowledge, thus demon-
strating an expertise reversal effect in the literary comprehension area. Embedded
explanatory text beneﬁts low-level knowledge readers. However, for learners with more
advanced and automated knowledge structures, needlessly processing redundant infor-
mation may overload working memory and impede its processing capacity. The beneﬁts of
guided instruction may reverse and become detrimental for individuals with high prior
knowledge levels.
The second paper ‘‘Expertise reversal effects in writing-to-learn’’ by Nu¨ckles et al. (this
issue) provides evidence for the expertise reversal effect in another non-technical area
related to journal writing in developmental psychology courses. Journal writing is an
effective follow-up coursework that is used after a lecture or seminar session by asking
students to write down a text in which they reﬂect on the previously studied contents.
Previously conducted laboratory studies indicated that to fully exploit the potentials of
writing learning journals and to maximize productive (germane) cognitive load, instruc-
tional support could be required in the form of prompts for applying appropriate cognitive
and metacognitive strategies. Two longitudinal ﬁeld studies reported in the current paper
investigated the long-term effects of prompts on strategy use and learning outcomes. In
Experiment 1, students wrote a journal entry about each weekly seminar session over a
whole term. The experimental group received a combination of cognitive and metacog-
nitive prompts, while the control group received no prompts. In the ﬁrst half of the term,
the experimental group applied more strategies in their learning journals and showed a
higher learning success than the control group. Towards the end of the term, the amount of
cognitive and metacognitive strategies elicited by the experimental group decreased while
the number of cognitive strategies applied by the control group increased. Accordingly,
212
S. Kalyuga, A. Renkl
123

when learning success was measured again at the end of the term, the experimental group
performed worse than the control group and it showed also less favorable motivation for
learning. In order to avoid these negative long-term effects of prompts, a gradual and
adaptive fading-out of the prompts was introduced in Experiment 2. In the experimental
group, each of the presented prompts was faded out as soon as a student applied the
prompted strategy to a satisfactory degree. In the control group, the prompts were pre-
sented permanently. The results showed that, over the course of the term, the fading group
applied increasingly more cognitive strategies while the permanent prompts group applied
increasingly less cognitive strategies. At the end of the term, the permanent prompts group
showed substantially lower learning outcomes than the fading group. Together, these
results provide evidence for an expertise reversal effect in writing-to-learn. In the begin-
ning of the term, the prompts successfully facilitated the application of beneﬁcial strate-
gies. However, as the students became more skilled in journal writing and internalized the
desired strategies, the external guidance by prompts became a redundant stimulus that
interfered with the students’ internal tendency to apply the strategies and, thus, induced
extraneous load. Accordingly, a gradual fading-out of the prompts in line with the learner’s
growing competencies was effective in mitigating the negative side-effects of the provided
instructional support.
The third paper ‘‘Developmental changes in expertise reversal for iconic representations
in science visualizations’’ by Homer and Plass (this issue) investigates how the addition of
visual scaffolds in computer-based narrated chemistry visualizations affects learning out-
comes for middle- and high-school students with differing levels of prior knowledge. It
was demonstrated that visual scaffolds created by adding iconic representations to the
purely symbolic (text-based and numerical) representations improved learning outcomes
for low-prior knowledge but not for higher-prior knowledge high-school students. The
study also showed that cognitive developmental levels of learners might have inﬂuenced
the expertise reversal effect. For younger middle-school children who presumably lacked
more general symbolic competencies (even if they had content knowledge), the effect was
eliminated: the icons helped the younger children, regardless of their level of prior
knowledge. The results support the claim that iconic visual scaffolds can facilitate learning
in visual learning environments, particularly for low prior knowledge learners at lower
levels of cognitive development. The ﬁndings argue for the importance of considering
variations of individual learners when designing dynamic science visualizations. To be
cognitively efﬁcient and effective, they should be tailored to developmental levels and
prior knowledge of individual learners.
The fourth paper ‘‘Interactions between the isolated-interactive elements effect and
levels of learner expertise: Experimental evidence from an accountancy class’’ by Blayney
et al. (this issue) investigates interactions between the isolated-interactive element
instructional formats and levels of learner expertise with ﬁrst year undergraduate university
accounting students. The isolated-interactive elements effect occurs when learning is
facilitated by initially presenting elements of information sequentially in an isolated form
(e.g., using several less complex intermediate working formulas in spreadsheet-based
calculations) rather than in a fully interactive form (using a single complex formula). The
results demonstrated that learner expertise interacted with instructional formats using
isolated or interactive elements of information during the initial phase of instruction.
Novice learners primarily beneﬁted from studying isolated elements ﬁrst by performing
complex tasks in a sequential manner using intermediate spreadsheet cells and starting
from simple procedural steps. In contrast, for more experienced learners, this method did
not improve learning as compared to using single spreadsheet cells that allowed these
Expertise reversal effect and its instructional implications
213
123

learners to take advantage of their knowledge base. It was suggested that for more
experienced learners, the need to integrate and cross-reference the sequence of redundant
for them simpliﬁed intermediate formulas with their available knowledge of the complete
formula might have consumed additional cognitive resources.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal empirical paper, ‘‘The expertise reversal effect and worked examples
in tutored problem solving: Beneﬁts of adaptive instruction’’ by Salden et al. (this issue)
describes an experimental study related to a major instructional implication of the expertise
reversal effect, namely to tailoring instruction to levels of learner knowledge in a task
domain. According to cognitive load theory, worked examples are more favorable than
problem solving exercises for initiating cognitive skill acquisition (worked examples
effect). However, problem solving could be more effective in later phases of skill acqui-
sition. This switch in effectiveness of examples is an instance of the expertise reversal
effect. Moreover, a ‘‘smooth’’ transition from worked examples to problems (i.e., gradually
fading worked-out steps) particularly facilitates learning (e.g., Renkl and Atkinson 2003).
Recently, Koedinger and Aleven (2007) have noted the assistance dilemma that addresses
the balance between giving information to the students (e.g., by using worked examples)
and deliberately withholding it (e.g., by asking students to solve problems). It is, however,
unclear when exactly should the switch between these assistance conditions take place to
optimize learning. The reported study was designed to investigate if the current skill levels
in terms of self-explanation performance while studying examples and problem solving
performance could be employed to determine the appropriate learning conditions. A fading
approach adaptive to a learner’s current skill level was expected to be more effective than a
predetermined fading approach to structuring the transition from studying examples to
problem solving. One laboratory and one classroom experiments were conducted to test
this assumption. An individualized fading procedure (adaptive fading) was compared to a
ﬁxed procedure (ﬁxed fading), and to a standard tutored problem solving condition
(problem solving) with high school students studying geometry lessons in the Cognitive
Tutor. The results of the lab study showed that the adaptive fading of worked-out examples
lead to higher performance scores on immediate and delayed (a week later) posttests. The
classroom study replicated this effect on the delayed posttest but not on the immediate
posttest. Despite only partially replicating lab results in the classroom, the study demon-
strated beneﬁts of the adaptive fading condition. Both experiments provided evidence of
better learning outcomes resulting from adaptive fading than from ﬁxed fading or problem
solving.
We hope that we can convince the readers of this special issue that the expertise reversal
effect is a powerful concept in instructional science (a) with respect to the more basic issue
of explaining boundary conditions of instructional principles and (b) with regard to the
applied issue of adapting learning environments to the individual learners. We see the
ﬁndings of this Issue also as a strong plea for taking the learners’ prior-knowledge level
into account when investigating and formulating instructional principles in future research.
References
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (1999). How people learn: Mind, brain, experience,
and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Cronbach, L., & Snow, R. (1977). Aptitudes and instructional methods: A handbook for research on
interactions. New York: Irvington.
214
S. Kalyuga, A. Renkl
123

Kalyuga, S. (2005). Prior knowledge principle. In R. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of multimedia
learning (pp. 325–337). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kalyuga, S. (2007). Expertise reversal effect and its implications for learner-tailored instruction. Educa-
tional Psychology Review, 19, 509–539.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). Expertise reversal effect. Educational
Psychologist, 38, 23–31.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of expertise and instructional design. Human
Factors, 40, 1–17.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2000). Incorporating learner experience into the design of
multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 126–136.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2001). Learner experience and efﬁciency of instructional guidance.
Educational Psychology, 21, 5–23.
Koedinger, K., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with cognitive tutors.
Educational Psychology Review, 19, 239–264.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive
Science, 21, 1–29.
Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the transition from example study to problem solving in
cognitive skills acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38, 15–22.
Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2007). An example order for cognitive skill acquisition. In F. E. Ritter,
J. Nerb, E. Lehtinen, & T. M. O’Shea (Eds.), In order to learn: How the sequence of topics inﬂuences
learning (pp. 95–105). New York: Oxford University Press.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K., Maier, U. H., & Staley, R. (2002). From example study to problem solving:
Smooth transitions help learning. Journal of Experimental Education, 70, 293–315.
Schnotz, W. (2002). Towards an integrated view of learning from text and visual displays. Educational
Psychology Review, 14, 101–120.
Schnotz, W., & Ku¨rschner, C. (2007). A reconsideration of cognitive load theory. Educational Psychology
Review, 19, 469–508.
Sweller, J. (2004). Instructional design consequences of an analogy between evolution by natural selection
and human cognitive architecture. Instructional Science, 32, 9–31.
Sweller, J., van Merrie¨nboer, J., & Paas, F. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251–296.
Tobias, S. (1976). Achievement treatment interactions. Review of Educational Research, 46, 61–74.
Tobias, S. (1989). Another look at research on the adaptation of instruction to student characteristics.
Educational Psychologist, 24, 213–227.
Van Merrie¨nboer, J., & Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive load theory and complex learning: Recent develop-
ments and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 147–177.
Wittwer, J., & Renkl, A. (2008). Why instructional explanations often do not work: A framework for
understanding the effectiveness of instructional explanations. Educational Psychologist, 43, 49–64.
Expertise reversal effect and its instructional implications
215
123

