Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02430-3
A bundle theory of words
J. T. M. Miller1
Received: 29 May 2019 / Accepted: 4 October 2019 / Published online: 17 October 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
It has been a common assumption that words are substances that instantiate or have
properties. In this paper, I question the assumption that our ontology of words requires
posting substances by outlining a bundle theory of words, wherein words are bundles of
various sorts of properties (such as semantic, phonetic, orthographic, and grammatical
properties). I argue that this view can better account for certain phenomena than
substance theories, is ontologically more parsimonious, and coheres with claims in
linguistics.
Keywords Words · Substance · Bundle theory · Ontology · Linguistics
1 Introduction
Debates in the metaphysics of language have largely focused on two interrelated issues.
First, whether words are particular objects composed of stages (Kaplan 1990, 2011),
or are abstract types or kinds, either as Platonic kinds (Katz 1981; Wetzel 2009), or
artifactual kinds (Hawthorne and Lepore 2011; Irmak 2018); and, second, how to
individuate words, with the focus being about whether we can do so through phonetic,
orthographic, or semantic properties, or through the word’s history/origin (see Miller
2019 for a critique of these attempts).
In this paper, I argue that in both of these debates there has been a common assump-
tion that words are substances that instantiate or have properties. Indeed, I will illustrate
that most of the literature has proposed that we should posit not just particular sub-
stances, but universal substances too. This means that, assuming none of those cited
here are intending to defend a form of resemblance nominalism,1 in the metaphysics
of words almost all theories posit at least a two category ontology of substances and
properties, with many, if not the majority, in fact defending (at least) a three cate-
1 Of which I know of no explicit defence in the metaphysics of words. See Rodriguez-Pereyra (2002) for
a discussion of the view more generally.
B J. T. M. Miller
james.t.m.miller@gmail.com; james.miller@nottingham.ac.uk
1
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
123

5732
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
gory ontology of particular substances, universal substances (or kinds or types), and
properties.
That the metaphysics of words has coalesced around this assumption puts the
domain, to a degree at least, in contrast to the rest of mainstream metaphysics and
ontology. Whilst there are a number of notable defenders of an ontological category
of substance,2 and some that defend the need for both particular substances and univer-
sal substances,3 bundle theories that reject substance as a genuine category in ontology
have been widely discussed and defended.4 But, in the metaphysics of words, bundle
theory is not even mentioned. In this paper, I will question the assumption that our
ontology of words requires substances by outlining a bundle theory of words.
To this end, in this paper I will ﬁrst evidence what I call the ‘substance assumption’
in the metaphysics of words (Sect. 2), before outlining more in more detail the bundle
theory of words (Sects. 3–5). I then argue that this view coheres with current linguistic
theories (Sect. 6), and ﬁnish by commenting on whether the bundle theory of words
outlined here is a nominalist theory (Sect. 7).
For space reasons, I will not consider other possible ontologies here. There may
be various categories of entities that are neither substances nor properties. Maybe
words are events, facts, or some other sort of thing. By restricting my discussion to
substances and properties, I do not intend to argue that all entities must be either a
substance or a property, nor to say that words cannot be events or facts or some other
sort of entity. Rather, there is an assumption prevalent in the literature in favour of
words being substances-plus-properties, and it is this assumption I wish to reject.
2 The substance assumption
In her highly signiﬁcant and inﬂuential work on word types, Wetzel is clear that words
are ‘objects’ instantiating properties. For Wetzel, words are abstract universal kinds,
where ‘abstract’ is strictly contrasted with ‘concrete’ or ‘physical’, and some entity is
a universal if that entity has instances:
‘Unlike such properties as whiteness and being Phoenician, types are quintessen-
tially objects’ (2009: p. xiii)
‘we should conclude that the generic objects, the types, apparently referred to in
the data exist - that is, species, genes, epigenotypes, languages, body parts like the
larynx, syllables, vowels, allophones, computers like the Altair 8800, Mozart’s
Coronation Concerto, the Queen’s gambit, the hydrogen atom, the football and
so on’ (2009: p. 23)
2 See Armstrong (1997), Johansson (1989), and van Inwagen (2011).
3 See Ellis (2001), and Lowe (2006).
4 There many variants of bundle theories. Here I will attempt to sketch an initial, relatively neutral, version.
For some examples and discussions of the positives and negatives of the many variants see, inter alia, Barker
and Jago (2018), Campbell (1990), Casullo (1984, 1988), Ehring (2001), Hakkarainen and Keinänen (2017),
Jago (2018), Maurin (2002, 2011), O’Leary-Hawthorne (1995), Paul (2017), Robb (2005), Simons (1994,
1998), Ujvári (2013), and Wayne (2008).
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5733
Furthermore, having instances means that types are universals. Yet they differ
from many other universals (e.g., properties) in that, as we have seen, words
are objects according to the commonsense and scientiﬁc theories we have about
them - values of the ﬁrst-order variables and referents of singular terms - rather
than properties […] And since they are objects according to the theory, they
have properties according to the theory. And the remarkable thing about these
universals, these types, is that unlike universals that are not types, they share
many of the properties of their instances, as we have seen; they model their
tokens (if they have tokens).’ (2009: p. 124)
What ontology does this view of words commit us to? It is clear that words are
explicitly not properties, but rather they instantiate or possess properties. The types
thatWetzelinvokesexplicitly‘differ’fromproperties,andarecontrastedwithuniversal
properties. Types are not properties, but rather are universal entities that instantiate or
possess properties. For Wetzel, words, whether universal (types or kinds) or particular
(instances or tokens of those types), are a distinct sort of thing from the properties that
they possess.
The most common entity posited as a property-bearer within metaphysics are sub-
stances (or substratum). Leaving aside various debates about the precise nature of
substances (see Hoffman and Rosenkrantz 1994; Robinson 2018), we can character-
ize a substance minimally as an ontologically basic entity that instantiates or bears
properties. Substances, so conceived, are also often posited to individuate entities.
That is, it is argued that two entities may share all of the same properties, but still
be distinct in virtue of their distinct substances (see Wiggins 1980, 2001). In this
Aristotelian tradition, substances are thus non-propertied property bearers such that
substances can instantiate properties, but cannot be instantiated themselves (see Lowe
2006). Objects, if we accept substances into our ontology, can be taken to be entities
that are composed (in some sense) of a substance and properties (whether tropes or
universals). Applying this to words, if, from the quotes above, words are strictly not
properties, without any further clariﬁcation from Wetzel, it is reasonable to conclude
that Wetzel is committed to an ontology of words that posits both the ontological
category of substance and the ontological category of property.5
Substances seem central to attempts to individuate words too. Wetzel argues that
‘the only linguistically interesting, projectable property that absolutely all the tokens
of a word have in common is being tokens of that word’ (2009: p. 124). Tokens of
a word are therefore not tokens of that word because they have some property in
common. Individuation of words does not happen through properties. What then does
individuate words? What makes the word ‘table’ different from the word ‘Paris’, and
make it the case that tokens of ‘table’ and tokens of ‘Paris’ are tokens of the type they
are tokens of? The most natural answer is that it is the substances that individuate
both tokens and types. That is, that the distinct tokens on this page are distinct tokens
as they are distinct particular substances, and the distinct types are distinct as they
are distinct universal substances. Given this, Wetzel’s ontology seems to be a three-
category ontology of universal substances, particular substances, and properties.
5 Wetzel does not discuss whether the properties that she posits are tropes or universals. I will return to this
distinction later in this paper.
123

5734
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
There are various concerns we could raise about Wetzel’s conception of ‘abstract’
and of ‘universal’ that might be problematic for the ontology I have argued she is
committed to. Lowe, for example, argues that there are alternative ways of under-
standing the notion of ‘abstract’ including as an entity that is ‘logically incapable of
enjoying a “separate” existence’ (1995: p. 514). Under this conception, Wetzel’s word
types would not be abstract as she is explicit that there can be uninstantiated words,
and hence word types can exist ‘separately’.6 We might also object that the notion
of ‘universal’ cannot do the work that Wetzel requires of it to secure the existence
of abstract entities as class nominalists may accept that redness (the property) has
instances, even though ‘redness’ is just the class or plurality of physical red things,
and is not a universal.
However, the claim here is simply that Wetzel conceives of words such that they are
distinct from properties. Wetzel’s ontology of words is prima facie committed to the
existence of (linguistic) properties, and entities that instantiate or bear those properties.
Wetzel calls words ‘objects’, but what she has in mind seems to be a substance-property
ontology.
Moving on to Hawthorne and Lepore and their ‘abstracta-articulations’ model
(2011), they similarly accept the existence of types or kinds qua universal substances
not individuated by the properties those kinds instantiate.7 They too talk of words as
‘objects’, where such objects are ontologically distinct from the properties that token
words, or abstract word types, have. Again, Hawthorne and Lepore are not explicit, but
it is reasonable to conclude that they have in mind (at least) a two category ontology
of substances and properties, if not a three category ontology of particular substances
(tokens), universal substances (types or kinds), and properties.
That these views are committed to the ontological category of substance should not
be surprising given that they are defences of (versions of) Platonism about words. In
both views, the phrase ‘the word ‘table” picks out a universal object that instantiates
various properties, and has instances or tokens. Such a conception is clearly in line with
a commitment to an ontological category of substance as words, whether universal or
particular, are explicitly distinguished from the properties they instantiate (whether
universal or particular).
However, even Kaplan, whose view is not Platonic, also posits the ontologi-
cal category of substance. Under Kaplan’s ‘stage-continuant’ view, ‘utterances and
inscriptions are stages of words, which are the continuants made up of these interper-
sonal stages along with some more mysterious intrapersonal stages’ (1990: p. 98). We
can easily see that Kaplan assumes a substance ontology:
I might have called the objects I am interested in empirical abstract objects, but
some of the characteristic features I ﬁnd in my created objects do not seem to
apply to properties and relations in general (2011: p. 507, fn. 6)
6 I will talk more about conceptions of ‘abstract’ in Sect. 7.
7 Hawthorne and Lepore do not embrace, as Wetzel does, the talk of types but they make clear that they
have ‘no deep objection’ (2011: 453, fn. 19) to such a way to phrase the view, rather they avoid it because
Kaplan (1990) had associated the type-token language with a shape-theoretic view on how to individuate
words that they wish to reject.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5735
Again we see that the words qua objects are distinct from the properties they
instantiate. The words are the ‘objects’ that instantiate properties, in line with typical
conceptions of substance within categorial ontology.
What this shows is that despite the differences between these views there is a
consistent assumption that words qua objects are to be analysed as substances (or
substratum) that have (or instantiate) properties, and hence that to account for words
requires us to posit some entity that is a property-bearer. Such property-bearers may
be particular or universal entities, but both are seemingly primitively unanalysable or
irreducible entities, play a role in individuating words, and instantiate, and thus are
ontologically distinct from, properties. This, I argue, is evidence of a commitment
to a category of substance, and hence to at least a two category ontology, if not a
three category ontology. In the rest of this paper, my claim will not be that positing
the category of substance is necessarily wrong. Rather, I contend only that this is a
debatable assumption, and in the rest of this paper I will outline a view that does not
require a commitment to the existence of substances.8
3 A bundle theory of words
It might be, as Van Cleve notes, too simplistic to state that the bundle theory holds that
‘a thing (individual, concrete particular) is nothing but a bundle of properties’ (1985:
p. 95). A better way is to say that ‘concrete objects, abstract objects, and perhaps even
space–time are constructed from mereological fusions of qualities’ (Paul 2017: p. 33).
Both statements indicate that a core idea in bundle theories is that all that is required
is one category of fundamental entities, namely properties or qualities, with objects
as derivative upon and ontologically posterior to properties.
In line with this, the view I will outline will be that particular words (tokens) are
objects qua bundles, or mereological fusions, of various properties or qualities. To get
there, there are various aspects worth mentioning. However, to stress, the remainder
of this section concerns tokens not types. The view will be that particular words are
bundles of properties; I will address word types in Sect. 5.
3.1 Which properties compose words?
If ordinary objects and words are bundles of properties, we need to know what prop-
erties might compose those bundles. For ordinary physical objects, these would likely
include, amongst others, shape, weight, and colour properties. Some of these seem to
also partly compose token words—orthographic properties are, in one sense, simply
shape properties. In the case of words, in addition to these there will be a range of other
8 There are some other views in the literature that may not be committed to substances, though they are not
explicit on this topic. Szabo’s (1999) representational view, for example, rejects the Platonic orthodoxy, but
it is not entirely clear what ontological categories are required for his view. More recently, Nefdt (2019)
has argued for a ‘structuralist’ view of words. Whether this account posits substances will depend on how
we understand the notion of ‘object’ within a linguistic structure. Nefdt does not commit himself either
way, but, prima facie, if words are ofﬁces or placeholders within the structure, then structuralism may be
compatible with the bundle theory I am proposing here.
123

5736
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
well-known, scientiﬁcally justiﬁed linguistic properties, such as semantic, phonetic,
and grammatical properties (such as ‘being a noun’).9
To account for words, we might also think that narrow linguistic properties are not
enough. Other social, cultural, physiological, or psychological properties may also
be needed to explain fully the nature of words. For example, if speaker-intention is
important to word individuation as Kaplan (1990, 2011) has argued, then token words
might be partly composed of intentional properties.10 This list is not intended to be
exhaustive, nor the distinctions between these sorts of properties certain.
Further to this, the properties that partly compose words might be intrinsic or extrin-
sic (or relational). Whether we accept extrinsic properties as partly composing words
will depend on a number of further claims about the nature of linguistic properties
(and any other category of properties we think partly compose words). Whilst most
standard bundle theories reject extrinsic properties, there are some, such as Paul (forth-
coming) that posit relational spatio-temporal properties. The bundle theory outlined
here is consistent with the view that the properties that compose words are all intrinsic,
all extrinsic, or are a mixture of intrinsic and extrinsic properties, though other aspects
of how we conceive of words may change signiﬁcantly depending on these further
commitments.
3.2 Tropes or universals?
Are the properties of words tropes or universals? Both trope-bundle and universal-
bundle theories have been defended within the metaphysical literature. Whether
linguistic properties are tropes or universals is unclear. Take semantic properties.
What do we mean when we say that two token words mean the same thing? Does
this mean that those words instantiate the numerically identical semantic property, or
that they instantiate (exactly) resembling, but numerically distinct, tropes? A similar
debate arises within grammatical theories. Are two nouns both nouns because they
both instantiate the numerical identical universal property of ‘being a noun’ or exactly
resembling but numerically distinct trope properties—‘being a noun1’ and ‘being a
noun2’? Deciding between these options is beyond the scope of this paper but we can
construct a bundle theory in both cases.
If a bundle of universals view is preferred, then the sameness of properties instan-
tiated by distinct tokens can be explained as the words will instantiate (or be partly
composed of) a numerically identical property. That is, distinct token words may
instantiate numerical identical universal semantic, phonetic, orthographic, etc. prop-
erties.
If tropes are preferred, intuitions about ‘sameness’ can be explained through the
relation of (exact) resemblance. Most bundle theorists take (exact) resemblance to be
an internal relation, and hold that resemblance between tropes is determined by their
9 I am not intending to presuppose any semantic theory here, and instead use the term semantic in its most
general sense to refer to the meaning of a word however it is that the word gets that meaning. Semantic
theories might change what we think about the nature of such properties, or what other properties might
exist, but it will not affect the plausibility of a bundle theory of words.
10 Though see Cappelen (1999) for more on intentional accounts of words.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5737
primitive intrinsic nature. Following Maurin, we can take exact resemblance ‘to be
formally characterized as an equivalence relation, i.e., as a relation that is symmetrical,
reﬂexive, and transitive. As such, exact resemblance partitions the set of tropes into
mutually excluding and non-overlapping classes; classes functioning more or less as
the traditional universal does’ (Maurin 2018).11 Applying this to our case, two token
words may instantiate numerically distinct but exactly resembling semantic, phonetic,
orthographic, etc. tropes.
If we do accept a trope-bundle view of words, we can also hold that two tokens
may instantiate non-exactly resembling tropes. Recognising that tokens instantiate
non-exactly resembling tropes may be important for particular explanatory purposes
and claims we wish to make. For example, it seems right to say that handwritten tokens
may be tokens of the same type even if they are not instantiating exactly resembling
orthographic tropes. Whether it is right to think of two non-exactly resembling tokens
as being instances of the same type will depend on broader issues concerning types
that I discuss in Sect. 5.
3.3 Composing bundles?
What relation holds between the properties that compose an object is also a matter
of much debate. Some take it to be a primitive relation, others have invoked co-
instantiation or compresence, and some have taken the ‘constructing’ talk I have
invoked above seriously and think of properties being related by composition rela-
tions.12 The outline I provide here is consistent with any account of how properties
are ‘bundled’. For ease, I will talk of words being constructed or composed of prop-
erties, but nothing unique to words turns on this issue.
3.4 Stating the bundle view
We are now in a position to more fully state the view. The view is that particular or
token words are objects, which are bundles of various sorts (most notably seman-
tic, phonetic, orthographic, and grammatical) properties. Distinct words are distinct
in virtue of being different bundles of properties. If those properties are taken to be
tropes, two token words exactly resemble if it is the case that those words are com-
posed of exactly resembling tropes; if properties are universals, then two words can
instantiate a numerically identical property in virtue of being partly composed of the
same universal.13
Centrally, this means that a bundle theory need not posit substances within their
ontology. Token words are objects, but those objects are bundles (or fusions) of proper-
11 These positions are widely agreed upon by those defending a trope bundle theory, though not universally;
see Mormann (1995) and Ehring (2011) for some alternatives.
12 See, inter alia, Bacon (1995), Campbell (1990), Castañeda (1974), Denkel (1997), Paul (forthcoming),
Schaffer (2001), Simons (1994), and Russell (1940).
13 A further possibility is that the universal properties compose a single word that is located at a number
of different spatio-temporal points (see O’Leary-Hawthorne 1995; Curtis 2014). This might even allow us
to combine a bundle theory with certain aspects of Kaplan’s view of words, however I leave investigating
this possible view for future work.
123

5738
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
ties, and hence we can avoid any ontological commitment to the category of substance.
This immediately means that the theory is more ontologically parsimonious than its
major competitors. Unlike other views proposed in the metaphysics of words which
posit substances, the bundle theory holds that all we require to account for the nature of
words are properties. Granting that parsimony is a theoretical virtue (cf. Miller 2018),
this is a signiﬁcant positive for the bundle theory.
It might be immediately objected that this parsimony argument in favour of bundle
theory holds for ontological parsimony, but not for ideological parsimony as the notion
of bundling or composition that we require under the bundle theory is not something
that the substance theorist requires, and this is an additional ideological cost. However,
ﬁrst, the substance-property view will require a relation that holds between a substance
and a property, and hence may require as many ideological posits as the bundle view.
Second, it has been argued that the primitives invoked in bundle theories are, in
fact, ideologically simpler (Campbell 1990). That is, even if there are more ideological
primitives in bundle theory, we might favour the view for its relative ideological
simplicity. For the objection to work, we would need a reason to favour a simple form
of parsimony based on the cardinality of primitives over a more complex comparison
of theoretical virtues.
Third, even if we accept that substance theories are more ideologically parsimo-
nious, this objection would require some argument to say that ideological parsimony
is to be preferred over ontological parsimony. There is no argument in the metaphysics
of words currently amongst those endorsing a substance theory that justiﬁes the extra
ontological cost of positing substance, and so pending that argument, it is reasonable
to suggest that a bundle theory leads to beneﬁts with respect to parsimony.
4 Changing words
One possible objection to the bundle view of words is a version of an argument raised
against the bundle theory by Van Cleve (1985). Van Cleve argues that a particular
bundle cannot change its members without becoming another bundle, and thus, another
particular or individual. In effect, the objection is that bundle theory makes every
property essential to the object.14
In the case of words, this would mean that altering any property that partly composes
a token word would result in that word being a different token. The problem is that
there seem to be clear counterexamples to this. Consider a case where I have typed
out a particular word in a particular font, as seen in (1).
(1) Table
After some reﬂection, I decide that this paper would be better in an alternative font,
and hence I press some buttons and (1) becomes (2):
(2) Table
14 This problem may not arise for all bundle theories, such as the trope bundle theories defended by Simons
(1994), or Keinänen and Hakkarinen (2014), who argue that they are not committed to the claim that the
change of property entails the destruction of an object and the creation of a new one.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5739
In this case, intuitively, what has happened is that the particular token word in (1)
has simply changed its orthographic properties. It is not that I have destroyed the object
in (1) but merely changed one of its (non-essential) properties. However, according
to the objection, if a particular, or token, word were only a bundle of properties then
this would mean that changing the font results in the destruction of one token and the
creation of a distinct entity, not just a simple change of properties. That is, a bundle
theory will have to say, contra our intuitions, that changing the font of a token word
destroys one object and creates a new one as (1) is a different bundle of properties
than (2).
This, we should admit, is counter-intuitive. The response, though, comes from
considering‘falsefriends’asthinkingaboutthesecaseswillshowusthatsmallchanges
in other properties of token words does intuitively result in different tokens, and that
the counter-intuitive consequences produced by (1) and (2) is less problematic than
initially seemed to be the case. Consider:
(3) Gettare il confetti.
(4) Throw the confetti.
Focus on the tokens in bold only. In (3) and (4), these tokens have a number of
resembling properties. As written here, they have exactly resembling orthographic
properties, have resembling grammatical properties (both are nouns, though one is
count and the other mass), and even have somewhat resembling semantic properties in
that both are terms that in their respective languages pick out items involved in certain
types of celebrations.15
Now imagine a scenario where after writing (3) on a blackboard, I subsequently
erasedtheItalianwordsexcept‘confetti’andreplacedthemwithEnglishwords‘Throw
the’ as they appear in (4). In this case, is the token ‘confetti’ still the same particular
object? That is, did my actions destroy the token in (3) and replace it with a new token,
or has the token survived through the changes made to the other words on the board?
Isuggestthatmostpeoplewillsaythetokenin(4)isadistinctentityoncetheyrealize
the subsequent change in the semantic properties—in (3) ‘confetti’ refers to almonds
with a hard sugar coating eaten at wedding ceremonies, whilst in (4) ‘confetti’ refers to
small pieces of paper thrown at wedding ceremonies. We have this intuition despite the
words that have been directly changed—‘Gettare il’ to ‘Throw the’—both meaning
the same. However, now we have competing intuitions. What are the metaphysical
grounds to consistently object that (1) and (2) are the same word whilst allowing that
(3) and (4) are different words?
Why then are our intuitions about (1) and (2) different from those about (3) and
(4)? I propose that this is because a change in semantic properties, such as the change
in turning (3) into (4), is more relevant to how we (normally) engage in language.
Metaphysically, particular words may not, under a bundle view, be able to change
their properties, but this is not as counter-intuitive as it ﬁrst seems. In normal commu-
nication, it is irrelevant whether the orthographic properties of a word are changed,
and we intuitively think the particular word can survive that change because it is not
15 This will depend on how ﬁne-grained we take semantic properties to be. Thanks to Anna Bortolan for
language help on this example.
123

5740
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
relevant to the purpose of the word at that time.16 For most linguistic communities and
purposes, the difference in properties in (1) and (2) is not relevant to how we think of
those words. However, the difference is relevant in (3) to (4).
Tolerated differences for relevant communicative aims or purposes are, though,
pragmatic concerns about successful and productive communication. The bundle
theory can accept the inﬂuence of these pragmatic concerns whilst holding that, meta-
physically, changing the font of a word creates a different particular word, just as a
change in the semantic properties of a particular word will also create a new particular
word. The counter-intuitiveness of the bundle theory in the ﬁrst case is undermined by
the intuitiveness of accepting the objects as being different particulars in the second.
5 Word types
A well-discussed problem in the metaphysics of words is that whilst we intuitively
think that two particular words can be instances of the same word, it is unclear what
makes them the same. Token words of the same type can differ in their semantic, pho-
netic, orthographic, and/or grammatical properties and yet we still intuitively think
they are the same word. This difﬁculty has led Hawthorne and Lepore to state that
identity conditions for words might be impossible to provide. This does not neces-
sarily mean that there are no identity conditions, but rather that we should be ‘sloppy
realists’ holding that ‘the unsettled questions turn out to rest on borderline cases and
are to be handled using the correct theory of vagueness (whether it be epistemicist,
supervaluationist, or whatever). In that case, there either are facts we may never know
or simply no facts at all about the myriad borderline cases left unresolved by our
capacity to settle questions in the area’ (2011: p. 36).
Hawthorne and Lepore assume that the only other alternative is ‘atheism’ about
words, the view that there are no words, and no interesting equivalence relations
between words. Finding such a view unattractive, they state:
The challenge remains to provide a criterion for word matching between per-
formances. Having eschewed superﬁcial criteria, this challenge takes on a
forbidding character, since there is no obvious surrogate that can provide a crite-
rion once the form-theoretic ones have been dispensed with. Rather than expect
that such criteria will be forthcoming, we must take seriously a conception of
our practice which guardedly endorses on ontology of words while despairing
of such criteria. (2011: p. 38)
Itisclear,though,thatHawthorneandLeporebasetheirargumentontheassumption
that words are substances instantiating properties. For them, word matching cannot
just be case of there being ‘interesting equivalence relations’ between the properties
16 This, though, may not always be the case. Certain signs in shop windows, for example, are designed
such that they can be read as both ‘open’ and ‘closed’ depending on which way the sign is hung. In this
case, it seems that the orthographic properties are important as only certain designs will allow this purpose
to be fulﬁlled. However, this is an unusual case. Handwriting style and choice of font are at least very often
taken to be irrelevant to the intended function of the words in a given context. This paper, for example, is
intended to be an exploration of a bundle theory of words, and it is irrelevant to that purpose which font the
journal it is published in uses.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5741
of words as the properties are non-essential to the identity of words, both at the level
of tokens and at the level of types. If we accept that assumption, then they are quite
possibly right—either it is the case that the identity will likely be vague or we must
accept atheism about words.
However, this is a false dilemma as bundle theory provides a non-atheistic alter-
native that can provide identity conditions for words. Under a bundle theory, words,
or types, cannot be kinds of the sort that Wetzel or Hawthorne and Lepore invoke.
This is because there is no notion of substance to ultimately ground the claim that two
tokens are tokens of the same type in virtue of being instances of the same substantial
kind. Instead, I suggest that if tokens are bundles of properties, then types are bundles
(or sets or collections or pluralities) of tokens, where those types have their criterion
of identity in virtue of the properties of the tokens that are members of type. That is,
whether two tokens are tokens of the same type will be determined by the properties
that compose the tokens.
How we ﬂesh this out further will turn on whether properties are tropes or uni-
versals. If universals, then types are collections of tokens that all instantiate the same
(numerically identical) universal property or properties. If properties are tropes, then
tokens are tokens of the same type in virtue of instantiating (exactly) resembling prop-
erties. This does not mean that the tokens need to instantiate all of the same properties.
Rather, ‘color’ and ‘colour’ may count as tokens of the same type in virtue of both
instantiating the same universal semantic property, or (exactly) resembling semantic
tropes.
There remains the question of whether there are any particular (set of) properties
that are necessary for type-membership. Personally, I think that this concern should
lead us to accept the idea that type-membership for tokens words will vary depending
on a variety of sociological and explanatory factors relevant to speakers within a
community. Whether ‘color’ and ‘colour’ are tokens of the same type will depend
on the overall communicative and explanatory goals to which we are putting those
tokens. ‘color’ and ‘colour’ are (likely) tokens of the same type in virtue of instantiating
the same universal semantic properties, or (exactly) resembling semantic tropes, but
tokens of distinct types relative to the orthographic properties they instantiate.
We might ﬂesh this out by adopting a version of Hawthorne and Lepore’s ‘tolerance
principle’ that was introduced to handle cases of words changing their properties and
holds that:
Tolerance: Performance p is of a word w only if p meets relevant local perfor-
mance standards on w (2011: p. 18)
Adjusting for a bundle theory, we can hold that to say that performances p1 and
p2 (where these performances can be inscriptions, utterance, or some form of mental
performance) are of a word w is to say that p1 and p2 are sufﬁciently similar with
regards to some relevant criteria within a particular community which are in part
dictated by the purpose of that performance within that community.
Platonists may object to this more conventionalist account of types, and it is not
strictly required by the bundle theory outlined here. However, it shows that the bun-
dle theory of words is not an atheistic theory of words, in either sense outlined by
Hawthorne and Lepore. Words exist, at both the level of tokens and types, and there
123

5742
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
are interesting equivalences between particular words. Perhaps relations of (exact)
resemblance (assuming tropes) are not what Hawthorne and Lepore intended when
they sought ‘interesting equivalence relations’, but, to object in this way is to beg the
question about what sort of equivalency could be ‘interesting’. Even if the bundle
theory does give up some intuitions we have about tokens being the ‘same’ word, this
does not mean they give up all explanations. Indeed, it is plausible that interesting
equivalency relations will be more prevalent for the bundle theorist as they can hold
between token words in virtue of any of the properties that partly compose them (cf.
Miller ms.).
6 Coherence with linguistics
The idea that Platonic realism about words coheres with the practices and claims of
linguistics has been explicitly invoked in order to support the view. Wetzel (2009:
chapter 1) runs through a number of claims in historical-comparative linguistics, pho-
netics, phonology, and other sciences (including biology and physics) to show that
‘type talk is pandemic’ (2009: p. 21), arguing that it should therefore be taken onto-
logically seriously. In this section, I argue that in certain domains of linguistics ‘bundle
talk’ is pandemic and that those theories are committed to an ontology that far more
closer coheres with a bundle theory than Platonism.
Before doing this, though, it is worth noting that saying that any philosophical
position has support from the linguistics literature may be met with an immediate
scepticism given the divided nature of linguistics itself. Even drawing distinctions
between the different schools, theoretical frameworks, or foundations of linguistics is
fraught, and none of the distinctions that I draw here should be taken to be anything
less than controversial.
In the broadest sense, though, we might draw a distinction between the generative
grammar programme, inspired by Chomsky’s work in the 1950s and 1960s, and cog-
nitive linguistics. Central to this distinction is the existence, or not, of some language
speciﬁc or autonomous module, and a related disagreement about whether language
evolved in one genetic leap, or more gradually alongside other complex cognitive
abilities.17 Generative approaches can also be distinguished from constraint-based
views. Very much in brief, the difference between these views is that whilst generative
grammars, as their name suggest, explain language by listing the rules that generate
well-formed sentences, the constraint approach, as their name suggests, focuses on
what certain rules might stop sentences from being well-formed. That is, both state a
set of rules, but the generative approach takes those rules to tell us what is allowed,
whilst the constraint approach takes those rules only to tell us what is not allowed,
with all structures not otherwise constrained being acceptable.18
These disagreements mean that my discussion will draw upon concepts, or def-
initions of concepts, that some linguists would reject. Appealing to (potentially)
17 See Hauser et al. (2002), Miller and Hughes (2014), Tattersall (2004), Jackendoff and Pinker (2005),
Pinker (2003), and Tallerman (2007) for a range of views on language evolution.
18 For an in depth discussion of the difference between generative and constraint-based approaches, see
Pullum (2013) and Jackendoff (2018).
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5743
controversial empirical evidence to support metaphysical claims is not new, as shown
by the various appeals to the latest, disputed evidence from physics. I do not know if
linguistics suffers from greater internal disagreements than physics. What is offered
here is at least a (falsiﬁable) point in favour of the bundle theory of words.
Within the generative approach, it is a commonly held that the primitives of our
linguistic system are ‘units that are standardly characterized as bundles of features’
(Boeckx 2008: p. 63). The basic idea is that lexical items are bundles of features, such
as phonetic, semantic, and formal features. Using Chomsky’s example of the word
‘airplane’ as an illustration, ‘airplane’ has the following sorts of features: phonetic
[begins with vowel]; semantic [artefact]; and formal [+ nominal] (Chomsky 1995:
p. 230).19 Such items, or ones like them, are the building blocks of language, and are
taken to be the elements stored within our mental lexicon. Indeed, this sort of ‘bundle-
talk’ is so pandemic that Sprouse and Lau say that ‘we believe it is fair to say that
there is some degree of consensus that the basic units are bundles of features’ (2013).
Some have argued that we do not need to build so much information into these
linguistic items. Marantz (2000) and Borer (2005), for example, hold that we do not
need to posit formal features in the lexicon as such features can be explained during
the derivation of a sentence by the operation Merge functioning over these lexical
items, or ‘roots’.20 However, such differences in the theoretical linguistics will not
matter for present purposes. The more general point is that linguists working in these
domains theorise that the elements of language that are then combined via syntactic
relations, patterns, and dependencies are bundles of certain sorts of features, in line
with the view outlined in this paper.
Furthermore, features look a lot like what I have been calling properties. We can
easily map the sorts of features onto the sorts of properties: semantic features are
semantic properties, phonetic features are phonetic properties, and formal features are
grammatical properties. Our mental lexicon could therefore be said to contain bundles
of these features, or, in my terms, bundles of properties. That is, if we wish to hold
to our intuition that our mental lexicon contains words, then the linguistics seems to
be already suggesting that these words are not substance-property pairs.21 Instead,
the mental lexicon contains elements that are bundles of features or properties. This
again is in line with the theory outlined in this paper, whilst also suggesting a uniﬁed
ontology across both externalised and ‘internal’ (or mental) instances of words.
What about the orthographic properties, as they are missing from this discussion?
Whether or not words instantiated in the mind have such properties is an issue that is
independent of the underlying ontology, though it at least seems plausible that words
19 ‘Formal’ features, as this example shows, can be roughly taken to be equivalent to what we might more
colloquially call grammatical features. [+nominal] is thus broadly equivalent to a grammatical property that
a word might have of ‘being a noun’.
20 This would be to disagree about how much information is contained within any single ‘root’. See
Acquaviva (2014a, b), Borer (2013, 2014), and Harley (2005, 2014) for more on ‘roots’. I also leave aside
the issue here of whether any of these sorts of features exist prior to lexicalisation, the process through
which it is held that concepts become interpretable by linguistic operations such as Merge. See Miller and
Hughes (2014).
21 I am certainly not alone in positing that in some sense there are word tokens that are ‘mental’. Kaplan
posits ‘mysterious intrapersonal stages’, and Wetzel talks about words having tokens such that only ‘some
[…] are physical objects/events’ (2009: 114), which suggests that other tokens are non-physical.
123

5744
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
instantiated within the mind do not have orthographic properties. We might have an
image in our mind about how a word is spelt but an image in our heads does not have
the physical orthographic properties that the image might represent. However, this
only suggests that it might be the case that some words have properties of a sort that
other words lack.
This, though, leads to the consequence that if we accept a bundle view of words then
inscribed or uttered words can never be the same word as those in our heads as they
will be composed of different properties. This would strike many as counter-intuitive.
After all, if I think of a word, and then write it down, most would want to say that I
am writing down the same word that I thought of. However, any theory will have to
accept that an uttered token and mental token are different particulars. For the bundle
theorist, the written token and the mental token are distinct particulars in virtue of one
being partly composed of orthographic properties whilst the other is not; but the two
particulars can be of the same type in the way outline above.
Can linguists can help provide an answer as to whether we should think of the
properties that compose words as tropes or universals? Boeckx, in the abstract for his
2015 book, says that ‘most syntacticians, no matter their theoretical persuasion, agree
that features (types or categories) are the most important units of analysis’. Taking
this on face value we might think that this suggests that Boeckx thinks of features as
being universals, not tropes.
However, some caution is needed here. Linguists typically use of the language of
set theory to group together features. This is entirely consistent with features being
tropes as we need not think that these sets are genuine universal entities. This is exactly
how many trope theorists talk, holding that to say that two particularized properties
are the ‘same’ is only to hold that they are both a member of some set or class such
that all the members of that set exact resemble.
Indeed, it seems that the only major difference between the bundle view outlined
here, and the theory taken from linguistics is how ﬁne-grained the features or properties
are individuated. For example, I have been using the notion of semantic properties
as being akin to potentially complex semantic properties such as [being an apple],
whilst the linguistic theory typically breaks such complex properties down into smaller
chunks, such as the mental item associated with the word apple having semantic
features such as [+edible].
This, though, is a difference only in which properties (or features) exist and how
ﬁne-grained semantic properties are; not about the overall ontological structure within
which they exist. I do not take it to be the job of this paper to say which properties exist,
butrathertoprovideanontologicalstructureintowhichwhateverpropertiesdoexistﬁt.
Just as many philosophers no longer think that macro properties are real properties, the
complex semantic properties that we might normally attribute to words may not survive
our empirical theorising. The same goes for grammatical properties. Our common-
sense notion of grammatical properties are things like ‘being a noun’ or ‘being a verb’,
but such properties are liable to be reduced in the linguistics to agreement relations,
argument places, and the interaction of other more speciﬁc properties in complex ways
that give rise to what we in ordinary usage call the property of ‘being a noun’. Whether
such a reduction takes place or not will not affect the plausibility of a bundle theory
of words.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5745
In summary, bundle theory therefore coheres with some important linguistic theo-
ries. Many linguists working in these (certain) areas make no ontologically committing
use of a notion of words as objects that are ‘substances-plus-properties’. Rather, they
posit bundles of features, in line with the idea that words are bundles of properties. To
stress, this is not to say that work in this domain of linguistics must or can only be taken
to be in support of a bundle theory. After all, linguists working in this ﬁeld are not likely
paying attention to metaphysical distinctions of the sorts that I have been discussing.
However, at the very least, bundle theory is coherent with the linguistics in a way that
it has previously been argued non-substance views like this fail to be. It is enough
then that, prima facie, what linguists, in this domain at least, seem to be positing is
not some substance that instantiates certain features, but rather bundles of features.
7 Nominalism?
I will close with some comments on whether the bundle view should be labelled as
a nominalist view. The assumption in favour positing substances has normally been
motivated in the metaphysics of words to respond to the ‘nominalist’ conception of
words often attributed to Goodman and Quine (1947). However, there are two notions
of nominalism that need to be distinguished in the vicinity before we can see whether
the bundle theory of words is a nominalist theory.
The ﬁrst sort of nominalism rejects abstract entities, in line with the way that
Wetzel understands ‘abstract’ as distinct from ‘concrete’ or ‘physical’. In this sense,
what I have proposed is nominalist, as I have not invoked any non-physical entity.
Properties, whether tropes or universals, have been assumed to be concrete, spatio-
temporal entities, and I have suggested that types might be mere collections rather than
beingadditionalPlatonicexistents.Sounderstood,bundletheoryisanominalisttheory.
If, though, as Lowe discusses, ‘abstract’ entities are those that are ‘logically inca-
pable of enjoying a “separate” existence’ (1995: p. 514), then whether this view is
nominalist will depend on whether we think that either (a) universal properties can
exist uninstantiated, or (b) that objects could be such that they are composed of only
a single property. I think that there are good reasons to reject both of these options,
for independent reasons to the main topic of this paper, meaning that this view is
not committed to the existence of entities that are ‘logically incapable of enjoying a
“separate” existence’. Nothing here rests on the rejection of either (a) or (b), but if we
do, then bundle theory is not rejecting abstract entities in this sense, and hence is not
a nominalist theory.
Alternatively still, Fisher (2019) has argued that Williams (1986 [1960]), the father
of contemporary trope theory, considered tropes as abstract in the sense that they are
capable of being co-located with other abstract entities. Under this understanding of
‘abstract’, a trope-bundle theory of words would certainly not count as nominalist
in the sense of denying the existence of abstract entities. Under this conception, a
trope-bundle view of words would, in fact, only posit abstract entities.
The second notion of nominalism is the notion that more commonly attributed to
bundle theories in metaphysics. This is rejection of universal entities. Again, though,
this will depend on what we mean. Wetzel understands an entity to be ‘universal’ if
123

5746
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
it can have instances; Simons invokes nominalism as (in part) the acceptance of only
entities that are ‘nonrepeatable’ (2013: p. 279).
Clearly, if we opt for a bundle of universals view, on both counts this view would not
be nominalist. Universal properties both have instances, and are repeatable entities. If
properties are tropes, bundle theory would be nominalist in light of Simons’ notion
of ‘nonrepeatable’—tropes are, by deﬁnition, particular nonrepeatable properties. It
is less clear in light of Wetzel’s criteria though. As I have outlined it here, the bundle
theory can accept types where those types are collections of objects (qua bundles of
properties), and hence we can think of those types having instances. That said, a trope
version of the bundle theory of words, will likely reject any additional ontological
commitment to those universals (or types), as they are ‘merely’ collections of objects.
If this is enough to be nominalist, then a trope-bundle view of words is nominalist.
8 Conclusion
My contention has been that much time has gone into defending the idea that words
are universal and abstract, but little attention has been paid to the resultant ontological
requirement that we posit at least two ontological categories: substance and prop-
erty. In this paper, I have outlined a bundle theory of words which holds that, contra
the dominant views, words are not substances, either particular or universal, but are
bundles of properties.
I have not tried to hide the potentially counter-intuitive consequences of this view.
However, I have suggested that those intuitions are not consistent across the different
properties that words have, and often do not respect the commonly accepted view that
all of the properties of words are non-essential to that word. Further, I have suggested
that the bundle theory is in fact consistent with various claims made in the empirical
literature, and that this consistency with the empirical literature is at least a weak
reason to suppose that we might be willing to simply accept those counter-intuitive
consequences.
I therefore (minimally) suggest that the bundle theory of words has been unfairly
ignored in the metaphysics of words due to prior assumptions in favour of positing
an ontological category of substance by the main theories in this ﬁeld, and that the
bundle theory of words is a view that deserves serious philosophical consideration and
discussion.ByapproachingwordsinthiswayIhopetowidentherangeofmetaphysical
theories that are represented in the literature, and hopefully encourage those that have
assumed substances within their theory to provide an explicit defence of this posit.
Acknowledgements Many thanks to audiences in Genoa, Nottingham, Berlin, and Novara, and to Anna
Bortolan, Keith Begley, and Barbara Vetter for discussions that helped to develop this view.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
5747
References
Acquaviva, P. (2014a). The roots of nominality, the nominality of roots. In A. Alexiadou, H. Borer, & F.
Schaffer (Eds.), The roots of syntax, the syntax of roots. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Acquaviva, P. (2014b). Roots, concepts, and word structure: On the atoms of lexical semantics. In F. Rainer,
W. U. Dressler, F. Gardani, & H. C. Luschützky (Eds.), Morphology and meaning. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Armstrong, D. M. (1997). A world of states of affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bacon, J. (1995). Universals and property instances: The alphabet of being. Oxford: Blackwell.
Barker, S., & Jago, M. (2018). Material objects and essential bundle theory. Philosophical Studies, 175(12),
2969–2986.
Boeckx, C. (2008). Bare syntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Borer, H. (2005). Structuring sense (Vol. 2). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Borer, H. (2013). Taking form: Structuring sense (Vol. III). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Borer, H. (2014). The category of roots. In A. Alexiadou, H. Borer, & F. Schaffer (Eds.), The roots of syntax,
the syntax of roots. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, K. (1990). Abstract particulars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cappelen, H. (1999). Intentions in words. Noûs, 33(1), 92–102.
Castañeda, H.-N. (1974). Thinking and the structure of the world. Philosophia, 4, 3–40.
Casullo, A. (1984). The contingent identity of particulars and universals. Mind, 93, 527–541.
Casullo, A. (1988). A fourth version of the bundle theory. Philosophical Studies, 54, 125–139.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Curtis, B. (2014). The rumble in the bundle. Nous, 48(2), 298–313.
Denkel, A. (1997). On the compresence of tropes. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 57(3),
599–606.
Ehring, D. (2001). Temporal parts and bundle theory. Philosophical Studies, 104(2), 163–168.
Ehring, D. (2011). Tropes: Properties, objects, and mental causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, B. (2001). Scientiﬁc essentialism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fisher, A. R. J. (2019). Abstracta and abstraction in trope theory. Philosophical Papers. https://doi.org/10.
1080/05568641.2019.1571938.
Goodman, N., & Quine, W. V. O. (1947). Steps toward a constructive nominalism. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 12(4), 105–122.
Hakkarainen, J., & Keinänen, M. (2017). The ontological form of tropes: Refuting Douglas Ehring’s main
argument against standard trope nominalism. Philosophia, 45(2), 647–658.
Harley, H. (2005). How do verbs get their names? Denominal verbs, Manner Incorporation and the ontology
of verb roots in English. In N. Erteschik-Shir & T. Rapoport (Eds.), The syntax of aspect. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Harley, H. (2014). On the identity of roots. Theoretical Linguistics, 40(3–4), 225–276.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language; What is it, who has it, and
how did it evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Hawthorne, J., & Lepore, E. (2011). On words. Journal of Philosophy, 108(9), 447–485.
Hoffman, J., & Rosenkrantz, G. S. (1994). Substance among other categories. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Irmak, N. (2018). An ontology of words. Erkenntnis. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-018-0001-0.
Jackendoff, R. (2018). Representations and rules of language. In B. Huebner (Ed.), The philosophy of Daniel
Dennett. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jackendoff, R., & Pinker, S. (2005). The nature of the language faculty and its implications for evolution
of language (Reply to Fitch, Hauser, and Chomsky). Cognition, 97, 211–225.
Jago, M. (2018). Essential bundle theory and modality. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-1819-
3.
Johansson, I. (1989). Ontological investigations. New York: Routledge.
Kaplan, D. (1990). Words. Aristotelian Society Supplementary, 64, 93–119.
Kaplan, D. (2011). Words on words. Journal of Philosophy, 108(9), 504–529.
Katz, J. J. (1981). Language and other abstract objects. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Keinänen, M., & Hakkarinen, J. (2014). The problem of trope individuation: A reply to Lowe. Erkenntnis,
79(1), 65–79.
Lowe, E. J. (1995). The metaphysics of abstract objects. Journal of Philosophy, 92, 509–524.
123

5748
Synthese (2021) 198:5731–5748
Lowe, E. J. (2006). The four-category ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marantz, A. (2000). Words. Cambridge: Ms, MIT.
Maurin, A.-S. (2002). If tropes. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Maurin, A.-S. (2011). An argument for the existence of tropes. Erkenntnis, 74(1), 69–79.
Maurin, A.-S. (2018). Tropes. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Stanford: Stanford
University.
Miller, J. T. M. (Unpublished Ms.). Sameness of word.
Miller, J. T. M. (2018). Are all primitives created equal? The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 56(2),
273–292.
Miller, J. T. M. (2019). On the individuation of words. Inquiry. https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2018.
1562378.
Miller, J. T. M., & Hughes, T. J. (2014). Lexicalisation and the origin of the human mind. Biosemiotics,
7(1), 11–27.
Mormann, T. (1995). Trope sheaves: A topological ontology of tropes. Logic and Logical Philosophy, 3,
129–150.
Nefdt, R. M. (2019). The ontology of words: A structural approach. Inquiry, 62(8), 877–911.
O’Leary-Hawthorne, J. (1995). The bundle theory of substance and the identity of indiscernible. Analysis,
55, 191–196.
Paul, L. A. (2017). A one category ontology. In J. A. Keller (Ed.), Freedom, metaphysics, and method:
Themes from van Inwagen. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paul, L. A. (forthcoming). Mereological bundle theory. In H. Burkhardt, J. Seibt, & G. Imaguire (Eds.),
Handbook of mereology. Philosophia Verlag.
Pinker, S. (2003). Language as an adaptation to the cognitive niche. In M. Christiansen & S. Kirby (Eds.),
Language evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pullum, G. K. (2013). The central question in comparative syntactic metatheory. Mind and Language, 28(4),
492–521.
Robb, D. (2005). Qualitative unity and the bundle theory. The Monist, 88(4), 466–492.
Robinson, H. (2018). Substance. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
Rodriguez-Pereyra, G. (2002). Resemblance nominalism: A solution to the problem of universals. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1940). An enquiry into meaning and truth. Crows Nest: Allen and Unwin.
Schaffer, J. (2001). The individuation of tropes. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 79, 247–257.
Simons, P. (1994). Particulars in particular clothing: Three trope theories of substance. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 54(3), 553–575.
Simons, P. (1998). Farewell to substance: A differentiated leave-taking. Ratio, 11(3), 235–252.
Simons, P. (2013). Vague kinds and biological nominalism. Metaphysica, 14(2), 275–282.
Sprouse, J., & Lau, E. (2013). Syntax and the brain. In M. den Dikken (Ed.), The handbook of generative
syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Szabó, Z. (1999). Expressions and their representations. The Philosophical Quarterly, 49(195), 145–163.
Tallerman, M. (2007). Did our ancestors speak a holistic protolanguage? Lingua, 117(3), 579–604.
Tattersall, I. (2004). What happened in the origin of human consciousness. The Anatomical Record, Part B
New Anatomy, 276B, 19–26.
Ujvári, M. (2013). The trope bundle theory of substance: Change, individuation and individual essence.
Frankfurt: Ontos.
Van Cleve, J. (1985). Three versions of the bundle theory. Philosophical Studies, 47(1), 95–107.
van Inwagen, P. (2011). Relational vs. constituent ontologies. Philosophical Perspectives, 25, 389–405.
Wayne, A. (2008). A trope-bundle ontology for ﬁeld theory. In D. Dieks (Ed.), The ontology of spacetime
II (pp. 1–15). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Wetzel, L. (2009). Types and tokens: An essay on abstract objects. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Wiggins, D. (1980). Sameness and substance. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wiggins, D. (2001). Sameness and substance renewed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, D. C. (1986[1960]). Universals and existents. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 64(1), 1–14.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

