ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Synthese (2022) 200:308
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-022-03752-5
Abstract
The basic kinds of physical causality that are foundational for other kinds of cau­
sality involve objects and the causal relations between them. These interactions do 
not involve events. If events were ontologically significant entities for causality in 
general, then they would play a role in simple mechanical interactions. But argu­
ments about simple collisions looked at from different frames of reference show 
that events cannot play a role in simple mechanical interactions, and neither can 
the entirely hypothetical causal relations between events. These arguments show 
that physics, which should be authoritative when it comes to the metaphysics of 
causality, gives no reasons to believe that events are causal agents. Force relations 
and some cases of energy-momentum transfer are examples of causal relations, with 
forces being paradigmatic in the macroscopic world, though it is conceivable that 
there are other kinds of causal relation. A relation between two objects is a causal 
relation if and only if when it is instantiated by the two objects there is a possibility 
that the objects that are the terms of the relation could change. The basic metaphys­
ics of causality is about objects, causal relations, changes in objects, and a causal 
primitive. The paper also includes a discussion of the metaphysics of forces and a 
discussion of the metaphysics of energy and momentum exchanges.
1  Introduction
The position defended in this paper is that the basic kinds of physical causality that 
are foundational for other kinds of causality involve objects and the causal rela­
Received: 6 November 2020 / Accepted: 21 May 2022 / Published online: 20 July 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022
A causal ontology of objects, causal relations, and various 
kinds of action
Andrew Newman1
	
 Andrew Newman
andrewnewman@unomaha.edu
1	
University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA
1 3

Synthese (2022) 200:308
tions between them.1 The objects, or substances, that are the subject of this paper 
are mostly macroscopic, though a few things will be said about microscopic objects. 
Force relations and some cases of energy-momentum transfer are examples of causal 
relations, with forces being paradigmatic in the macroscopic world, though it is con­
ceivable that there are other kinds of causal relation. Causal relations between objects 
are “the objective, physical, causal connections that Hume sought in vain” that drive 
the world (Salmon, 1994). Some of the metaphysical problems associated with forces 
and with exchanges of energy and momentum will be discussed in some detail.
These basic kinds of physical causality do not involve events. If events were onto­
logically significant entities for causality in general, then they would have to play a 
role in simple mechanical interactions. But it will be seen that they cannot play a role 
in simple mechanical interactions. One of the reasons is that the cause event and the 
effect event identified in one frame of reference are not the same as the cause event 
and effect event identified other frames of reference. In fact, what is the cause event 
and effect event in one frame could be reversed in another frame, so that original 
cause event becomes the effect event, and the original effect event becomes the cause 
event, contrary to the usual philosophical understanding of causality. The case I have 
in mind is where in one frame of reference a billiard ball strikes one at rest, and in 
another frame of reference the ball that was moving is at rest and the ball that was at 
rest is moving.
If events were causes and effects, then we would expect there to be causal rela­
tions between them.2 But an examination of simple mechanical situations will show 
no signs of interaction between events. It is also difficult physically to identify causal 
relations between events, whereas it is easy to find causally significant relations 
between objects. Causal relations can be explained as follows: a relation between 
two objects is a causal relation if and only if when it is instantiated by two objects 
there is a possibility that the objects that are the terms of the relation could change 
as a consequence. It is only a possibility because it is also possible that change could 
be prevented.
Even though the basic kinds of causal interaction between objects are symmetri­
cal, there are situations in which there is asymmetry in causality. One example is the 
development through time of a complex system composed of parts that interact via 
symmetric causal relations, where earlier states of the complex system give rise to 
later states. There are two different kinds of action here: the symmetric interaction of 
the parts are examples of transitive action, whereas the asymmetric evolution of the 
complex system is an example of developmental action. In transitive action, two dif­
ferent objects act on each other by means of a causal relation in such a way that both 
1  Norton 2003 expands on Russell’s idea that science is not about causality (see Sect. 4 of this paper). 
Nevertheless, he thinks better of the theories of Salmon and Dowe (see Sect. 4). Although my distinctions 
are in a sense a priori, I see what I am doing as an example of basic philosophy of physics, and I also 
think that the making of distinctions is one of the more important things that philosophy does. Though a 
priori, I do not think it is armchair philosophy in Norton’s sense.
2  Event theorists take both causes and effects to be events. There is a tendency for philosophers to think 
that causes and effects are ontologically the same kind of thing. On the other hand, someone could con­
ceivably take the activity of the sculptor to be the cause and an event and the sculpture to be the effect 
and an object.
1 3
308 
Page 2 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
objects are changed. In developmental action, a system evolves through time, where 
the changes are not due to things outside of the system, but due to the interactions of 
the parts of the system.3 The traditional example of developmental action was that 
of an organism, which, though not isolated, changes in a way that is generated from 
within the organism.4 The interaction between two planets via forces is an example of 
transitive action whereas the development of the solar system as a whole on account 
of the interaction of the parts is an example of developmental action.
Causal chains are another example of asymmetry in causality. They include 
designed mechanisms, such as the mechanism that relates a trigger in a rifle to the 
movement of the firing pin. Such mechanisms consist of objects that interact with 
one another via symmetric causal relations and other forms of causal action. They are 
typically designed such that when the mechanism is used, it only works in one direc­
tion to achieve one result, which introduces the asymmetry. Designed causal chains 
are discussed in Sect. 11.
2  Recent causal ontologies and symmetry
A number of things have been suggested as causally significant entities. They include: 
events, facts (states of affairs), processes, substances (objects), properties, property 
instances, tropes, and powers.5 Event causation and substance causation appear to be 
connected since events will have substances as components so that it is conceivable 
that the causal action of substances could be understood in terms of events. Whittle 
2016, for example, defends substance causation but thinks that substances cannot 
act alone, and that causation also requires events, so that both substances and events 
are causes. It appears that one of the things that she is trying to do is to make use of 
events to introduce the expected asymmetry into causation: the expected direction of 
causation is from cause to effect and not the other way round. She does not, however, 
3  A counterfactual account of causality might regard both developmental action and transitive action as 
forms of causality. But if it did, that would be of no significance.
4  Aquinas talks about actio immanens or operatio immanens and actio transiens or operatio transiens, 
see Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 1 and Summa Theologica, 1a, q. 18, a. 3 ad 1, q. 23, a. 2 ad 1, q. 54, 
a. 1 ad 3. For Chisholm 1966, transeunt causation refers to an event causing another event; immanent 
causation refers to an agent causing an event. Dowe 2000, p. 52 ascribes the distinction to Leibniz, 
who distinguished between intrasubstantial or immanent causation versus intersubstantial or transeunt 
causation. Spinoza made a distinction between self-causing (causa sui), immanent causing (causa imma­
nens), which has to do with the persistence of one thing, and transitive causing (causa transiens), which 
involves transference from one thing to another, see Lærke 2010. Cf. Spinoza, Ethics, I, def. 1 and prop.8 
and Bennett 1984, p. 113.
5  To take a few examples: Whittle’s 2016 defends joint substance-event causation. She thinks that events 
are the “the front runner”. Weaver 2019 defends event causation in the context of philosophy of physics. 
He explains the role of causal relations, but they are a new, hypothetical kind of entity. Menzies 2009 
defends events within a linguistic approach to metaphysics. Buckareff 2017 in his critique of Whittle, 
defends the causal powers of substances as causes. Tropes as causal relata have been defended by Ehring 
1999 and 2011 and by Garcia-Encinas 2009, and, earlier, notably by Campbell 1990. Lowe 2008, pp. 
54 − 5 & 110 distinguishes between fact causation and event causation. Salmon 1984 and Dowe 2000 
take causal processes, which are constructed out of events, to be causally significant. Ehring 2009 is a 
very long discussion of causal relata.
1 3
Page 3 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
mention causal relations or whether substances are related by one kind of causal rela­
tion and events by some other kind of causal relation, and so does not mention how 
are those relations are related.6 Heil 2012 recognizes the causal importance of sub­
stances over events, and, significantly, takes causation to be symmetrical and recip­
rocal. For him, “causings” are the mutual manifestings of powers (or dispositions), 
though in addition to “causings”, there are also causes and effects. Apart from powers 
or dispositions, it is difficult to know exactly what the other metaphysical categories 
are that he is appealing to.7
In contrast, Menzies 2009 believes that events alone are causes and effects, but 
again makes no mention of what relates them.8 He recognizes that events may have 
substances, which what I call objects, as components, but for him the action of sub­
stances is completely submerged in the events that they are components of. He rejects 
substances as causes because ordinary language sentences involving substances can 
always be translated into sentences about events. He appears to be inferring things 
about the world from how ordinary language is used, though he does also make use 
of the notion of truth makers.
The aim of Massin 2009 is to defend the reality of forces, where he takes forces to 
be dyadic, symmetric relations between objects. Although he recognizes that forces 
are causally significant, as I think he must, he denies that they are themselves causal 
relations, and the reason he gives is that forces are symmetric. Since he expects 
causal relations to be asymmetric, he must develop a more complex way of explain­
ing the role of forces in causality. He does this by means of causal relations that are 
additional to the force relation and which assist the force relation, though he does not 
appear to want to make use of events. Likewise, Wilson 2007 defends the reality and 
symmetry of forces and also has to find a way to explain how they figure in causal 
interactions, again not making use of events. Weaver 2019 assumes the reality of 
forces and events and has an even more complex way of explaining the role of forces 
in causality, where Massin adds two causal relations to an interaction between two 
objects, Weaver adds four. However, the causal relations of Massin and Weaver are 
entirely hypothetical. The attempts of Massin, Wilson, and Weaver to explain of the 
role of forces in interaction can be regarded as attempts to explain the fundamental 
causal connection.9
6  She makes a number of interesting points about causation to help justify her claims. She believes that 
causes can be collective, so that a substance and an event can both be among the causes of some effect.
7  Heil cautions “. . it is important to see that one and the same power is capable of manifesting itself dif­
ferently with different kinds of reciprocal partner ” (p. 121, cf. p. 133.)
8  Events theorists have a number of different kinds of event available to them. Kim 1976 defends fine-
grained events, see also Bennett 1988, Chap. V, whereas Davidson 1967 defends coarse-grained events, 
see also Bennett 1988, Chap. IV. Ehring 2009, like Bennett, gives accounts of a number of different kinds 
of event. Lowe 2002, Chap. 13 is a discussion of the elimination of events. See also Casati & Varzi 2008, 
pp. 31–54. Fine-grained events can be described in only one way. Two events are the same if and only 
if they have the same constituents, which are objects, properties, relations, and times. Coarse-grained 
events can be described in many different ways. Two events are identical if and only they have the same 
causes and effects. Paul 2000 gives a critique of both fine-grained and coarse grained events.
9  Heil 2012, Sect. 6.2 talks about the causal nexus, which is the same thing.
1 3
308 
Page 4 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
3  Metaphysical terms and assumptions
The ontology defended in this paper consists only of objects, properties, and relations. 
Objects are entities that instantiate properties and are not themselves instantiated by 
anything else. Among paradigmatic properties are those known to science, such as 
shape, mass, and charge; hence, objects are things that can instantiate properties like 
these. Such objects are located in the space-time world, they persist through time, 
and they persist through changes of properties. Macroscopic objects are taken to be 
real composite wholes that can be the terms of relations such as forces, though they 
are not the only things that can be terms of causal relations. This view is defended 
by Wilson 2007 and Newman 2013.10 Events and states of affairs, if there were such 
things, might be particulars, but they would not be objects, though they are closely 
connected to objects since objects would be among their components.
4  Critique of events in simple interactions: Windows, baseballs, and 
Billiard Balls
Some conclusions can be drawn about the interaction of objects by considering some 
simple physical examples, such as how baseballs break windows and how billiard 
balls collide with each other. It will be seen that all that is needed to account for these 
examples are objects and the causal relations between them, and that no purpose is 
served in introducing events as an additional ontological category.
When a baseball breaks a window, it is supposed that the cause is the event of the 
ball’s striking the window, and that the effect is the event of the window’s break­
ing. The event of the ball’s striking the window starts when the ball first touches the 
window and there begins to be a force between them; it ceases when there ceases to 
be a force on the ball, which I assume is when the breaking ends. The window first 
bends elastically for a finite period of time and then begins to break. The event of the 
window’s breaking starts when cracks begin to appear, and it ceases when the win­
dow has separated into the independent pieces that fall to the ground.11 The bending 
and the breaking do not overlap. Hence, there are three different events: a striking, 
a bending, and a breaking, which can be depicted as follows with time progressing 
from left to right:12
10  There are causally significant boundaries that separate the matter of the object from other matter; there 
are emergent properties of solid objects, such as the conduction band in metals; and so on, Newman 2013.
11  It would still be a breaking even if the cracks remained just cracks, but in the case being considered, it 
is a breaking that starts with cracks and ends with separate pieces.
12  The events that would be appropriate here may be the coarse grained events of the early Davidson, see 
fn.8.
1 3
Page 5 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
The left-hand boundaries of the events and the boundary in the middle are fairly 
sharp, whereas the right-hand boundaries are less sharp. These events are not inde­
pendently existing entities. They are related in that the events have as components 
two objects: the striking has both objects as components, and the bending and the 
breaking have just the window as a component. There is a metaphysical clue in that 
it is the objects, namely, the ball and the window, that are the independently existing 
entities.
On an events view, the event of the baseball’s striking the window must cause 
the event of the window’s bending. In this case the cause overlaps the effect, and 
continues after the effect event has ceased.13 The event of the ball’s striking the win­
dow must also cause the event of the window’s breaking. In this case the events also 
overlap, but in such a way that they both end together. The bending and the break­
ing do not overlap; they touch. Does the bending also cause the breaking? There 
is antecedence and contiguity, which are traditional criteria for causality.14 Another 
question raised here is the general one of what is the temporal relation between cause 
events and effect events? And a more specific question is how do the causal relations 
work in this case?
Unfortunately, there is something wrong with this account from the point of view 
of physical science. This can be seen by noticing that there is no essential difference 
between a baseball striking a window and one billiard ball striking another.
Consider the elastic collision of two billiard balls, A and B, in empty space mov­
ing in a straight line that joins their centres. While in contact the billiard balls change 
shape, which is analogous to the bending of the window. Consider looking at the 
collision from the point of view of three different frames of reference, labelled 1, 2, 
and 3, where time is always thought of as going in the same direction. This approach 
is consistent with Newtonian mechanics and special relativity, and, in effect, origi­
nated with Huygens in the 17th century.15 Technically, the frames of reference are the 
inertial frames that are common to Newtonian mechanics with absolute space and 
absolute time, Newtonian mechanics with Galilean space-time, and special relativity. 
An inertial frame is one that is not accelerating.
The initial states before the collision are on the left of the arrows, and the final 
states after the collision are on the right of the arrows:
13  In this case, the supposed cause and the effect start together and are simultaneous for a period of time. 
Cf. “[It] is presumed that it is metaphysically impossible for an effect to precede, or even to be simulta­
neous with, one of its causes.” Lowe 2002, p. 230. On the other hand, simultaneous causation has been 
defended by Huemer & Kovitz 2003. They point out that the interaction of billiard balls is continuous, 
symmetrical, and reciprocal, though they do believe in events.
14  Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, I, III, XV.
15  See Barbour 1989, Chap. 9.
1 3
308 
Page 6 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
According to the first frame of reference, A moves to the right with velocity v and 
strikes B causing it to move. The cause as an event is A’s striking B with velocity v at 
time t; the effect as an event is B’s moving away with velocity v after time t.
According to the second frame of reference the cause and effect are reversed. B 
moves to the left with velocity –v and strikes A causing it to move. The cause as an 
event is B’s striking A with velocity –v at time t. The effect as an event is A’s moving 
away with velocity –v after time t. If events as causes and effects were to be identified 
in this way for the third reference frame, there would be two causes and two effects.
The interaction of the two billiard balls is just like the interaction of the baseball 
and the window in that there is a force that acts between two bodies for a finite period 
of time. It is easy to construct a situation for billiard balls that is analogous to a base­
ball breaking a window: just suppose that billiard ball B breaks into pieces on contact 
and A does not. From the point of view of the first frame of reference, A’s striking 
B causes B to shatter. From the point of view of the second frame of reference, B’s 
striking A causes B to shatter.
The most obvious difficulty in the case of the collision of two billiard balls is that 
if the cause is to be an event, it should not be interchanged with the effect in another 
frame of reference.16 Hence any account of causality in terms of events understood in 
this fashion must be mistaken. If intuition, common sense, or ordinary language insist 
that the billiard ball A’s striking the billiard ball B is the cause, then they are mis­
taken. It might be interesting to discover what view of causality is embedded in ordi­
nary language, but there is no reason to believe that it tells us anything about reality.
Another difficulty with the events account is that there are no known causal rela­
tions between such events. Going back to the window, the event of the baseball’s 
striking the window (the supposed cause) and the event of the window’s breaking 
(one supposed effect) overlap temporally, so that there is plenty of opportunity for 
interaction. But there is no mechanism, and no one has any idea of how they inter­
act. On the other hand, physics is clear that it is the ball and the window that inter­
act. Forces act between physical objects. Energy and momentum are properties that 
are instantiated by physical objects, and hence they are exchanged between physical 
16  Cf. “[If] an event, e1, is a cause of another event, e2, then it is not the case that e2 is also a cause of e1.” 
Lowe 2002, p. 329. This appears to be based on a widespread, fundamental intuition about causality. If 
the sculptor is a cause of the statue, then the statue is not a cause of the sculptor, however you look at the 
situation. If the ball’s striking the window is a cause of the window’s breaking, then the window’s breaking 
is not a cause of the ball’s striking the window. If the first billiard ball’s striking the second billiard ball is 
a cause of the second billiard’s movement, then the second billiard ball’s movement is not a cause of the 
first billiard ball’s striking the second billiard ball.
1 3
Page 7 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
objects.17 The supposed causal relations between events are entirely hypothetical, 
unknown to physics, and not subject to investigation. The idea that the two events 
interact is a pure figment of philosophers’ imaginations. Instead, these arguments 
show that that physics, which should be authoritative when it comes to the metaphys­
ics of causality, gives no reasons to believe that events are causal agents.
Any point of view that takes causality to have direction as given uniquely, say, 
by the first frame of reference in the case of the billiard balls is mistaken. Consider, 
for example, Quine’s view that causality is the same as energy flow, or Aronson and 
Fair’s view that causality is the flow of energy and momentum.18 According to the 
first frame of reference, billiard ball A transfers all its kinetic energy and momentum 
to billiard ball B, and the energy and momentum flow from left to right. But from the 
point of view of the second reference frame, billiard ball B transfers all its kinetic 
energy and momentum to billiard
ball A, and the flow of kinetic energy and momentum is from right to left. Hence 
the direction of the “flow” of energy and momentum depends on the frame of refer­
ence. It follows that to speak of energy and momentum as flowing is purely metaphor­
ical. Even to speak of energy and momentum as being exchanged is metaphorical. 
Properties change, but nothing flows. Hence, the suggestion that causality is the same 
as the flow of energy and momentum is inconsistent with physics.19 It also follows 
that interactions of this sort cannot be understood in terms of the transfer of tropes.20
The third reference frame is the frame defined by the centre of mass of the two bil­
liard balls, which might be regarded as the preferred reference frame. From the point 
of view of this frame of reference, the kinetic energy of each billiard ball remains 
17  Cf. Dowe 2000, p. 92. Bennett admits that objects do the “pushing and the shoving and the forcing” 
but denies that causal relations relate objects, Bennett 1984, pp. 22 − 3. But he also believes that events 
are supervenient entities and that all truths about events are reducible to truths not involving events, ibid., 
p. 12 & chap. VI. It appears, then, that he thinks that causal relations can only be explained linguistically. 
Trenton Merricks distinguishes object causation from event causation, and maintains that object causation 
cannot be eliminated, Merricks 2001, pp. 65 − 6.
18  Quine 1973, Chap. 2, Aronson 1971, Fair, 1979.
19  Dowe 2000, pp. 55–59 argues in another way that the energy that is transmitted from one object to 
another does not possess identity and hence cannot be regarded as a kind of fluid.
20  If energy does not have identity through time, then an energy trope cannot have identity through time 
either. It is interesting that when Douglas Ehring, who believes that tropes have identity through time, 
gives examples of causation involving the transference of tropes that the tropes he considers are charge 
tropes and structural tropes, which are not obviously subject to this problem, see Ehring 1999, pp. 123-7 
and Ehring 2011. Very perceptive perhaps, but in his examples, it is electrons that are exchanged, not 
charge tropes. See also Ehring 2009 and Campbell 1990, pp. 4, 113, 138 − 42. Paul 2000 says that her 
aspects correspond to tropes, but her explanation makes them sound like facts, particularly her use of the 
gerund, and Bennett says that fine-grained events are rather like tropes (Bennett, 1984, p. 90). Their view 
makes some sense, since, despite the formal differences between events and tropes: if the property that is 
a component of a fact is a trope, then the trope is the powerful or business end of the fact. Nevertheless, 
physically it is objects that interact, not their properties however conceived. When objects interact, they 
do so on account of their properties and very often on account of several of their properties, not just one. 
When heat energy is absorbed by a body its temperature increases. The effect, namely the increase in tem­
perature, depends on several properties including the amount of heat added, the mass of the body, and the 
specific heat of the body. Moreover, if a trope of one object exerted a force on a trope of another object, 
then the tropes belonging to just one object would have to exert forces on each other. But both kinds of 
interaction are unknown to physics.
1 3
308 
Page 8 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
unchanged. Those that believe that energy flows would have to credit energy with 
some sort of primitive identity through time like a fluid in order to account for the 
exchange of equal amounts of kinetic energy in either direction. And they would have 
to believe something similar about momentum so that the quantities of momentum 
could flow through each other. Neither makes any sense.
Hence, the best that can said about the baseball and the window, and about the 
two billiard balls, is that two different objects interact, and both are changed as a 
result, an interaction that is symmetrical and reciprocal.
It might be objected that the ball is the cause and not the window, since the ball 
is active whereas the window is passive; the thrower of the ball is blamed, not the 
installer of the window. On the other hand, the window acts on the ball just as much 
as the ball acts on the window, even though there would be no point in complaining 
that your baseball had been scratched up. Blaming the thrower involves thinking in 
terms of human agency, with its attendant notion of intention, and a chain of inter­
actions, whereas our focus is on the temporal neighbourhood of just one physical 
interaction. To remove human agency (and intention and blame), consider a hailstone 
breaking a window. According to Newton, the falling of the hailstone is like the fall­
ing of an apple, which is like the falling of the moon. In the case of the moon and the 
earth, it is more obvious that both act, and both are acted upon.
It is possible to look at the collision of the two billiard balls as an example of 
developmental action. The account of the collision from the point of view of the third 
frame of reference, where the balls approach each other from opposite directions with 
the same speed, in fact suggests that the initial state of both balls gives rise to the final 
state of both balls. If the two balls are taken together and regarded as an isolated sys­
tem that evolves according to physical laws, it can be represented by a single point in 
a six-dimensional configuration space. This is described by the Lagrangian formula­
tion of classical mechanics. If this developmental action of a composite system were 
regarded as what causality is, then the direction of causality would be from past to 
future, not from left to right. On the other hand, what underlies the temporal evolu­
tion of this combined system is the symmetrical, reciprocal interaction of the billiard 
balls, an example of transitive action.
5  Accounts of physical causation that involve events
Phil Dowe’s book on causality is called Physical Causation. In fact, Russell, Reichen­
bach, Salmon, and Dowe form a tradition that can be called the physical causation 
tradition. It is a tradition that I sympathize with despite its reliance on events.
In “On the Notion of Cause” of 1912, Bertrand Russell concluded that “. . the 
law of causality, as usually stated by philosophers, is false, and not employed in 
science”.21 The function that causality was supposed to perform has to do with how 
the state of a “functionally isolated” system at one time determines the state of the 
system at a later time.22 Functionally isolated means sufficiently isolated for all prac­
21  Russell 1912, p. 207. Cf. Norton 2003 and fn. 1.
22  Russell 1912, p. 199.
1 3
Page 9 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
tical purposes, where not enough is coming in from the outside to make a significant 
difference. Russell was thinking about composite systems, with the universe as an 
extreme example.23
In Human Knowledge of 1948, Russell took a different view and defined a causal 
line as a continuous, temporal sequence of events that displays quasi-permanence, 
and which is numerically different and separate from other causal lines. Quasi perma­
nence implies that given an event that occurs at a certain time on a causal line, then at 
any slightly earlier or slightly later time there is on that causal line a closely similar 
event.24 He is thinking about a temporal neighbourhood of that point. This time he is 
prepared to talk about causality:
When two events belong to one causal line the earlier may be said to ‘cause’ 
the latter. In this way laws of the form ‘A causes B’ may preserve a certain 
validity.25
A causal line for Russell is, in effect, the world line of a physical object. But he does 
not want to start by talking about the world lines of physical objects because he thinks 
that events are more fundamental than physical objects, and so he wants to start with 
events and try to construct what is commonly regarded as the world line of a physi­
cal object out of events. Salmon follows Russell in seeing events as fundamental, 
whereas Dowe sees physical objects as fundamental.
These two passages from Russell discuss two different kinds of developmental 
action. There is the development through time of a composite system where the evo­
lution of the system through time is due to the interaction of its parts. Russell seems 
to have had this in mind in 1912. And then there is the development through time of 
a physical object, understood in terms of events, which may incidentally have parts, 
but where the focus is not on the interaction of the parts but on the change in its prop­
erties. This is what he seems to have had in mind in 1948.
Although in the later account, Russell does actually say that causal lines may 
always be regarded as the persistence of something,26 he thinks that events are funda­
mental and physical objects are to be explained in terms of them, or constructed out 
of them.27 In this later account, he is reifying events as fundamental entities, whereas 
in the earlier discussion of composite systems, he does not appear to want to reify the 
states of isolated composite systems as events, even though an earlier state of such a 
system determines a later state of the system.
Russell’s accounts of causality only make use of developmental action, even 
though the physics of his day can be regarded as recognizing the existence of transi­
tive action. The accounts of Wesley Salmon and Phil Dowe are improvements as they 
make use of both developmental action and transitive action. Wesley Salmon’s idea 
23  This paper still exerts it spell, see the collection of papers in Price & Corry 2007.
24  Russell 1948, pp. 475-7 & 487.
25  Russell 1948, p. 334.
26  Russell 1948, p. 477.
27  Olson 1987 believes that facts are basic, and objects are abstracted out of facts, see pp. 61–64 & 78–81. 
He ascribes this view to Bradley and Frege.
1 3
308 
Page 10 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
of a causal process as a series of events is very similar to the idea of a causal line of 
the later Russell.28 The fundamental problem with Salmon’s account lies in distin­
guishing the progress of a physical object through time, regarded as constructed out 
of events, from a pseudo process such as the movement of a spot of light on a surface, 
also regarded as constructed out of events. This is the issue of the transmission of a 
mark. According to Salmon, given a structure that could have been transmitted along 
a process, then a mark is a modification of a structure.29 Russell’s account of a causal 
line faces the same problem, as was pointed out by Reichenbach.
Although Dowe’s idea of a causal process is similar to that of Salmon, he under­
stands the events that make up a causal process to be constructed out of an object 
and its properties.30 Nevertheless, for both Salmon and Dowe causal interactions 
take place between causal processes rather than between physical objects, and causal 
processes are things that have events as their components. For Dowe, both causal 
processes and causal interactions are defined in terms of conserved quantities:
CQ1. A causal process is a world line of an object which possesses a conserved 
quantity.
CQ2. A causal interaction is an intersection of world lines that involves 
exchange of a conserved quantity. (Dowe 2000, p.90, cf. Dowe 1995, p. 323)
He is thinking mainly of energy and momentum as conserved quantities, follow­
ing the causal theories of Quine 1973, Aronson, 1971, and Fair 1979. However, it 
should be noted that in classical mechanics angular momentum is a conserved quan­
tity, whereas in quantum mechanics orbital angular momentum in conjunction with 
spin is a conserved quantity. Electric charge is a conserved quantity in classical and 
quantum mechanics.
Although people who believe that events that have physical objects among their 
components are causally significant, they may not be so enthusiastic about reifying 
events involving composite systems. The interesting question here is what sorts of 
composite whole can be components of events, given so many physical objects are 
composites? If an event is the sort of thing that can enter into causal relations, then 
an event should have some sort of natural principle of unity. From Dowe’s point of 
view, it is derived from the object that is one of its components; whereas from Rus­
28  Salmon 1984, pp. 139 & 144.
29  A causal process is then one that can transmit a mark, where a mark is transmitted from A to B if the 
mark is manifested at all points from A to B given no interaction, Salmon 1984, pp. 141-4. Dowe believes 
Salmon’s view should be that a causal process is one that can transmit a mark and a process that cannot is 
not a causal process, Dowe 1992, p. 198. For Salmon, the dividing of a causal line or the coming together 
of two causal lines, in other words, generalized interactions, involve the modification of structure. Salmon 
focusses on structure, Dowe on conserved quantities.
30  Cf. Dowe 2000, p. 107, where he uses the language of endurantism. He also talks about events, facts, 
and states of affairs, and at one stage appears indifferent to which term is used. He settles on facts as the 
terms of causal relations, where a fact is an object’s possessing a conserved quantity and is an example 
of what Armstrong calls a state of affairs, Dowe 2000, pp. 168–171. He describes events as thin events. 
An event in this sense is an object’s possessing certain properties at a certain time, though, at one point, 
he does also say that an event is a change in a property, ibid., p. 169. His events appear to correspond to 
Kim’s fine grained events.
1 3
Page 11 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
sell’s or Salmon’s point of view, it is not clear where the principle of unity for events 
could come from. Although many people would, very reasonably, regard a baseball 
as a real composite whole and therefore the sort of thing that could be the component 
of an event,31 a pair of billiard balls that will interact or have interacted in the past is 
an unlikely real composite whole because eventually they separate indefinitely and 
hence lack of any principle of unity. At least, I think our intuition should take us in 
this direction. Although there are mereologists who believe in unrestricted composi­
tion and metaphysical atomists who deny that baseballs are real composite wholes,32 
they usually admit that their views are counterintuitive. But I have no time for either 
of these theories.
The difficulties associated with finding an answer to the question of what sorts of 
composite whole can be components of events add to the difficulties in maintaining 
that events are causally significant. Quantum entanglement may provide a principle 
of unity for two quantum systems that originate from the same method of preparation. 
But that does not apply to billiard balls.33
As we have seen, philosophers such as Russell and Salmon regard the develop­
ment through time of what is normally regarded as a physical object as a series of 
events, which Russell calls a causal line and Salmon a causal process.34 It follows, I 
believe, that in the absence of any natural way of dividing a causal process into finite 
intervals, the events that make up a causal process must be instantaneous. Even with 
some natural division into finite intervals, there seems to be no way of avoiding the 
conclusion that those finite intervals are also composed of instantaneous events.
Such instantaneous events appear to be very similar to the temporal parts of perdu­
rantism. Perdurantism is the view that a physical object is a four-dimensional entity 
that occupies four-dimensional space-time, in which it is divided into temporal parts, 
where each temporal part corresponds to a time at which the object exists. Hence the 
temporal parts are sometimes called time slices. Special relativity makes the time 
slices of a spatially extended object dependent on the frame of reference since they 
are simultaneity slices. So, the division into temporal parts is frame dependent and 
the time slices are of no ontological significance.
31  See Merricks 2001.
32  Cf. Quine and the later Davidson’s account of what Bennett calls concrete events, see Bennett 1984, 
Chap. VII. “Each [event] comprises the content, however heterogeneous, of some portion of space-time, 
however disconnected and gerrymandered.” from Quine’s Word and Object quoted in Bennett 1984 p. 103. 
The difficulty with events of this kind is that they are arbitrary, lacking any principle of unity. The unity of 
an event could perhaps be explained by the unity of the physical object that was its principal component; 
but the unity of a physical object cannot be explained by the unity of the event that it is supposed to be 
abstracted from.
33  The de Broglie wavelength of a billiard ball moving at a reasonable speed is far too small to be measured 
and decoherence sets in very quickly for objects of this size.
34  Armstrong has a causal theory of identity through time, see Armstrong 1980.
1 3
308 
Page 12 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
6  The Metaphysics of Forces
Accounts of causality where the causal relations are identified include that of Big­
elow and Pargetter, who believe that all causes are reducible to the action of forces,35 
and that of Quine, who believed, in effect, that all causal relations were reducible to 
the exchange of energy. Quine’s view was generalized by Aronson and Fair to causal 
relations being exchanges of energy and momentum. There are also the theories of 
Campbell and Ehring, who think that causal relations are nothing other than the trans­
fer of tropes.36
Forces are well known and part of our common understanding of the world. It 
appears that forces cause things to happen. They cause bodies to accelerate, to cease 
to move, to change in shape, to break, and also to be in compression or tension 
(though these are continuum states), so that forces have several powers. Hence, mac­
roscopic forces have a prima facie claim to be real.37
In physics forces are introduced by Newton’s laws. In particular Newton’s third 
law states that if body A exerts a force F on body B, then body B exerts a force –F 
on body A. Hence, a force on a body is not alone: such forces always occur in pairs, 
where the two forces have the same magnitude and direction but opposite sense.38 
These two forces, though applied to different bodies, are clearly related to each other. 
Equally clearly, the two bodies are interacting causally and hence there is a causally 
significant relation between them. Hence, Newton’s third law is about forces in a 
relational situation, and, as we shall see later, does not apply to resultant forces.
In the mathematics of physics, a force is represented by a vector that points towards 
or away from a body: it has magnitude, direction, and sense. The magnitude is the 
numerical value of its strength in certain units, and the direction of a force vector is 
35  Bigelow & Pargetter 1990a, Chap. 6.
36  See fn. 20.
37  Bigelow et al., 1988, Newman, 1992, Wilson, 2007, and Massin 2009 among others defend the reality 
of forces. For further references, see Massin 2009. Wilson 2007 and Newman 2013 defend the reality of 
forces applied to macroscopic objects. Mach 1883, pp. 242-4 tried to eliminate forces from his system of 
mechanics. But the forces that he got rid of were forces as introduced and understood by dynamics; his 
method appears to have no bearing on forces as introduced and understood by statics (for the distinction, 
see Lange 2009). But perhaps he assimilated the forces of statics to the forces of dynamics on account of 
his view, following Newton, that the parallelogram law for forces is shown to be true in dynamics: dis­
placements obey the parallelogram law, and therefore velocities do, and accelerations do, and therefore the 
forces that cause the accelerations also obey the parallelogram law (ibid., p. 40). But this is just not true in 
special relativity, where the acceleration caused by a force is, in general, not in the same direction as the 
force vector acting on a particle. The force vector, the acceleration vector, and the velocity vector lie in the 
same plane but differ in direction (see Sect. 8). So perhaps there is something to be said for the priority of 
the statical conception of forces. In any event, static forces certainly cannot be eliminated.
38  The third law was Newton’s major innovation according to Sklar 2013, p. 51. Massin 2009, p. 582 
thinks that the third law is a metaphysical necessity. Lange 2002, however, does not think that it holds in 
electromagnetism: “Bodies do not exert forces on fields; bodies alone feel forces.” p. 163”, cf. pp. 114-5. 
There are three things to consider here: (1) in a dynamic situation, the field that exerts a force on a body 
undergoes a change in momentum, so that there is action and reaction, (2) in a static situation, the field 
exerts a force on a body but the field does not itself change so it does not undergo a change of momentum 
(do roof trusses stop geodesics?), (3) railguns have recoil, where in a railgun the force on the projectile and 
the force on the gun itself are mediated by an electromagnetic field. Hence, I suspect that the third law is 
defensible in electromagnetism, but whether locally is not clear.
1 3
Page 13 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
the orientation of the straight line associated with it without regard as to whether it is 
pointing towards the body or away from the body. The two possible senses associated 
with the direction of a force vector are towards the body or away from the body. The 
direction and sense of a force vector are the same as the direction and sense of the 
resulting acceleration, if a body were allowed to accelerate due to just that force in 
pre-relativistic mechanics.39
Let us distinguish between the force relation, which is a symmetric, dyadic rela­
tion that has magnitude and direction, and is attractive or repulsive, but does not have 
sense, and the force vectors, namely F and –F, which are monadic, and which have 
magnitude, direction, and sense. This distinction is made by Newman 1992 and Mas­
sin 2009. Although the force vectors are monadic, they are not intrinsic properties 
of the bodies because monadic intrinsic properties of objects cannot have direction 
as was pointed out by Massin 2009. When forces occur in pairs like this, each force 
vector is directed along a line that points it to the other body and its sense is either 
towards that body or away from it. In other words, the spatial relation between the 
two bodies is essential to the force vector acting on that body.40 It is plausible to 
suggest that because force vectors are not intrinsic properties of objects and are not 
relations, then they are not real entities.
Force vectors are applied to objects, as though acting from the outside. In fact, 
it is essential to mechanics to understand forces as external to the objects they act 
on. The idealized objects that are basic to mechanics are made of uniform matter 
without internal structure. These objects are inert and cannot move themselves, as 
Descartes pointed out in the Second Meditation. However, there are objects that can 
move themselves, but they have internal structure associated with a source of poten­
tial energy implanted in them, such as a spring or an internal combustion engine. 
Newton’s laws are not in the first place about such objects; they are about the ideal­
ized objects made of uniform matter.
The reason there is something acting on one body is that the two objects act on 
each other, which must be via a relation. Since it is not possible for both the force 
relation and the two force vectors to be causally effective, the best explanation is 
that it is the force relation that is causally effective and real, and the force vectors are 
merely calculating devices or ways of looking at how the force relation acts. A force 
vector is just a monadic reduction of a force relation (Newman, 1992; Massin, 2009). 
It also appears to be an important fact of nature that forces are always dyadic so that 
there are no forces of higher adicity.
39  Newton’s second law is that the resultant force applied to a body is equal to the rate of change of 
momentum of the body, where both the force and the momentum are vectors. This law, just as it stands, is 
true both in Newtonian mechanics and special relativity. If f is the force vector, then the four-force is Fα 
= (γd/dt(E/c), γf), where γ = (1 – v2/c2)−1/2, the Lorentz factor. In terms of four-vectors, Newton’s second 
law takes the form.Fα = dpα/dτ = d(m0vα)/dτ = m0dvα/dτ = d/dτ((m0γc, m0γv), which involves differentiation 
with respect to proper time.
40  Cf. the discussion by Massin 2009, pp. 566–572. He points out that if two bodies are at a distance from 
each other, there is both a dyadic spatial relation with direction only and two spatial vectors with the same 
direction and opposite sense, and clearly the dyadic relation is real. It could be argued that since forces 
are not intrinsic, they are not dispositional, though there are those who think that there are dispositional 
relations.
1 3
308 
Page 14 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
The parallelogram law for the addition of forces is about how two component 
forces can be added to give a resultant force. There is a dispute as to whether the 
component forces are real, or the resultant force is real.41 The answer is neither. The 
parallelogram law for the addition of forces, though it is not itself a law of physics, 
is about the force vectors of the laws of physics, so that both component forces and 
resultant forces are force vectors and therefore not real.42
In general, component forces are associated directly with force relations as, for 
example, in the attractive force between two planets. Consider planet A and planet B 
having a force relation between them. We also imagine that there is also a force vec­
tor rooted in planet A pointing at planet B, and a force vector rooted in planet B point­
ing at planet A. If there were another planet C, then it would have a force relation 
with planet A and a force relation with planet B. Let us focus on planet A. In addition 
to the two force relations, there is a force vector rooted in A pointing at planet B and 
a force vector rooted in A pointing at planet C. These two force vectors can then be 
summed using the parallelogram law of forces. The resultant force vector does not 
point at planet B or planet C, or anything else for that matter. It is not associated with 
any force relation; and it does not have a third law pair. But none of this matters if 
force vectors are not real and just constructions.
It is also possible to resolve a force vector associated with a force relation into 
components: that force vector, then, becomes the resultant force vector that is the 
vector sum of the components. This can be done in any number of arbitrary ways. 
Again, this does not matter if force vectors are not real.
In the case of Newton’s law of gravitation, the two force vectors mentioned in the 
third law appear to be generated equally and symmetrically by both bodies. This can 
be explained by the single force relation between the bodies being generated equally 
and symmetrically by both bodies. The same is true of the force relation generated 
between two bodies when they interact during a collision.43 As was noted before, it 
is essential to understand that the force that causes a body to accelerate is external to 
that body. Each body in itself is inert, but together in combination in an interaction 
they can generate a force. This is another reason for interpreting the situation meta­
physically in terms of a single force relation between two bodies.
But there is something metaphysically paradoxical in something that is essentially 
inert, and therefore powerless, having the power to generate a force relation, which 
is not powerless.44 Suppose that it were suggested that if two objects both lacked a 
41  I believe that the dispute first arose between Cartwright 1980 (and 1983), who believed that only the 
resultant force was real, and Creary 1981, who believed that only the component forces were real. New­
man 1992 and Massin 2009 side with Creary. Wilson 2009 sides with Cartwright. Armstrong 1997, Mol­
nar, 2003, and Bigelow & Pargetter 1990a think forces are monadic, but not Bigelow & Pargetter 1990b.
42  Lange 2009 has an interesting account of those in the 19th century who had a statical conceptions of 
forces and tried to derive the parallelogram law from statical considerations, and others, such as Mach, 
who had a dynamical conception of forces and tried to derive it from dynamical considerations, see fn. 37. 
Lange did not seem very convinced by these efforts.
43  It is also true for the force relation between two charged bodies. Bigelow et al., 1988 claim that it is true 
of a force relation between a particle and a field.
44  Descartes, Locke, and Leibniz were aware of this paradox. Newton’s first law expresses the inertness of 
matter, though that law was first formulated by Descartes in The Principles of Philosophy, Part II. In the 
1 3
Page 15 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
certain property, then the combination must also lack that property. That would be 
a fallacy, related to the fallacy of composition, and it would also be a denial of the 
possibility of emergence. Although a basic Newtonian object by itself cannot move 
itself, the property of mass of one object in combination with the mass of another 
object can generate a force, a relation, which can cause movement. The inertness of a 
single body is one thing, the generation of a force by two bodies is another.45
7  The fundamental causal connection
Massin 2009 maintains that Newtonian forces are real, symmetric relations that have 
causal powers. But he denies that force relations are causal relations just because they 
are symmetric, pp. 582-7. He believes that causal relations should be asymmetric, 
perhaps on account of some linguistic view as he does not believe in events. Massin’s 
proposal for introducing asymmetry is that there is an asymmetric causal relation 
between the force relation and one of the accelerations it is responsible for: “There­
fore, the causal relation between forces and accelerations seems to be the right place 
to stop in order to avoid the causal regress: it is a causal relation that has no causal 
powers, that is not itself a cause.” p. 586. This is Massin’s account of the fundamental 
causal connection.
According to Massin’s proposal, there is a cause and an effect that are related by 
a causal relation, a situation that is asymmetric. Hence, Massin’s account of the two-
body situation is that the force relation between the objects A and B acts on A to cause 
an acceleration via one causal relation, which is an asymmetric situation, and the 
same force relation acts on B via another causal relation to cause another accelera­
tion, which is also an asymmetric situation. To his credit Massin is aware that there 
is the possibility of a regress, and that the regress needs to be stopped. Weaver 2019 
pp. 118-9 goes even further. His account of the same situation involves two objects, 
four events, two forces, and four causal relations. Adding events appears to lead to 
the further multiplication of entities. It is not clear why Weaver hypothesizes the 
existence of events. Perhaps he just assumes that causal relations must relate events.
The ordinary language approach to causation and the related events view requires 
an ontology of causes, effects, and asymmetric causal relations that relate the causes 
to the effects. One obvious way of applying this requirement to the interaction of 
two objects is to take the cause to be the event of the two objects’ instantiating a 
force relation for a certain period of time. The effect would then be the changes in 
the objects understood as an event involving two objects. The causal relation would 
be some hypothetical relation between the two events. There would be no reason to 
object to this approach on the ordinary language approach or the events view.
Second Meditation, Descartes explains the inertness of a body by saying that a body is something that can 
be moved but not by itself.
45  In some ways the laws about the generation of forces are brute facts: that is just the way things are; 
though if laws of dynamics were at root relations between universals, then the appropriate relation between 
universals would be the explanation.
1 3
308 
Page 16 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
The main problem with this approach is that there is something counterintuitive 
about a causal relation between events where each event has two independent, sepa­
rable objects as their components. As was pointed out in the section on physical cau­
sation, there is a difficulty with the principle of unity of such events. In the case of the 
interaction of two billiard balls looked at from the point of view of the third centre of 
mass frame of reference, there is a sequence of events from time past involving two 
quite separate objects and a sequence of events receding into time future also involv­
ing two quite separate objects. Any of the events in the past could be called a cause 
and any of the events in the future could be called an effect.
An alternative to the linguistic or events view that recognizes symmetry and reci­
procity is to propose that object A and object B interact on account of the force rela­
tion between them, which is a real relation, and that force relation is itself the causal 
relation. That they interact is that they act on each other via the force relation. The 
object A acts on object B via the force relation to cause it to move in one way, and 
object B acts on object A via the force relation to cause it to move in another way. 
Object A and object B interact in virtue of the force relation between them, and “as 
a result” object A moves in one way and object B moves in another way. This way 
of looking at it is preferable because there is just one symmetrical, reciprocal act, 
an act that is an example of transitive action. Here “as a result” is intended to be a 
causal primitive, so that the causal is not fully explained in terms of the non-causal, 
though some other form of words, such as ‘bring about’ could have been used with 
equal effect.46 Any account of causation that is non-reductive, will involve at least 
one causal primitive (obviously). For example, for Massin, his two causal relations 
and their actions are causal primitives. But there is no reason to suppose that the force 
relation needs help from other entities, such as additional causal relations, events, 
powers, or dispositions.
This approach can be generalized to give an account of all causal relations:
A relation between two objects is a causal relation if and only if when it is 
instantiated by the two objects there is a possibility that the objects that are the 
terms of the relation could change as a result of that relation between them.47
A change in properties of an object is the most obvious form of change, but the cre­
ation and annihilation of objects are also changes that can be the result of the action 
46  Characterizations, or elucidations, of this sort can only take us so far. What is meant can then be pinned 
down by giving examples, which, of course, have already been given. For the notion of elucidation, see 
Frege 1914, p. 313. Some earlier versions of this work unfortunately use ‘illustrative examples’ to translate 
‘erläuterung’. Cf. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 3.263 and 4.112.
47  Although it is conceivable that one object could act upon another without being acted upon, we are 
more likely to think that when two objects interact that each acts upon the other and each is acted upon 
by the other. Perhaps there is a more general metaphysical principle here of mutuality that at least applies 
to all finite concrete objects: in whatever way they act, they cannot act without being acted upon. Cf. Le 
Poidevin 1991, pp. 83 & 88 on the principle of reciprocity. Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B106. He 
thought that a general metaphysical principle lay behind each of Newton’s three laws, in this case the third 
law.
1 3
Page 17 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
of causal relations.48 It has to be said that it is possible for changes to occur just 
because it is possible that changes not occur due to other causal relations prevent­
ing change as in static causal situations, such as the eternal ball sitting in the eternal 
cushion, or indeed in any roof truss.49
The basic metaphysics of causality is about objects, causal relations, changes in 
objects, and a causal primitive such as “results in”. These are the formal metaphysi­
cal categories. Obviously, it is possible to talk about causes and effects in an infor­
mal sense. It could be said that each of the changes was an effect, or both changes 
together, or, indeed, some later state of the two objects was the effect. But since it 
is an informal idea, there is no need to identify just one effect. There is also no need 
metaphysically to identify just one cause belonging to one specific category. If ordi­
nary language requires the singling out of just one cause, then that is a fault of ordi­
nary language. In an informal sense, the causal relation itself could be called a cause, 
and of each the objects and the two objects together could also be called causes.50
How the force does its work is a question that cannot be answered. It is just part 
of its nature. If, for example, new hypothetical causal relations were introduced in 
addition to the force relation relating the force relation to the acceleration, it could be 
asked of them how do they do their work? The answer would be that it is just part of 
their nature. Hence the addition of new causal relations does not help with answering 
questions about how things work. In many cases there is an answer to the question 
“how does it work?”. But there must come a point where that question cannot be 
answered, as Hume pointed out long ago.51
8  The Metaphysics of Energy and Momentum exchanges
It would be nice if it could be said that forces were an example of causal relations, 
and that exchanges of energy and momentum were another, different example of 
causal relations, and that there were yet other, different kinds of causal relation, and 
48  There is no need for causal relations to be associated with exceptionless laws. Consider a machine 
that is designed to exert a specified force on certain objects that are manufactured to be the same in every 
way. Suppose that, in fact, as a rule 90% break and 10% do not. In cases where the object breaks, it is the 
machine and the force that it exerts that make it break. The machine can break objects of that type, which 
is realized most of the time, but not always.
49  Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B 248 ff.: eternal ball denting the eternal cushion. Aquinas, Summa 
Theologica, Pt. I, Q. 46, A. 2, ad 1 μm, quoting Augustine: eternal foot in the eternal footprint.
50  It is interesting that Whittle regards causes as collective. She thinks that there is no need to identify just 
one cause. “It often makes good sense to single out parts of an event as among the causes because they are 
particularly important to the occurrence of the effect.” Whittle 2016, pp. 8–9. She does not think that there 
is a problem of overdetermination if the two entities are related as part and whole or something analogous. 
She appears to be denying that there is a problem of two-levels overdetermination. She cites Shaffer 2003 
who makes a distinction between two-levels overdetermination and two rocks over determination. In the 
case of the breaking of a window by rocks, the determinate changes that would have been caused by one 
rock with certain properties are not the same determinate changes that would have been caused by two 
rocks each with the same properties. Hence the problem of overdetermination does not arise.
51  Hume, Enquiry concerning Human Understanding, Sect. 4.
1 3
308 
Page 18 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
perhaps there are. Unfortunately, although exchanges of energy and momentum are 
real, they are metaphysically complicated in a number of different ways.
However, a few conclusions can be drawn quite easily. For example, an exchange 
of energy and momentum between two macroscopic objects or two microscopic par­
ticles is such that both parties are changed, just because of the conservation laws. In 
the case of the macroscopic billiard balls looked at from different frames of refer­
ence, the exchange of energy and momentum can be regarded as symmetrical and 
reciprocal.
It can also be shown that for macroscopic objects an exchange of energy and 
momentum is different from a force relation. The reason is based on the fact that in 
special relativity, if a force is applied to a body, the direction of the resulting accel­
eration is different from the direction of the force, and the direction of the body’s 
velocity is different again. There are three vectors: the object’s velocity, the applied 
force, and the resulting acceleration of the object. These three vectors have different 
directions, but all three lie in the same plane.52 If bodies A and B exert forces on each 
other, then the force that body A exerts on B should be equal and opposite to the force 
that B exerts on A, by Newton’s third law. The change of momentum of A and the 
change of momentum of B obey the law of conservation of momentum and as a con­
sequence both lie in the same direction. But the common direction of the changes in 
momentum is different from the common direction of the two forces since the forces 
and momenta lie in different directions. Hence the exchange of energy and momen­
tum between two objects is different from the force relation between them, though 
they are related. It follows that Newton’s third law cannot be reduced to the exchange 
of momentum, as Wilson 2007, pp. 179 − 80 claims. And it follows that forces cannot 
be eliminated as Wilson claims.
One of the difficulties with the claim that all causal interactions are nothing other 
than the exchange of energy and momentum is that it is possible for the exchange of 
energy and momentum to be the result of the action of another causal relation. This 
can be seen by considering the collision of two billiard balls as understood by clas­
sical mechanics. In Newtonian mechanics the momentum of an object is the mass 
times the velocity (p = mv) and the kinetic energy is half the mass times the square 
of the velocity (K = ½mv2). Consider an elastic collision, which is such that kinetic 
energy is conserved. During the time of interaction, the force between the objects 
brings about changes in the velocities of the two objects. Because the velocities of the 
objects change, their momenta and kinetic energies also change in accordance with 
the formulas for momentum and kinetic energy. It is possible, though metaphorical, 
to speak of an exchange of energy and momentum since momentum and energy are 
conserved. But it is clear that the causal relation is the force relation and cannot be the 
exchange of energy and momentum. Hence, it is possible for there to be an exchange 
of energy and momentum where that exchange is not a causal relation.
On the other hand, it is also possible for there to be an exchange of energy and 
momentum where that exchange is a causal relation. For example, the exchange of 
52  The equations are f = dp/dt = d(mu)/dt = mdu/dt + udm/dt = ma + udm/dt = ma + {f.u/c2}u. The last term, 
which requires some work, shows that generally the force, the acceleration, and the velocity lie in different 
directions in the same plane.
1 3
Page 19 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
radiant heat between two macroscopic bodies as understood by classical thermody­
namics is a good example of such a causal relation, and the interaction is indeed sym­
metrical and reciprocal.53 The interaction involves the exchange of radiation, which 
is a form of electromagnetic radiation. Radiation carries energy and momentum that 
results in the changes in the objects. Hence, this causal relation is nothing other than 
an exchange of energy and momentum.
In Newtonian mechanics, kinetic energy and momentum are associated with 
objects having a velocity.54 Even though this issue cannot be gone into in any detail 
here, it should be noted that in the case of fields and waves, including electromag­
netic radiation, energy and momentum stand alone and are not associated with objects 
having a velocity. Therefore, there may be more examples of situations where the 
exchange of energy and momentum is the causal relation. And in quantum mechan­
ics, exchanges of energy and momentum appear to be of a different kind from those 
in classical mechanics since standard interpretations of quantum mechanics, at any 
rate, appear to regard them as involving stand-alone energy and momentum. Bohm­
ian mechanics is a non-standard interpretation of quantum mechanics partly because 
it does ascribe a velocity to quantum particles.55
There are also situations where there are exchanges of energy of momentum that 
are non-causal, where there are no relevant causal relations. The radioactive decay of 
a nucleus by the emission of an alpha particle is an example of spontaneous action, 
where something changes without the change being the result of causal relations of 
any sort. It follows that an exchange of energy and momentum is not a sufficient 
condition for a situation being a causal situation. Spontaneous action is discussed in 
detail in the next section.
There are also causal situations where there is no exchange of energy and momen­
tum, which shows that the exchange of energy and momentum is not a necessary 
condition for a causal interaction.56 When the string of a crossbow is released driving 
the bolt forward, the part of the trigger mechanism that is holding the string in place 
moves forward and downwards due to the circular motion of that part. The movement 
of this part of the trigger mechanism contributes no force nor energy nor momentum 
to the string that acts on the bolt. This can be seen more clearly by observing that that 
part of the trigger mechanism could do its work by moving out of the way at right 
angles to the string. Because they are at right angles, that moving part can contribute 
no force nor energy nor momentum to the movement of the string. This is the causal 
action of a trigger. Something similar is true of the firing mechanism of a bolt action 
rifle, which involves a chain of objects interacting with each other, from the actual 
trigger being pulled to the bullet leaving the barrel. At some stage in this chain, the 
energy in a spring is released to drive the bolt and the firing pin forward, which will 
53  For classical thermodynamics presented as an autonomous subject, see A. B. Pippard, The Elements 
Classical Thermodynamics, Cambridge, 1966.
54  This is also true of that part of special relativity that deals with objects, otherwise known as bodies.
55  See Holland 1993 on Bohmian mechanics. The clue is in the title of the book: The Quantum Theory of 
Motion.
56  For Salmon and Dowe the exchange of a conserved quantity is a necessary condition for a causal inter­
action: Dowe 2000, p. 90, Salmon 1997, pp. 462 & 468, but not the Salmon of Salmon 1984, see p. 171.
1 3
308 
Page 20 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
involve the causal action of a trigger.57 The causal action of triggers is discussed from 
a more general point of view in Sect. 10.
These conclusions about the rather complicated relations between exchanges of 
energy and momentum and causality can be summarised as follows:
1.	 For macroscopic objects, an exchange of energy and momentum is different from 
a force relation. (From an equation in special relativity)
2.	 There are situations that are causal where there is an exchange of energy and 
momentum, and that exchange is not a causal relation. (As in a collision of bil­
liard balls)
3.	 There are situations that are causal where there is an exchange of energy and 
momentum, and that exchange is a causal relation. (As in an exchange of 
radiation)
4.	 There are situations that are not causal where there is an exchange of energy of 
momentum. (As in spontaneous action)
5.	 Therefore, an exchange of energy and momentum is not a sufficient condition for 
a situation being a causal situation.
6.	 There are situations that are causal where there is no exchange of energy and 
momentum. (As in the action of triggers)
7.	 Therefore, an exchange of energy and momentum is not a necessary condition for 
a situation being a causal situation.
Although it may be worthwhile to present the conclusions in the abstract, they are 
difficult to think of in the abstract without thinking of the examples. It is worth noting 
that the example of the exchange of radiation is likely not to be an isolated example 
of where the causal relation is an exchange of energy and momentum.
9  Spontaneous action
Transitive action and developmental action are two different kinds of causal action. 
There are also other kinds of causal action. Spontaneous action is a different kind of 
action that is not causal. For example, in the alpha decay of a lead atom (Z = 82) to a 
mercury atom (Z = 80) an alpha particle (helium nucleus) exits the lead nucleus leav­
ing it a mercury nucleus. For these purposes, it is an isolated system that divides into 
two isolated systems. Something changes but there is no reason for the change to take 
place. That change is not the result of interactions between the parts of the nucleus, or 
the result of interactions of any of the parts of the nucleus with something outside the 
nucleus, and it is not the result of whatever it is that governs the development of the 
57  But according to Daniel Dennett: “A fundamental principle of physics is that any change in the trajec­
tory of any physical entity is an acceleration requiring the expenditure of energy, and [if the change is 
caused by a mental phenomenon] where is this energy to come from?” Dennett 1991, p. 35.
1 3
Page 21 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
nucleus as an isolated system. This is how alpha emission is understood by standard 
quantum mechanics.58
For Dowe, however, nuclear decay is an example of causality, and he mentions 
it frequently.59 The reason is Dowe’s view that “A causal interaction is an intersec­
tion of world lines that involves exchange of a conserved quantity.” (2000, p. 90) In 
nuclear decay, he maintains, the world lines of the alpha particle and the rest of the 
nucleus exchange energy and momentum, which are conserved quantities, and there­
fore it is an example of a causal interaction.
The mechanism is the quantum tunnelling that happens when a particle is confined 
within a finite potential barrier that it does not have the energy to surmount, but nev­
ertheless has a probability of passing through. According to the elementary treatment 
involving the application of Schrödinger’s equation to a particle within a finite poten­
tial well, there is no relation of any sort between the particle and anything inside the 
barrier or anything outside the barrier that is involved in making it leave the barrier. 
In particular, there is no applied potential. If there were, then it could be regarded as 
a stand in for a causal relation. But there isn’t one.
The mathematical theory of quantum tunnelling shows that as time increases the 
wave function leaks through the potential barrier, so that the probability of finding 
the particle outside the barrier increases and the probability of finding the particle 
inside the barrier decreases. At some point the alpha particle just passes through the 
potential barrier. There is no reason why it passes through the barrier, or why it hap­
pens at that time. It happens spontaneously. Hence the laws of physics are consistent 
with the existence of spontaneous action. Hence, it is possible relative to what we 
know about the world.
Besides spontaneous action, it is also conceivable that changes could take place 
on account of the action of free will choice, where the change of the will itself, and 
therefore the changes that flow from it, are not due to the interaction of objects and 
not due to whatever it is that governs the development of the mind. The difficulty here 
would lie in explaining how free will action differs from physical spontaneous action. 
But the issue of free-will action will be left merely as a suggestion, and the issue of 
whether there are other kinds of action will not be given any further consideration.
58  The discussion in the text concerns the elementary theory of alpha emission according to Schrödinger’s 
equation applied to a particle in a finite potential well (quantum tunnelling) as given by standard quantum 
mechanics. Sakurai & Napolitano 2017 is a recent textbook of standard quantum mechanics. Their starting 
point is the powerful algebra of quantum mechanics and in their discussion of Bell’s inequality they reject 
hidden variables. It is like special relativity’s rejection of an ether. Bohmian mechanics, which should be 
regarded as a different theory from standard quantum mechanics (Bricmont, 2016, p. 18), has as its starting 
point the trajectory of a single particle, which it derives from Schrödinger’s equation. It has the resources 
to give a causal account of the exit of an alpha particle in terms of hidden variables (Holland, 1993, 
pp. 198–203, based ultimately on the computer modelling of Christopher Dewdney). It affirms what the 
standard theory denies. The stochastic interpretation is another distinct theory, but I do not know whether 
it has resources that parallel those of Bohmian mechanics. Standard quantum theory at least shows that 
causeless action is possible, which is what is needed for metaphysics: a consistent, extremely successful 
empirical theory is consistent with causeless action. Hence, it is possible relative to what we know about 
the world. There may be some conceptual difficulties with the standard theory, but so there are with Bohm­
ian mechanics, see Bricmont 2016, p. 181 and Holland 1993, p. 277-8: multi-dimensional configuration 
spaces and their contents are regarded as real!
59  Dowe 2000 mentions radioactive decay on pp. 23, 25, 45, 83, and 93.
1 3
308 
Page 22 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
10  Omission
Given a set of objects and a set of relations between them, causal relations are the 
relations that can change the objects that are their terms. Nevertheless, with respect 
to any given object there are two kinds of transitive causal action. The first kind of 
transitive causal action is where a change is brought about in an object by a causal 
relation of which it is a term. The second kind of transitive causal action is where a 
change is brought about in an object by a change in a causal relation of which it is a 
term. Clearly if there are such things as causal relations between objects, then some­
thing could make a causal relation to change, or, indeed, to cease to be instantiated, or 
to begin to be instantiated. Nevertheless, there is only one fundamental kind of transi­
tive causal action, since the only way a causal relation attached to one object can be 
changed is by means of other causal relations acting on other objects. On the other 
hand, relative to a certain object, the two kinds of causal action are metaphysically 
different. This distinction is helpful in analysing causal situations and could help in 
dealing with some of the standard difficulties that face theories of causality.
The problem of omission in causality is often introduced by considering the fact 
that omitting to water a plant can cause it to die. The problem with plants is that the 
flow of water and nutrients through its vascular system are examples of transport phe­
nomena, not causal relations between objects. The relevant transport phenomenon is 
the flow of a fluid down a tube due to a pressure difference. Transport phenomena 
can be regarded as causal but do not involve causal relations between objects, at least 
at the macroscopic level.60 However, they should really be looked at from a micro­
scopic perspective, which would involve molecules or atoms (objects) and fields and 
would be statistical.
It would be better, then, to consider a simpler situation involving forces. Consider 
a small body resting on a board attached to pegs by means of a number of rubber 
bands so that it does not move. It is embedded in a network of force relations, one for 
each rubber band and one for the reaction force of the board that it is sitting on. Each 
of the rubber bands prevents the others moving the body. “Omit” one of the relations 
by cutting the rubber band with a pair of scissors and the body will move. There is 
a sense in which its subsequent movement is due to the forces in the remaining rub­
ber bands: the other forces produce the movement (one causal expression), but the 
cutting of the rubber band made the movement happen (another causal expression). 
The cutting of the rubber band is an example of the causal action of a trigger: the act 
of cutting does not contribute a force or energy or momentum to the body. Similarly, 
watering the plant prevents certain factors coming into play. Watering maintains the 
flow of water through the vascular system of a plant and keeps the plant’s cells in 
60  Other examples include the flow of heat in a piece of copper due to a temperature gradient and the flow 
of an electrical in a wire due to a potential difference. From a macroscopic point of view, they are all con­
tinuous phenomena and the equations that govern them have the same form. Creary’s 1981 discussion of 
“laws of causal influence” (a little like laws governing causal relations) was criticized by Cartwright 1983, 
pp. 62–67 by merely presenting a large number of complex transport phenomena, which, she claimed, his 
approach could not deal with. He was talking about causal relations; she wanted to confuse matters by 
talking about transport phenomena.
1 3
Page 23 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
their correct, full shape, and prevents them from collapsing. This steady state can be 
disrupted by failure to water, which is analogous to cutting a rubber band.
It would be consistent with the ontology developed in this paper to maintain that a 
change of properties was the joint “result” of all the causal relations that acted on the 
object: it would be an example of plural causal action that parallels plural reference.61 
If ordinary language demands a single cause for each change, then ordinary language 
is mistaken. It is unlikely that a metaphysical theory of causality will follow our com­
mon sense or ordinary linguistic usage exactly.
The causal action of a trigger is an example of transitive causal action of the second 
kind where there is no contribution of force or energy or momentum to the change. 
The cutting of one of the rubber bands is an example of a trigger. When a bolt is shot 
from a crossbow or when a rifle is fired, there is a causal chain starting at the actual 
trigger such that at some point in the chain there is an example of the causal action of 
a trigger, an example of transitive causal action of the second kind. Transitive causal 
action of the second kind is not a static absence; it involves an intervention.
11  Causal Chains
It is difficult to talk about causality without alluding to causal chains, where the 
mechanism of the crossbow and the mechanism of the rifle are examples of designed 
causal chains.62 Here is a brief account of designed causal chains. Take another more 
complicated example: if the key is turned in the ignition of a car, then as a result the 
engine will start. It is an obvious, intuitive example of causality. But it is not just one 
causal relation: it is a sequence of processes, electrical, chemical, and mechanical, 
which can be called a causal chain:
An electrical current flows, the current’s potential is increased by some means, 
there are sparks in the tops of the cylinders in a staggered fashion, gaseous 
mixtures explode in a staggered fashion in the tops of the cylinders, the piston 
heads are driven downwards in the cylinders in a staggered fashion, the con­
necting rods of the pistons are driven downwards in a staggered fashion, the 
crankshaft rotates. The flow of the electrical current is a transport phenomenon. 
The explosions are chemical. The interactions of the cylinder heads, connect­
61  I am grateful to Jonathan Lowe for drawing my attention to this parallel. Whittle 2016 has a different 
idea of collective causes, see fn. 50.
62  A conceivable philosophical view of causality is that causal chains (mechanisms or causal processes) are 
what causality is and hence the starting point for a theory of causality. Such a theory would face a number 
of philosophical difficulties. Causal chains will have parts and components, and questions can be raised 
about how they interact. And questions about how they interact will not always be answered by referring to 
further causal chains but will at some point come down to interactions between objects. But such a theory 
cannot account for the interactions between two objects, which are obviously causal but are not chains or 
causal processes.
1 3
308 
Page 24 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
ing rods, and crank shaft are mechanical and involve forces between extended 
objects.63
Within one causal chain, there will be a number of different causal relations and a 
number of different kinds of causal action. The causal chain involved in starting a car 
is objective, although there is intention involved because it was designed to perform 
a certain task. It is a single thread in the sense that the processes are designed to lead 
from the turning of the key to the turning of the crank shaft and nothing else. In this 
case, there is also some splitting in that the current is “distributed” to the cylinders in 
turn, which leads to the different actions of the cylinders that act together.64 It should 
be recognized that there can be local splitting, providing that overall, there is a single 
thread. There are also other, extraneous, unintended effects such as the exhaust and 
the heating that takes place at every stage of the chain, but they are incidental to the 
design.
My informal account of this kind of a designed causal chain is that it is a sequence 
of processes, like the starting of a car engine, that overall forms a single thread. A 
causal chain is not fundamental because is based on fundamental causal relations and 
other kinds of causal action. The action of a crossbow which starts with the pulling of 
the trigger, which is all mechanical, and the action of the mechanism of a rifle, which 
is not all mechanical, are also examples of this type of designed causal chain with a 
single thread.65 There are, presumably, other, natural (non-designed), causal chains, 
but there is no need to go into them here.66
12  Conclusion
The position defended in this paper is that the basic kinds of physical causality that 
are foundational for other kinds of causality involve objects and the causal relations 
between them. These interactions do not involve events. If events were ontologically 
significant entities for causality in general, then they would play a role in simple 
63  An enthusiast for events could suggest that turning the ignition key in the lock was an event and the 
cause, and the turning of the engine’s crank shaft was an event and the effect. But there really is no need 
to reify changes as metaphysical entities. Things change all the time and there is no need to suggest that 
philosophers’ entities come into and out of existence all the time. For one thing it is not even clear what 
the effect event is. Is it the beginning to turn of the crank shaft, which is a limit point event and problem­
atic ontologically? Is it the temporally extended event during which the crank shaft is undergoing angular 
acceleration? Or is it the final temporally extended event of the crank shaft having a constant angular 
velocity, which will be ended by some arbitrary intervention?
64  Those that remember old-fashioned distributors that had a distributer cap, points, and a rotator arm will 
find “distribution” easier to understand.
65  Causal chains like the simple mechanical mechanism found in a rifle are not subject to issues concerning 
different frames of reference for obvious reasons.
66  Dowe 2000, pp. 170ff gives a formal account of what he calls causal connections, which are, in effect, 
natural causal chains. Putnam’s theory of meaning of 1975 could make use of natural causal chains, as 
could theories of reference to past objects in the philosophy of time. For the philosophy of time, causal 
chains have the virtue that their end points do not exist at the same time. Theories of reference require a 
single thread.
1 3
Page 25 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
mechanical interactions. But arguments about simple collisions looked at from dif­
ferent frames of reference show that events cannot play a role in simple mechani­
cal interactions, and neither can the entirely hypothetical causal relations between 
events. These arguments show that physics, which should be authoritative when it 
comes to the metaphysics of causality, gives no reasons to believe that events are 
causally significant.
Force relations and some cases of energy-momentum transfer are examples of 
causal relations, with forces being paradigmatic in the macroscopic world, though it 
is conceivable that there are other kinds of causal relation. When there is a force rela­
tion between objects A and B, the force relation is the causal relation. Object A and 
object B interact in virtue of the force relation between them, and “as a result” object 
A changes in one way and object B changes in another way. There is just one sym­
metrical, reciprocal act, an act that is an example of transitive action. Generalizing, 
a relation between two objects is a causal relation if and only if when it is instanti­
ated by the two objects there is a possibility that the objects that are the terms of the 
relation could change “as a result” of the causal relation. The basic metaphysics of 
causality is about objects, causal relations, changes in objects, and a causal primitive.
The conclusions drawn from the discussion of forces can be summarized as fol­
lows. Newton’s third law is about forces that act on bodies, and which always occur 
in pairs. It follows that the third law is about bodies in a relational situation. Hence, 
there must be a relation associated with the forces between the bodies. Hence it 
makes sense to distinguish between a force relation and the force vectors that are 
specific to each body. The best explanation is that the force relation is real and the 
force vectors constructions, mere calculating devices. Since the force relation is real 
and responsible for the changes, it is the causal relation.
The conclusions drawn from the discussion of exchanges of energy and momen­
tum can be summarized as follows. For macroscopic objects, an exchange of energy 
and momentum is different from a force relation on account of an equation in special 
relativity. There are situations that are causal where there is an exchange of energy 
and momentum, and that exchange is not a causal relation, as in a collision of bil­
liard balls. On the other hand, there are situations that are causal where there is an 
exchange of energy and momentum, and that exchange is a causal relation, as in the 
exchange of radiation between two bodies. It is important to note that the exchange 
of radiation, where an exchange of energy and momentum is a causal relation, is 
likely not to be an isolated example. It was also shown that an exchange of energy 
and momentum is neither a sufficient condition for a situation to be a causal situation 
nor a necessary condition for a situation to be a causal situation.
During the course of the previous discussion, a number of different kinds of causal 
action were described, and one kind of non-causal action, namely spontaneous action 
as in alpha emission. The examples of causal action are as follows. Transitive action 
is where there is a causal relation between two objects that as a result change their 
properties, as in a collision of billiard balls. Where the situation is more compli­
cated, a distinction can be made between transitive causal action of the first kind and 
transitive causal action of the second kind. The first kind of transitive causal action 
is where a change is brought about in an object by a causal relation of which it is a 
term. The second kind of transitive causal action is where a change is brought about 
1 3
308 
Page 26 of 28

Synthese (2022) 200:308
in an object by a change in a causal relation of which it is a term, as in the cutting 
of one of the rubber bands. The action of a trigger is an example of causal action of 
the second kind where the action of the trigger contributes no force nor energy nor 
momentum to the changes that result, as in the trigger of a crossbow. Developmental 
action is where a composite system evolves through time driven by the causal rela­
tions between its parts, as in an organism or the solar system. An earlier state of the 
composite system does indeed determine a later state, but there are no causal relations 
between earlier states and the later states. Static causation is where causal relations 
are instantiated but there are no changes, such as the eternal ball sitting on the eternal 
cushion. There are many obvious examples of static causation involving forces, but 
two bodies exchanging radiation energy can reach equilibrium where energy contin­
ues to be exchanged but the bodies do not change their properties.
References
Armstrong, D. M. (1980). “Identity Through Time”. In van P. Inwagen (Ed.), Time and Cause (pp. 67–78). 
Dordrecht: Reidel
Armstrong, D. M. (1997). A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Aronson, J. (1971). "On the Grammar of ‘Cause’". Synthese, 22, 414–430
Barbour, J. (1989). Absolute or Relative Motion? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett
Bennett, J. (1988). Events and their Names. Ind.: Hackett: Indianapolis
Bigelow, J., & Pargetter, R. (1990a). Science and Necessity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Bigelow, J., & Pargetter, R. (1990b). “Metaphysics of Causation”. Erkenntnis, 33, pp. 89–119
Bigelow, J., Ellis, B., & Pargetter, R. (1988). “Forces”. Philosophy of Science, 55, 614–630
Bricmont, J. (2016). Making Sense of Quantum Mechanics. Springer
Buckareff, A. A. (2017). "A Critique of Substance Causation". Philosophia, 45, 1019–1026
Campbell, K. (1990). Abstract Particulars. Oxford: Blackwell
Cartwright, N. (1980). "Do the Laws of Physics State the Facts?" Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 61, 
75–84
Cartwright, N. (1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Casati, R. & Varzi, A. C. 2008.  “Event Concepts” in Shipley & Zacks 2008
Chisholm, R. (1966). “Freedom and Action”. In K. Lehrer (Ed.), Freedom and Determinism. New York: 
Random House
Creary, L. G. (1981). "Causal Explanations and the Reality of Natural Component Forces". Pacific Philo­
sophical Quarterly, 62, 148–157
Davidson, D. (1967). “Causal Relations”. Journal of Philosophy, 64, 691–703
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. London: Penguin
Dowe, P. (1992). “Wesley Salmon’s Process Theory of Causality and the Conserved Quantity Theory”. 
Philosophy of Science, 59, pp.195–216
Dowe, P. (1995). "Causality and Conserved Quantities: A Reply to Salmon". Philosophy of Science, 62, 
321–333
Dowe, P. (2000). Physical Causation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000
Ehring, D. (1999). Persistence and Causation: A Theory of Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Ehring, D. (2009). “Causal Relata”. Oxford Handbook of Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Ehring, D. (2011). Tropes. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Fair, D. (1979). “Causation and the Flow of Energy”. Erkenntnis, 14, pp. 219–250
Frege, G. (1914). “Logic in Mathematics” (1914). In A Frege Reader Michael Beaney (ed.). Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1997
Garcia-Encinas, M. J. (2009). “Tropes for Causation”. Metaphysica, 10, pp. 157–174
Heil, J. (2012). The Universe as We Find it. Oxford: Oxford University Press
1 3
Page 27 of 28 
308

Synthese (2022) 200:308
Holland, P. (1993). The Quantum Theory of Motion: An Account of the de Broglie-Bohm Causal Interpre­
tation of Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Huemer, M., & Kovitz, B. (2003). "Causation as Simultaneous and Continuous". The Philosophical Quar­
terly, 53, 557–565
Kim, J. (1976). “Events as Property Exemplifications”. In M. Brand, & D. Walton (Eds.), Action Theory 
(pp. 159–177). Dordrecht: Reidel
Lærke, M. (2010). “Sketch of a Metaphysics of Absolute Exteriority: Some reflections on Spinoza’s theory 
of causality and ontology of power”. History of Philosophy, 15
Lange, M. (2002). Introduction to Philosophy of Physics. Oxford: Blackwell
Lange, M. (2009). "A Tale of Two Vectors". Dialectica, 63, 397–431
Le Poidevin, R. (1991). “The principle of reciprocity”. In Change, Cause and Contradiction. New York: 
St Martin’s Press
Lowe, E. J. (2002). A Survey of Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Lowe, E. J. (2008). Personal Agency. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Mach, E. (1883). The Science of Mechanics. Chicago: Open Court, 1902 (first German edition 1883)
Massin, O. (2009). "The Metaphysics of Forces". Dialectica, 63, 555–589
Menzies, P. (2009). "Nature’s Metaphysics". Analysis, 69, 769–778
Merricks, T. (2001). Objects and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Molnar, G. (2003). Powers. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Newman, A. (1992). The Physical Basis of Predication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Newman, A. (2013). "On the Constitution of Solid Objects out of Atoms". The Monist, 96, 149–171
Norton, J. (2003). "Causation as Folk Science". Philosophers’ Imprint, 3, 1–22
Olson, K. R. (1987). An Essay on Facts. Stanford: CSLI
Paul, L. A. (2000). “Aspect Causation”. Journal of Philosophy, 9, 235–256
Price, H., & Corry, R. (2007). Causation, Physics, and the Constitution of Reality: Russell’s Republic 
Revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press
van Quine, W. O (1973). The Roots of Reference. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court
Putnam, H. (1975). “The Meaning of Meaning”. In Mind, Language, and Reality: Philosophical Papers 
(vol. 2). Cambridge University Press
Russell, B. (1912). “On the Notion of Cause”. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1912–1913. In 
Mysticism and Logic, London: Longmans, 1917
Russell, B. (1948). Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: George Allen & Unwin
Sakurai, J. J., & Napolitano, J. (2017). Modern Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press
Salmon, W. C. (1984). Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press
Salmon, W. C. (1994). "Causality without Counterfactuals". Philosophy of Science, 61, 297–312
Salmon, W. C. (1997). "Causality and Explanation: A Reply to Two Critiques". Philosophy of Science, 
64, 461–477
Schaffer, J. (2003). “Overdetermining Causes”. Philosophical Studies, 114, 23–45
Shipley, T. F., & Zacks, J. (Eds.) (2008). Understanding Events: From Perception to Action. New York: 
Oxford University Press
Sklar, L. (2013). Philosophy and the Foundations of Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Strawson, P. (1959). Individuals. London: Methuen
Weaver, C. G. (2019). Fundamental Causation: Physics, Metaphysics, and the Deep Structure of the 
World. New York: Routledge
Whittle, A. (2016). "A defence of substance causation". Journal of the American Philosophical Associa­
tion, 2, 1–20
Wilson, J. (2007). “Newtonian Forces”. British Journal for Philosophy of Science, 58, 173–205
Wilson, J. (2009). “The Causal Argument against Component Forces”. Dialectica, 63, pp. 525–554
Wilson, J. (2009). “The Causal Argument against Component Forces”. Dialectica, 63, pp. 525–554.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
1 3
308 
Page 28 of 28

