Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02548-9
Fame in the predictive brain: a deﬂationary approach
to explaining consciousness in the prediction error
minimization framework
Krzysztof Doł˛ega1 · Joe E. Dewhurst2
Received: 12 June 2018 / Accepted: 20 January 2020 / Published online: 29 January 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The proposal that probabilistic inference and unconscious hypothesis testing are cen-
tral to information processing in the brain has been steadily gaining ground in cognitive
neuroscience and associated ﬁelds. One popular version of this proposal is the new the-
oretical framework of predictive processing or prediction error minimization (PEM),
which couples unconscious hypothesis testing with the idea of ‘active inference’ and
claims to offer a uniﬁed account of perception and action. Here we will consider one
outstanding issue that still looms large at the core of the PEM framework: the lack of
a clear criterion for distinguishing conscious states from unconscious ones. In order
to fulﬁll the promise of becoming a unifying framework for describing and modeling
cognition, PEM needs to be able to differentiate between conscious and unconscious
mental states or processes. We will argue that one currently popular view, that the
contents of conscious experience are determined by the ‘winning hypothesis’ (i.e.
the one with the highest posterior probability, which determines the behavior of the
system), falls short of fully accounting for conscious experience. It ignores the pos-
sibility that some states of a system can control that system’s behavior even though
they are apparently not conscious (as evidenced by e.g. blindsight or subliminal prim-
ing). What follows from this is that the ‘winning hypothesis’ view does not provide a
complete account of the difference between conscious and unconscious states in the
probabilistic brain. We show how this problem (and some other related problems) for
the received view can be resolved by augmenting PEM with Daniel Dennett’s mul-
tiple drafts model of consciousness. This move is warranted by the similar roles that
attention and internal competition play in both the PEM framework and the multiple
drafts model.
B Krzysztof Doł˛ega
krzysztof.dolega@rub.de
1
Institut für Philosophie 2, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum,
Germany
2
MCMP, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Ludwigstraße 31, München 80539, Germany
123

7782
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
Keywords Predictive processing · Active inference · Consciousness · Multiple
drafts · Prediction error minimization · Generative model · Control model ·
Attention · Illusionism
1 Introduction
Thepredictionerrorminimizationframework(henceforth,PEM)aimstoofferauniﬁed
explanation of the processes underlying perception and cognition by postulating that
all cognitive functions can be reduced to one kind of process: minimizing prediction
error. It has recently been popularised in the philosophical literature by Hohwy (2013)
and Clark (2013, 2016), and has been increasingly gaining traction in both empirically
informed philosophy of mind and cognitive (neuro)science. One of the reasons for
PEM’s widespread adoption is the claim that the framework can deliver a uniﬁed
theory of all cognitive functions. In the words of Clark, it is “the ﬁrst truly uniﬁed
account of perception, cognition, and action” (Clark 2016, p. 2). Similarly, Hohwy
claims that PEM is “meant to explain perception, and action, and everything mental in
between” (Hohwy 2013, p. 1). Unsurprisingly, the lofty uniﬁcatory and explanatory
ambitions of the framework have come under much scrutiny (Colombo and Hartmann
2017; Gładziejewski 2019). However, there has been relatively little focus on the fact
that, in order to offer a truly exhaustive account of our mental lives, PEM must also face
the problem of explaining the processes and mechanisms underlying consciousness.
Our aim in this paper is to assess the (currently) most popular proposal for account-
ing for consciousness under the PEM framework and identify problems with its
underlying assumptions, which we think can be resolved by applying a deﬂationary
interpretation drawn from the work of Daniel Dennett and other like minded philoso-
phers and scientists (e.g. Dennett 1991; Humphrey 2011; Graziano 2013; Pereboom
2011; Frankish 2016a, b; Doł˛ega and Dewhurst 2019). Our approach will show how
consciousness can be accommodated by the PEM framework, while also resolving
some long-standing philosophical issues surrounding that topic.
In Sect. 2 we will introduce some basic aspects of the PEM framework, without
going into more detail than is strictly necessary for our argument. These aspects are
prediction error (2.1), generative models (2.2), active inference (2.3), and precision
optimisation (2.4). We will then present Jakob Hohwy’s proposal that conscious expe-
rience is determined by the current winning hypothesis (2.5), before moving on in
Sect. 3 to identify some issues with this proposal. We will make explicit a repre-
sentational assumption lying behind the implicit relationship between the properties
of conscious experience and the properties of generative models, which leads to two
problems—the problem of unconscious representation (3.1) and the problem of uncon-
scious perception (3.2). As we argue, both of these related issues threaten to trivialize
or severely limit the scope of Hohwy’s account of consciousness. In Sect. 4 we will
present Daniel Dennett’s approach to studying consciousness and the resulting mul-
tiple drafts model (especially the notion of a ‘probe’ that determines the content of
consciousness, discussed in 4.3), before arguing that it is a natural ﬁt for the PEM
framework, and that it offers a deﬂationary solution to both problems. One conse-
quence of applying the multiple drafts model to PEM is that it urges the framework’s
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7783
proponents to adopt a somewhat revisionary attitude towards our understanding of
consciousness, as it will turn out that we may be systematically mislead about the
nature and richness of our conscious experiences (4.4). We conclude by considering
some of the further implications of this approach for the future development of the
PEM framework.
2 Basic tenets of the prediction error minimization framework
PEM aims to completely overhaul the way we think about the organization and the
functioning of the brain. According to this framework, the brain does not process
information by accumulating raw sensory data and processing them into ever more
detailed and complex representations of the world (as proposed, for example, by Marr
1982). Rather, it postulates that the nervous system operates by generating anticipatory
hypotheses about the environmental causes of its future inputs, which are then tested
against the actual states of the sensory surfaces and updated accordingly. This is
accomplished by a hierarchically organised structure that is driven in a top-down
manner, with each level predicting the activity of the level below.1 Predictions are made
based on a ‘generative model’ of the external world, and cascade down the hierarchy,
constraining activity on each of the levels below. These predictions terminate in the
sensory periphery, where they are ‘tested’ against sensory inputs, with any error being
passed back up the hierarchy in order to correct the model. In this section we will brieﬂy
review some of the most important features of the framework,2 before considering the
leading proposal for how it might try to account for consciousness.
2.1 Prediction error
Unlike in traditional models of cognition and early sensory processing, only informa-
tion that is inconsistent with the downward ﬂow of predictions (i.e. prediction error)
is propagated up the hierarchy for further processing (Rao and Ballard 1999; Friston
2010). This error signal carries information about the divergence between the pre-
dicted pattern of sensory stimulation and the actual state of the sensory periphery,
and is propagated back up the hierarchy until it reaches a level at which it can be
integrated into the system’s future predictions (Clark 2013, p. 187). This process of
revising and updating the current generative model can be seen as a form of implicit,
on-line learning, and begins as soon as prediction error is fed up the hierarchy. The
process takes place over multiple levels and time scales, offering a high degree of
plasticity (continuous revision) and efﬁciency (through its anticipatory nature) in real
time processing.
1 The notion of a ‘level’ is somewhat underdetermined in the PEM literature. It is usually assumed that
different portions of the PEM hierarchy will map onto different cortical areas, but the individuation of what
counts as a distinct cortical area may differ between particular implementations (Spratling 2017).
2 For a more detailed philosophical overview see Wiese and Metzinger (2017), and for a technical tutorial
see Bogacz (2017). Here we focus just on presenting the details that are most pertinent to our discussion of
consciousness.
123

7784
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
2.2 Generative models
One of the notions which lie at the heart of the PEM proposal is that of a generative
model. Clark (2013) summarizes the role that these models play in the framework as
follows:
A generative model […] aims to capture the statistical structure of some set of
observed inputs by tracking (one might say, by schematically recapitulating) the
causal matrix responsible for that very structure. […] In practice, this means
that top-down predictions within a multi-level (hierarchical and bidirectional)
system come to encode a probabilistic model of the activities of units and groups
of units within lower levels, thus tracking […] interacting causes in the signal
source, which might be the body, or the external world […] (Clark 2013, p. 182).
Therefore, the system not only learns the regularities in the sensory input, but also
infers abstract rules governing such regularities. By building a statistical model of the
environment and capturing the structure of the underlying ‘causal matrix’ (Clark 2013,
p. 182) responsible for the sensory data the system can efﬁciently predict its input.
This can be done by a variety of statistical methods such as, for example, ‘empirical
Bayes’, in which priors (i.e. the statistical ‘beliefs’ or expectations which form the
basis for the top-down predictions) are initially extracted from the regularities in the
bottom-up signal and reﬁned with consecutive inferences (Friston and Kiebel 2009),
or variational Bayesian methods (e.g. Mathys et al. 2011, 2014), in which the problem
of inferring the true causes of sensory stimulation is reformulated as one of optimizing
the parameters of the internal model so as to minimize some objective function (in this
case the divergence between the predicted and actual state of the sensory periphery).
The exact method used does not matter for present purposes, although ultimately
a plausible mechanism will have to be proposed for its neural implementation (cf.
Milkowski 2016).
2.3 Active inference
Passively performing inferences and updating the generative model is, for many pur-
poses, not enough to accommodate incoming prediction error. As Hohwy notes: “a
system without agency cannot minimize surprise but only optimize its models of the
world” (2012, p. 3). Thus, the system needs to also perform active inference (Clark
2013; Friston et al. 2009; Hohwy 2012), in which it not only predicts the changes in its
own states, but also engages in prediction about how its interactions with the environ-
ment will affect the inputs that it receives. Thus, in addition to inferring how the world
is, the system also infers action policies that it expects will be best at minimising pre-
diction error over long time scales. These action policies can then generate real-world
behaviours in a way similar to ideomotor accounts of motor control, such as the one
proposed by Wolpert and Flanagan (2001; cf. Wiese 2017, though see Pickering and
Clark 2014, as well as Adams et al. 2013, for important differences between forward-
and generative-model based accounts of motor control). In other words, the system
can actively intervene on its environment in ways that aim to minimize the ‘surprising’
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7785
signals. This can either be done by a selective sampling of the surroundings aimed at
obtaining more data (e.g. eye saccades), or by manipulating the environment in a way
that minimizes signal uncertainty and brings the surroundings into a tighter ﬁt with
the current model (cf. Friston et al. 2009). The latter offers a very general mechanism
for action control, as any behaviour of the system can be reconceived as aiming to
minimize prediction error over the long term, and is therefore a crucial ingredient in
the PEM framework’s claim to unify perception and action under one model.
2.4 Precision optimization
One problem faced by a PEM system is that not all prediction errors will be the result
of inaccurate predictions about the world, but rather some may simply be caused by
volatility in the environment or noise in the system’s sensory channels. Thus, a PEM
system needs to account for uncertainty in the error signals it receives, and aim to
minimize only those that constitute a reliable learning signal. PEM proposes to allevi-
ate this problem by estimating the expected precision of the prediction errors (usually
formalized as the inverse of their variance), which is used to weight different error
signals according to their reliability. The precisions of prediction errors are context
dependent, i.e. the precision that can be expected from different sensory modalities
and in different environmental conditions will vary, and therefore need to be learned
over time. This suggests the need for an additional, domain general control mecha-
nism, either sitting on top of the main prediction/error hierarchy, or incorporated into
the system and acting as a ‘virtual’ controller.3 Either way, the system needs “to rep-
resent the known unknowns“(Hohwy 2012, p. 5) which determine the precision of the
incoming error signals.
Recently it has been proposed that the role played by the optimization of expected
precision in the PEM framework is equivalent to that of attention (Feldman and Friston
2010; Hohwy 2012; Brown and Friston 2013). According to this proposal, exogenous
attention is present in the case of “stimuli with large spatial contrast and/or temporal
contrast (abrupt onset)” (Hohwy 2012, p. 6), and is a result of the system’s expectation
that strong error signals, i.e. ones standing out from the predicted noise level, will be
more precise. Endogenous attention, on the other hand, is the result of a top-down
process in which predictions about incoming stimuli increase signal gain in the relevant
receptive ﬁelds. The function of endogenous attention is to decrease the uncertainty of
future stimuli rather than reacting in response to unexpectedly strong incoming error
signals (Hohwy 2012, p. 6). This type of attention can be illustrated using the example
of visual search tasks, where the search is driven by a highly precise prediction of a
particular stimulus that the subject needs to locate. According to PEM, this increases
3 Engineers speak of a ‘virtual’ controller (or governor), when a complex system behaves as if it was
controlled by a separate governing system, but such behavior is an emergent property of the whole system
with no discrete parts playing the function of a governing system. Hooker, who introduced this term to the
philosophical literature, explains that “’has a virtual governor of reliability f’ is a property of the system
as a whole but of none of its components. [And…] from an ontological point of view there is nothing to
the system over and above its components and the physical relations between them (however physically
realised)” (Hooker 1981, p. 509). We think it is plausible that the mechanism responsible for precision
estimation in the PEM framework might be a virtual governor of this kind (cf. Doł˛ega and Dewhurst 2019).
123

7786
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
the gain on the receptive ﬁeld sensitive to the object of the search. Once a pattern
of retinal activations similar to the target is found, the high gain on the error signal
pathways guarantees that only a hypothesis tailored to minimizing that very precise
signal (corresponding to the object of the search) will be selected for driving the
system’s behavior. This precision/attention mechanism will play an important role in
our deﬂationary account of consciousness in the PEM model, and we will return to it
later (in Sect. 4).
2.5 Conscious experience as the‘winning hypothesis’
Finally, we arrive at the most popular proposal for how to explain consciousness within
the PEM framework, namely that “conscious perception is determined by the predic-
tion or hypothesis with the highest overall posterior probability—which is overall
best at minimizing prediction error” (Hohwy 2012, p. 4).4 To put it simply, what we
perceive is the brain’s best guess about ‘what is out there’. This simple proposal is
expanded upon by Hohwy (2012), who points out that by assuming this perspective,
PEM ends up treating attention and perception as “two distinct, yet related aspects of
the same prediction error minimization mechanism”, that together are responsible for
determining “which contents are selected for conscious presentation” (Hohwy 2012,
p. 1). At the core of this approach are two properties that control the dynamics of
the bidirectional (i.e. top-down and bottom-up) exchange of information within the
PEMsystem—accuracyand(expected)precision(Hohwy2012,p.5)—whichtogether
form the “statistical dimensions of conscious perception” (Hohwy 2012, p. 5), a state
space within which conscious and unconscious perceptual states can be located and
compared (see Fig. 1).
Hypotheses with high accuracy can be understood as being better at represent-
ing the causal structure of the world, since accuracy can be taken to refer “to the
inverse amplitude of prediction error per se” (Hohwy 2012, p. 5), representing the
degree to which a hypothesis can account for the incoming sensory signal. However,
as will become relevant in the later parts of this paper, Hohwy points out that this
characterization involves a slight simpliﬁcation, as “surprise has both accuracy and
complexity components, such that minimizing surprise or free energy increases accu-
racy while minimizing complexity” (Hohwy 2012: ft. 2). What this means is that
accurate hypotheses are not only good at minimizing prediction error, but can accom-
plish that by recruiting fewer resources (e.g. by making use of models with fewer
parameters). As Hohwy explains: “This ensures the explanations for sensory input are
parsimonious and will generalize to new situations […]” (Hohwy 2012: ft. 2).
Precise hypotheses, on the other hand, are those that are best at minimizing predic-
tion error relative to the system’s prior expectations of the error signals’ variability.
Thus, precise hypotheses are those that are best at explaining the error that is least ran-
dom for the given prior distribution, i.e. they are best at ignoring noise and picking out
4 Hobson and Friston (2014) have made an alternative proposal with a slightly different ﬂavour, but as
Doł˛ega and Dewhurst (2015) argue, this approach strays too far into the realms of the ‘Cartesian materialism’
that Dennett (1991) warns of. Hobson and Friston have acknowledged this criticism of their proposal in a
subsequent publication (Hobson and Friston 2016), suggesting a revised approach that takes on board some
of these concerns.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7787
Fig. 1 A diagram depicting the
relationship between conscious
and unconscious states with their
accuracy (x-axis) and precision
(y-axis) (from Hohwy 2013,
p. 203)
the input that is relevant for a given context (Hohwy 2012, p. 4). Choosing the ‘best’
hypothesis involves making trade-offs between these two dimensions, as sometimes
the most precise hypothesis might not be the one that is most accurate, and vice versa.
Although this proposal is centered around the basic assumption that conscious per-
ception will typically belong within the space of high accuracy and precision (Fig. 1),
Hohwy admits that this might not always be the case. It is possible that “a relatively
inaccurate but precise model might determine conscious perception over a competing
accurate but imprecise model, and vice versa” (Hohwy 2012, p. 5). The latter is what
supposedly happens in gist perception, where subjects can perceive the general gist
of a brieﬂy presented scene, even though they are unaware of the details (see Bayne
2016 for a comprehensive overview). Conversely, the ‘ventriloquist effect’ (Jack and
Thurlow 1973), involving a misperception of the location from which a sound comes,
is an example in which our perceptual discrimination is highly precise and yet still
inaccurate.
The role of attention in bringing predictions into consciousness is, therefore,
twofold. Firstly, attention can raise a perceptual hypothesis into consciousness by
adjusting precision weightings on either a strong incoming error signal (exogenous
attention), or a signal expected to be highly reliable/salient in a given context (endoge-
nous attention). Secondly, it can also serve as a kind of ‘bias control’ in cases of
competition between hypotheses (Hohwy 2012, p. 7). Hohwy links this second role of
attention to studies on the receptive ﬁelds of retinotopic neurons, which indicate that
a single neuron’s activity is decreased “when two different objects are present in the
neuron’s receptive ﬁeld” (Hohwy 2012, p. 7). Following Feldman and Friston (2010),
he proposes attention as the mechanism responsible for biasing neuronal responses
between different inputs falling within the same receptive ﬁeld, thus resolving the
conﬂict and preventing further decrease of neuronal activity in that ﬁeld. This role
of attention is crucial for the PEM framework, as only one hypothesis can drive the
system’s behavior in a particular task at any given time. This is consistent not only with
the empirical ﬁndings within receptive ﬁelds studies (e.g. Robert Desimone’s famous
research of biased competition, see Desimone and Duncan 1995; Desimone 1998), but
123

7788
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
also with research on perceptual phenomena like binocular rivalry (Dijkstra et al. 2016;
O’Shea et al. 2013), in which neurotypical subjects experience alteration between per-
cepts that are simultaneously presented in each of their visual hemiﬁelds. In the case
of the latter phenomenon, PEM conceptualizes the two percepts (e.g. a house and a
face) as distinct hypotheses generated by the system in order to try and predict the
current state of the visual environment. The perceptual system is unable to resolve the
rivalry between these competing hypotheses because both are equally probable given
the sensory evidence, nor can it synthesize the two into a singular percept due to their
incompatibility with prior expectations about the structure of the environment (i.e.
that objects belonging to separate categories cannot occupy the same spatiotemporal
location). This is why the competition is resolved sequentially over time, resulting
in an alternating percept. Although the heuristic description provided here is quite
simple, a computational model inspired by this approach has recently been validated
with fMRI data collected by Weilnhammer et al. (2017), who showed that the PEM
model outperformed other competing accounts in predicting increased responses from
cortical areas implicated in controlling the rate of perceptual bistability.
To sum up, Hohwy’s proposal is that the status of a hypothesis as conscious or
unconscious is determined by two separate dimensions: precision and accuracy (see
Fig. 1). A hypothesis that is both precise and accurate will play a strong role in
determining consciousness, whereas a hypothesis that is lacking in both dimensions
will not, with other hypotheses falling somewhere along a spectrum from conscious to
unconscious. One advantage of this proposal is that it can account for some variation
in the quality of different conscious states: “inattentive but conscious states would
cluster towards the lower right corner and attentive but unconscious states would
cluster towards the upper left” (Hohwy 2012, p. 203). The proposal is also consistent
with some recent ﬁndings that have been used to develop the PEM framework (such
as the binocular rivalry studies described above), thus lending it a degree of empirical
credibility.
3 Two problems with the ‘winning hypothesis’ approach
Our aim in this section is to explore the tacit assumptions behind the ‘winning hypothe-
sis’ approach, revealing several conceptual problems that the framework is still facing.
We saw earlier that the PEM framework assumes a direct connection between the
content and properties of the generative model and the content and properties of
conscious experience. It is relatively uncontroversial to assume that the content of
perceptual experiences is a product of subpersonal processes, and that cognitive func-
tions like attention are involved in determining which contents are made available for
conscious presentation. However, the way in which numerous perceptual paradigms
are framed in PEM explanations (see e.g. Clark 2013, 2016; Hohwy 2012 for an
overview) implies that the framework carries a stronger implicit assumption about the
relationship between the winning hypothesis (or state of the internal model) and the
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7789
phenomenal aspects of conscious experience. Namely, most proponents of PEM seem
to be committed to a form of representationalism about conscious experience.5
Although there are many varieties of this philosophical position (see Chalmers 2004
and Lycan 2019 for comprehensive overviews), in its basic form representationalism
about conscious experience is the thesis that the phenomenal aspect or properties of
conscious experience are part of, or coincide with, the content which is represented
by that experience.6 Proponents of strong versions of the view (e.g. Dretske 1995;
Tye 1995) postulate that representation of a certain kind is sufﬁcient for phenomenal
properties (”where the kind can be speciﬁed in functionalist or other familiar material-
ist terms”, Lycan 2019, p. 2.1) or that such properties reduce to representational ones
(Kind 2007, p. 406). Weak representationalists (Block 1990, 1996; Chalmers 1996),
on the other hand, are only committed to the view that phenomenal properties (of a
certain kind or within a certain class) entail representational properties (of the same
kind or class), but not vice versa, meaning that some further story is required about
how phenomenal properties are determined.
A commitment to some form of this view is clear from the deployment by PEM
proponents’ of the argument from transparency, which has long played an important
role in the representationalists’ argumentative arsenal (cf. e.g. Moore 1903; Harman
1990; Tye 1995, 2003; Dretske 2003; Metzinger 2003, 2008). According to this argu-
ment, our perceptual experiences are transparent or diaphanous to us because our
introspection into ‘what it is like’ to experience something does not reveal that we are
in a perceptual state, while “the properties we are aware of in perception are attributed
to the objects perceived” (Lycan 2019, Sect. 4.3). For example, when I see a red
tomato, I experience the redness of the tomato as a property of the object which is
the content of my conscious state, and not as a property of that conscious state itself.
On the PEM side, Limanowski and Friston (2018) propose that this property of our
experiential states “can metaphorically be understood as looking through a window
onto the world, instead of looking at the window itself: we only access the representa-
tion’s intentional content (something in the world which it is about) without noticing
its non-intentional carrier properties” (2018, p. 4), revealing a clear commitment to
representational transparency.
Hohwy (2014, pp. 184–185) also embraces representationalism by arguing that
PEM satisﬁes key requirements for a successful theory of phenomenal experience
as laid out by Frank Jackson (2003). According to him, conscious representations
in PEM are not only rich in detail due to an underlying “variance of percepts from
5 Note that representationalism about conscious experience is a distinct issue to the representational status
of the subpersonal mechanisms that constitute the PEM system. Although most proponents of PEM are also
representationalists in this latter sense, there have been some dissenting voices, and we will not address that
issue here (see Doł˛ega, 2017 for an overview/discussion of the representational status of PEM).
6 A further distinction among different representational views which has been made in philosophy involves
that between viewing experiences as carrying Russelian or Fregean contents. In the case of the former, the
content “can be a singular proposition or a conﬁguration of objects and their properties.” (Lycan 2019: 2.3).
Although such contents can be presented under a certain description or mode, the manner in which they
are presented is not taken to be a part of the content itself. Fregean contents, on the other hand, do include
the mode of presentation as part of the content of representations, but exclude objects from being part of
the content (cf. Lycan 2019: 2.3). The Russelian position has been famously defended by Tye (1995, 2003,
2009) and Dretske (1993, 1996), while Chalmers (2004) has defended its Fregean counterpart.
123

7790
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
the ﬁrst-person perspective as represented in the fast time-scale causal regularities in
the lower levels of the perceptual hierarchy” (Hohwy 2014, p. 184), but can even be
said to be “inextricably rich” due to the “richly hierarchically structured perceptual
inference(includingbinding, penetrability, andsensoryintegration); [as onPEM] there
is no perceptual inference without a perceptual hierarchy to accommodate empirical
Bayes.” (ibid.).7
Yet, despite this, it is rather unclear which version of the view (strong or weak)
Hohwy subscribes to. On one hand he states that PEM “seems to tick the boxes
that Jackson and others have set out as requisites for a substantial representationalism
about consciousness.” (Hohwy 2014, p. 184). While it is open to interpretation whether
‘substantial’ is meant as synonymous with ‘strong’, it seems quite clear that a strongly-
representational position would be the best ﬁt for PEM’s explanatory ambitions, as it
would allow for an explanation of consciousness without relying on resources external
to the framework. However, Hohwy undercuts this interpretation by also claiming that
PEM is unlikely to solve the mystery of phenomenal experience and that the best it can
hope for is to offer some insight into the nature of the mechanisms that bring about key
aspects conscious perception (such as perceptual binding, illusions, and mental illness)
and to help us capture “many of the things we care about in conscious experience”
(Hohwy 2014, p. 208). Such statements side with a weakly representational view,
but are inconsistent with his commitment to the framework’s explanatory power and
ambitions.
In the remainder of this section we will investigate two problems emerging from
these competing interpretations of PEM’s representational commitments, and show
that either interpretation carries a signiﬁcant cost for its proponents.
3.1 The problem of unconscious representation
Let us now return to the previous example of binocular rivalry. According to PEM,
the subject might have the experience of a face, rather than a house, because the ‘face’
hypothesis is currently the winning one and the ‘house’ hypothesis is suppressed
(Hohwy et al. 2008). Therefore the face hypothesis determines the content and phe-
nomenal quality of the conscious state (at this time). However, the house hypothesis is
also represented in the system at the same time. The default view about how hypothe-
ses come to determine conscious experience, when paired with PEM’s commitment
to representationalism about consciousness, seems to lead to a puzzle.
If PEM is committed to the strong view and phenomenal properties are identiﬁed
with representational properties, then proponents of the framework need to spell out
why the competing hypotheses are not both experienced phenomenally at the same
time. After all, what changes in the process of switching are the probabilities assigned
to such hypotheses, not their contents. A common answer to this kind of puzzle is
that strong representationalism requires representations of a certain kind for content
to be conscious (see e.g. Tye 1995). This may be helpful to PEM proponents in the
short run, but eventually they will have to face a further question: what is it about the
attribution of highest posterior probability that makes contents conscious?
7 An assumption that we will, to a certain extent, challenge in Sect. 4.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7791
Perhaps it is the difﬁculty of answering this second question that pushes Hohwy
to sometimes interpret PEM as being committed only to weak representationalism
(see e.g. Hohwy 2014, pp. 208–209). Moving in this direction helps to sidestep the
question altogether, since weak representationalism does not bind one to the claim
that phenomenal properties are representational properties. However, it forces a pro-
ponent of the framework into a sort of quietism in which they have to state that, even
though representations with the highest posterior probability do determine conscious
perception, PEM does not answer why or how such states contribute to the phenomenal
aspect of experience.
Although Hohwy sometimes seems to side with the latter option, he also acknowl-
edges that PEM does face the problem of answering whether representations that
are suppressed, but nevertheless processed by the system, do come with phenomenal
properties:
There remains the rather important and difﬁcult question whether or not the
unseen stimulus is in fact consciously perceived but not accessible for introspec-
tive report, or whether it is not consciously perceived at all; this question relates
to the inﬂuential distinction between access consciousness and phenomenal con-
sciousness (Block 1995, 2008). (Hohwy 2012, p. 7)
Here, he refers to the distinction between the phenomenal, qualitative aspect of a
state and the availability of that state to introspection, report, and other forms of
executive functions, i.e. its accessibility to consciousness. Ned Block (1995, 2008)
and Victor Lamme (2006) have argued that all that is needed for a state to be imbued
with phenomenal quality is that it is sustained over time by recurrent activity within a
sensory cortex, even in the absence of any kind of cognitive access to that state (Block
2007). Howhy does not directly comment on this issue, but he does seem to side with
Block and Lamme when he speculates that:
(i) access consciousness goes with active inference (i.e. minimizing surprise
though agency, which requires making model parameters and states available
to control systems), and (ii) phenomenal consciousness goes with perceptual
inference (i.e. minimizing the bound on surprise by more passively updating
model parameters and states). (Hohwy 2012, p. 7)
While the above proposal may solve the present problem (by effectively embracing
the view that hypotheses that are represented in the PEM system but are inaccessible
to the subject do come with phenomenal qualities), it ends up introducing addi-
tional confusion about the position held by Hohwy. Firstly, the proposal is ambiguous
between embracing an unusually strong version of representationalism on which all
that is needed for content to instantiate phenomenal properties is that it is rendered in
the system via perceptual inference, and claiming that perceptual inference is some-
how instrumental, but not sufﬁcient, for the instantiation of phenomenal properties.
Embracing the former position leads to a proposal which may not be coherent—how
can one be in a phenomenally conscious state, and yet not be aware of it? How could I
be in a qualitative state that ‘it is something like to experience’, yet not know ‘what that
state is like’? Cohen and Dennett (2011) have criticized this position and pointed out
that the very possibility of phenomenal experience in the absence of cognitive access
123

7792
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
is not veriﬁable in any way, since all empirical methods of investigating consciousness
require the availability of some form of explicit or implicit report. Embracing the latter
option—that only perceptual and not active inference plays a role in instantiating phe-
nomenal properties—is less problematic, but it is signiﬁcantly underdeveloped, and it
is unclear whether such an interpretation is consistent with Block’s original phenome-
nal/access distinction (as Block and his followers associate phenomenal consciousness
with particular stages of perceptual processing rather than kinds of processing). How-
ever, the most unwelcome consequence of embracing either solution is that neither
of them can help us understand how the initial proposal that consciousness is deter-
mined by the hypothesis with the highest posterior probability can account for the well
documented phenomenon of unconscious perception, to which we turn next.
3.2 The problem of unconscious perception
Our ability to respond above chance to stimuli that we are not consciously aware of
is well documented in the literature. It seems that some perceptual signals are simply
too weak to ever become conscious, but can nonetheless inﬂuence our behaviour. For
example, subjects fail to detect subliminal primes even in controlled settings, but such
stimuli can still drive behavioral responses (see e.g. Norman et al. 2014; Faivre et al.
2014; see also Ansorge et al. 2014 for a review). On the other hand, several studies
have shown that percepts which were not consciously registered by the subjects can
later be brought into consciousness by attentional cues directed at the location of the
stimulus after its disappearance (Kentridge 2013; Sergent et al. 2013; Thibault et al.
2016). This is important, as it lends support to the PEM idea that, by modulating the
probability of the bottom-up signals, attention determines how much inﬂuence their
probability should have on the posterior. However, this also seems to pose a problem
as it indicates that whether or not some content is available for conscious perception is
not just a question of its relative probability, but also other factors (such as subsequent
attentional cues).
Consider the cases of blindsight and visual form agnosia. The former occurs when
patients who have suffered lesions to the primary visual cortex become ‘blind’ on
one side of their visual ﬁeld, but nonetheless retain some discriminatory ability on
that side (see e.g. Humphrey 1974; Weiskrantz 1986; Holt 2003). The latter is a
condition in which localized damage to the temporal lobes causes loss of the capacity
to recognize shapes or objects, but leaves vision-guided motor coordination mostly
unaffected (see e.g. Benson and Greenberg 1969; Milner et al. 1991; Carey et al. 1996).
Patients suffering from these conditions have been shown to detect, localize, and act
upon visual stimuli apparently without experiencing them consciously, which in turn
has been proposed as evidence that perception can affect behavior in the absence of
consciousness. For example, one particular subject suffering from visual form agnosia,
known as D.F., has been shown to retain the ability to perform simple visuo-motor
tasks (like grabbing a cup or posting a letter into a letterbox) nearly or even equally
well as healthy controls, despite not being able to discriminate the shapes of objects
involved in the tasks (i.e. performing at chance in shape or object discrimination tasks).
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7793
When looking at such cases from the perspective of PEM, it seems that the visual
system does form distinct, albeit imprecise, hypotheses about the objects present in
the portion of the visual ﬁeld affected by the cortical damage. Since such hypotheses
are able to affect behavioral responses, they must at some point be assigned the highest
posterior probability, i.e. be the ‘winning hypothesis’ on some level of the hierarchy.
Yettheyarenotexperiencedinconsciousness,andsoposteriorprobabilityalonecannot
be the only property than determines whether a hypothesis is selected for conscious
presentation.
Squaring such evidence with Hohwy’s earlier stipulation that phenomenal con-
sciousness is associated with perceptual inference is also difﬁcult. It seems that, by
subscribing to Block’s distinction, Hohwy’s original proposal that consciousness is
determined by the hypothesis with the highest posterior probability becomes severely
limited in scope. Embracing Block’s distinction means that the winning hypothesis
view is only an account of access consciousness and not phenomenal consciousness.
However, even that might not work once we consider visual form agnosia, which
implies that sometimes unconscious states do take control of the system’s behavioral
responses, in the same way that conscious states can, but without any (reported) phe-
nomenal experience. Effectively this means that, at least in some cases, hypotheses can
be ascribed the highest posterior probability while remaining unconscious, which in
turn undermines the idea that the ‘winning hypothesis’ view offers a complete account
of the functional aspect of consciousness.8
Hohwy anticipates this problem by pointing out that the ‘winning hypothesis’ view
does not necessarily apply to hypotheses on a single level of the hierarchy, but rather
should be understood as targeting hypotheses that successfully minimize prediction
error across multiple levels:
When a speciﬁc model is the one determining the consciously perceived content
it is just because it best minimizes prediction error across most levels of the
cortical hierarchy—it best represents the world given all the evidence and the
widest possible context. This is the model that should be used to selectively
sample the world to minimize surprise in active inference. Competing but less
probable models cannot simultaneously determine the target of active inference:
the models would be at cross-purposes such that the system would predict more
surprise than if it relies on one model alone (for more on the relation between
attention and action, see Wu 2011). (Hohwy 2012)
According to Hohwy, then, there is no speciﬁc threshold for consciousness, but his
answer to the question implies that whether a hypothesis is accessible depends on the
landscape of probabilities in which it competes. The reason why a relatively inaccurate
and imprecise hypothesis can sometimes be the one driving conscious experience
8 Some may object to the idea that unconscious states that drive overt behavior are functionally equivalent
to conscious states by pointing out that the former are not available for verbal report or introspection.
There are two problems with this response. Firstly, it is question begging, as there needs to be some
observable difference between such states for us to be able to discover them in the ﬁrst place. Secondly, the
performance of visual form agnosia patients on motor tasks implies that the inaccessibility of states driving
their performance is likely not caused by changes intrinsic to those states, since any impairment to their
functional proﬁle would presumably have a negative effect on task performance.
123

7794
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
is because all the competing models are ‘worse’. The winning hypothesis, simply
put, merely needs to be better than the competition. This move pushes back on our
accusation that the ‘winning hypothesis’ cannot account for the functional aspect of
conscious experience, while embracing the proposal that it just is an account of access
consciousness.
All of the above seems to support the weakly representational interpretation offered
at the end of Sect. 3.1. While this may be a satisfying conclusion for many, and the
position certainly has the virtue of being restrained, we would like to (once again)
stress that, at least at face value, it is inconsistent with PEM’s ambition to explain all
facets of our mental lives (Hohwy 2013, p. 1). Embracing such a position, therefore,
is an admittance of PEM’s limited explanatory power and inability to deliver on its
promises. In the next section we will argue that this view be strengthened by rejecting
Block’s access/phenomenal distinction, which would enable it to offer an answer to
questions about the nature of phenomenal consciousness (albeit a deﬂationary one),
and therefore rescue some of PEM’s broad explanatory ambition.
4 A deﬂationary approach to PEM and consciousness
Having presented an overview of PEM and assessed one popular proposal for how it
might account for consciousness, we will now turn to our own alternative position.
Our approach has much in common with Hohwy’s position, insofar as it retains an
important role for attention in determining conscious content, but it moves away from
the idea that high probability alone is sufﬁcient for content to be conscious.9 Our
proposal is that in order to (potentially) enter consciousness, a hypothesis must be
‘probe-able’, a feature that depends partly (but not entirely) on its probability. As we
will explain in more detail shortly, the Dennettian concept of a ‘probe’ that determines
consciousness ﬁts nicely with the concept of active inference and the role of attention
in PEM, and so we will propose that the PEM mechanism responsible for controlling
attention can serve as an implementation of probing. By adopting this approach, we
will reframe Hohwy’s original proposal as a self-standing approach to consciousness
and resolve the problems it faces.
Before presenting our proposal in more detail, we will ﬁrst outline some important
philosophical assumptions that underwrite this approach. Our aim here is not to present
a defense of these assumptions, but rather to clearly state where we are coming from, so
that any disagreement will (hopefully) be made more perspicuous. We will then explain
how we think this approach helps us to resolve (or dissolve) the two problems outlined
above, before moving on in the ﬁnal section to consider some further outstanding
issues.
9 An anonymous reviewer has pointed out that, given what has been said about Hohwy’s position in Sect. 2
and 2.1, it is possible that he might be defending a much weaker position that allows for fringe cases in
which the content of conscious experiences is to be explained not in terms of high probability, but rather
some other (as yet unspeciﬁed) factors. While we admit that this is a salient possibility, we haven’t found
any evidence that this is the position embraced by Hohwy, or any other proponents of the framework. We
would also like to point out that subscribing to such a position would move Hohwy’s view even further
away from the initial goal of PEM being a self-sufﬁcient framework for explaining cognition.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7795
4.1 The method of heterophenomenology
There is widespread agreement that any serious empirical investigation into conscious
experience must take subjective verbal reports as a genuine datum (see e.g. Piccinini
2003; Chalmers 2013). To explain consciousness we need to explain why we experi-
ence and report our experiences as being this way rather than another (Chalmers 2018).
However, this basic intuition clashes with the fact that ﬁrst person reports about sub-
jective experience, while a valuable source of data about perceptual processing, are
often considered to be unreliable due to the lack of any possibility for veriﬁcation
(Dennett 1991; Schwitzgebel 2007, 2012b). Medical conditions like visual anosog-
nosia, in which subjects are unaware that they are blind (Prigatano and Schacter 1991);
visual illusions, like the color phi phenomenon (Kolers and von Grünau 1976); and
the fact that subjects systematically overestimate the precision and richness of visual
information outside of the foveal area (Dennett 1991) and outside of the scope of
attention (Knotts et al. 2018) all indicate the general unreliability of our introspective
abilities (see e.g. Schwitzgebel 2007, 2012a, b for further discussion).
Dennett’s ‘heterophenomenological’ methodology (1991, 2003, 2006) is aimed
at taking both of these points seriously. In contrast to the phenomenological tradition
(see Smith 2018) and introspection based psychology (e.g. Titchener 1901), heterophe-
nomenology does not consider subjective self-reports as ultimately authoritative about
mental phenomena, but rather treats them as non-committal ﬁctions, which carry infor-
mation about how things seem or are judged to be by the subjects, rather than how
they really are. In this regard heterophenomenology is claimed to be similar to anthro-
pology, as it suspends judgement about the reality of the entities and properties of
subject’s reports, in a similar way to how an anthropologist studying some peoples’
religious system does not pass judgement on the existence of deities and other enti-
ties that are the object of those peoples’ beliefs. As Dennett points out, this way of
doing science of the mind “is nothing new; it is nothing other than the method that has
been used by psychophysicists, cognitive psychologists, clinical neuropsychologists,
and just about everybody who has ever purported to study human consciousness in a
serious, scientiﬁc way” (2003, p. 22).
Associated with this proposal is the rejection of the idea of phenomenal properties
(or ‘qualia’) as ineffable and intrinsic properties of experiential states, to which con-
scious subjects have immediate (and privileged) epistemic access (cf. Dennett 1988).
Since properties present in experience can be in some sense illusory (e.g. peripheral
vision appears as rich and detailed even though it is not, colors appear to be the intrinsic
properties of objects even though they are bundles of complex relational properties;
cf. Cohen 2009), consciousness researchers should not aim to explain the existence
of such properties themselves, but should rather explain why conscious experience
appears to have such properties (Frankish 2016a, b, cf. Chalmers 2018), i.e. why and
how subjects come to believe that their experiences have such properties.
As mentioned before, our approach in the remainder of this paper will be funda-
mentally deﬂationary, in just the way implied by heterophenomenology. We take the
strong representational proposal that phenomenal properties are identical to repre-
sentational properties quite seriously, and the solution to the problems posed in the
123

7796
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
previous section will simply require an explanation for why some hypothesis (instead
of another) determines the content of a verbal report about conscious experience,
rather than determining the phenomenal properties of that experience as such. Fol-
lowing Dennett, we think that taking this course of action will result in rendering the
problematic or mysterious character of phenomenal properties as nothing more than
an adaptive illusion. Of course, in line with the outlined method, and in order to fully
amend Hohwy’s account, we will also need to say why or how such an illusion comes
about. With these preliminary remarks out of the way, we will now move on to our
main positive proposal.
4.2 Multiple-drafts model and the‘fame in the brain’metaphor
The PEM account of consciousness developed by Hohwy (and others) bears some
interesting similarities to Dennett’s multiple drafts (or ‘fame in the brain’) approach,
which we think positions it well to adopt the further innovation of a ‘probe’ that deter-
mines conscious content. According to Dennett’s model of consciousness there are
multiple, parallel streams of information that are being processed in the brain at any
given time. Conscious experience is determined by a ‘probe’ that, through a process
of eliciting reports (verbal or otherwise) from a subject, takes one of the competing
information streams as a more-less complete story about what is going on in the mind
at that time (1991, p. 135). Probing may be verbal, environmental, or self-induced;
what matters is that the subject is able to respond to the probe in an appropriate
way, i.e. by producing an internal or external indication of their apparent conscious
experience (e.g. a silent or vocalized report, or the production of some behavior that is
consistent with the apparent conscious experience). In this context a ‘probe’ is a kind
of higher-order, meta-cognitive state which takes another perceptual or cognitive state
as its object. Prior to being probed in this way, there is no determinate fact of the matter
about what the subject is conscious of, but rather a stream of possible ‘drafts’, each of
which is potentially available to determine the content of a report if it is probed in the
right way (we could say that a draft of this kind is ‘probe-able’). As Dennett puts it,
there are “multiple ‘drafts’ of narrative fragments at various stages of editing in various
places in the brain. Probing this stream at different places and times produces different
effects, precipitates different narratives from the subject” (Dennett 1991, p. 113).
Although it is impossible to pinpoint which contents will be selected for conscious-
ness prior to a report, any process can have more or less ‘fame’ or ‘clout’ (Dennett
2005, pp. 136–138), i.e. be more or less likely to feature in a subject’s report, in virtue
of the functional role it plays in global information processing in the brain. Thus, the
question of which states and processes ‘become conscious’ boils down to a distinct
question of which of many possible ‘drafts’ (i.e. information streams) is the one exert-
ing the most inﬂuence on the system at the time of the probe, and thus which draft
becomes available for report (verbal or otherwise). While it may seem counterintuitive,
this means that, on Dennett’s conception, there is actually no fact of the matter about
what a system is conscious of until it is probed (although it is important to note that a
probe may be either internally or externally generated, meaning that a system might
become conscious ‘spontaneously’, at least as it appears from the outside). Dennett’s
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7797
metaphor of ‘fame in the brain’ is meant to refer to how likely a state is to be in control
of the system at the time it is probed, and thus how likely it is to determine the content
of consciousness at that moment.
While we do not wish to subscribe to the claim that the contents of unconscious
states are underdetermined prior to probing (according to PEM, there is a fact of the
matter about which hypothesis is currently ascribed the highest posterior probability,
even if its contents are inaccessible to the subject), we do think that the notion
of ‘fame in the brain’ is extremely similar to the idea of the winning hypothesis
being responsible for determining the contents of conscious experience (described
in Sect. 2.5), while the notion of probing can be treated as equivalent to the way that
PEM describes attention and active-inference (Sects. 2.3 and 2.4). We develop this
proposal in more detail below.
4.3 Probe-ability determines conscious content
Probing, we want to suggest, can be cashed out in terms of the PEM notion of attention.
A probe can be considered a higher-order process of predicting the states of the system
in accordance with the expected precision of the incoming error signals.10 As we have
already suggested in Sect. 2.4, for attention to be successfully deployed the system
needs to draw on stored information about the context in which the prediction errors
are generated. In other words, it needs to draw on the multi-level representations which
shaped the hypotheses that generated the erroneous predictions, in order to assess the
reliability of the errors related to said predictions. Thus, the successful deployment
and control of attention on a given level of the hierarchy will require the system to
issue descending predictions about the expected states on that level of the hierarchy,
in order to predict what precision the errors on a given level should have. Effectively,
the system needs to be predicting its own states in order to deploy attention, and
these top-down meta-predictions, we want to suggest, constitute what Dennett calls a
probe.11
10 One important kind of probe that we unfortunately do not have space to discuss in detail here are linguistic
probes, i.e. self- or other-directed natural language that elicits a conscious report (verbal or otherwise). As
language has also been suggested to play a crucial role in attention modulation according to some versions
of the PEM framework (see e.g. Lupyan and Clark 2015), it seems like there could be an interesting avenue
of research here, one that we would be keen to explore in future work. We thank an anonymous reviewer
for bringing this point to our attention.
11 We do not want to associate probing with the activity of a particular model within the hierarchy, but
rather suggest that (as discussed in 2.4) it can be treated as the output of a distributed ‘virtual governor’. This
means that we are safe from the potential objection that we are postulating a ‘Cartesian theatre’ (Dennett
1991) and do not fall into the same issues as, e.g. Hobson and Friston (2014; cf. Doł˛ega and Dewhurst 2015).
It does, however, raise an additional interesting question, of how to individuate instances of probing (we
thank an anonymous reviewer for pressing us on this point). If every instance of a top-down meta-prediction
constitutes a probe, then these are going to be much more ubiquitous than they seem to be in the original
Dennettian story, perhaps resulting in something close to Graziano’s (2016) attention schema theory of
consciousness. On the other hand, if only some of these meta-predictions constitute probes, then we will
need to provide an additional story about which ones qualify as probes, and why. Our preliminary answer
is that the meta-predictions that qualify as instances of probing will typically be the ones affecting the
most levels in the hierarchy, often having a relatively gross behavioural outcome. It also seems plausible
that the kind of pooling of contextual information that is required for generating predictions of precision
123

7798
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
Recall that, according to PEM, attention is the allocation of expected precision
based on the relative spread of the sensory samples. There are two distinct ways in
which attention can inﬂuence the attenuation of prediction error. Exogenous atten-
tion operates by raising the precision of predictions that can account for sudden or
especially pronounced error signals, increasing the strength of the hypothesis that
generates those predictions and thus making it more likely that that hypothesis will
come to dominate the hierarchy. This can be likened to the way in which a sudden,
unexpected event can act as a probe, generating a conscious report from a system that
was previously operating ‘on autopilot’, so to speak. We can illustrate this with the
example of driving down a familiar street, not really paying any (conscious) attention
to one’s surroundings, when another car pulls out in front of you and forces you to
suddenly slam on the brakes. Even though prior to this event there may not have been
any fact of the matter about what one was ‘conscious’ of, immediately afterwards
you will have a seemingly conscious memory of what was happening prior to the car
pulling out (cf. Dennett 1991, 137). From the PEM perspective, this seems to be a
clear case of exogenous attention determining the content of conscious experience
by raising previously unconscious hypotheses into awareness, in a way that ﬁts very
neatly with the Dennettian story about probing.
Endogenous attention, on the other hand, operates in a top-down fashion, where the
system raises the expected precision of predictions matching the object of attention,
thereby increasing the salience of sensory inputs that conﬁrm these predictions. This
type of attention can be illustrated using the example of Where’s Waldo? books. The
premise of these books is that the reader has to ﬁnd the character Waldo, who is hid-
den in complex, confusing images ﬁlled with human and animal ﬁgures. The search is
driven by a top-down prediction of a particular stimulus, Waldo, appearing against the
noisy background. Thus, this process relies on the mechanism of endogenous atten-
tion—the gain on the receptive ﬁeld sensitive to the object of the search is increased.
Notice that this requires the attentional control system to form a high-level hypothesis
about the target of the search. Once a pattern of retinal activations corresponding to
those possibly caused by the target is found, the high gain on the error signal pathways
guarantees that only a hypothesis tailored to minimize that very precise signal (congru-
ent with the ‘Waldo hypothesis’) will be selected for driving the system’s behavior. In
this case, attentional modulation comes from within the system itself, highlighting the
draft (a hypothesis or a collection of hypotheses on multiple levels) that corresponds to
the behavior of scanning the page looking for Waldo. Thus, the system will be primed
to report a conscious experience with this content, though importantly other ‘shorter’
drafts can also capture a system’s resources in an exogenous manner during visual
scanning.12
Footnote 11 continued
across multiple levels of the hierarchy may require long distance signaling between different cortical areas,
the kind of which are postulated by the global workspace hypothesis (Baars 1997; Dehaene and Naccache
2001). Thus, probes as such may be distinguishable from meta-predictions in general by their distinct
functional and neural proﬁles. We hope that this might preserve the Dennettian spirit of our proposal while
accommodating the details of the PEM account of attention.
12 One of the interesting consequences of the PP account of endogenous attention is that the system needs
to de-regulate lower level perceptual states in order to boost the error signal on the pathways relevant for
the search task. This means that, in the case of searching for the Waldo ﬁgure, the system needs to ﬁx
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7799
Both kinds of attention contribute to determining the winning hypothesis and thus,
according to Hohwy, the content of conscious experience. Here the concept of a ‘win-
ning hypothesis’ can be likened to Dennett’s metaphor of ‘fame in the brain’—the
hypothesis that currently enjoys the greatest control of the system is the one that,
when probed, determines the content of experiential reports. Our proposal is that a
winning hypothesis (or, in the case of a more complex stimulus/situation, a hierar-
chically organised bundle of hypotheses) becomes more probe-able the greater its
probability. Note, however, that on this view it is not sufﬁcient for a process to be
highly probable for it to be conscious, rather the system needs to be actively prob-
ing the model—in other words, it needs to be performing active inference on its own
states. It is this additional feature, coupled with the Dennettian deﬂationism about
the phenomenal status of a draft (or hypothesis) pre-probe, that gives us the tools to
resolve the two problems introduced in the previous section.
A possible solution to what we previously called the problem of unconscious
perception should now be visible. Although phenomenal properties simply are repre-
sentational properties, the difference between conscious and unconscious hypotheses
lies in which of these states the system is currently conducting active inference on. This
means that, in cases like binocular rivalry, there may be multiple candidate hypotheses,
each of which is sufﬁciently high probability to be ‘probe-able’, but none of which
will determine the content of consciousness until the moment that one is actually
probed. The attention mechanism described above provides a simple account of how
this process of probing can take place: attending to a hypothesis heightens the pre-
cision (and probability) of that hypothesis, boosting it to a level where it is able to
(temporarily) take control of the system and thus elicit a verbal report (or some other
indication of consciousness according to the heterophenomenological method). In the
case of exogenous attention this is triggered by an external factor, such as a loud noise
or sudden change in the visual ﬁeld, whereas in the endogenous case it is triggered
internally, and is the result of the system predicting how its lower-level internal states
should be in order to minimize long term prediction error.13
This approach can also help explain why an antecedently ‘improbable’ hypoth-
esis (low accuracy, low precision, or some combination of the two) can sometimes
nonetheless enter consciousness: the very act of probing serves to focus attention on
that hypothesis, heightening its precision and thus boosting its ‘fame’. A clear example
of this kind of situation is when a sudden, surprising event focuses our attention on
a previously unlikely hypothesis, such as a loud noise that we immediately become
aware of. Similarly, an exogenous or endogenous probe can make salient a previ-
Footnote 12 continued
at least some portions of the hierarchy to states incongruent with the desired input for it to produce error
signals to can be explained away by a higher-order ‘Waldo hypothesis’. Thus, the prior knowledge of what
Waldo looks like biases the system to endogenously induce the pop-out effect when the desired stimulus is
encountered. This kind of self-induced de-regulation may be the source of our introspective unreliability,
as suggested by Doł˛ega (2018).
13 Doł˛ega and Dewhurst (2019) have described how this attention mechanism might also be integrated with
Graziano’s attention schema model (2013, 2016), which we think can shed further light on the apparently
mysterious nature of consciousness.
123

7800
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
ously unconscious hypothesis, bringing ‘into’ consciousness the events of the last
few moments, and making it seem as though we were always aware of them. Classic
examples of this phenomenon include focusing on the last few chimes of a clock that
one was previously ignoring, but nonetheless being able to accurately determine how
many chimes there were (an endogenous probe), or being jolted into awareness by a
surprising event while driving along a familiar route on ‘autopilot’, but nonetheless
retaining a clear sense of having been aware of driving prior to the event (an exoge-
nous probe). In both cases the Dennettian approach would argue that the question of
whether or not one was conscious ‘all along’ simply doesn’t make sense, as prior to a
probe there is just no fact of the matter about what one was conscious of, but rather a
hierarchy of potentially probe-able drafts (or hypotheses) that are only selected from at
the moment of probing. This approach, we think, ﬁts very neatly into the existing PEM
story about the determination of consciousness, helping to make sense of some oth-
erwise puzzling features without having to posit any additional tools or mechanism
(as hypotheses take the place of drafts, and probing is naturally identiﬁed with the
deployment of the attention mechanism). It also sheds useful light on Dennett’s more
recent work, in which he has defended attention as a resource which can be distributed
among many perceptually salient targets at the same time (Cohen and Dennett 2011).
This ﬁts nicely with our proposal, as the conception of probing we described above
allows for many ‘famous’ hypotheses located on different levels to be simultaneously
probed by levels higher up the hierarchy.
Finally, the approach sketched here can give an account of unconscious percep-
tion without falling into the same issues as the winning hypothesis account. It is not
surprising that patients suffering from partial loss of vision, as in the case of blind-
sight, can perform certain visual tasks in the absence of consciousness. Such subjects
do form hypotheses that are functionally capable of driving their responses on rele-
vant tasks, however since most cases of unconscious perception are caused by serious
pathologies resulting from structural damage, such hypotheses are likely inaccessible
for probing and precision adjustment by the rest of the system. This may also explain
why, despite performing adequately on relevant tasks, subjects suffering from such
deﬁciencies have a very limited capacity for forming subjective assessments of their
own reliability.
4.4 Cleaning up the phenomenal residue
So far we have applied Dennett’s multiple drafts model to PEM and shown that,
on our view, what differentiates conscious from unconscious representations is not
just their posterior probability, but also the fact that they are the target of a system
actively generating meta-predictions about their optimal state and precision. Given
our heterophenomenological assumptions, this is enough to deal with the problems
incurred by unconscious perception and representation. However, critics of the deﬂa-
tionary approach may point out that all we have done is reframe Hohwy’s own view
about active inference being linked to the winning hypothesis—an account of access
consciousness—without really addressing the problem of phenomenal consciousness.
While we do not hope to completely defuse this worry, we do think that our approach
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7801
can help to address at least two distinct questions that deﬂationary approaches some-
times face. The ﬁrst question has to do with why certain worldly properties, e.g.
electromagnetic waves of a certain length, are represented by contents with a distinct
qualitative character, e.g. redness, while others, e.g. the number two, are not. The sec-
ond question is about accommodating our intuitions that there is something more to
subjective properties than them just being representations, i.e. that there is something
‘special’ or ‘mysterious’ about phenomenal consciousness, or what Chalmers (2018)
has recently described as “the meta-problem of consciousness”.
The ﬁrst question is largely an empirical one. For example, ﬁnding out why the
human visual system is attuned to track certain physical quantities is largely a matter
of exploring the morphological and ecological constraints that shaped our evolutionary
history. However, the issue that typically troubles philosophers more is answering the
second question: why do certain contents come with a speciﬁc subjective feel—i.e.
why does that particular combination of physical properties cause such a sensation
of redness, when it could have very well caused a sensation of greenness? Again,
the exact nomological relation between, say, the space of possible physical quantities
responsible for color perception and the space of phenomenal color sensations will
likely depend on empirical facts about human vision. However, PEM can offer some
insights into why certain clusters of quantitative physical properties might be repre-
sented by seemingly very different qualitative properties, i.e. why it is that quantitative
properties can come to seem ‘special’ or ‘mysterious’.
Recall (from Sect. 2.5) that the successful minimization of prediction error involves
minimizing surprise or free energy by increasing the accuracy of hypotheses, while
simultaneously minimizing their complexity. What this means is that the PEM system
is constantly making tradeoffs between speed and efﬁciency on the one hand, and
devoting costly resources to ﬁne-tune its representations of the world on the other.
Facedwithﬁniteresourcesandexternalconstraints,itisnotsurprisingthataPEMbrain
might settle on furnishing internal models with only as much detail as is necessary for
achieving a given task, compressing complex webs of interdependent physical causes
into frugal representations that optimize not for veridicality, but rather for processing
speed and efﬁciency. One result of this frugal representational format might be that our
conscious states come to seem (to us) to be mysterious, as they are relatively lacking
in detail (cf. Doł˛ega and Dewhurst 2019).
Combining PEM’s propensity to favor frugal representations with our proposal
regarding probing can also shed further light on our intuitions about the mysterious
or ineffable quality of consciousness.14 When we take into account the hierarchical
nature of the PEM cognitive architecture, and the fact that probing is essentially a
metacognitivecapacityinvolvingpredictingtheoptimalstateofthesystem’smodelsby
drawing on prior information about the world and the context the agent is in, it turns to
be relatively unsurprising that probing frugal models may lead to somewhat inaccurate
inferences about one’s own capacities. The successful precision optimization of frugal
perceptual models will require drawing on available contextual information about
how such models operate, and using it to form predictions about how to optimize
14 Dewhurst and Doł˛ega (forthcoming) provide an explicit application of this approach to Chalmers’ meta-
problem.
123

7802
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
information processing. Thus, the successful deployment of endogenous attention,
say to a particular perceptual process, will require forming a representation that is
‘twice-removed’ from the world—a facsimile of a facsimile of how the world is. Such
a meta-representation will itself be optimized for complexity in the same way as its
target representations are. This process of nesting content within content may be what
is responsible for our intuition that there is more to the contents of our perception than
just representational properties. However, this is just a ‘user illusion’ (Dennett 1991)
caused by our cognitive system’s adaptive capacity for efﬁciency over accuracy. Thus,
properties of and present in our experience only seem mysterious because of the way
in which they come to be represented by the PEM system.
5 Conclusion
We have argued that Hohwy’s proposal for explaining consciousness within the PEM
framework, while promising, suffers from two outstanding problems. Firstly, it seems
to suggest the existence of phenomenal-yet-unconscious states, as there can be cases
wheretwoormorefunctionallyequivalentstatesfulﬁlallthecriteriaforconsciousness,
but only one is experienced by the subject as being conscious. Secondly, and relatedly,
it seems that Hohwy’s approach cannot adequately account for cases of unconscious
perception, such as blindsight. We then suggested that both problems can be resolved
by adopting a deﬂationary, Dennettian approach to the determination of consciousness,
where multiple hypotheses can be simultaneously ‘probe-able’, but do not become
conscious until they are actually probed, eliciting either a verbal or behavioural report.
This approach is well-suited to the PEM framework, as both draw on similar bodies of
empirical research for support (e.g. biased competition), and also share other structural
similarities, such as the role played by attention (or probing) in determining the content
of consciousness (or a report thereof). Finally, it seems to us that in order to properly
accommodate consciousness and allow further empirical investigations (e.g. into its
relation with other leading models of consciousness in neuroscience, such as the global
neuronal workspace, e.g. Baars 1997; Dehaene and Naccache 2001), PEM will have
to adopt a somewhat deﬂationary approach to consciousness, yielding similar results
to the position advocated in this paper (i.e. positions similar to those occupied by
Carruthers 2000 or Lau 2008), as failing to do this would mean that the framework
will likely fail to deliver on its explanatory ambitions.
Acknowledgements Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL. We are extremely grateful to several
anonymous reviewers, and also to numerous conference audiences, all of whom have provided helpful
feedback on earlier drafts. It has been a long time coming—the original idea for this paper was developed
when both authors were MSc students at the University of Edinburgh in 2013, and it was ﬁrst presented at
the 2014 Rudolf Carnap Lectures, where Daniel Dennett encouraged us to continue working on it. Since
then we have both completed PhDs and started postdoctoral research, and so we should also thank all of
our friends, family, and colleagues who have supported us along the way.
OpenAccess ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7803
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands: Active inference in the motor
system. Brain Structure and Function, 218(3), 611–643.
Ansorge, U., Kunde, W., & Kiefer, M. (2014). Unconscious vision and executive control: How unconscious
processing and conscious action control interact. Consciousness and Cognition, 27, 268–287.
Baars, B. J. (1997). In the theatre of consciousness: Global Workspace Theory, a rigorous scientiﬁc theory
of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4(4), 292–309. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:
oso/9780195102659.001.1.
Bayne, T. (2016). VI—Gist! Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 116(2), 107–126. https://doi.org/10.
1093/arisoc/aow006.
Benson, D. F., & Greenberg, J. P. (1969). Visual Form Agnosia. Archives of Neurology, 20(1), 82–89.
Block, N. J. (1990). Inverted Earth. Philosophical Perspectives, 4, 53–79.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18,
227–287.
Block, N. J. (1996). Mental paint and mental latex. Philosophical Issues, 7, 19–49.
Block, N. J. (2007). Consciousness, accesibility, and the mesh between psychology and neuroscience.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5), 481–548.
Block, N. (2008). Phenomenal and Access Consciousness. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society New
Series, 108(2008), 289–317.
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling perception and learning. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 76(B), 198–211.
Brown, H. R., & Friston, K. J. (2013). The functional anatomy of attention: A DCM study. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00784.
Carey, D. P., Harvey, M., & Milner, A. D. (1996). Visuomotor sensitivity for shape and orientation in a
patient with visual form agnosia. Neuropsychologia, 34(5), 329–337.
Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A naturalistic theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The conscious mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2004). The representational character of experience. The Future for Philosophy. https://
doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195311105.003.0011.
Chalmers, D. J. (2013). How can we construct a science of consciousness? In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The
Cognitive Neurosciences III (3rd ed., pp. 1111–1120). Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2018). The meta-problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(9–10),
6–61.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477.
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Cohen, J. (2009). The Red and The Real: An Essay on Color Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199556168.001.0001.
Cohen, M. A., & Dennett, D. C. (2011). Consciousness cannot be separated from function. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 15(8), 358–364.
Colombo, M., & Hartmann, S. (2017). Bayesian Cognitive Science, Uniﬁcation, and Explanation. The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68(2), 451–484.
Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: Basic evidence
and a workspace framework. Cognition, 79(1–2), 1–37.
Dennett, D. C. (1988). Quining qualia. Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. https://
doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198522379.001.0003.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. London: The Penguin Press.
123

7804
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
Dennett, D. C. (2005). Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Desimone, R. (1998). Visual attention mediated by biased competition in extrastriate visual cortex. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 353(1373), 1245–1255. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.1998.0280.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 18, 193–222. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.18.030195.001205.
Dewhurst, J. & Doł˛ega, K. (Forthcoming). Attending to the Illusion of Consciousness. In Kammerrer
Francoise (Ed.) Symposium on David Chalmers’ ‘The Meta-Problem of Consciousness, second
part—Special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies.
Dijkstra, N., van de Nieuwenhuijzen, M. E., van Gerven, M. A. J. (2016). The spatiotemporal dynamics of
binocular rivalry: Evidence for increased top-down ﬂow prior to a perceptual switch. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 1, niw003. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niw003.
Doł˛ega, K. (2017). Moderate Predictive Processing: Philosophy and Predictive Processing. In W. Wiese &
T. Metzinger (Eds.), Philosophy and Predictive Processing (pp. 161–179). Frankfurt am Main: MIND
Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573116.
Doł˛ega, K. (2018). Commentary: M-Autonomy. Frontiers in Psychology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2018.00680.
Doł˛ega, K., & Dewhurst, J. (2015). Curtain call at the Cartesian theatre. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
22(9–10), 109–128.
Doł˛ega, K., & Dewhurst, J. (2019). Bayesian Frugality and the Representation of Attention. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 26(3–4), 38–63.
Dretske, F. (1993). Conscious Experience. Mind, 102, 263–283.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Drteske,F.(1996).Phenomenalexternalism,orifmeaningsain’tinthehead,wherearequalia?Philosophical
Issues, 7,143–158.
Dretske, F. (2003). How Do You Know You Are Not a Zombie? In B. Gertler (Ed.), Privileged Access and
First Person Authority. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Faivre, N., Mudrik, L., Schwartz, N., & Koch, C. (2014). Multisensory integration in complete unawareness:
Evidence from audiovisual congruency priming. Psychological Science, 25, 2006–2016. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956797614547916 (Epub 2014 Sep 30).
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Frontiers in Human Neuro-
science. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215.
Frankish,K.(2016a).Illusionismasatheoryofconsciousness.JournalofConsciousnessStudies,23(11–12),
65–72.
Frankish, K. (2016b). Illusionism as a theory of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
23(11–12), 256–259.
Friston, K. J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Computational Biology, 4 (11). (Online), http://
www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/~karl/Hierarchical%20Models%20in%20the%20Brain.pdf (14 July 2014).
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? National Review of Neuroscience,
11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement learning or active inference? PLoS ONE,
4(7), e6421 (Online).
Friston, K. J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
B, 364, 1211–1221. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0300.
Gładziejewski, P. (2019). Mechanistic unity of the predictive mind. Theoretical Psychology (ISTP), Online
ﬁrst. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354319866258.
Graziano, M. S. A. (2013). Consciousness and the social brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Graziano, M. S. A. (2016). Consciousness engineered. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 23, 98–115.
Harman, G. (1990). The intrinsic quality of experience. Philos. Perspect., 4, 31–52. https://doi.org/10.2307/
2214186.
Hobson, J. A., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Consciousness, dreams, and inference. Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 21(1), 1–27.
Hobson, J. A., & Friston, K. J. (2016). A Response to Our Theatre Critics. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
23(3–4), 245–254.
Hohwy, J. (2012). Attention and conscious perception in the hypothesis testing brain. Frontiers in Psychol-
ogy, 3(APR). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00096.
123

Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
7805
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2014). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs. https://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062.
Hohwy, J., Roepstorff, A., & Friston, K. (2008). Predictive coding explains binocular rivalry: An epistemo-
logical review. Cognition, 108(3), 687–701. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2008.05.010.
Holt, J. (2013). Blindsight and the nature of consciousness. Broadview Press.
Hooker, C. A. (1981). Towards a General Theory of Reduction. Part III: Cross-Categorical Reduction.
Dialogue, 20(03), 496–529. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217300023593.
Humphrey, N. (1974). Vision in a monkey without striate cortex: A case study. Perception, 3, 241–255.
https://doi.org/10.1068/p030241.
Humphrey, N. (2011). Soul Dust: The Magic of Consciousness. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Jack, C. E., & Thurlow, W. R. (1973). Effects of degree of visual association and angle of displacement
on the “ventriloquism” effect. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 37(3), 967–979. https://doi.org/10.2466/
pms.1973.37.3.967.
Jackson, F. (2003). Mind and Illusion. In A. O’Hear (Ed.), Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kentridge, R. W. (2013). Visual attention: Bringing the unseen past into view. Current Biology, 23(2),
R69–R71.
Kind, A. (2007). Restrictions on Representationalism. Philosophical Studies, 134(3), 405–427.
Knotts, J. D., Odegaard, B., Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2018). Subjective inﬂation: Phenomenology’s get-
rich-quick scheme. Current Opinion in Psychology, 29, 49–55.
Kolers, P. A., & von Grünau, M. (1976). Shape and color in apparent motion. Vision Research, 16(4),
329–335.
Lamme, V. (2006). Toward a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10(11),
494–501.
Lau, H. (2008). A higher order Bayesian decision theory of consciousness. Progress in Brain Research,
168(7), 35–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(07)68004-2.
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). ‘Seeing the Dark’: Grounding Phenomenal Transparency and Opacity
in Precision Estimation for Active Inference. Frontiers in Psychology, Online ﬁrst:. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fpsyg.2018.00643.
Lupyan, G., & Clark, C. (2015). Words and the World: Predictive Coding and the Language-Perception-
Cognition Interface. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24(4), 279–284.
Lycan, W. (2019). Representational Theories of Consciousness. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2,
1–24.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational approach. San Francisco: Freeman & Co.
Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2011). A Bayesian foundation for individual
learning under uncertainty. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, 39.
Mathys, C. D., Lomakina, E. I., Daunizeau, J., Iglesias, S., Brodersen, K. H., Friston, K. J., et al. (2014).
Uncertainty in perception and the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8,
825.
Metzinger, T. (2003). Phenomenal transparency and cognitive self-reference. Phenomenology and the Cog-
nitive Sciences, 2(4), 353–393. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:PHEN.0000007366.42918.eb.
Metzinger, T. (2008). Empirical perspectives from the self-model theory of subjectivity: A brief sum-
mary with examples. Progress in Brain Research, 168, 215–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-
6123(07)68018-2.
Milkowski, M. (2016). A mechanistic account of computational explanation in cognitive science and com-
putational neuroscience. In V. C. Müller (Ed.), Computing and Philosophy. Berlin: Springer.
Milner, A. D., Perrett, D. I., Johnston, R. S., Benson, P. J., Jordan, T. R., Heeley, D. W., et al. (1991).
Perception and action in ‘visual form agnosia’. Brain, 114(1), 405–428.
Moore, G. E. (1903). The refutation of idealism. Mind, 12, 433–453.
Norman, L. J., Akins, K., Heywood, C. A., & Kentridge, R. W. (2014). Color constancy for an unseen
surface. Current Biology, 24, 2822–2826.
O’Shea, R. P., Kornmeier, J., & Roeber, U. (2013). Predicting Visual Consciousness Electrophysiologically
from Intermittent Binocular Rivalry. PLoS ONE, 8(10), e76134. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0076134.
Pereboom, D. (2011). Consciousness and the Prospects of Physicalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Piccinini, G. (2003). Data from introspective reports: Upgrading from common sense to science. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 10(9–10), 141–156.
123

7806
Synthese (2021) 198:7781–7806
Pickering, M. J., & Clark, A. (2014). Getting Ahead: Forward Models and Their Place in Cognitive Archi-
tecture. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(9), 451–456.
Prigatano, G. P., & Schacter, D. L. (1991). Awareness of deﬁcit after brain injury: Clinical and theoretical
issues. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpretation
of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 79–87. https://doi.org/10.
1038/4580.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2007). Do You Have Constant Tactile Experience of Your Feet in Your Shoes? Or Is
Experience Limited to What’s in Attention? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14(3), 5–35.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2012a). Self-Ignorance. In Jee Loo Liu & John Perry (Eds.), Consciousness and the Self .
Cambridge: Cambridge.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2012b). Introspection, What? In Declan Smithies & Daniel Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection
and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford.
Sergent, C., Wyart, V., Babo-Rebelo, M., Cohen, L., Naccache, L., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2013). Cueing
Attention after the Stimulus Is Gone Can Retrospectively Trigger Conscious Perception. Current
Biology, 23(2), 150–155.
Smith, D.W. (2018). Phenomenology. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/sum2018/entries/phenomenology/.
Spratling, M. W. (2017). A review of predictive coding algorithms. Brain and Cognition, 112, 92–97.
Thibault, L., Van den Berg, R., Cavanagh, P., & Sergent, C. (2016). Retrospective attention gates discrete
conscious access to past sensory stimuli. PLoS ONE, 11(2), e0148504.
Titchener, E. B. (1901). Experimental psychology: A manual of laboratory practice, Vol. 1. Qualitative
experiments: Part 2. Instructor’s manual. New York: MacMillan Co.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2003). Consciousness and Persons. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2009). Consciousness Revisited: Materialism without Phenomenal Concepts. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Weilnhammer,V.,Stuke,H.,Hesselmann,G.,Sterzer,P.,&Schmack,K.(2017).Apredictivecodingaccount
of bistable perception - a model-based fMRI study. PLoS Computational Biology, 13(5), e1005536.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005536.
Weiskrantz, L. (1986). Blindsight: A Case Study and Implications. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wiese, W. (2017). Action is enabled by systematic misrepresentations. Erkenntnis, 82, 1233–1252. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10670-016-9867-x.
Wiese, W., & Metzinger, T. (2017). Vanilla PP for philosophers: A primer on predictive processing. In W.
Wiese & T. Metzinger (Eds.), Philosophy and Predictive Processing (pp. 1–18). Frankfurt am Main:
MIND Group.
Wolpert, D. M., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001). Motor prediction. Current Biology, 11, R729–R732. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00432-8.
Wu, W. (2011). Confronting many-many problems: Attention and agentive control. Noûs, 45, 50–76.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

