Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-020-01736-x
ORIGINAL PAPER
Structure preservation of image using an efficient content‑aware 
image retargeting technique
Ankit Garg1   · Ashish Negi2 · Prakhar Jindal3
Received: 12 November 2019 / Revised: 1 June 2020 / Accepted: 25 June 2020 / Published online: 9 August 2020 
© Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
The presence of a wide range of high- and low-resolution devices renders the images to experience changes in respect to 
aspect ratio and size for better adaptability. This paper proposes a novel and effective technique that vanquishes the prob-
lems encountered in the conventional seam carving method. To achieve minimum distortion in salient objects of the image, 
the proposed technique restricts intersection or overlapping of multiple seams in the horizontal and vertical direction and 
bypasses them to the neighboring low energy pixel. The proposed technique hinders the pixel selection from a single row 
or column beyond the defined threshold so as to save the image information and reduce distortion at a single location. To 
justify the effectiveness of the proposed technique, results have been presented in comparison with the five state-of-the-art 
image retargeting techniques. Compared with the conventional techniques, this technique shows remarkable results in terms 
of low distortion percentage. The proposed technique also produces excellent results for shrinkage and enlargement of a 
single image multiple times.
Keywords  Seam carving · Image retargeting · Intersecting seams · Distortion · Aliasing
1  Introduction
Image retargeting plays a vital role in the applications relat-
ing to image browsing and web browsing, since there is a 
continuous change in the layout of web pages while brows-
ing, being redirected to another web page. In recent years, 
content-aware image retargeting techniques are used to pre-
serve salient objects existing in the image and obtain results 
that are appealing and pleasing visually. The development 
and adaptability of new devices with different display and 
aspect ratio requires consistent improvement of efficient 
image retargeting algorithms.
Image resizing by enhancing a patch-based similar-
ity measure in the original, and the output image can be 
achieved by using the patch-based method [1]; however, it 
proves to be costly during computations [2]. On the other 
hand, the size of the image is not constrained in the cropping 
method [3–6]. In this, an ideal window of the required size 
is obtained which helps in size reduction of the input image. 
During this cropping, the salient region of the image may 
be discarded that are closer to each other. Image resizing 
using fixed meshes on the image is performed by the warp-
ing method as it is non-homogenous [7, 8]. As the name 
suggests, the multi-operator technique [9, 10] combines vari-
ous properties of all the existing techniques such as scaling, 
cropping, warping, seam carving, etc., and performs image 
resizing. This technique helps in obtaining better results than 
acquired by the conventional retargeting techniques.
The method of seam carving [3, 11] achieves image resiz-
ing by successively inserting an element in the most insig-
nificant region on the image. The seam carving method is 
best suited for images having sparsely placed objects within 
the image. In seam carving, the input image undergoes the 
calculation of the gradient of the image in x and y-direction. 
This gives the image derivatives in horizontal (x) and verti-
cal (y) directions. In the next step, removal of the optimal 
seam is carried out in horizontal (x) and vertical (y) direc-
tions which gives the retargeted image. The retargeted image 
has some distortions as seam carving is not very efficient. 
 *	 Ankit Garg 
	
agarg1@ggn.amity.edu
1	
Department of CSE, Uttarakhand Technical University, 
Dehradun, India
2	
GB Pant Engineering College, Pauri, India
3	
Amity School of Engineering and Technology, Amity 
University Haryana, Gurgaon, India

186
	
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193
1 3
Hence, the proposed technique tries to overcome the prob-
lems encountered in image retargeting using seam carving.
In the process of image retargeting, recognition of impor-
tant and salient regions in the image is highly desirable for 
protecting image content. This paper presents an improved 
seam carving technique that can be used to resolve the 
problems associated with the conventional seam carving 
technique. The proposed technique has also been tested for 
shrinking and enlargement of a single image to capture the 
distortions occurring during this process. Later, the percent-
age distortion analysis has also been discussed to find the 
effectiveness of the proposed technique.
2  Literature review
This section presents and discusses various literature avail-
able on the content-aware image retargeting techniques. The 
patch transformation introduced by Cho et al. [12] breaks the 
image into different patches and rearranges them according 
to the given constraints. Barnes et al. [13] suggested a ran-
domized algorithm to find the best approximated adjacent 
neighbor amongst image patches. Pritch et al. [14] suggested 
a shift map image editing technique that specifies the shift-
ing of each pixel relatively for the retargeted image. Avidan 
and Shamir [15] suggested the use of seam carving as a tech-
nique for image retargeting. Removal of the seam from the 
image can also generate image artifact if seam cuts through 
important areas. The inculcation of important regions near 
the salient objects was proposed by Goferman et al. [16]. 
Local and global uniqueness is defined based on color dif-
ferences and distances between image patches.
Rubinstein et al. [9] suggested that rather than trusting on 
a single operator it is more preferable to adopt a combina-
tion of retargeting operators to get more pleasing results. 
Liu et al. [17] proposed a combination of uniform scal-
ing and continuous seam carving operators to achieve the 
best-approximated results. Liu and Gleicher [3] suggested 
a technique that resizes the source image similar to a fish-
eye lens. Pavi´c and Kobbelt [18] presented the concept of 
two-colored pixels (TCP) splitting into two regions using 
an edge.
Cho et al. [19] used a neural network-based method for 
deep convolution in image retargeting. Zhou et al. [20] pro-
posed a novel graph ranking algorithm that preserves the 
geometry. Their algorithm produced good results in a very 
small time frame. Kang et al. [21] studied foldable displays 
and the distortion associated with them. Qi et al. [22] pre-
sented a novel image retargeting technique, particularly for 
non-rectangular objects. Their proposed algorithm preserves 
the content and transforms the domain of the image. Zhang 
et al. [23] conducted experimental quality assessment of the 
retargeted images using a multi-level feature measure. Liang 
et al. [24] also performed an experimental qualitative analy-
sis on the retargeted images and compared the results with 
the existing metrics. Zhang et al. [25] proposed the usage of 
sub-graphs within the image and proposed a probability based 
model that helps in transferring the aesthetic features from the 
original image to the output cropped image. Shen et al. [26] 
developed a new depth-aware seam carving method for image 
resizing. They used the just noticeable difference model with 
the depth information to target the optimal seams. Li et al. [27] 
proposed an improved seam carving approach by adopting an 
energy function that can measure and find the optimal seams 
that can be eliminated. Patel et al. [28] suggested an accel-
eration of conventional seam carving algorithm by inserting 
and eliminating a batch seam with multiple pixels in a single 
iteration. Chang et al. [29] suggested content- and mask-aware 
image retargeting to retarget input image into various shapes 
to identify the important region of the image.
3  Algorithm development and testing
3.1  Mathematics involved
The following section discusses the concepts involved in the 
image retargeting process using seam carving. Since this 
method cautiously removes the seam, the proposed algorithm 
tries to minimize the distortions judiciously.
Let I be a× b image having some intensity. Equation 1 rep-
resents the derivatives of the image in horizontal (x) and verti-
cal (y) directions [15]. In this equation, 휕I
휕x and 휕I
휕y are measures 
of change of intensity in x and y directions, respectively.
To find the variation of change of image intensity in x and 
y direction, image gradients are obtained using Eq. 2. These 
variations may occur due to the presence of different colors in 
the image. Image gradient is denoted by ∇I.
Gradient magnitude provides the edge strength. This is used 
to identify the edges with the help of the intensity variation 
of different colors present in the image. Equation 3 shows the 
formula used to find the gradient magnitude in both x and y 
directions.
(1)
휕I
휕x(x, y) & 휕I
휕y(x, y)
(2)
∇I(x, y) =
[
휕I
휕x(x, y);휕I
휕y(x, y)
]

187
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193	
1 3
The change in intensity variation occurs diagonally or at 
an angle, and then the direction of gradient shown in Eq. 4 is 
used to obtain the orientation of the edge. It is denoted by 휃.
The removal of pixels in such a way that they intermin-
gle with the background requires the evaluation of the energy 
function. This energy function makes the removal of pixels 
invisible. Equation 5 shows the evaluation of the energy of 
the pixel used for the seam removal for minimal distortion in 
that pixel. It is denoted by f for a particular location x and y.
The horizontal and vertical seams can be defined using 
Eqs. 6a and 6b, respectively. These equations show the selec-
tion of apt seam which will be removed for image retargeting. 
In the equations below, SH and SV are the horizontal and verti-
cal seams, (x, y) are the mappings of image (a × b) to (b × a) 
and S(Vi) and S(Hj) are the vertical and horizontal seam locations 
at i and j, respectively.
To find the optimal path for seam removal, the cost of the 
seam is an important factor. It can be computed using Eq. 7 
mentioned below. In the equation, E
(
Is
) denotes the cost of 
the seam.
After evaluating the cost of the seam, one can find the opti-
mal seam that can be removed for image retargeting without 
distortions. Equation 8 shows the optimal seam 
(So
)
 which is 
used for reducing the seam cost.
The selection of the optimal seam using Eq. 8 is achieved 
successfully only after computing the cumulative minimum 
(3)
|∇I|(x, y) =
√
( 휕I
휕x(x, y)
)2
+
(
휕I
휕y(x, y)
)2
(4)
휃= tan−1
[
휕I
휕y(x, y)
/
휕I
휕x(x, y)
]
(5)
f(x, y) = ||||
휕I
휕x
||||
+ ||||
휕I
휕y
||||
(6a)
SH =
{
Sy
Hj
}b
j=1 = {(j, y(j))}b
j=1
Such that ∀j, |y(j) −y(j −1)| ≤1
(6b)
SV =
{
Sy
Vi
}a
i=1 = {(i, x(i))}a
i=1
Such that ∀i, |x(i) −x(i −1)| ≤1
(7)
E(Is
) =
a
∑
i=1
f[I(SVi
)]
(8)
So = min
s E(Is
) = min
s
a
∑
i=1
f[I(SVi
)]
energy Emin for all the possible seams in the vicinity of i 
and j. This minimum energy can be computed using Eq. 9 
where the left pixel is represented by Emin(i −1, j −1) ; 
upper pixel is represented by Emin(i −1, j) ; and right pixel 
is denoted by Emin(i −1, j + 1) . 
3.2  Proposed algorithm
The algorithm is based on seam carving which simultane-
ously optimizes and improves the existing seam carving 
technique. The proposed algorithm counters the problems 
commonly faced during seam carving image retargeting, 
viz. intersection at single or multiple points during seam 
removal and removal of the seam in a single row/column if 
it covers several pixels beyond a defined threshold, result-
ing in image distortion in the retargeted image. To get the 
minimum energy of pixels in optimal seam path, Eqs. (11 
and 12) are used (see Fig. 1). 
From Eq. 10, the obtained index of minimum energy from 
the first row of energy map M, is 1 where (i = 0 to j = 1). In 
backtrack matrix, the values are changed (where i = 1, j = 0, 
Idx = 1). Hence backtrack [1, 0]= 1. After comparing the 
energy of neighboring pixels the obtained least energy is 3. 
After the first iteration, minimum energy value will be added 
with 10 in energy map which is indexed at M [0, 1]. If the 
value of j > n, then the conditions in Eq. 10 will be false.
Equation 12 is used to obtain the location of intersec-
tion point to bypass the seam from intersection point in a 
single row and column; initially, both the masks (Mask1 
and Mask2) are set to zero. Mask1 and Mask2 are updated 
by 1 at the same location where ­Minenergy is obtained in the 
energy map. After calculating the ­Minenergy location in the 
energy map in next iteration, the corresponding locations 
(9)
Emin(i, j) = f(i, j) + min[Emin(i −1, j −1);
Emin(i −1, j);Emin(i −1, j + 1)
]
(10)
Idx = Min(M(i −1), j)
backtrack(i, j) = Idx + j
Minenergy = M(i −1, Idx + j)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
if j = 0
(11)
Idx = Min(M(i −1), j −1)
backtrack(i, j) = Idx + j −1
Minenergy = M(i −1, Idx + j −1)
M(i, j) = M(i, j) + Minenergy
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
if j ≠0
(12)
M(i, j) = Maxenergy
{ if
Mask1(i, j) = Mask2(i, j) = 1
otherwise, search for least energy

188
	
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193
1 3
in both the masks are checked; if the locations in both the 
masks Mask1 (i, j) and Mask2 (i, j) are already set to 1, it 
shows that seams are trying to clash. In this case, maximum 
energy is seared in the corresponding row in the energy map 
and energy of intersection point replaced with maximum 
energy, M (i, j)= Maxenergy; otherwise, the process of finding 
the least energy pixel in energy map is continued.
From Eq. 13, the seam bypassing operation can be per-
formed if the number of pixels covered by a seam in a single 
row is beyond the defined threshold (T). In each iteration 
where j = 1, 2, 3….n number of covered pixels by optimal 
seam is counted. If the count of pixels ­Rpixelscount> T, the 
entry location of the seam in the corresponding row is 
updated by the maximum energy; otherwise, the seam travels 
in the row to obtain the optimal pixel locations which can be 
further added in the path of the optimal seam.
From Eq. 14, the seam bypassing operation is performed 
if the number of pixels covered by a seam in single-column 
is beyond the defined threshold (T). In each iteration where 
i = 1, 2, 3…m number of covered pixels by the optimal seam 
are counted. If the count of pixels ­Cpixelscount > T, the entry 
location of the seam in the corresponding column is updated 
by the maximum energy; otherwise, the seam travels in the 
column to obtain the optimal pixel locations which can be 
further added in the path of the optimal seam (see Fig. 2).
The four problems in the existing seam carving algo-
rithm, with their solution, have been discussed in the form 
of four cases which are presented below:
(a)	 Cases I and II
/* In case of seam intersection in row and column/*
•	 Check if the value of selected pixel locations in mask 1 
and mask 2 is different.
•	 Search for maximum energy pixels in corresponding row 
and column and change the energy of selected pixel and 
Rpixelscount =
(Mj × T)
(m × n)
(13)
M(i, j) = Maxenergy
{
if
Rpixelscount > T
otherwise,
j = j + 1
j = 1, 2, 3 … n.
Cpixelscount = (Mi × T)
(m × n)
(14)
M(i, j) = Maxenergy
{
if
Cpixelscount > T
otherwise,
i = i + 1
j = 1, 2, 3 … m.
search for the next minimum energy from the remaining 
neighbors./* Seam bypassing/*
•	 Set corresponding location in mask2 = 1
•	 Cases III and IV
/* bypassing seam in case seam travels in a single column 
and breaks the defined threshold/*
•	 In each iteration, seam bypassing operation will be 
started only if the index of the column in seam path 
increases or decreases in either an upward or downward 
direction and also satisfies defined threshold in a sin-
gle column or row. In this case, start searching for the 
highest energy from the corresponding column or row 
and increase the energy of pixel location from where the 
seam has entered in the column and row.
•	 Search for the next minimum energy from the remaining 
two neighbors and bypass the seam path.
•	 Set corresponding location in mask2 = 1
3.3  Testing and analysis
For a better understanding of the proposed technique, the 
four cases (I, II, III, and IV) mentioned in the previous sec-
tion are discussed and explained with the help of the flow-
chart of the proposed scheme (see Figs. 3, 4, 5 and 6). In the 
below-mentioned images, (a) refers to the original image, (b) 
is the interaction of seams, (c) is the searching of the pixel 
with high energy, (d) shows the insertion of new energy on 
intersection point, (e) shows the bypassing process, and (f) 
is the final retargeted image.
For testing and verification of the proposed technique, 
these four cases are analyzed using a random image. Fig-
ure 7a shows the image with 4 seams removal, encounter-
ing the problems of the existing seam carving technique. 
Figure 7b shows the solution of those problems from the 
proposed technique.
Cases I and II (For Height and Width Shrinkage)  In 
the existing algorithm, image distortion occurs if, in each 
Fig. 1   Problems encountered in the results of existing seam carving 
algorithm

189
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193	
1 3
iteration of the column and row-wise seam removal, optimal 
seams are intersecting at a single point. It is observed that 
if an image contains a high amount of line structures, the 
existing seam carving algorithm distorts lines present in the 
image. If all intersection points lie on the line structures, 
then the seam removal process distorts them and produces 
aliasing effects. Contrary to this, the proposed algorithm 
protects straight lines present in the image and also prevents 
visual smashing of objects which are highly noticeable to 
the human eye. For preventing seam intersection on a single 
point in the image, a search operation is applied on the cor-
responding column/row to get the highest energy. Replacing 
high energy on the intersection point restricts other seams 
for overlapping each other. Seam bypassing process, search 
for next least energy from the remaining two neighbors and 
consider the selected location in the optimal path of the 
seam.
Cases III and IV  In the existing algorithm, image distortion 
occurs if in each iteration optimal seams path covers a large 
number of pixels in a single column or row. Each iteration of 
seam removal produces two distinguished image segments. 
Removing a large number of pixels on a single column/row 
produces an extra edge between segments which is highly 
noticeable to the human eye. To overcome this problem, a 
threshold should be defined which restricts the pixel removal 
from a single column/row. In the proposed algorithm, the 
defined threshold minimizes image distortion. If a seam 
path covers 30% pixels in a single column/row, selection 
of next optimal pixel on seam path will stop and the pro-
cess of selecting neighboring pixels will be rolled back to 
the diversion point from where seam path starts entering in 
the column/row. The search operation will start to find out 
maximum energy on selected column/row and the energy 
of diversion point will be replaced. Seam bypassing process 
searches for the next least energy from the remaining two 
neighbors of diversion point, and the selected location will 
be considered in the optimal path of the seam.
As seen in Fig. 7a, the seam is getting intersected at sin-
gle and multiple points in both rows and columns. Also, 
the seam is covering the pixel in a row/column beyond the 
defined threshold and hence contributing to distortion. On 
the other hand, Fig. 7b shows the results from the proposed 
technique which performs well in all the cases of the inter-
section of seams and covering of pixels beyond the defined 
threshold. The reason behind this has already been presented 
in the above section.
4  Results and discussion
For the testing and verification of the proposed scheme, five 
types of images, viz. symmetry, background, face, land-
scape, and the court, have been selected. In the image retar-
geting process, it is observed that image distortion can eas-
ily be analyzed on 5 types of images. Distortion and image 
artifacts can be analyzed if in an image (a) symmetry of 
butterfly wings gets distorted, (b) structure of foreground 
and background objects gets distorted, (c) curved shaped 
objects and lines are being distorted, (d) distance among 
multiple image objects get reduced up to an undesirable 
level, (e) image contains a large number of line structures 
[30]. The obtained results will be presented and discussed 
in the subsequent sections.
4.1  Comparisons
In this section, the obtained results from the proposed 
scheme have been compared with 5 state-of-the-art image 
retargeting techniques, viz. Warping, Seam carving, SNS, 
MultiOp, and Shift-Maps [31, 32]. Due to their advantages 
of less distortion and reduced time consumption, these tech-
niques are most extensively utilized in various applications 
related to image processing. The MultiOp technique is most 
Input: Original Image img of size m x n, energy map M, Maximum 
Element max, Backtrack Matrix backtrack, Intersection point K
Output: Retargeted Image I’
while img ≠ I’ do
Optimal seam selection using (1)
for i in reversed(range(r)) do
Mask [i, j] = 1, j = backtrack [i, j]
end
Seam intersection and bypassing using (13)
if (Mask1 [i, j] = Mask2 [i, j]) then
M [i, j] = max 
end
Compute Cpixelscount covered by seam vertically using (15)
if ( Mask1 [i, j] = Mask1 [ i+1, j] or
Mask1 [i, j] = Mask1 [i-1, j]) then
Cpixelscount ← Get count of covered pixels 
Update energy map M, to bypass seam
M [i, j] = max
end
Compute Rpixelscount covered by seam horizontally using (14)
if ( Mask1 [i, j] = Mask1 [ i, j+1] or
Mask1 [i, j] = Mask1 [ i, j-1]) then
Rpixelscount ← Get count of covered pixels 
Update energy map M, to bypass seam
M [i, j] = max
end
K ← increase energy of pixel at single point intersection 
horizontally and vertically using
I’ ← reshape the size of original image
end
Fig. 2   Proposed algorithm

190
	
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193
1 3
successful retargeting techniques being used these days. Fig-
ure 8 shows the input or original images used for the testing 
and comparison of the proposed technique with the existing 
ones. The proposed technique tries to preserve the shapes 
and properties of the prominent object such as in the case of 
symmetry, the butterfly shape.
As can be seen from Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, the pro-
posed technique outperformed the existing techniques fairly. 
The proposed technique tries to preserve the shapes and 
properties of the prominent object such as in the case of 
symmetry, the butterfly shape.
In other cases, apart from the court one, the proposed 
scheme constraints distortion in and around the important 
objects and removed seams containing pixels having low 
energy. The main reason behind this is the novelty of the 
proposed scheme which prevents the intersection of seam 
both row- and column-wise. Also, the scheme prevents seam 
removal beyond the defined threshold and thus results in less 
distortion during image retargeting contrary to other existing 
techniques. Furthermore, the proposed scheme protects the 
aspect ratio of salient objects available in the image which 
was not prominent in the existing schemes. While observing 
the figures closely, SC and SM inevitably remove a large part 
of the image reducing its quality and introducing more dis-
tortions. SNS and Warp techniques perform poorly in many 
cases where the number of foregrounds and background 
objects are more and closely placed.
The MultiOp technique tries to serve well for these pecu-
liar details but fails in certain cases where lines, curves, and 
distance of nearby objects come into the picture. Although 
our method also shows this in some cases since the most 
resizing job has been done by SC. In the case of court, the 
results change abruptly. The proposed scheme’s performance 
has been compromised due to the presence of a large num-
ber of lines in the image. The presence of distortion in our 
scheme was similar to that of MultiOp, while the Warp and 
SNS techniques do fairly well. Due to the space constraint, 
only a few results have been presented in the paper.
CASE I: Single Point Intersection in Column
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3   a Original image, b intersection of the seam in a column on a 
single point p(x, y), c search operation on corresponding row to find 
out maximum energy, d enhancement in the energy of intersection 
point, e seam bypass from the intersection, f width shrinkage to get 
retargeted Image
CASE II: Single Point Intersection in Row
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 4   a Original image, b intersection of the seam in a row on a sin-
gle point p(x, y), c search operation on corresponding row to find out 
maximum energy, d enhancement in the energy of intersection point, 
e seam bypass from the intersection, f height shrinkage to get retar-
geted image
CASE III: Multiple Pixels Intersection by Seams (in 
Column)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 5   a Original image, b seam travel in a column which a number 
of pixels beyond the defined threshold, c search operation on the cor-
responding column to find out maximum energy, d enhancement in 
energy on a pixel from where seam starts coverage of pixels more 
than the defined threshold, e seam bypassing, f width shrinkage to get 
retargeted image
CASE IV: Multiple Pixels Intersection by Seams (in Row)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 6   a Original image, b seam travel in a row which covers a num-
ber of pixels beyond the defined threshold, c search operation on the 
corresponding column to find out maximum energy, d enhancement 
in energy on a pixel from where seam starts coverage of pixels more 
than the defined threshold, e seam bypass from the intersection, f 
height shrinkage to get retargeted Image
Fig. 7   a Image retargeting using seam carving; b image retargeting 
using proposed technique

191
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193	
1 3
4.2  Image resizing
Seam carving is widely used for image size reduction and 
expansion, but the distortions are quite pertinent. To over-
come this, the proposed scheme has been applied particu-
larly to carry out these objectives of image resizing. In the 
proposed algorithm, image enlargement can be carried out 
by duplicating the pixels of horizontal and vertical optimal 
seams stored in the matrix during image shrinking opera-
tion. The repetition of the duplication process results in the 
stretching of the artifact by choosing the same seam. To 
generate better results of image enlargement, it is essential 
to make a balance between the salient region of image and 
artificial inserted part.
An input image of 500 × 355 resolution has been taken for 
down-sampling and enlargement. When image shrinking is 
performed optimal seam paths will be saved in the matrix. 
The entire process of image enlargement can be observed as 
the process of navigating back in time to recuperate pixels 
from a larger image that would have been removed by seam 
removals.
4.3  Percentage distortion analysis
The percentage of image similarity between two images can 
be calculated by the structural similarity (SSIM) index. This 
index measures the quality of the image being processed 
with that of the input or the reference image. On compar-
ing the results with some existing similarity measures such 
as MSE, PSNR, etc., SSIM generates remarkable results. 
Changes in the structural information are being perceived 
as image degradation by SSIM. Pixels that are in the close 
vicinity of each other affect the structural information of an 
image significantly. The global structuring of image objects 
carries such dependencies as significant information. The 
similarity indexes are then converted to obtain the distortion 
percentage and are represented in Fig. 14.
From the figure, it is evident that retargeted results 
obtained from the proposed technique generate the low-
est possible distortion for all image types except the court 
image type. Warp method generates the best results for the 
court image which have more number of lines and geometric 
patterns. The proposed algorithm does not perform well in 
the presence of line structure or multiple geometries. The 
overall mean percentage distortion is high in the face and 
background images because of the presence of more number 
of curvatures in the images. Distortion on the faces can be 
easily perceived if structural information of the face or other 
features is deformed.
4.4  Average percentage distortion
In Fig. 15a, the comparison has been explained technique-
wise based on average distortion. Our technique shows the 
lowest values of distortion for all image types. Figure 15b 
shows the comparison of average distortion occurring in the 
images. In this, the percentage distortion values from all 
other techniques apart from our technique have been aver-
aged and compared and represented image type-wise.
From the image, it is fairly evident that our proposed tech-
nique gave better results in all the images type except the 
court one. The main reason might be the presence of more 
number of lines/geometric patterns in the image. Hence, the 
limitation of the proposed algorithm is that if any image has 
more number of lines or geometric patterns, then there might 
be more distortions in the retargeted image.
5  Conclusions
The paper proposes a novel technique for obtaining retargeted 
images with minimum distortions. Our contributions in the 
paper can be broadly presented as (1) bypassing of seam inter-
section at single or multiple points in row/column; (2) restrict-
ing pixel removal within a single row or column beyond the 
defined threshold; (3) image resizing of a single image on a 
Fig. 8   Input images for all the considered image types
Fig. 9   a Seam carving, b Shift-Map, c scale and stretched, d non-
homogeneous warping (Warp), e MultiOp, f ours. SC and SNS pro-
duce results in which symmetry of butterfly wings has been lost. 
SM, Warp, MultiOp distort butterfly tale and structure of wings. Our 
method preserves the shape of the butterfly and symmetry of wings

192
	
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193
1 3
different scale with no distortions; (4) percentage distortion 
analysis. The proposed technique has been tested and analyzed 
using the obtained results. The results have been compared 
with the existing state-of-the-art techniques used for image 
retargeting. The results from our proposed technique show 
a significant reduction in distortion. The proposed technique 
also produces excellent results for shrinkage and enlargement 
of a single image multiple times with no increment in the 
distortions. The analysis showed remarkable results for our 
technique in terms of average percentage distortions.
References
	 1.	 Simakov, D., Caspi, Y., Shechtman, E., Irani, M.: Summarizing 
visual data using bidirectional similarity. In: IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8 (2008)
Fig. 10   a Seam carving, b Shift-Map c scale and stretched d nonho-
mogeneous warping (Warp), e MultiOp, f ours. Above results show 
all 5 state-of-the-art methods produce distortion on line and curved 
shaped objects (Stick, Symbol on the button, stomach). Our method 
produces the result which is visually pleasing and less distorted
Fig. 11   a Seam carving, b Shift-Map, c scale and stretched, d nonho-
mogeneous warping (Warp) e MultiOp f ours. In the above results, it 
is observed that the structure of taxis gets distorted in SC, SM, SNS, 
Warp, and MultiOp. By restricting seams clashes, seam bypassing, 
and incorporating threshold in the proposed algorithm our method 
only distorts tree trunk and produces a visually pleasing result
Fig. 12   a Seam carving, b Shift-Map, c scale and stretched d non-
homogeneous warping (Warp), e MultiOp, f ours. By observing the 
above results, it is clear that SC, SNS distort only foreground object 
and SM, Warp method distort foreground and background objects. 
Restricting seams clashes and incorporating threshold in proposed 
algorithm our method minimizes object distortion and produces bet-
ter results in comparison with most other methods
Fig. 13   a Seam carving, b Shift-Map c scale and stretched, d non-
homogeneous warping (Warp), e MultiOp, f ours. The above results 
show the distortion of line segments present in the image. Our result 
shows restricting seams clashes, comprising seam bypassing opera-
tion, and incorporating threshold in the proposed algorithm; our 
method preserves the structure of line segments and produces fewer 
artifacts in comparison with the 5 state-of-the-art methods
Fig. 14   Comparative analysis of percentage distortion in different 
techniques
Fig. 15   Comparison of average percentage distortion in techniques 
and image types

193
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2021) 15:185–193	
1 3
	 2.	 Rubinstein, M., Gutierrez, D., Sorkine, O. and Shamir, A.: A 
comparative study of image retargeting. In: ACM Transactions 
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 29(6), p. 160 (2010)
	 3.	 Liu, F., Gleicher, M.: Automatic image retargeting with fisheye-
view warping. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM Symposium 
on User Interface Software and Technology, Seattle, USA, pp. 
153–162 (2005)
	 4.	 Suh, B., Ling, H., Bederson, B.B., et al.: ‘Automatic thumbnail 
cropping and its effectiveness’. Proc. 16th ACM Symp. on User 
Interface Software and Technology, Vancouver, Canada, pp 
95-104 (2003)
	 5.	 Santella, A., Agrawala, M., DeCarlo, D., Salesin, D. and Cohen, 
M.: Gaze-based interaction for semi-automatic photo cropping. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
computing systems, pp 771-780 (2006)
	 6.	 Ciocca, G., Cusano, C., Gasparini, F., Schettini, R.: Self-adaptive 
image cropping for small displays. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 
53(4), 1622–1627 (2007)
	 7.	 Wolf, L., Guttmann, M., Cohen-Or, D.: Non-homogeneous con-
tent—driven video—retargeting. In: IEEE 11th International 
Conference on Computer Vision, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 1–6 
(2007)
	 8.	 Zhang, Y.F., Hu, S.M., Martin, R.R.: Shrinkability maps for con-
tent-aware video resizing. In: Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 
27(7), pp. 1797–1804, Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Oxford (2008)
	 9.	 Rubinstein, M., Shamir, A., Avidan, S.: Multi-operator media 
retargeting. ACM Trans. Graph. (TOG) 28(3), 23:1–23:11 (2009)
	10.	 Dong, W., Zhou, N., Paul, J.C., et al.: Optimized image resizing 
using seam carving and scaling. ACM Trans. Graph. (TOG) 28(5), 
125:1–125:10 (2009)
	11.	 Wang, Y.S., Tai, C.L., Sorkine, O., et al.: Optimized scale—and—
stretch for image resizing. ACM Trans. Graph. (TOG) 27(5), 
118:1–118:8 (2008)
	12.	 Cho, T.S., Butman, M., Avidan, S., Freeman, W.T.: The patch 
transform and its applications to image editing. In: IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8 (2008)
	13.	 Barnes, C., Shechtman, E., Finkelstein, A., Goldman, D.B.: Patch-
Match: a randomized correspondence algorithm for structural 
image editing. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 
28(3), p. 24 (2009)
	14.	 Pritch, Y., Kav-Venaki, E., Peleg, S.: Shift-map image editing. 
In: IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision, 
Kyoto, Japan, pp. 151–158 (2009)
	15.	 Avidan, S., Shamir, A.: Seam carving for content-aware image 
resizing. ACM Trans. Graph. (TOG) 26(3), 10:1–10:10 (2007)
	16.	 Goferman, S., Zelnik-Manor, L., Tal, A.: Context-aware sali-
ency detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(10), 
1915–1926 (2011)
	17.	 Liu, Z., Yan, H., Shen, L., et al.: Adaptive image retargeting 
using saliency-based continuous seam carving. Opt. Eng. 49(1), 
1–10 (2010)
	18.	 Pavić, D., Kobbelt, L.: Two-colored pixels. Comput. Graph. 
Forum 29(2), 743–752 (2010)
	19.	 Cho, D., Park, J., Oh, T.H., Tai, Y.W., So Kweon, I.: Weakly-and 
self-supervised learning for content-aware deep image retarget-
ing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Vision, pp. 4558–4567 (2017)
	20.	 Zhou, Y., Zhang, L., Zhang, C., et al.: Perceptually aware image 
retargeting for mobile devices. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 
27(5), 2301–2313 (2017)
	21.	 Kang, L.W., Weng, M.F., Jheng, C.L., Tseng, C.Y., Ramesh, 
S.K., Gureja, A., Hsu, H.C., Yeh, C.H.: Content-aware image 
retargeting for image display on foldable mobile devices. Pro-
cedia Comput. Sci. 56, 104–110 (2015)
	22.	 Qi, S., Chi, Y.T.J., Peter, A.M., et al.: CASAIR: content and 
shape-aware image retargeting and its applications. IEEE Trans. 
Image Process. 25(5), 2222–2232 (2016)
	23.	 Zhang, Y., Lin, W., Li, Q., Cheng, W., Zhang, X.: Multiple-level 
feature-based measure for retargeted image quality. IEEE Trans. 
Image Process. 27(1), 451–463 (2017)
	24.	 Liang, Y., Liu, Y.J., Gutierrez, D.: Objective quality predic-
tion of image retargeting algorithms. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. 
Graph. 23(2), 1099–1110 (2016)
	25.	 Zhang, L., Song, M., Zhao, Q., Liu, X., Bu, J., Chen, C.: Proba-
bilistic graphlet transfer for photo cropping. IEEE Trans. Image 
Process. 22(2), 802–815 (2012)
	26.	 Shen, J., Wang, D., Li, X.: Depth-aware image seam carving. 
IEEE Trans. Cybern. 43(5), 1453–1461 (2013)
	27.	 Li, K., Yan, B., Li, J., Majumder, A.: Seam carving based aes-
thetics enhancement for photos. Signal Process. Image Com-
mun. 39, 509–516 (2015)
	28.	 Patel, D., Shanmuganathan, R.: Accelerated seam carving for 
image retargeting. IET Image Process. 13(6), 885–895 (2019)
	29.	 Chang, H.H., Shih, T.K., Chang, C.K., et al.: CMAIR: content 
and mask-aware image retargeting. Multimedia Tools Appl. 
78(15), 1–28 (2019)
	30.	 Shao, F., Fu, Z., Jiang, Q., et al.: Transformation-aware simi-
larity measurement for image retargeting quality assessment 
via bidirectional rewarping. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, pp. 1–15 (2019)
	31.	 Arar, M., Danon, D., Cohen-Or, D. et al.: Image resizing by 
reconstruction from deep features. Comput. Vis. Pattern Rec-
ogn. pp. 1–13. arXiv​:1904.08475​ (2019)
	32.	 Yan, B., Bare, B., Li, K., et al.: Learning quality assessment of 
retargeted images. Signal Process. Image Commun. 56, 12–19 
(2017)
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

