J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
DOI 10.1007/s40313-013-0069-3
Condition Assessment of Power Transformers Through
the Integration of Historical and On-line Data
in a Multi-Agent System
Diego R. Morais · Elias Bencz · Jacqueline G. Rolim
Received: 28 March 2013 / Revised: 17 July 2013 / Accepted: 5 August 2013 / Published online: 29 August 2013
© Brazilian Society for Automatics–SBA 2013
Abstract
Power transformers undergo numerous different
tests during their life cycle. Some are applied just when they
are new, some (non- invasive tests) are repeated in a regular
basis, and others only when a defect is suspected. Mainte-
nance engineers specialize in a few tests, sometimes only
one, so an expert who can interpret and combine the results
of several tests to reach a more valuable conclusion is rare. In
addition to maintenance tests, frequently power transformers
are monitored by on-line devices which generate more data
to be analyzed. This paper describes the development and
the implementation of a multi-agent system for integrated
diagnosis of power transformers. The system is composed of
multiple agents. The social ability and cooperation between
the agents lead to the ﬁnal diagnosis and to other relevant
conclusions through various monitoring technologies, diag-
nostic methods, and data sources.
Keywords
Power transformers · Monitoring · Artiﬁcial
intelligence · Condition assessment
1 Introduction
In the past, the condition of power transformers was mon-
itored by preventative maintenance programs executed on
D. R. Morais
Endesa Cien, Garruchos, RS 97690-000, Brazil
e-mail: dmorais@endesabr.com.br
E. Bencz (B) · J. G. Rolim
LABSPOT, Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica, UFSC,
Florianópolis, SC 88040-900, Brazil
e-mail: elias_bencz@grad.ufsc.br; eliasbencz@gmail.com
J. G. Rolim
e-mail: jackie@labspot.ufsc.br
a time schedule, with the transformer off-line. These mea-
sures were combined with some tests that did not require the
transformer disconnection and could be applied more fre-
quently, for instance dissolved gas analysis. The objective of
these procedures was to detect and repair faults in their early
stage. Although preventative maintenance may avoid some
failures, it also causes unnecessary shutdowns, and faults or
accidents may still occur in the intervals (Wang et al. 2002).
Human and ﬁnancial resources have been wasted as result of
this kind of maintenance which usually has little information
about the current condition of the transformers (Setayesh-
mehr et al. 2004).
Due to the deregulation process, energy companies have
been trying to reduce maintenance costs and outages for
services without decreasing the reliability and security of
their systems. This results in a tendency in utilities to sub-
stitute their traditional time-based maintenance programs for
condition-based ones. In this case, instead of maintenance at
regular intervals, services are only carried out if the condition
of the equipment requires them.
Condition-based maintenance requires more knowledge
about the transformer so that engineers can reduce the num-
ber and duration of disconnections while assuring a high level
of operational reliability. There is an increasing need for bet-
ter diagnostic and monitoring tools to assess the internal con-
dition of the transformers.
Before analyzing the status of a transformer, the mainte-
nance specialist has to gather information from historic main-
tenance tests, monitoring systems and possibly information
about the operating conditions of the equipment from super-
visory systems. This data is usually found in several data-
bases in different departments or laboratories.
Thus, tools developed for diagnosis and monitoring must
function with a large volume of dispersed data. Similarly
to a human specialist, these tools should also combine
123

94
J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
different methods of analysis in order to reach a con-
clusion. The maintenance crew will then be advised of
what action to take even if these methods lead to different
diagnoses.
A method to analyze and combine information from on-
line monitoring devices and off-line measurements has been
recently proposed in the literature and is called health index.
Ashkezari et al. (2013) compute the health index of oil-paper
insulating system through the application of intelligent algo-
rithms combined with technical standards and recommenda-
tions. The data considered are the concentration of dissolved
gases in oil, some oil quality tests (acidity, moisture content,
breakdown voltage, and dielectric dissipation factor) and fur-
fural content.
This paper presents a multi-agent system approach for
integrated diagnosis of power transformers. It considers
information from on-line monitoring devices and off-line
diagnostic methods, including, among others: frequency
response analysis (FRA), recovery voltage measurement
(RVM), dissolved gas analysis (DGA), and furfural analy-
sis. This approach aims to assist operators and maintenance
personnel providing them with the results of an intelligent
analysis of the available data.
In order to evaluate the performance of this system, a data-
base with results of real oil analysis combined with some sim-
ulated data has been employed. The main objective of the
proposed tool is to provide a more conclusive and reliable
diagnosis about the transformer state supporting decisions
concerning its maintenance schedule.
2 Assessments of Power Transformers in Service
Methods for assessment of a transformer’s condition are
important for detecting incipient faults during its normal
operation. These methods are also very useful for advising
when maintenance or equipment replacement is needed if it
has been operating under stressed conditions such as frequent
overloading or it is nearing the end of its life. Sometimes tests
are also performed to provide a ﬁngerprint of the transformer,
which can later be used as a reference when new tests are exe-
cuted.
Several authors afﬁrm that the transformer’s life is equal
to the insulation life. The ability of the power transformer to
perform its function is directly associated to the efﬁcacy of its
insulation. Failure statistics of large transformers show the
importance of insulation and its participation in fault occur-
rence (Wang et al. 2002).
Another factor determines the importance of insulation
analysis for detecting incipient faults is that some defects in
power transformer components affect the insulation system.
Usually incipient faults of power transformers are classiﬁed
into the following major categories (IEEE 2009): electrical
arcing, electrical corona, cellulose overheating, and oil over-
heating.
The development of tools for diagnosing power transform-
ers requires a study about the main transformer components
with their associated defects and the diagnostic methods usu-
ally applied. A survey about the insulating system is summa-
rized in Table 1 (similar to Morais et al. (2007)). It was based
Table 1 Transformer
components, their defects and
monitoring and diagnostic
methods
Components
Defects
Monitoring and diagnostic methods
Solid insulation
High moisture content
Recovery voltage method (RVM); depolarization
and polarization current (PDC); dissipation factor
(tan δ(f); insulation power factor (IPF); furfural
analysis (2-fal)
Aging
Degree of polymerization (DP); RVM; PDC; tan
δ(f); 2-fal; estimation of insulate aging
Partial discharge
Partial discharges (PD); dissolved gas analysis
(DGA).
Overheating
DGA; Thermography; 2-fal, frequency response
analysis (FRA)
Insulating oil
High moisture content
Chemical and physical properties of insulating oil
(C-P)
Overheating
DGA; Thermography
Arcing
DGA; C-P, FRA
Aging
C-P; DGA
Partial discharge
DGA; DP; C-P
Insulation as a whole
Dielectrical losses
tan δ(f); IPF
Contamination
Insulation resistance (IR); DP
Moisture
IR; tan δ(f)
Deterioration
PD; estimation of insulate aging
123

J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
95
on publications on this subject (Wang et al. 2002; IEEE 2006;
Emsley and Stevens 1994; Kim et al. 2005), interviews with
experts in power transformers and on a database of mainte-
nance of power transformers obtained from a large Brazilian
transmission utility.
2.1 Online Monitoring Systems
The monitoring and evaluation of a transformer state through
on-line sensors assembled in transformers has gradually
evolved. The operation of these sensors is based on the moni-
toring of different quantities such as current, voltage, temper-
ature, the amount of gases dissolved in the oil, etc. Usually
these quantities are compared to thresholds, which when sur-
passed, generate alarm signals. Although these sensors do not
have the function of protecting power transformers, they can
detect the development of incipient faults before they evolve
into a failure.
In the approach described in this paper, there is an agent
which deals with information received from on-line sensors,
considering the relations between temperature, moisture, and
gases. This agent may automatically activate the tool and is
described in Sect. 5.
3 Diagnostic Techniques
Several tests are usually executed during the life of a large
power transformer. These tests are executed off-line, but
some require the transformer disconnection and others do
not. Both sets of tests correspond to agents in the multi-agent
system implemented, which are responsible for interpreting
their results. The main diagnostic techniques considered by
the tool are summarized below.
3.1 Dissolved Gas Analysis (DGA)
There are many procedures and systems encountered in the
literature for DGA data interpretation. These tools are based
on either methods described in standards or artiﬁcial intelli-
gence techniques (Morais and Rolim 2006; Meng et al. 2010;
Aghaei et al. 2010).
By means of an approach similar to the one presented
by
Morais and Rolim (2006), the DGA agent interprets
the results of the Dissolved Gas Analysis applying three
standardized criteria Rogers’ method (IEEE 2009), Doer-
nenburg’s method
(IEEE 2009), the Brazilian standard
NBR7274 (ABNT1982),andafuzzysystem.Speciﬁcagents
are responsible for the application of the standards and the
fuzzy system.
The DGA agent works interacting with the agents below
it in the hierarchy (Displayed in Fig. 1). It provides a diag-
nosis about the transformer state using data about the gases
dissolved in the insulating oil. It accomplishes this task by
combining the responses provided by its supervised agents,
considering the certainty degree associated to each output
(detailed in Sect. 5). Each criterion cited above reaches one
of the four possible conclusions: normal condition, overheat-
ing, partial discharges, and electrical arc. The rules applied to
achieve the ﬁnal conclusion and its corresponding certainty
degree are based on heuristics acquired from experts in this
ﬁeld.
3.2 Chemical and Physical Properties
These tests evaluate some properties of the insulating oil
such as: water content, dielectric strength, color, interfacial
tension, dissipation factor, and neutralization number. These
properties change during a transformer’s lifetime, modifying
its capacity of heat transfer and stability. The changes are due
mainly to the operating condition, the temperature and the
entry of water. These tests are considered by the multi-agent
system. The limits accepted depend on the voltage class and
were based on an international standard (IEEE 2006).
3.3 Furfural Analysis
One of the effects of insulation aging is the decomposi-
tion of the cellulose, which produces CO, CO2, and other
compounds soluble in the insulating oil; mainly furanoid
compounds. Among furans, the concentration of furfural
(2-furfuraldehyde) is the highest (Saha 2003). The furans
concentration can be used to assess the aging process of the
insulation. This measurement avoids the necessity of deter-
mining the degree of polymerization of the paper, which is
another way of evaluating its aging, but has the disadvan-
tage of requiring the collection of a sample of paper from the
transformer windings.
The interpretation of furan measurement is not well estab-
lished yet. However, based on experience, some authors sug-
gest a guideline (Wang et al. 2002). This guideline has been
used as a basis to the analysis performed by the 2-fal Agent,
which is summarized in Table 2.
3.4 Recovery Voltage Measurement
Recently, special attention has been directed to methods of
determining moisture content and the analysis of its effects
on paper electrical properties. The measurement of dielec-
tric response parameters which characterize the polarization
phenomenon led to the use of three main techniques by the
utilities: polarization and depolarization current (PDC), tan
δ(f) and recovery voltage measurement (RVM). In the multi-
agent system, there are agents responsible for interpreting
the results of the RVM test, but for the other two methods the
123

96
J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
Central 
Diagnostic
Off-line
Disconnected
Off-line
Energized
tan(f)
Voltage 
Recovery 
Measurement
Polarization 
and 
Depolarization 
Current
Partial 
Discharge
Acoustic 
Method
Electric 
Method
Frequency 
Response 
Analysis
Degree of 
Polymerization
Power 
Factor
Insulation 
Resistance
Electrical 
Resistance
Dissolved 
Gas Analysis
Chemical and 
Physical 
Properties
2-fal
Rogerss
Method
Doernenburg’s
Method
Insulation 
aging
Database
Fuzzy 
System 
monitor
NBR 
7274 
Method
Fuzzy 
System
Fig. 1 Ditrans structure design
Table 2 Guidelines for degradation using 2-fal
2 - Furfuraldehyde
Condition
Condition degree
0.0–0.10
Normal
1.0
0.1–0.49
Degradation
0.7
0.5–0.99
Degradation
0.8
1.0–1.99
Degradation
0.9
2.0–9.99
Degradation
0.95
<10
Degradation
1.0
agents simply import the conclusion already available in the
database.
The RVM method aims to assess the condition of insula-
tion in power transformers, especially to evaluate its water
content. The method is based on the principle of the interfa-
cial polarization of composite dielectric materials which, in
the case of oil-paper insulation, is altered in the presence of
impurities and moisture. A DC voltage is applied to the insu-
lation during a period of time. The electrodes are then short-
circuited for a period corresponding to half of the charg-
ing time. The short circuit is then removed and the recovery
voltage curves are formed. This procedure is repeated for sev-
eral charge times. With the maximum values of the recovery
voltage and the time corresponding to these peaks, the polar-
ization spectrum is obtained (Wang et al. 2002).
The RVM agent considers typical RVM curves (Osvath
et al. 1992) for the diagnosis of power transformers. It also
takes into account the date the transformer began to operate.
3.5 Degree of Polymerization
The degree of polymerization (DP) is the average number
of glucose rings in the cellulose molecule. In order to mea-
sure the DP it is necessary to collect a sample of paper used
in the winding insulation. In the sequence, a chemical test
determines its DP.
When the paper ages or deteriorates due to heat, acids,
oxygen or water, the DP decreases. Deteriorated insulating
paper has less tensile strength, increasing the risk of failure
due to the forces originated from fault currents or vibration. A
paper with good tensile strength, normally when the insula-
tion is new, has a DP of around 1,000–1,200. A DP less than
200 indicates the end of life of paper used in transformer
123

J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
97
Table 3 Guidelines for degradation evaluation through DP
Degree of polymerization
Condition
Condition degree
800 < DP ≤1,200
Normal
1.0
700 < DP ≤800
Degradation
0.4
550 < DP ≤700
Degradation
0.5
500 < DP ≤550
Degradation
0.8
450 < DP ≤500
Degradation
0.9
300 < DP ≤450
Degradation
0.95
DP < 300
Degradation
1.0
insulation (Emsley and Stevens 1994). The agent used in this
tool for DP analysis utilizes the values of condition degree
presented in Table 3, which are based on a similar table
presented in (Wang et al. 2002).
3.6 Frequency Response Analysis
In order to evaluate the condition of a transformer using this
method, its frequency response is usually compared with one
obtained in a previous test (“ﬁngerprint”), typically when the
transformer was new. However, ﬁngerprints are rarely avail-
able, especially for transformers that have been in service for
a while. Thus, other information, such as the response curves
of an identically constructed transformer has to be used for
comparison. Comparison between phases is also a possibility
(Kim et al. 2005).
Since the transformer has to be disconnected for taking
the measurements to build the frequency response curves, it
is recommended to carry out this test after repair commis-
sioning and when the transformer is in maintenance. This
method is also included in the multi-agent system through
the importation of its diagnosis from the agent’s database.
3.7 Insulation Resistance and Polarization Index
The measurement of the insulation resistance enables the
identiﬁcation of degradation process and water inﬁltration in
the insulation. The insulation resistance is measured between
a winding and the ground or just between windings. The
procedures usually taken to obtain these values are described
in (IEEE 1991). The polarization index is the ratio between
the insulation resistance measured at the end of a 10 min test
and that at the end of a 1 min test, at a constant voltage
usually close to the line voltage.
The agent uses the rules shown in Table 4 for interpret-
ing the values described above. This Table is based on the
IEEE guide for failure investigation of power transformers
and shunt reactors (IEEE 1991).
Table 4 Guidelines for degradation using insulation resistance and
polarization index
Insulation resistance and
polarization index
Condition
Condition degree
Aux1 −Aux2 > 0.25Aux2
Moisture
1.0
Aux2 −Aux1 > 0.25Aux1
Moisture
1.0
PI < 1
Degradation
1.0
1 ≤PI < 1.1
Degradation
0.6
2.0–9.99
Degradation
0.95
1.1 ≤PI < 1.25
Degradation
0.4
1.25 ≤PI < 2
Normal
0.8
PI ≥2
Normal
1.0
Where Aux1 is insulation resistance with voltage of 2.5 kV, Aux2 is
insulation resistance with voltage of 500 V, PI polarization index (insu-
lation resistance at 10 min/insulation resistance at 1 min)
3.8 Winding Resistance
The value of winding resistance is used to evaluate the con-
ditions of the winding conductor and the tap changer contact.
These values vary according to the oil temperature, thus this
temperature should be recorded (Wang et al. 2002). Usually,
the resistance measurement is converted to a ﬁxed tempera-
ture in order to facilitate future comparisons. This tempera-
tureisnormally85 ◦C(IEEE1991).Thewindingresistanceis
used to calculate the losses in winding conductors. Historical
analysis of the winding resistance value provides an assess-
ment of the quality of internal connections in the windings
(Harlow2004).TheWindingResistanceAgentconsidersthat
a variation above 5 damaged conductor in a winding.
3.9 Partial Discharges
Partial Discharges (PD) in transformers usually have small
magnitudes but degrade the properties of the insulating mate-
rials which may lead to eventual failures (Bolhuis et al. 2002).
There are two main methods commonly used for detecting
PD activities: acoustic and electrical signals measurement.
Partial Discharges can also be detected indirectly by mea-
suring the degradation products generated by them. The PD
sources most commonly encountered are moisture in the
insulation, cavities in solid insulation, metallic particles, and
gas bubbles generated due to some fault conditions (Harlow
2004).
The developed system considers the application of electri-
cal methods. An insulation fault in the transformer winding
results in a PD current impulse injected into the winding at
the position of the fault. This electrical signal then propagates
along the winding before it reaches the two main terminals.
The electrical method for PD detection involves the use of
appropriate sensors; at the neutral end, a clip-on HF current
123

98
J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
transformer can be used; at the line end, another HF current
transformer clamped around the HV bushing tap or a capac-
itive coupler can be used. By comparing the signals picked
up at the two winding ends, it is then possible to locate the
PD source (Phung and Blackburn 2003).
During the induced-voltage test in the 1 h period, partial
discharge readings are taken every 5 min. The criteria and
the values of the thresholds used by the PD agent are based
on (Harlow 2004):
– The partial discharge activity does not exceed 100 µV
(500 pC);
– after the PD level has stabilized, any increase in its activ-
ity does not exceed 30 µV (150 pC);
– the PD levels during the 1 h period do not have an increas-
ing trend;
– there is no sustained increase in PD level during the last
20 min of the test.
3.10 Estimation of Insulation Aging
The Insulation Aging is estimated according to the IEEE
Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil-Immersed Transformers and
Step-Voltage Regulators (IEEE 2012), which is based in
Arrhenius equation for the temperature dependence in the
reaction rate. In this case the reaction is the insulation paper
deteriorationandthetemperatureinanalysisisofthehotspot.
If the hot spot temperature is unknown there is a method to
estimate it described in IEEE guide and used in this agent.
This method was encapsulated in an agent which monitors
temperature and load databases and signalizes situations of
advanced aging or accelerated aging. The active part of this
agent is intrinsically linked with DGA method calling it every
time a high aging rate or a overheat signal is detected. If there
are no valid results for DGA analysis, this agent asks the
user to insert new measures of gases in database notifying
the actual situation of aging.
4 Multi-Agent Systems
Integrated diagnosis of power transformers requires the con-
sideration of all available data and the application of a variety
of diagnostic methods. The chosen approach must be able to
handle large volumes of dynamic information that is disorga-
nized and sometimes contradictory and/or dispersed around
the network. A system designed for this purpose should also
be able to provide human operators with decision-support,
issuing important and meaningful conclusions, adequately
adapted to each situation.
MAS have been used with success in condition monitoring
systems and other power system applications (McArthur et
al. 2004; McArthur and Davidson 2004). They provide ﬂex-
ibility and extensibility, allowing additional data supplied
from monitoring systems to be incorporated in the future.
These systems offer an appropriate approach to the design
and implementation of diagnostic and condition monitoring
applications. Each agent in a multi-agent system has the fol-
lowing well-known characteristics: autonomy, social ability,
reactivity, and pro-activeness (Wooldridge 2002).
The structure and agents which have already been imple-
mented in the proposed approach are described in the next
section.
5 DITRANS Approach
A multi-agent system is proposed in order to combine the
information provided by the monitoring systems and the
diagnostic methods previously discussed. The multi-agent
system for integrated diagnosis of power transformers, enti-
tled DITRANS, uses a planar architecture and the methods
are grouped according to their nature and objectives in order
to make easier the agents organization to the end user. The
modules are distributed over the network and there is no con-
straint in relation to their physical location, they are designed
in a way that only pertinent information for the diagnosis
process is sent.
The multi-agent system was developed through the LPA
Agent Toolkit (Logic Programming Associates) as a comple-
ment of WIN-Prolog. This tool has the advantage of enabling
integration with executable ﬁles. After the integration, the
LPA Agent Toolkit has facilities that permit the inclusion of
agents for supervision, with objectives, plans and so on.
In the way Ditrans was implemented all agents have the
same priority and can communicate with any agent over the
network, a usual organization is a distribution in a tree form
wheretheagent ontopcombinetheresults of thelower agents
to compute a uniﬁed result.
The representation of this structure is summarized in
Fig. 1.
5.1 Architecture
DITRANSiscomposedof3maincomponents:Server,Agent
Manager, and User Interface. This organization provides a
central channel of communication to enable agents to com-
municate to each other independent where they are in the
network. The Server is responsible for informing all Agent
Managers about the entry and exit of any agent in the net-
work, because some agents may need to know about other
agents to perform consults and start them.
The Agent Manager loads and manipulates messages
between agents in order to only send messages across the net-
work if it is necessary. It provides a way extremely efﬁcient to
perform local calls so the system can be widely distributed in
123

J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
99
subagents responsible for very speciﬁc tasks. Each computer
needs one or more Agents Manager to communicate with
DITRANS server and load their agents in the system. This
Manager also provides routines to call system applications
and manages these calls to do not overload the operational
system. Most of agents developed with DITRANS use this
resource to perform calculations in languages with higher
performance like C/C++ or with more functionality like C#
and MATLAB.
The third component is the interface with the user; in fact
this component is also a kind of Agent Manager, the unique
difference lies in the fact that a graphical interface is com-
posed of an agent linked to an Agent Manager. To provide
more functionality this component is a particular implemen-
tation of a manager that shares some messages routines with
the original component. In the interface the user can see the
output, alarms, and notiﬁcations sent by agents and also start
a agent of his interest.
The agents implemented in prolog have some default rou-
tines of input, output, and notiﬁcations and they bring infor-
mation about their location at main menu and if they are hid
to user. The agents can be passive or active; active ones mon-
itor alarms and databases calling others agents if necessary,
it is made using a timed function to constantly check a ﬁle,
to check a data base or to call a application. Passive agents
are trigged by a incoming message from others agents, they
can searching for a result or consulting other agents.
The main characteristics of this multi-agent are displayed
in Table 5.
Table 5 Transformer components, their defects and monitoring and
diagnostic methods
Attribute
Classiﬁcation
Agents
Number
2 or more
Uniformity
Heterogeneous
Goals
Complementary
Architecture
Deliberative
Abilities (sensors, effectors)
Advanced
Interaction
Frequency
Medium
Persistence
Long-term
Level
Signal-passing
Pattern (ﬂow of data and control)
Hierarchical
Variability
Fixed
Purpose
Cooperative
Environment
Predictability
Forseeable
Accessibility and Knowability
Limited
Dynamics
Fixed
Diversity
Rich
Availability of Resources
Ample
5.2 Diagnosis Validity
The multi-agent system veriﬁes the validity of the test data
(Dv) considered by its agents through Eq. 1, which takes into
account that test results lose validity with time.
Dv = 1 −t −ttest
dval
(1)
where t is date of the diagnosis, ttest is date of the last test
immediately previous to the date of diagnosis and dval is the
maximum period (in days) in which the diagnosis is valid.
The method importance (Mi) is also a signiﬁcant para-
meter in the whole analysis and is determined by experts for
each test included in the multi-agent system. The condition
degree (Cd) is a value associated with the conclusion of each
criterion that has been applied to interpret the test results.
It expresses the fault intensity or normality condition. This
value is provided by rules speciﬁc for each methodology.
After the determination of these three indexes, the certainty
degree (CD) of each method is calculated by the application
of Eq. 2:
CD = Dv × Mi × Cd
(2)
5.3 Initiating the System by Alarm Monitoring
Devices for monitoring gases, humidity, oil, and winding
temperatures issue alarm signals when these quantities reach
previously set thresholds. These alarms do not always imply
that there is a fault, because load or operating conditions
may sometimes increase the gas content in the insulating
oil. Another important aspect is the migration of humidity
between oil and paper, which occurs according to temper-
ature changes. The determination of the thresholds values
should take into account speciﬁc aspects of each transformer,
however this is hardly considered.
The system should correct the values of gases concentra-
tion according to the temperature of the oil. This correction
requires real data of gas concentrations, measured at two
or more different temperatures and for various power trans-
formers. As this type of data is not available for a signiﬁ-
cant amount of transformers, this correction was not imple-
mented and DITRANS is initiated trigged every time the
device responsible for online monitoring of gases sends an
alarm to an agent specialized to monitor this event, this mon-
itoration is made through polling. After this signaling, all
off-line energized methods are triggered.
The curves shown in Fig. 2 (Garcia et al. 2005) repre-
sent the moisture migration between paper and oil accord-
ing to the temperature. These curves were approximated by
linear functions in DITRANS and the moisture content is
corrected to a reference temperature every time the moisture
alarm is activated, taking into account the top oil temperature
123

100
J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
Fig. 2 Water content in mineral oil and paper at different temperatures
(Garcia et al. 2005)
measured at that moment. If after this correction the values
remain high, the following methods which detect moisture,
are activated: chemical and physical properties of insulating
oil, insulation resistance, and dissipation factor (tan δ(f)).
5.4 Initiating the System by Database Monitoring
The Fuzzy System Monitor Agent (FSMA) represents
another way of activating the tool automatically. This agent
monitors all data registered in DGA databases independently
of power transformers. Daily, it checks changes found in the
data and detects possible failures. This diagnosis is based on
the Total Generated Gas Level (TGGL) and Total Gas Gen-
erating Rate (TGGR) analysis, described in (Morais et al.
2007).
The fuzzy sets were deﬁned according to those presented
in (Morais and Rolim 2006). This agent’s output classiﬁes
the equipment condition between: “Normality Condition—
CN and Indication of Fault—IF.” Another way to start DGA
agent is through the estimation of insulation aging agent as
mentioned early.
6 A Case Study
The sequence of analyses presented in this section uses his-
torical data, but is presented as if the multi-agent system was
available at the time of the events. The transformer identi-
ﬁed by number 102-07000 was manufactured in 1969 and
has 138, 69, and 13.8 kV windings, with power capacity of
31.25, 31.25, and 15.65 MVA, respectively. The operation
of the Buchholz relay of this transfomer was documented
on 24/09/2004 in the historical database. A dissolved gas
analysis and chemical and physical tests were performed
on the same date. DITRANS was consulted and indicated
the normal condition with certainty degree equal to 0.42, as
can be observed in Fig. 3 (Insulating Oil Analysis). With
Fig. 3 Tool output
on 24/09/2004
123

J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
101
Fig. 4 Level of generated gases
this value, the technical “recommendation” determined by
the multi-agent system was “The intervals between samples
must be reduced.” This equipment was kept in constant oper-
ation but the time interval between its oil sampling and dis-
solved gas analysis was reduced by the utility, as presented in
Fig. 4.
A partial analysis through the off-line energized agent was
started by a user on 06/10/2004. This agent interpreted the
dissolved gases measured, also taking into account the meth-
ods analyzed by other agents it supervises (C-P and 2-fal).
The resulting diagnosis for insulating oil analysis was “Nor-
mal Condition,” with a certainty degree equal to one. Figure
4 shows that the gases concentration was only slightly higher
than the previous data sampled.
On 13/10/2004, the fuzzy agent responsible for monitor-
ing the DGA database sent a message to the diagnosis cen-
ter, informing that a fault had been detected by its intelligent
diagnostic process, which takes into account each gas level
and their generation rate. This warning message starts the
agents responsible for the off-line energized methods, thus
consulting the agents DGA, C-P, and 2-fal. The combina-
tion of the results from all off-line energized methods for
insulating oil analysis indicated “Arcing” with a certainty
degree of 0.53. In this case, the technical “recommenda-
tion” of DITRANS tool was “Maintenance services should
be scheduled for this power transformer.” The last sample,
on 16/10/2004, was analyzed after a user request. The output
was the same as that presented on 13/10/2004. The difference
wasthecertaintydegree,whichincreasedto0.79.Inthiscase,
the technical “recommendation” was “Warning: The trans-
former must be disconnected immediately.” After this date,
the transformer was disassembled in the plant, and deforma-
tion and burn of coil 1 were identiﬁed. A short circuit was dis-
coveredinthewindingswhichhadbeencausedbyanexternal
fault.
7 Conclusion
This paper has proposed a multi-agent system (DITRANS)
for the transformer diagnosis and condition monitoring. Due
to the nature of the monitoring systems, the techniques used
for the equipment evaluation and the physical distribution of
the databases in electrical plants, many authors cite the con-
dition evaluation and integration of various diagnostic meth-
ods as a better alternative for the optimization of equipment
availability.
DITRANS proved to be highly adequate for this situa-
tion because it can handle large volumes of data dispersed
along the net. It permits the integration of results provided by
different software modules and allows the addition of other
sensors and methodologies, without causing difﬁculties for
the future.
The methods applied to interpret test results are based on
the procedures described in standard guidelines and on arti-
ﬁcial intelligence techniques. The agents that simply apply
methods to interpret test results can be easily updated. Some
knowledge on multi-agent systems and on LPA toolkit is nec-
essary to include new agents.
The results provided by the application of the system to a
real case were satisfactory and in accordance with the inspec-
tion results realized after the fault occurrence. DITRANS
prototype is ready for practical use as support tool. With
several years of experience, the availability of an extensive
database will allow some improvements in DITRANS. For
instance, agents may be modiﬁed to deal with special cases
123

102
J Control Autom Electr Syst (2014) 25:93–102
and to provide more detailed information to maintenance
crews about services which should be executed.
Acknowledgments
TheauthorsgratefullyacknowledgeMarcoMarin,
M. Sc., and the Energy Company in the State of Paraná for the provi-
sion of some experimental data. They also thank the Brazilian Research
Council (CNPq) for their ﬁnancial support.
References
ABNT (1982). Interpretation of dissolved gas analysis of transformers
in service procedures. ABNT Brazilian Standard, nbr7274 edn.
Aghaei, J., Gholami, A., Shayanfar, H. A., & Dezhamkhooy, A. (2010).
Dissolved gas analysis of transformers using fuzzy logic approach.
European Transactions on Electrical Power, 20(5), 630–638.
Ashkezari, A., Ma, H., Saha, T., & Ekanayake, C. (2013). Application
of fuzzy support vector machine for determining the health index of
the insulation system of in-service power transformers. IEEE Trans-
actions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, 20(3), 965–973.
doi:10.1109/TDEI.2013.6518966.
Bolhuis, J. P. V., Gulski, E., & Smit, J. J. (2002). Monitoring and diag-
nostic of transformer solid insulation. IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, 17(2), 528–535.
Emsley, A., & Stevens, G. (1994). Kinetics and mechanisms of the low-
temperature degradation of cellulose. Cellulose, 1, 26–56. doi:10.
1007/BF00818797.
Garcia, B., Burgos, J., Alonso, A., & Sanz, J. (2005). A moisture-in-oil
model for power transformer monitoring, part i: Theoretical foun-
dation. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 20(2), 1417–1422.
doi:10.1109/TPWRD.2004.832366.
Harlow, J. H. (2004). Electric power transformer engineering (1st ed.).
Florida: CRC Press.
IEEE. (1991). IEEE guide for failure investigation, documentation,
and analysis for power transformers and shunt reactors. IEEE Std
C57125–1991. doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.1992.101090.
IEEE. (2006). IEEE guide for acceptance and maintenance of insulating
oil in equipment. IEEE Std C57106–2006 (Revision of IEEE Std
C57106–2002), pp. 1–36. doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.2006.371041.
IEEE. (2009). IEEE guide for the interpretation of gases generated in
oil-immersed transformers. IEEE Std C57104–2008 (Revision of
IEEE Std C57104–1991), pp. C1–27. doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.2009.
4776518.
IEEE. (2012). IEEE guide for loading mineral-oil-immersed trans-
formers. IEEE Std, C5791–1995, pp. 1–112. doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.
2012.6168452.
Kim, J. W., Park, B., Jeong, S. C., Kim, S. W., & Park, P. (2005).
Fault diagnosis of a power transformer using an improved frequency-
response analysis. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 20(1),
169–178. doi:10.1109/TPWRD.2004.835428.
McArthur, S. D. J., & Davidson, E. M. (2004). Multi-agent systems
for diagnostic and condition monitoring applications. IEEE Power
Engineering Society General Meeting, Wiley, UK. 1, 50–54.
McArthur, S. D. J., Stracha, S. M., & Gordon, J. (2004). The design of a
multi-agent transformer condition monitoring system. IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems, 19(4), 1845–1852.
Meng, K., Dong, Z. Y., Wang, D. H., & Wong, K. P. (2010). A self-
adaptive rbf neural network classiﬁer for transformer fault analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 25(3), 1350–1360. doi:10.
1109/TPWRS.2010.2040491.
Morais, D., & Rolim, J. (2006). A hybrid tool for detection of incipient
faults in transformers based on the dissolved gas analysis of insu-
lating oil. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 21(2), 673–680.
doi:10.1109/TPWRD.2005.864044.
Morais, D., Rolim, J., & Vale, Z., (2007). Ditrans: A multi-agent sys-
tem for integrated diagnosis of power transformers. IEEE Lausanne
Power Tech, pp. 1917–1922. doi:10.1109/PCT.2007.4538610.
Osvath, P., Cspes, G., & Webb, M. (1992). Polarisation spectrum analy-
sis for diagnosis of insulation systems. 6th IEEE International Con-
ference on Dielectric Materials, Measurement Application (pp. 270–
273). London, UK.
Phung, B. T., & Blackburn, T. R. (2003). Proceedings of the Austalasian
Universities Power Engineering Conference AUPEC, New Zealand
(pp. 146–152).
Saha, T. K. (2003). Review of modern diagnostic techniques for assess-
ing insulation condition in aged transformers. IEEE Transactions on
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, 10(5), 903–917.
Setayeshmehr, A., A Akbari, H.B., & Gockenbach, E. (2004). A pro-
cedure for diagnosis and condition based maintenance for power
transformers. IEEE International Symposium on Electrical Insula-
tion, Indianapolis (pp. 504–507).
Wang, M., Vandermaar, A. J., & Srivastava, K. D. (2002). Review of
condition assessment of power transformers in service. IEEE Elec-
trical Insulation Magazine, 18(6), 12–26.
Wooldridge, M. (2002). An introduction to multi-agent systems (Vol.
1). New York: Wiley.
123

