Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Spin-decoupling of vertical cavity surface-
emitting lasers with complete phase mod-
ulation using on-chip integrated Jones
matrix metasurfaces
Pei-Nan Ni1, Pan Fu2, Pei-Pei Chen
3
, Chen Xu
2, Yi-Yang Xie
2
&
Patrice Genevet
1
Polarization response of artiﬁcially structured nano-antennas can be exploited
to design innovative optical components, also dubbed “vectorial meta-
surfaces”, for the modulation of phase, amplitude, and polarization with
subwavelength spatial resolution. Recent efforts in conceiving Jones matrix
formalism led to the advancement of vectorial metasurfaces to independently
manipulate any arbitrary phase function of orthogonal polarization states.
Here, we are taking advantages of this formalism to design and experimentally
validate the performance of CMOS compatible Jones matrix metasurfaces
monolithically integrated with standard VCSELs for on-chip spin-decoupling
and phase shaping. Our approach enables accessing the optical spin states of
VCSELs in an ultra-compact way with previously unattainable phase controll-
ability. By exploiting spin states as a new degree of freedom for laser wavefront
engineering, our platform is capable of operating and reading-out the spin-
momentum of lasers associated with injected spin carriers, which would
potentially play a pivotal role for the development of emerging spin-
optoelectronic devices.
The exploitation of electron spin degree of freedom as information
carrier in addition to the charge degree of freedom has grown into a
vibrant research ﬁeld, known as “spintronics”, which promises novel
multifunctional electronic devices with non-volatility, higher opera-
tion
speed
and
very
low
power
consumption,
etc1,2.
Spin-
optoelectronics that explicitly utilizes the spin of an electron-hole
pair inside direct band-gap semiconductor opens a novel platform to
transfer the quantum information stored in the spin states of electrons
to the spin angular momentum of the emitted photons via the optical
selection rule. The emergence of spin-optoelectronics establishes
close connections between the spintronics and optoelectronics with
appealing potential for the implementation of innovative optoelec-
tronic systems. In this context, comprehensive studies of spin injec-
tion, transport, and coherence of electrons has fueled the rapid growth
of spin-polarized light source, including spin light-emitting diodes
(spin-LEDs) and spin-controlled semiconductor laser (spin-lasers)3–5.
Crucially, the exchange of quantized information from matter to the
circular polarization states of photons, and the design of spin-selective
optoelectronic devices will beneﬁt from spin-dependent photonic
interfaces6,7. During the past few years, remarkable achievements have
been made in terms of manipulating and/or reading-out the electron
spin using optical interfaces, including photonic waveguides8,9,
Received: 30 June 2022
Accepted: 14 November 2022
Check for updates
1Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Centre de Recherche sur l’Hétéro-Epitaxie et ses Applications (CRHEA), Valbonne, France. 2Key Laboratory of Optoe-
lectronics Technology, Ministry of Education, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. 3Nanofabrication Laboratory, CAS Key Laboratory of
Nanophotonic Materials and Devices, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, China.
e-mail: chenpp@nanoctr.cn;
xieyiyang@bjut.edu.cn; patrice.genevet@crhea.cnrs.fr
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

plasmonic interfaces10, and nonlinear metasurfaces11. However, it is
challenging to combine the waveguide approach with the current spin-
polarized sources due to their poor mutual integrability. On the other
hand, despite that the plasmonic nanostructures have the advantage
of ease of integration, their high dissipative losses present a major
hurdle for the practical use.
Dielectric metasurfaces, which are interfaces composed of two-
dimensional (2D) array of artiﬁcially patterned lossless optical reso-
nators, provide ﬂexibility and selectivity in spin-polarized wavefront
engineering. In particular, this new type of planar optics enables highly
efﬁcient control of the amplitude, phase, and polarization states of
light with exceptional subwavelength spatial resolution, adding a new
paradigm into optical design for a large variety of ultracompact optical
components, including metalens with large numerical aperture12,
waveplates13, polarizers14, and holograms15,16, etc. Recent advances in
metasurface polarization optics, also referred as Jones matrix meta-
surfaces, demonstrate remarkable controllability over the spatial dis-
tribution of phase, amplitude and polarization states, including one-
only circular polarization modulation near a singularity17–19. Different
from the previous design of metasurface, Jones matrix metasurface
can independently tailor the phase proﬁles on any pair of orthogonal
polarizations
by
combining
the
geometric
phase,
also
called
Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase, with the propagation, resonant or
singular phase to break the phase conjugation limitation of using
geometric phase alone20,21, and thus allow for the implementation of
versatile multiplexing metasurfaces with dual functionalities22–24.
Nevertheless, to date, metasurfaces have been mainly used as stan-
dalone devices for free-space applications, for which an external light
source and deliberate irradiation alignments are needed. The notice-
able advantages of metasurfaces for integrations with photonic devi-
ces that root in
their unique characteristics, such as planar
conﬁguration, ultra-compactness, compatibility with complementary
metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) process, and lightweight, have
been highly appreciated and are triggering a new surge of integrated-
metadevices in numerous platforms, including optical ﬁbers25,26,
waveguides27,28, semiconductor light sources29,30, and CMOS chips31,
etc. Notably, the territories of on-chip optoelectronic integrations of
metasurfaces can be considerably expanded to implement wafer-level
sorting and wavefront shaping of spin-decoupled semiconductor
lasers by further exploring the design methodology of Jones matrix
metasurfaces.
With respect to edge-emitting lasers, vertical cavity surface-
emitting lasers (VCSELs) exhibit several unique characteristics, such as
small threshold current, circular beam proﬁle, high modulation speed,
and large-scale 2D array6,32, making them highly preferred for spin-
optoelectronic applications. In addition, the short cavity length of
VCSELs (typically less than 100 nm) favors the escape of spin-polarized
photons with much less reabsorption, facilitating the access to the
spin-polarized photons using optical polarization components. How-
ever, conventional polarization optics is usually bulky and heavy, and
requires a precise alignment process for integration, which forfeits the
advantage of compactness for which VCSELs are renowned. By con-
trast, polarization metasurface optics not only have the advantages of
ultra-compactness, lightweight and relatively high efﬁciency, they also
provide a powerful tool to simultaneously control both the polariza-
tion states and phase proﬁles, in line with the trend toward miniatur-
ized optical systems. Despite that the spin-decoupled polarization
metasurfaces have been widely engaged into free-space applications,
their integration with VCSELs has not been explored to date.
Here, we propose to integrate Jones matrix metasurfaces for the
purpose of optical spin-decoupling of VCSEL emissions. Beside the
capability to on-chip decouple the circularly polarized (CP) states of
the laser beam, we aim as well to arbitrarily modulate the phase
proﬁles of each spin component independently, including dual-
channel holographic images projection, directional generation of
multi-collimated beams with polarization dependence. Based on the
spin-decoupled CP beams as the basis, we further demonstrate the
feasibility to explicitly manipulate the polarization states of VCSELs.
As a proof of concept, vector beams with radial and azimuthal
polarizations were generated, respectively. Fully combining the
unique properties of metasurface polarization optics, such as the
compactness, multi-functionalities, and polarization controllability,
this work unlocks a generalized scheme for on-chip beam structuring
of semiconductor lasers with complete polarization degree of free-
dom. It also proves that vectorial metasurfaces could play a sig-
niﬁcant role to read-out and manipulate the spin-polarized photons
at an ultracompact device level, thus highlighting their important
potential for spin-optoelectronic applications.
Results
Design and integration principles
The transmission coefﬁcients of a birefringent meta-atom can be
conveniently described using Jones matrix as20:
J θ
ð Þ = RðθÞ tu
0
0
tv


RðθÞ
ð1Þ
where tu = Tueiφu, and tv = Tveiφv are the complex transmission
coefﬁcients of the meta-atom along its fast and slow axes, respectively,
R θ
ð Þ =
cosθ
sinθ
sinθ
cosθ


is a rotation matrix, θ is the rotation angle
relative to the reference coordinate, as depicted in Fig. 1a. Upon the
incident CP light Ein with different spin states ∣σ + i and ∣σi, where ∣σ + i
represents the right-circularly polarized (RCP) light and ∣σi the left-
circularly polarized (LCP) light, the transmitted light Eout can be
expressed as:
Eout = JðθÞ  Ein = JðθÞ  ∣σ ± 
= tu + tv
2
∣σ ± 
+ tu  tv
2
e∓i2θ∣σ∓
ð2Þ
where the ﬁrst term represents the co-polarized component with the
same spin state as the incident light, and the second term stands for
the cross-polarized component with the opposite spin state imposed
by an additional PB phase. Equation 2 clearly shows that the full 2π
phase coverage can be easily achieved for the cross-polarized light by
rotating the anisotropic meta-atom from 0° to 180°. Capitalizing on
the PB phase mechanism, metasurfaces with various functionalities,
such as achromatic metalens12,33, holograms34,35, and polarization
tunable devices36,37, etc have been widely demonstrated using an array
of anisotropic meta-antennas that have the same geometry but
spatially varying rotation angles. However, there are some restrictions
if the PB phase is used alone: Firstly, the same structure will impose
equal and opposite phase proﬁles on incident beams of different spin
states. Such conjugate phase function limits their applications. For
example, Wen et al. demonstrated the deﬂection of opposite CPs
components of VCSEL by equal and opposite angles through on-facet
integration of PB metasurface38. This approach is not able to
simultaneously collimate both transmitted beams since a collimating
geometric phase works as converging lens for one spin state only,
leaving the other operating as a diverging lens. Secondly, according to
Eq. 2, only the cross-polarized light picks up the PB phase. Therefore,
to achieve phase modulation with high efﬁciency, each meta-atom of
the PB phase metasurface must work as an ideal half-wave plate, with
the conditions: ∣φu  φv∣= π, and |Tu| = |Tv|, otherwise a signiﬁcant
amount of light will stay at its original spin state, i.e., the co-
polarization, of which the phase remains unmodulated.
Consequently, to independently tailor the phase of both spin
states of the VCSEL with unity conversion efﬁciency, the Jones matrix
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
2

(Jðx,yÞ) of the integrated metasurface needs satisfying:
Jðx,yÞ  ∣σi = eiφ + ðx,yÞ∣σ + i
Jðx,yÞ  ∣σ + i = eiφðx,yÞ∣σi
(
ð3Þ
where φ + ðx,yÞ, and φðx,yÞ are two independently and arbitrarily
modulated phase for the two spin states, respectively. This can be
achieved by rewriting the Jones matrix through a linear combination of
the geometric phase and propagation phase into the following form39:
J x,y
ð
Þ =
exp iφ + x,y
ð
Þ
½
 + exp iφ x,y
ð
Þ
½

2
iexp iφ x,y
ð
Þ
½
  iexp iφ + x,y
ð
Þ
½

2
iexp iφ x,y
ð
Þ
½
  iexp iφ + x,y
ð
Þ
½

2
exp iφ + x,y
ð
Þ
½
  exp iφ x,y
ð
Þ
½

2
2
4
3
5
ð4Þ
where
φ + x,y
ð
Þ = φu + 2θ,
φ x,y
ð
Þ = φu  2θ,
∣φu  φv∣= π:
8
<
:
As the relations are valid for arbitrary φu
values, we can impose independent phase proﬁles to each of the spin
states of a VCSEL, respectively.
To implement spin-decoupling of VCSEL emission with arbitrary
phase proﬁles, we integrate Jones matrix metasurfaces composed of
birefringent nano-ﬁn arrays on the bottom-emitting facet of the laser
by directly patterning the backside surface of the GaAs substrate, as
illustrated in Fig. 1a. A very small oxide aperture (~3 µm in diameter)
was employed to ensure the single-mode emission of the fabricated
VCSEL, as conﬁrmed in Fig. 1b, which helps to simplify the design of
metasurface to address the well-deﬁned fundamental transverse mode
proﬁles of the incident beam. Note that a thick GaAs substrate
(~630 µm) was intentionally used for the epitaxial growth of the laser
structure. The reason to use such a thick substrate is to signiﬁcantly
expand the laser beam after exiting from the laser cavity to a larger
diameter of ~90 µm (considering a divergence of about 4° for light
propagating in high index substrate). By doing this, we ensure sufﬁ-
cient diffraction and expansion of the laser beam to correctly manip-
ulate the wavefront through the interaction with a large number of
nanostructures forming the integrated metasurfaces. According to the
size of the divergent beam, we deﬁned larger metasurface of about
200 µm in diameter to avoid any diffraction of light caused by its
physical boundary (see Supplementary Fig. S1 for details). For the
design of metasurface, the complex transmission coefﬁcients of the
meta-atoms were calculated at the laser wavelength of 978 nm under
normal incidence, as summarized in Fig. 1c. In addition, only small
variations as a function of the incident angles (for changes up to 4°
incidence) were noticed in Supplementary Fig. S2. Metasurfaces were
designed for a precise monochromatic wavelength of the fabricated
VCSELs, but due to the non-dispersive nature of the geometric phase40
and the roughly constant phase intervals among the meta-atoms
within the wavelength range from 974 nm to 984 nm (see Supple-
mentary Figs. S3, S4), the Jones matrix requirement in Eq. 3 remains
satisﬁed over the spectral range of interest. This property is beneﬁcial
to ensure that we could cover, with the same design, various emission
frequencies of VCSELs in an array, mitigating any perturbation caused
by the wavelength drifting, for example, due to the Ohmic heating,
change of injection current as shown in Supplementary Fig. S5, and
even multi-transverse modes emissions from VCSELs with a larger
oxide aperture for high power operations. On the other hand, on-chip
spin decoupling over the entire bandwidth could be further achieved
by
properly
compensating
the
dispersive
propagation
phase
Fig. 1 | Conceptual design and integration principles. a Schematic illustration of
a spin-decoupled VCSEL via on-chip integration of a Jones matrix metasurface
composed of nanoﬁns, enabling imposing independent and arbitrary phase pro-
ﬁles to the orthogonal CPs beams. In this example, spin states were encoded to
display two different holographic images in the far ﬁeld. b Laser peak with small full
width at half maximum (<0.02 nm) and high side-mode suppression ratio (>40 dB)
were observed from the emission spectrum of the bare VCSEL under a continuous
injection current of 4 mA at room temperature, which reveal the single funda-
mental transverse mode operation. This is achieved by employing a small oxide
aperture (~3 µm in diameter). c Calculated transmission amplitude and phase of the
selected six meta-atoms at the wavelength of 978 nm. A complete 2π modulation
range of propagation phase ðφu and φvÞ is achieved, keeping the phase difference
between the two eigen-polarization channels ﬁxed at: ∣4φ∣= ∣φu  φv∣= π.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
3

responses through rigorous dispersion engineering. For example,
achromatic beam focusing/collimating requires the design of meta-
surface not only to control the local phase response, but also
to engineer both the group delay
∂φ
∂ω


and the group delay
dispersion
∂2φ
∂ω2


, respectively12,33.
Independent beam structuring of the spin-decoupled states
of VCSEL
A simple rectangular pillar can work as an anisotropic effective trun-
cated waveguide, allowing independent control of propagation phases
imposed to two orthogonally polarized eigenmodes along its fast and
slow axis by changing its width (W) and length (L), respectively, as
depicted in the inset of Fig. 1a. For a complete 2π modulation of pro-
pagation phase, six nanopillars numbered 1–6 with an equivalent phase
step of π/3 were employed to build the meta-atom library in our
design. Speciﬁcally, each unit cell was selected to impose |φu −φv| = π,
whereas it exhibits a slightly different amplitude (|Tu | ≠|Tv|) between
the two orthogonal polarizations (Fig. 1c), rendering it to operate as a
half-wave plate with a moderate conversion efﬁciency in the range of
65–75% (see Supplementary Fig. S3). In this case, the rest of the
unconverted impinging light, that is, the co-polarized beam, was not
modulated by the PB phase, as explicitly expressed in Eq. 2, and thus
was transmitted with uncontrolled phase.
In the ﬁrst example, we exploit the integrated Jones matrix
metasurface that composes of only a single layer of anisotropic
structures to decouple and modify the two spin states of VCSEL
independently. This feature is extremely relevant and could ﬁnd
applications in a spin injected VCSEL (spin-VCSEL) to establish the
connection between the spin states of electrons with that of photons
according to the injected spin electrons (see Discussion for details). To
verify the capability of encoding arbitrary and independent phase
functionality into each spin state of VCSEL, the wavefronts of both the
output RCP and LCP components were holographically structured to
display two different far-ﬁeld images (a university logo and the letters
“BJUT”), respectively, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 2a. In experi-
ment, a holographic Jones matrix metasurface was integrated with the
VCSEL, of which the desired phase proﬁles were retrieved based on
Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm to project two different targeted images
onto the white screen placed at Z = 1 cm from the device. Figure 2a
demonstrates well-deﬁned shape and sidewall proﬁles of the inte-
grated metasurface, conﬁrming the high accuracy of the developed
nanofabrication process (see Method for fabrication details). Without
the use of any polarization analyzer, two designed holographic images
can be observed simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 2b. Additionally, a
large beam spot was superimposed in the center of the images due to
the existence of a co-polarized light presenting an uncontrolled phase
proﬁle, thus behaving as a diverging beam. The co-polarization com-
ponent can be ﬁltered out with a polarizer to unveil completely the
holographic patterns, as shown in Fig. 2c. The polarization states
(SOPs) of the two holographic images were further determined by
adding additional polarizer and waveplate as CP polarization ﬁlter in
the optical path (Fig. 2d, e), respectively, conﬁrming the generation of
two orthogonally polarized CP channels for spin-decoupled holo-
graphic displays (see Supplementary Fig. S6 for measurement details).
The orthogonality of the VCSEL spin states can be utilized to
further encrypt the images with polarization selectivity. For this pur-
pose, another holographic VCSEL (referred as “Device A”) was fabri-
cated such that its CP components were designed to propagate along
the same direction to mix their beam patterns, and the co-polarization
light was later removed from the far-ﬁeld image with a polarizer. (The
top panel of Fig. 3a, b). Then, the individual holographic information
can be accessed through CP ﬁltering, respectively, as demonstrated in
the top panel of Fig. 3c, d. The existence of co-polarization light caused
by the non-unitary conversion efﬁciency of meta-atoms is utilized here
as an additional degree to encrypt the optical information. The
uncoded, but spatially overlaying, co-polarization signal can thus serve
as an interference channel to hide the holographic information carried
by the CP components. The concealed images can further be revealed
through proper polarization ﬁltering. This functionality can be better
showcased by creating metasurfaces using meta-atoms with con-
siderably reduced conversion efﬁciency to intentionally overlay a
much stronger co-polarization beam spot with the holographic images
(see Supplementary Fig. S7 for details). To this end, two new devices
(referred as “Device B” and “Device C”) were designed such that both
the RCP components of device B and device C will display the same
image of university logo. But we designed the phase of the LCP
Fig. 2 | Spin-decoupled holographic VCSEL. a SEM images of the integrated
holographic metasurface, revealing the high accuracy of the developed integration
process. The inset schematically summarizes the example of dual-channel holo-
graphic design to structure the far-ﬁeld intensity proﬁles of the spin-decoupled
VCSEL into two CP channels, in which two infrared images of the letters of “BJUT”
and the university logo were directly projected onto a white screen for observation.
b, c show the recorded far-ﬁeld beam patterns without and with a polarizer, in
which the uncontrolled co-polarization channel can be ﬁltered out using a polar-
izer. The SOPs of each spin-decoupled holographic channel can be further con-
ﬁrmed upon the use of the polarization analyzers, respectively (d, e), which agrees
well with the design.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
4

components differently for the two devices. Speciﬁcally, the LCP
channel of device B was designed to display the letters of “BJUT” while
that of the device C was kept divergent to leave this spin state unused
for holographic encryption. Moreover, the encoded holographic ima-
ges were resized in the design so that their central region in the image
plane at Z = 1 cm will be superimposed, and thus blocked by the
expanded beam spot of the strong co-polarized light, which are
demonstrated in the middle and bottom panels of Fig. 3a. As sug-
gested, the hidden holographic information encoded into the circular
polarizations can be revealed with a polarizer (see the middle and
bottom panels of Fig. 3b). Likewise, the individual spin state channel
carrying the holographic pattern can be selectively concealed upon
the use of CP ﬁlters, as shown in the middle and bottom panels of
Fig. 3c, d, which is further illustrated in Supplementary Fig. S8.
Furthermore, such a dual-channel holographic laser chip with
orthogonally polarized beams may also ﬁnd applications in stereo-
scopic holographic display by assigning two images from different
viewpoints of the same three-dimensional object38. In this way, a ste-
reoscopic image can be viewed by further combining the beams with
additional polarization components. Notably, compared with the
widely reported metasurface holography, our integrated holographic
VCSEL features a built-in light source without the requirement of
external alignment, and therefore offers the advantages of compact-
ness, low insertion loss, portability, and low cost. Moreover, the unique
2D array VCSELs provides a feasible and simple way to construct large
size holographic images with high-resolution by stitching that of dif-
ferent individual laser pixels, rendering it a suitable platform to scale
up the vectorial holographic display in contrast to the conventional
metasurface holography.
Generation of interference-free multi-polarization channels
As suggested by the Eq. 2, the divergent co-polarized light can be
effectively depressed by employing half-wave plate meta-atoms with
higher conversion efﬁciency, whereas it presents practical challenges
related to nanofabrication imperfections and design tractability (see
Supplementary Fig. S7 for details). Here we proposed a feasible and
rather simpler solution to avoid both polarization mixing and poor
image rendering in case of non-unitary PB efﬁciency. We demonstrated
that by the proper design of Jones matrix metasurface, it is possible to
generate interference-free multi-polarization channels output by spa-
tially separating the optical path of each polarization channel. As a
proof of concept, in the second example, we show that the co-
polarization of VCSELs can be modulated as well by the same Jones
matrix metasurface into collimated emission. Note that collimating the
co-polarized light restricts its angular expansion, and thus suppresses
its superposition with the deﬂected cross-polarized light in the pro-
jection plane, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4a. This is achieved by
leveraging the fact that the propagation phase (φu) only relies on the
material refractive index and the geometry of the meta-atoms, which
therefore can exert equivalent phase modulation to both the co-
polarized and cross-polarized light. Accordingly, the SEM images of
the integrated Jones matrix metasurface are shown in Fig. 4a.
For this purpose, a gradient phase proﬁle: ϕdef lector = 2π 
2π
λ y sinα, where λ represents the laser wavelength and α the deﬂection
angle, is imposed to the RCP component using PB phase to deﬂect the
RCP light along the transverse direction (we choose this to be Y-
direction). By doing this, the LCP component will automatically gain an
equal and opposite phase gradient, and thus be deﬂected at an angle of
α towards to Y-direction due to the conjugation phase functions of
PB phase. In absence of propagation phase, the co-polarized light will
remain unmodulated and should propagate straight as if there were no
metasurface. To simultaneously collimate both the CPs beams and the
co-polarized light, an additional hyperboloidal phase distribution:
ϕcollimatorðx,yÞ = 2π  2πn
λ ð
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x2 + y2 + f 2
q
 f Þ, where f is the focal
length, n is the refractive index of the substrate was introduced using
Fig. 3 | Superposition of different beam proﬁles of the spin-decoupled holo-
graphic VCSEL, of which the polarization selectivity of each channel can be
used for encryption purpose. In this example, two sets of meta-atoms with dif-
ferent dimensions were employed to construct metasurfaces with relatively high
efﬁciency (Device A) and low efﬁciency (Device B and Device C). Meanwhile, a
broad diverging beam coming from the uncontrolled co-polarization channel was
aligned with the spin-decoupled CPs beams to block the holographic images (a).
Then, the divergent co-polarization beam spot can be removed from the holo-
graphic images with a polarizer, revealing the hidden information (b). Each spin
state channel carrying the holographic information can be further selectively
concealed by proper CP ﬁltering, taking advantages of their orthogonality (c, d).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
5

propagation phase, which can compensate for the diffraction of both
the cross-polarized and co-polarized components of VCSEL emissions.
The resulting phase proﬁles for all three beams are summarized in
Supplementary Fig. S9. Figure 4b, c show the measured beam intensity
proﬁles of the VCSEL both along the propagation direction (Z-direc-
tion) and at Z = 1 cm, respectively, without the use of polarizer. As
evidenced, three collimated beams with comparable proﬁles were well
separated along different directions. To determine the SOPs of the
generated beams, far-ﬁeld emission patterns are analyzed at the dis-
tance of Z = 1 cm using additional polarizer and waveplate, respectively
(see Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. S10). As expected, the combina-
tion of PB phase and propagation phase allows us to simultaneously
collimate and separate of the cross-polarized and co-polarized chan-
nels of VCSEL. Therefore, this example provides a feasible approach to
avoid
the
interferences
between
the
otherwise
diverging
co-
polarization channel and the cross-polarization channels by design-
ing the integrated Jones matrix metasurface to spatially separate the
optical paths of different polarization beams. The effectiveness of this
simple design strategy was also conﬁrmed in the case where a much
stronger co-polarization beam exists due to the reduced conversion
efﬁciency of the meta-atoms, as demonstrated in Supplementary
Fig. S11. Furthermore, as a comparison, both the collimating phase and
the deﬂecting phase were imposed to the RCP component of VCSEL
by the integrated metasurface that deploys PB phase alone. In this
case, the LCP beam will obtain a diverging phase due to the conjugate
relationship with RCP light, while the co-polarization light will remain
unmodulated and divergent. As a result, only the RCP component of
the VCSEL is collimated by the metasurface, which manifests as a well-
conﬁned Gaussian beam according to the far-ﬁeld measurement (see
Supplementary Fig. S12).
The above design approaches of Jones matrix metasurface that
rely on the propagation phase and geometric phase are shown to
enable either (i) full decoupling of oppositely crossed CP beams,
leaving the co-polarization channel uncontrolled, or (ii) collimating
both co- and cross-polarizations, while the cross-polarizations are split
into two conjugated circularly cross-polarized beams and modulated
by the opposite PB phase proﬁles. Furthermore, by introducing
another phase addressing mechanism as an additional degree of
freedom, it becomes possible to completely decouple all the CP
channels of the Jones matrix metasurface with arbitrary modulated
phases. For instance, Yuan et al. demonstrates that all the cross- and
co-polarized outputs can be utilized and encoded independently by
supplementing the metasurface design with chirality-assisted phase in
addition to the propagation and geometric phases41. Therefore, inte-
grating Jones matrix metasurface that decouples all the CP beams with
VCSELs can serve as a generalized scheme to make the full utilization
of CP components as independent data-carrying channels.
On-chip manipulation of the polarization states of VCSELs
The fully decoupled spin states by the integrated Jones matrix meta-
surface provide a new pathway for on-chip manipulation of any
polarization states of the VCSELs, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. To under-
stand our proposition, we simply consider that any required polar-
ization state ∣φi can be expressed in the combination of the two
opposite spin states according to:
∣φi = A + expðiφ + Þ∣σ + i + A expðiφÞ∣σi
ð5Þ
where A + , φ + , andA, φ are the amplitude and phase term of the two
spin states, respectively. Accordingly, the azimuth angle ψ and
ellipticity
angle
χ
of
∣φi
can
be
derived
as
ψ = φ +  φ
2
,
and χ = 1
2 arcsin
A2
+ A2

A2
+ + A2



. In this way, the SOPs of VCSELs can be fully
controlled by tuning the phase retardation and amplitude ratio of the
two spins states. Here, vector vortex beams were taken as examples to
testify the feasibility of on-chip manipulating VCSEL SOPs. In the
paraxial approximation, the SOPs of a monochromatic vector vortex
beam can be represented by the linear combination of two spin states
vortex beams of opposite topological charges42,43:
∣Ei = cos α
2
 
exp imθ + i β
2

	
∣σ + i + sin α
2
 
exp inθ  i β
2

	
∣σi
ð6Þ
where θ denotes the azimuthal angle in the polar coordinate system, m
and n represent different topologicalcharge numbers, cosðα
2Þ and sinðα
2Þ
Fig. 4 | Generation of interference-free multi-polarization channels. a SEM
images of the integrated Jones matrix metasurface (height 750 nm) for directional
collimations. The inset is a schematic illustration of a three-channel collimated
VCSEL emitting directional RCP, LCP, and LP beams enabled by metasurface inte-
gration. In this example, the cross-polarization components (RCP and LCP light)
were modulated both by a deﬂecting PB phase proﬁle and a collimating phase
imposed by the propagation phase, while the co-polarization component was only
modulated by the propagation phase. As a result, the cross-polarization
components were respectively collimated and deﬂected at 10° (RCP) and −10°
(LCP) toward to Y-axis, and the co-polarized light was collimated without deﬂec-
tion. The intensity beam proﬁles of the VCSEL were recorded along Z direction (b),
and at Z = 1 cm (c) without polarizer, respectively, revealing the well separation of
those three collimated beams without noticeable interferences along different
directions. The SOPs of the generated beams were further determined using
polarization analyzers, respectively (d).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
6

are the amplitude of ∣σ + i and ∣σi, and β is their relatively phase delay.
By this means, a given vortex beam can be expressed by a point on the
surface of higher-order Poincaré Sphere (HOPS) with coordinates
ðα,βÞ, where a 2 0,π
½
, β 2 0,2π
½
44. For simplicity and without loss of
generality, two vector vortex beams, of which α = π
2, polarization
order l = m  n
2
= 1, β = 0 and π, are designed and demonstrated,
respectively, corresponding to two different positions on HOPS (radial
and azimuthal polarizations), as depicted in Fig. 5b. In experiment,
doughnut shape intensity proﬁles are observed from the two
differently designed VCSELs (the ﬁrst column in Fig. 5c, d). The
spatially varying polarization proﬁles of both beams are revealed by
placing a polarizer in front of the VCSEL. The images obtained by
continuously rotating the polarizer create typical petal-shaped
intensity distribution proﬁles, either parallel or orthogonal to the
direction of polarizer (see Fig. 5c, d), revealing the generations of
radially and azimuthally polarized vector beams with the polarization
order equal to 1, respectively.
Despite that, in the above example, two orthogonal spin states
with same amplitude are selected to create the vector vortex beams, it
is worth noting that the Jones matrix metasurface is also capable to
individually control the amplitude of each spin state45. Therefore, the
on-chip integrated Jones matrix metasurface provides a powerful tool
for the manipulation of VCSEL SOPs with full degree of freedoms.
Discussion
Jones matrix metasurfaces enable the control of arbitrary and inde-
pendent phase functions on any pair of orthogonal polarization states,
adding a powerful tool to the toolbox of metasurface design. Capita-
lizing on this concept, a large variety of bi-functional metasurfaces
have been previously demonstrated with a focus to multiplex the
functionalities of metasurface by controlling the SOPs of the incident
light in the free space. Moreover, such polarization dependent phase
response can be used to sort the light of different SOPs, for example,
operating as a separated polarimeter in combination of photo-
detectors array46. With respect to those free-space applications, we
would like to stress that the advantageous CMOS compatibility of
Jones matrix metasurface can outperform the conventional polariza-
tion optics for on-chip integration applications, having profound
potential to upgrade conventional semiconductor optoelectronic
devices with spin-decoupled characteristics.
In addition to controlling the wavefront of the laser, the metasur-
face integration can be also used to modify the laser mode and dynamic.
In
this
regard,
impressive
controls
over
the
orbital
angular
momentum47,48 and chirality of the light49 have been proposed and
demonstrated by directly introducing metasurface inside the laser
cavity. Nevertheless, there are several critical challenges, including the
deterioration of material optical quality caused by the nanofabrication,
the effective injection of carriers under electrical pumping, that need to
be solved to realize electrically injected metasurface lasers. In com-
parison, integrating metasurfaces on the emitting facet of the laser has
the advantages of high compatibilities with standard laser process, such
as manufacturing, packaging, electrical injection solutions, etc. There-
fore, there would be substantial interest to further exploit the meta-
surface integrated outside the laser cavity for on-chip control of lasing
characteristics, while preserving the intact laser structure. To this end,
one of the potential strategies could be coupling the reﬂection of the
metasurface into the laser cavity for mode selection by properly
designing the reﬂectivity of both the metasurface and the DBRs mirror.
Furthermore, we envision that the integration of spin-decoupled
metasurface could provide an ideal interface to manipulate and read-
out the spin-polarized photons emitted by the spin-VCSEL. This will
ﬁnd particular interest in developing high-performance spin-optoe-
lectronic devices, in which the spin momentums of both injected
carriers and emitted photons are directly connected for the generation
of spin-controlled emissions. For instance, despite the spin ampliﬁca-
tion in the spin-VCSEL allows generating CP light with high degree of
polarization (DOP) even under the injection of low polarized carriers50,
the current DOP of a spin-VCSEL is limited due to the fast spin ﬂipping
and thermal quenching rate in the semiconductor quantum wells
(QWs). Hence, integration of spin-decoupled metasurface can be used
Fig. 5 | On-chip manipulation of the polarization states of VCSELs. a Schematic
showing a metasurface integrated VCSEL that functions as a vector vortex laser.
b As a proof of concept, two vector lasers with radical and azimuthal polarizations
located on different positions of the HOPS are designed, respectively. The
measured beam intensity proﬁles at Z = 5 cm in together with polarization analysis
conﬁrm the generations of radically polarized (c) and azimuthally polarized (d)
vector beams, respectively. The black arrows indicate the orientation of the
polarizer.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
7

not only to facilitate chiral emissions with high DOP by ﬁltering out the
unwanted CP light, but also to encode both two spin components
independently. On the other hand, combing the design of spin-
decoupled metasurface with various helicity-switching mechanisms of
spin-VCSELs, such as by controlling the applied optical51, electrical52, or
magnetic ﬁelds53, will give rise to a new type of tunable laser with spin
controlled reconﬁgurable beam functionalities. In addition to shaping
the emitted spin photons, the electron spins of the VCSEL can also be
controlled using the metasuface in the sense that spatial distributions
of the optically injected spin carriers can be manipulated by inde-
pendently guiding the CP pumping beams of different chirality into
speciﬁcally assigned regions in the active medium. In this way, spatially
selective generation of spin electrons can be implemented inside dif-
ferent areas of semiconductor QWs.
In conclusion, by monolithically integrating Jones matrix
metasurfaces with commercially available VCSELs, this work
proposes and proves that the optical spin states of VCSELs can be
decoupled with complete phase modulation in an ultracompact
on-chip manner. Our approach provides a timely opportunity to
access the optical spin states of VCSELs with the capability to
independently manipulate their phase functions. To demonstrate
this concept, spin-decoupled VCSELs with various functionalities
were designed and presented, including chirality selective dual-
channel holographic displays, and directional generation of
multi-collimated beams with polarization dependence. More-
over, we show that using the spin-decoupled CP beams as the
basis any arbitrary polarization states can be explicitly generated
from VCSELs. As an example, vector beams with radial and azi-
muthal polarizations were created by judiciously superimposing
the spin-decoupled beam components with designed phase
relations, respectively. Therefore, our ﬁnding can serve as a
generalized scheme for the wavefront structuring of VCSELs with
complete controllability over the amplitude, phase, and polar-
ization states in an integrated way.
Methods
Numerical simulations
The complex transmission coefﬁcients of the meta-atoms were
obtained numerically using full-wave ﬁnite-difference time-domain
(FDTD) simulations. For the FDTD simulations, rectangular GaAs
nanopillars are arranged on a GaAs bulk substrate in a subwavelength
lattice constant of 360 nm. Plane wave polarized along X- and Y- axes
are employed as the excitation sources, respectively, in which periodic
boundary conditions are applied along all the in-plane directions and
perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary condition is used in the
direction of the light propagation. The phase shifts (φu and φv), and
amplitude (Tu and Tv) are obtained by parameter sweeping of the W
and L of the GaAs nanopillars while keeps the rotation angle (θ) at zero,
as depicted in the inset of Fig. 1a.
On-chip integration of metasurface
Prior to the integration of metasurface, a commercially available
VCSEL wafer was processed into the backside emitting conﬁguration
(see Supplementary Fig. S1 for fabrication details). After that, meta-
surfaces were integrated at the backside surface of the GaAs substrate
by directly structuring the substrate into nanopillars. To this end, a
180 nm thick Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) layer was spin-coated
onto the substrate and deﬁned into the metasurface patterns using
electron beam lithography (EBL), serving as the hard mask. To further
transfer the deﬁned metasurface patterns into the GaAs substrate,
inductively coupled plasma reaction ion etching (ICP-RIE) etching was
used with optimized conditions to minimize the surface damage. Due
to the lack of an etch-stopping layer in the current design of the laser
structure, the etching depth was adjusted by controlling the
etching time.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data used in this study are available from the corresponding
authors upon reasonable request.
Code availability
The code used for the meta-hologram design is available from the
corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
References
1.
Awschalom, D. D. & Flatté, M. E. Challenges for semiconductor
spintronics. Nat. Phys. 3, 153–159 (2007).
2.
Žutić, I., Fabian, J. & Sarma, S. D. Spintronics: Fundamentals and
applications. Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 (2004).
3.
Wang, J. et al. Spin-optoelectronic devices based on hybrid
organic-inorganic trihalide perovskites. Nat. Commun. 10,
1–6 (2019).
4.
Huang, Y. et al. Room-temperature electron spin polarization
exceeding 90% in an opto-spintronic semiconductor nanostructure
via remote spin ﬁltering. Nat. Photonics 15, 475–482 (2021).
5.
Wang, X. et al. Room-temperature defect-engineered spin ﬁlter
based on a non-magnetic semiconductor. Nat. Mater. 8,
198–202 (2009).
6.
Lindemann, M. et al. Ultrafast spin-lasers. Nature 568,
212–215 (2019).
7.
Drong, M. et al. Spin-VCSELs with local optical anisotropies: toward
terahertz polarization modulation. Phys. Rev. Appl. 15,
014041 (2021).
8.
Javadi, A. et al. Spin–photon interface and spin-controlled photon
switching in a nanobeam waveguide. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13,
398–403 (2018).
9.
Coles, R. et al. Chirality of nanophotonic waveguide with embed-
ded quantum emitter for unidirectional spin transfer. Nat. Commun.
7, 1–7 (2016).
10.
Wen, T. et al. Steering valley-polarized emission of monolayer
MoS2 sandwiched in plasmonic antennas. Sci. Adv. 6,
eaao0019 (2020).
11.
Hu, G. et al. Coherent steering of nonlinear chiral valley photons
with a synthetic Au–WS2 metasurface. Nat. Photonics 13,
467–472 (2019).
12.
Wang, S. et al. A broadband achromatic metalens in the visible. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 13, 227–232 (2018).
13.
Ding, F., Wang, Z., He, S., Shalaev, V.M. & Kildishev, A. V.Broadband
high-efﬁciency half-wave plate: a supercell-based plasmonic
metasurface approach. ACS nano 9, 4111–4119 (2015).
14.
Dorrah, A. H., Rubin, N. A., Zaidi, A., Tamagnone, M. & Capasso, F.
Metasurface optics for on-demand polarization transformations
along the optical path. Nat. Photonics 15, 287–296 (2021).
15.
Ren, H. et al. Metasurface orbital angular momentum holography.
Nat. Commun. 10, 1–8 (2019).
16.
Rubin, N. A., Zaidi, A., Dorrah, A. H., Shi, Z. & Capasso, F. Jones
matrix holography with metasurfaces. Sci. Adv. 7, eabg7488 (2021).
17.
Arbabi, A., Horie, Y., Bagheri, M. & Faraon, A. Dielectric meta-
surfaces for complete control of phase and polarization with sub-
wavelength spatial resolution and high transmission. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 10, 937–943 (2015).
18.
Song, Q. et al. Broadband decoupling of intensity and polarization
with vectorial Fourier metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–9
(2021).
19.
Song, Q., Odeh, M., Zúñiga-Pérez, J., Kanté, B. & Genevet, P. Plas-
monic topological metasurface by encircling an exceptional point.
Science 373, 1133–1137 (2021).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
8

20. Mueller, J. B., Rubin, N. A., Devlin, R. C., Groever, B. & Capasso, F.
Metasurface polarization optics: independent phase control of
arbitrary orthogonal states of polarization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
113901 (2017).
21.
Xu, H.-X. et al. Completely spin-decoupled dual-phase hybrid
metasurfaces for arbitrary wavefront control. Acs Photonics 6,
211–220 (2018).
22. Chen, C. et al. Metasurfaces with planar chiral meta-atoms for spin
light manipulation. Nano Lett. 21, 1815–1821 (2021).
23. Guo, Y. et al. Spin-decoupled metasurface for simultaneous
detection of spin and orbital angular momenta via momentum
transformation. Light. Sci. Appl. 10, 1–12 (2021).
24. Ding, F., Tang, S. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Recent Advances in Polariza-
tion‐Encoded Optical Metasurfaces. Adv. Photonics Res. 2,
2000173 (2021).
25. Yang, J. et al. Photonic crystal ﬁber metalens. Nanophotonics 8,
443–449 (2019).
26. Ren, H. et al. An achromatic metaﬁber for focusing and imaging
across the entire telecommunication range. Nat Commun 13,
4183 (2022).
27.
Li, Z. et al. Controlling propagation and coupling of waveguide
modes using phase-gradient metasurfaces. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12,
675–683 (2017).
28. Meng, Y. et al. Optical meta-waveguides for integrated photonics
and beyond. Light. Sci. Appl. 10, 1–44 (2021).
29. Xie, Y.-Y. et al. Metasurface-integrated vertical cavity surface-
emitting lasers for programmable directional lasing emissions. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 15, 125–130 (2020).
30. Khaidarov, E. et al. Control of LED emission with functional dielec-
tric metasurfaces. Laser Photonics Rev. 14, 1900235 (2020).
31.
Venkatesh, S., Lu, X., Saeidi, H. & Sengupta, K. A high-speed pro-
grammable and scalable terahertz holographic metasurface based
on tiled CMOS chips. Nat. Electron. 3, 785–793 (2020).
32. Huang, M. C., Zhou, Y. & Chang-Hasnain, C. J. A surface-emitting
laser incorporating a high-index-contrast subwavelength grating.
Nat. Photonics 1, 119–122 (2007).
33. Chen, W. T. et al. A broadband achromatic metalens for focusing
and imaging in the visible. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 220–226 (2018).
34. Song, Q. et al. Ptychography retrieval of fully polarized holograms
from geometric-phase metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–8 (2020).
35. Zheng, G. et al. Metasurface holograms reaching 80% efﬁciency.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 308–312 (2015).
36. Kim, I. et al. Pixelated bifunctional metasurface-driven dynamic
vectorial holographic color prints for photonic security platform.
Nat. Commun. 12, 1–9 (2021).
37. Yu, P. et al. Generation of switchable singular beams with dynamic
metasurfaces. ACS Nano 13, 7100–7106 (2019).
38. Wen, D., Meng, J., Cadusch, J. J. & Crozier, K. B. VCSELs with On‐
Facet Metasurfaces for Polarization State Generation and Detection.
Adv. Opt. Mater. 9, 2001780 (2021).
39. Liu, M. et al. Broadband generation of perfect Poincaré beams via
dielectric spin-multiplexed metasurface. Nat. Commun. 12,
1–9 (2021).
40. Song, Q. et al. Bandwidth-unlimited polarization-maintaining
metasurfaces. Sci. Adv. 7, eabe1112 (2021).
41.
Yuan, Y. et al. Independent phase modulation for quadruplex
polarization channels enabled by chirality-assisted geometric-
phase metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–9 (2020).
42. Liu, G. et al. Geometric control of vector vortex light beams via a
linear coupling system. Opt. Express 29, 30694–30705 (2021).
43. Milione, G., Sztul, H., Nolan, D. & Alfano, R. Higher-order Poincaré
sphere, Stokes parameters, and the angular momentum of light.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 053601 (2011).
44. Rosales-Guzmán, C., Ndagano, B. & Forbes, A. A review of complex
vector light ﬁelds and their applications. J. Opt. 20, 123001 (2018).
45. Guo, X. et al. Metasurface-assisted multidimensional manipulation
of a light wave based on spin-decoupled complex amplitude
modulation. Opt. Lett. 47, 353–357 (2022).
46. Arbabi, E., Kamali, S. M., Arbabi, A. & Faraon, A. Full-Stokes imaging
polarimetry using dielectric metasurfaces. Acs Photonics 5,
3132–3140 (2018).
47. Sroor, H. et al. High-purity orbital angular momentum states from a
visible metasurface laser. Nat. Photonics 14, 498–503
(2020).
48. Seghilani, M. S. et al. Vortex Laser based on III-V semiconductor
metasurface: direct generation of coherent Laguerre-Gauss modes
carrying controlled orbital angular momentum. Sci. Rep. 6,
1–12 (2016).
49. Zhang, X., Liu, Y., Han, J., Kivshar, Y. & Song, Q. Chiral emission from
resonant metasurfaces. Science 377, 1215–1218 (2022).
50. Gerhardt, N. et al. Enhancement of spin information with vertical
cavity surface emitting lasers. Electron. Lett. 42, 1 (2006).
51.
Frougier, J. et al. Control of light polarization using optically spin-
injected vertical external cavity surface emitting lasers. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 103, 252402 (2013).
52. Sinova, J. & Žutić, I. New moves of the spintronics tango. Nat. Mater.
11, 368–371 (2012).
53. Nishizawa, N., Nishibayashi, K. & Munekata, H. Pure circular polar-
ization electroluminescence at room temperature with spin-
polarized light-emitting diodes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 114,
1783–1788 (2017).
Acknowledgements
P.F., C.X. and Y.X. acknowledge support from the National Key R&D
Program of China (2018YFA0209000), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (62074011, 61874145, 62134008), Beijing Nova
Program (Z201100006820096). P.N., and P.G. acknowledge support
from European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement
FLATLIGHT No 639109). The authors thank the Nanofabrication Labora-
tory at National Center for Nanoscience and Technology for sample
fabrication.
Author contributions
P.N., Y.X., and P.G. conceived the idea and coordinated the experiment.
P.C., C.X., Y.X. and P.G. supervised the project. P.N. performed the
design and numerical simulations. P.F. carried out the fabrication and
measurement. P.N., Y.X., and P.G. wrote the paper draft. All authors
participated in improving the ﬁnal version of the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Pei-
Pei Chen, Yi-Yang Xie or Patrice Genevet.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Junsuk Rho
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
9

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34977-0
Nature Communications|        (2022) 13:7795 
10

