ARTICLE
Osseosurface electronics—thin, wireless, battery-
free and multimodal musculoskeletal biointerfaces
Le Cai1,5, Alex Burton1,5, David A. Gonzales2, Kevin Albert Kasper1, Amirhossein Azami
1, Roberto Peralta3,
Megan Johnson1, Jakob A. Bakall1, Efren Barron Villalobos2, Ethan C. Ross1, John A. Szivek1,2,
David S. Margolis
1,2,6✉& Philipp Gutruf
1,4,6✉
Bioelectronic interfaces have been extensively investigated in recent years and advances in
technology derived from these tools, such as soft and ultrathin sensors, now offer the
opportunity to interface with parts of the body that were largely unexplored due to the lack of
suitable tools. The musculoskeletal system is an understudied area where these new tech-
nologies can result in advanced capabilities. Bones as a sensor and stimulation location offer
tremendous advantages for chronic biointerfaces because devices can be permanently
bonded and provide stable optical, electromagnetic, and mechanical impedance over the
course of years. Here we introduce a new class of wireless battery-free devices, named
osseosurface electronics, which feature soft mechanics, ultra-thin form factor and minia-
turized multimodal biointerfaces comprised of sensors and optoelectronics directly adhered
to the surface of the bone. Potential of this fully implanted device class is demonstrated via
real-time recording of bone strain, millikelvin resolution thermography and delivery of optical
stimulation in freely-moving small animal models. Battery-free device architecture, direct
growth to the bone via surface engineered calcium phosphate ceramic particles, demon-
stration of operation in deep tissue in large animal models and readout with a smartphone
highlight suitable characteristics for exploratory research and utility as a diagnostic and
therapeutic platform.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
OPEN
1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. 2 Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Arizona Arthritis Center,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. 3 Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
4 Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, BIO5 Institute, Neuroscience GIDP, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. 5These authors
contributed equally: Le Cai, Alex Burton. 6These authors jointly supervised this work: David S. Margolis, Philipp Gutruf. ✉email: dsm@arizona.edu;
pgutruf@email.arizona.edu
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

C
ontinuous recording of bio-signals with high ﬁdelity has
been widely recognized to play a key role in modern
exploratory research, diagnostics and therapeutics1. Spe-
ciﬁcally, with the emergence of computational tools such as
neural networks, artiﬁcial intelligence, and machine learning that
can help to analyze large datasets2,3, continuous high-quality data
streams will enable the development of diagnostics and ther-
apeutics that will result in signiﬁcantly improved patient
outcomes4,5. However, current biosensing platforms with clini-
cally relevant data streams rarely extend recording beyond short
time periods. This is due to inadequate powering solutions, such
as bulky electrochemical power supplies6 and biointerfaces that
degrade rapidly requiring intervention by users or health care
providers, thus limiting the utility for exploratory, screening,
diagnostic, and therapeutic applications7,8.
Recent integration of high-performance silicon-based devices9
and emerging soft electronics10 yields numerous subdermally
implantable neuromodulation systems that interface intimately
with the central and peripheral nervous system11,12. This tech-
nological platform enables wireless supply of power and com-
munication for highly miniaturized implants, allowing for the
creation of interfaces to organs that are currently understudied
due to the lack of suitable tools. One such area is the muscu-
loskeletal system where wireless, battery-free interfaces are critical
to evolve drug discovery, diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities13.
Just one example of clinical need are fragility fractures associated
with osteopenia and osteoporosis that account for more hospital
bed-days than myocardial infarction, breast cancer, or prostate
cancer14. These fractures cause high mortality and long-term
disability with healthcare cost over $25 billion per year by 202515.
Thus, technologies that directly and continuously monitor bone
quality16, and enable exploratory research towards advanced
therapeutics in a form factor that enables broad dissemination and
a convenient study platform will considerably improve patient
quality of life and reduce healthcare costs.
Here we introduce a device platform that uses intimate inte-
gration with the osseosurface, the surface of the bone, to enable
chronic monitoring of the musculoskeletal system in small and
large animal models and lays the foundation for clinical diag-
nostic tools that can be operated using broadly available near-
ﬁeld communication (NFC) standard in deep tissue. The wireless,
battery-free, and fully implantable devices, named osseosurface
electronics, can be attached to the surface of bones during
orthopedic surgeries and form a chronic interface with bone
tissues to directly record a multitude of physiological and bio-
physical signals critical for the assessment of musculoskeletal
health and deliver stimulation in real time (Fig. 1a), providing a
powerful point-of-care platform to facilitate rehabilitation and to
manage musculoskeletal diseases.
Results
Device design. The creation of osseosurface electronics requires
several technical innovations that differ from epidermal electro-
nics, such as device footprint and mechanical properties suitable
for direct lamination onto the bone surface to minimize
mechanical mismatch with the surrounding tissues, and electro-
magnetic design allowing for direct readout through thick tissues
with portable devices to enable smart therapeutics. Special
attention to mechanical design of interconnects is required to
enable chronic stability of the interconnect and minimize
mechanical impact on the targets sensing region to avoid intro-
duction of additional strain. Figure 1b shows a device that meets
these design criteria (2.5 cm × 1.5 cm, ~170 mg) and enables
direct, conformal lamination to the curved osseosurface with
minimal impact on the surrounding tissues. The device features
mechanically isolated biointerfaces that are capable of measuring
deformation of the bone with microstrain accuracy, high-ﬁdelity
thermography with millikelvin resolution, and photonic stimu-
lation capabilities. The system features a hybrid integration of
mechanically compliant ﬂexible substrate with high-performance
analog and digital functionalities provided by miniaturized off-
the-shelf components (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2) arranged in
a conﬁguration that enables conformality and reliable operation
when applied to the curvilinear surface of the bone, as depicted by
the layered-device makeup shown in Fig. 1c. The inset of Fig. 1c
highlights the multifunctional biointerface comprised of a metal-
foil strain gauge, a negative temperature coefﬁcient (NTC) ther-
mistor, and a microscale inorganic light emitting diode (µ-ILED),
enabling simultaneous recording of local biophysical signals and
on-demand delivery of exogenous stimulation. The device geo-
metry is highly adaptable to accommodate implementation sce-
nario and anatomic structure. Figure 1d shows a device variant
applied to a sheep humerus, a testbed to gain insight on cap-
abilities for use as a diagnostic tool after recovery from surgery.
We also introduce devices designs for exploratory research in
small animal models.
Figure 1e describes the electrical working principle of the system
that enables wireless, battery-free operation in a form factor suitable
for full implantation that can adopt various NFC chipsets
(Supplementary Fig. 3). Near-ﬁeld magnetic resonant coupling
(13.56 MHz,
speciﬁc
absorption
rate
(SAR) < 20 mW kg−1)12
between an external primary loop antenna (primary antenna) and
the on-board loop antenna (secondary antenna) enables, for the ﬁrst
time, reliable radio-frequency (RF) power harvesting through thick
tissues up to 11.5 cm with hardware that is compatible with NFC
protocols widely available in portable devices17. Optimized harvest-
ing electronics matched to digital and analog circuits provide power
to an NFC system-on-chip (SoC) that enables operational control
through a microcontroller (µC) and NFC transponder in a compact
package (4 mm × 4 mm), and analog front-ends (AFE) comprised of
passive ﬁlters and instrumentation ampliﬁers that read out
thermographic and strain sensors. Design of the sensing circuits is
facilitated by circuit simulation (details in the “Methods” section),
yielding a strain sensing AFE that consumes 3.24 mW with a
sensitivity of 0.194 mV µε−1, and a thermography AFE that
consumes <0.06 mW with a sensitivity of 98.9 mV °C−1 (Supple-
mentary Figs. 4 and
5). Digital engineering and manufacturing
enable rapid development and deployment of osseosurface electro-
nics in form factors suitable for a variety of operational conditions.
Figure 1f shows an example of a system variant that enables
operation in a freely moving small animal model without tethers or
other externalized elements, which allows advanced exploratory
studies. The ultrathin mechanics and low displacement volume
(<0.2 cm3) of the device enable rapid recovery of the subject from
surgical placement and high-ﬁdelity behavioral studies while
collecting bioinformation in real time, which is not possible with
existing wire-bound technologies.
System characteristics. Consistent operation of osseosurface
electronics relies on robust wireless power transfer through tis-
sues for large animal models and for therapeutic applications. In
the case of small animal models for exploratory research, free
motion in a variety of test arenas is required. Both scenarios
required robust power transfer and efﬁcient wireless power
transfer via magnetic resonant coupling that can be boosted by
adopting a secondary antenna with high-quality factor, in our
case antennas with high inductance and low impedance18. Fig-
ure 2a displays a large-animal-model device with optimization
though iterative imperial electromagnetic designs (Supplementary
Fig. 6) of the secondary antenna using ~185 pF to match the
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

reactance of the antenna inductance of ~745 nH (3 turns, 600 µm
wide, 60 µm spacing) at 13.56 MHz allowing for low trace
impedance (~30 mΩ)19, for operational voltages of 2.5 V. As
shown by the power-harvesting characteristics (Fig. 2b and
Supplementary Fig. 7) measured at the center of a handheld
primary antenna (diameter ~20 cm), the maximum values of
harvested power (~14 mW) and rectiﬁed voltage (~2.1 V) support
operation at an electrical load of ~300 Ω. Circular symmetry of
the handheld primary antenna (2–8 W of RF power) results in
minimal spatial variation in harvested power (Fig. 2c and Sup-
plementary Fig. 8) in close proximity to the antenna and at
physiologically relevant distance (5 cm) that corresponds to the
depth of implantation on a sheep or human humerus.
To provide power to freely moving small animals, critical for
exploratory research in large test arenas (treadmill cage, 45 cm ×
12 cm; home cage, 26 cm × 33 cm), devices designed for rat
models
(Fig.
2d)
require
an
enlarged
secondary
antenna
(3.5 cm × 2.5 cm) and device layout that features serpentine
interconnects (~11 cm at full extension) to route the biointerface
from the back of the subjects, which houses the electronics and
antenna section of the device to the limb that is the sensing target
in our experiments. Optimization though iterative imperial
electromagnetic designs (Supplementary Figs. 6 and
7) of the
secondary antenna using ~485 pF to match the reactance of the
antenna inductance of ~284 nH (2 turns, 600 µm wide, 60 µm
spacing) at 13.56 MHz allowing for low trace impedance
(~3.3 mΩ)19, enables harvesting performance of a rectiﬁed
voltage of ~2.2 V at a load of 300 Ω (16.13 mW) at the center
of the 45 cm × 12 cm cage, providing a margin of 0.4 V to enable
constant system voltage of 1.8 V throughout all experimental
conditions (Fig. 2e). The spatial distribution (Fig. 2f) of the
harvested power in the 45 cm × 12 cm cage exhibits sufﬁcient
power for stable device operation with primary antenna winding
heights at 3 and 6 cm chosen to match device-body implantation
location in the freely moving subject (Supplementary Fig. 9).
Similar results are obtained for the 26 cm × 33 cm primary
antenna, revealing a rectiﬁed voltage of ~2.1 V at a load of
300 Ω (14.7 mW) at the cage center and sufﬁcient power at
physiologically relevant heights (Supplementary Fig. 10a, b). A
comparison between the power-harvesting capability and the
power consumption of the biointerface provides a practical guide
for feasible in vivo operation modes. Figure 2g shows system
power consumption, speciﬁcally ~3.24 mW in sensing mode, and
~10.26 mW as optical stimulation is activated, which represents
Electronic
components
Bone
Copper (top)
Polyimide (PI)
Bio-interface
Encapsulation
Glue
Gauge back
PI
Solder
Thermistor
LED
Gauge
grid
Cu
2 weeks post-surgery
Device Body
Bio-Interface
Copper (bottom)
Stimulation
5 mm
5 mm
a
b
c
d
e
f
Strain
Temperature
Fig. 1 Osseosurface electronics: concept, device architecture, and implementation strategies. a Illustration of osseosurface electronic systems that are
permanently bonded to the bone and operate wirelessly to continuously monitor biophysical signals such as bone strain, local temperature, and to deliver
optical stimulation to the bone and surrounding tissues. b Photograph of an osseosurface device designed for studies in large animal models. c Layered
makeup of the osseosurface system and its constituent layers. Inset features a close-up view of the multifunctional biointerface comprised of a metal-foil
strain gauge, an NTC thermistor, and a µ-ILED. d Photograph of an osseosurface device conformally attached on the surface of a sheep humerus. e
Functional block diagram of osseosurface electronics comprised of an external NFC reader that provides power and facilitates wireless communication, and
an implanted system that contains active power management, operational control, analog front-end (AFE), and biointerface. f Photograph of a rat (2 weeks
after surgery) implanted with an osseosurface device where the main electronics reside on the back while the biointerface is routed and attached on the
left femur.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

~60% and ~50% of the harvested power at the corresponding
electrical loads, i.e., 900 and 300 Ω, respectively (Fig. 2e).
Considering the dependence of power-harvesting capabilities on
tilt
angle
and
bending
curvature
radius
(Supplementary
Fig. 10c–e), stable and sufﬁcient power can be guaranteed as
long as the tilt angle is below 50° and curvature radius is
above ~1 cm.
Wireless communication is crucial for implantable devices and
often limits device operation in thick tissues20. Benchtop
experiments reﬂecting this scenario reveal that the device
designed for deep tissue implantation immersed in PBS solution
supports a nearly constant data rate of ~46 points per minute
with a reading distance up to 7.5 cm from the handheld primary
antenna (Fig. 2h) enabling operation as a diagnostic device in
large animal models and human subjects. Similar tests designed
for use in rodent models reveal uniform data rate in test arenas
for rats such as the treadmill cage and home cage (Supplementary
Fig. 11). Long-term data recording (Fig. 2i) tests performed in the
biologically relevant settings with moving osseosurface electronic
devices (details in the “Methods” section) results in stable
communication
over
extended
periods
of
time
(42 h,
no
limitation in operation time) where the recorded temperature
proﬁle matches that of environment temperature measured by a
spatially separate thermometer. Further studies of chronic device
encapsulation (18 µm Parylene-C) and device operation are
conducted via an accelerated rate test in 90, 60, and 40 °C PBS
bath to enable device lifetime estimation (205 days at 37 °C) via
Arrhenius scaling21 (Supplementary Fig. 12).
Biointerface characterization. Characterization of the multimodal
biointerface is performed with benchtop experiments that reﬂect the
in vivo environment. Wireless strain sensors exhibit sensing per-
formance on par with the gold standard wired strain measurement
systems in typical physiologically relevant range (0–1200 µε)22, as
conﬁrmed by ramping and cyclic loading tests performed on a
sheep bone specimen (Fig. 3a–c, details in the “Methods” section),
with an estimated sensitivity of ~3.5 ADC µε−1 and a resolution of
~14.3 µε with a sampling rate up to 87 Hz. Cyclic loading tests up to
10 Hz show recording capabilities that surpass gold standard
acquisition systems for recording bone strain (Supplementary
Fig. 13a–c). Simultaneous recording of temperature and strain with
optogenetic stimulation is shown in Supplementary Fig. 13d.
Repeatable, hysteresis-free response is obtained upon progressively
Fig. 2 System characteristics of osseosurface electronic systems. a–c Device for large animal models. Device photograph (a). Harvested power and
voltage as functions of electrical load (b). Spatial distribution of harvested power using a handheld primary antenna at a load of 300 Ω (c). d–f Device for
small animal models. Device photograph (d). Harvested power and voltage as functions of electrical load (e). Spatial distribution of harvested power using
a 45 cm × 12 cm primary antenna measured with a load of ~900 Ω (f). g Power consumption of the device operating at different modes: I. temperature
sensing; II. temperature and strain sensing; and III. temperature and strain sensing, and optical stimulation. Modes II and III are represented by green and
red dashed lines in (b) and (e) that indicate the value of electrical load and power consumption. h Data rate of wireless communication for a large animal
device (immersed in PBS solution) read and powered by a handheld primary antenna as a function of antenna-to-device distance. Inset, 3D rendering of the
experimental setup. i Demonstration of long-term data recording, for a small animal device (immersed in PBS solution), measured with the 45 cm × 12 cm
primary antenna on a custom-built metal-free rat treadmill with back-and-forth motion at a speed of 25 cm s−1. The wireless results are benchmarked
against environmental temperature recorded by a thermometer (red data line) placed in close proximity. Inset, 3D rendering of the experimental setup.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

increasing loads (Fig. 3b), indicating that a stable bond is formed
between the strain gauge and the bone specimen. Reliability of the
wireless strain sensor is further demonstrated by cyclic loading with
sinusoidal (Fig. 3c), square, and triangle (Supplementary Fig. 14)
wave forms.
Current implantable biointerfaces for the musculoskeletal
system are typically limited to wired strain sensing23–27, however
our device architecture offers the multimodal integration of
stimulation capabilities currently only available in tethered
embodiments28–32. To demonstrate the feasibility of optogenetic
stimulation capability in the periphery33 on an osseosurface
electronic platform, we use miniaturized individually addressable
µ-ILEDs to deliver stimulation to the bone and the surrounding
tissue. The bone–tissue interface provides a unique platform
capable of versatile optical coupling modes tailored for various
application scenarios, such as phototherapeutic stimulation for
bone regeneration28 and optogenetic activation of muscular
contraction32. Figure 3d demonstrates this design ﬂexibility with
devices that are capable of illuminating the soft tissue side (left),
bone side (middle), and multimodal stimulation (right). Typical
operation for optical stimulation covers a parameter space of
5–20 Hz
for
applications
such
as
sustained
tetanic
contraction31,32, which is achieved on our platform by utilizing
a µC for precisely controlled timing as demonstrated in Fig. 3e.
The µ-ILEDs used to create an ultraminiaturized form factor
(240 µm × 240 µm × 100 µm) and high energy efﬁciency (>20%,
Fig. 3f), ensure minimal thermal impact to the tissues34.
Continuous monitoring of the local temperature can simulta-
neously be achieved on our platform with a miniaturized (0201,
0.6 mm × 0.3 mm) NTC thermistor that is integrated monolithi-
cally on the biointerface. The wireless temperature sensor exhibits
linear response in physiologically relevant temperature ranges
(33–41 °C) with a sensitivity of ~1920 ADC K−1 and a resolution
of 10 mK (Fig. 3g, h, details in the “Methods” section), and can be
used to monitor physiological events or to directly assess thermal
impact of the µ-ILED, enabling closed-loop control for photo-
therapeutic and stimulation applications requiring deep tissue
penetration. Figure 3i presents the thermal impact of the µ-ILED
operating at increasing intensities (30–170 mW mm−2) and duty
cycles (5–80%) in a physiologically relevant environment mapping
the parameter space for optogenetic stimulation and phototherapy.
Experimental measurements are in agreement with ﬁnite element
analysis (FEA) simulation (Supplementary Fig. 15)34 enabling
computational design of the interface. Irradiation that can be
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
i
Optical Power (mW)
a
b
c
f
e
d
h
g
ADC (arb. units)
Fig. 3 Benchtop characterization of the biointerface. a–c Strain sensing module: comparison of strain–load curves measured using standard wired system
and wireless OSE device (a); strain proﬁle measured with the wireless device under progressively increasing load (b); and strain proﬁles measured with
wired system and wireless device under cyclic load (c). Benchtop test setup where the strain gauges are attached on a piece of sheep bone and the load is
applied with a MTS system. d–f LED module: photographs of devices inserted at the bone–tissue interface, with µ-ILED on the bottom (left), on the top
(middle), and on both sides (right) (d); current proﬁle of the µ-ILED operating at frequencies of 5, 10, and 20 Hz with pulse width of 20 ms (e); current and
optical power as functions of driving voltage of the µ-ILED used (f). Scale bar in (d), 5 mm. g–i Thermal sensing module: wirelessly logged ADC values as a
function of temperature (g); wirelessly measured change in temperature using the NTC thermistor with the micro-heater driven at various levels of power,
demonstrating a sensing resolution of <10 mK (h); thermal impact of an µ-ILED operating at various optical powers and duty cycles in PBS solution
measured wirelessly with a co-located NTC thermistor (i). Insets of (h) and (i), schematics showing the layout of thermistor-micro-heater (h) and
thermistor-LED front-end (i).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

delivered by our platform (e.g., 30 mW mm−2) is well beyond the
intensity used for optogenetic activation of skeletal muscles31,32
and evokes only a 0.29 °C temperature increase at a duty cycle of
80%. This suggests operation over a wide range of conditions
without thermal activation of neuronal function.
Mechanical characterization. Subdermal implantation in small
animal models involves placement in highly mobile areas that
require a compact formfactor with mechanical design strategies
that can withstand repeated strain cycles without interfering with
biosensor readouts. This is evident when studying the micro-CT
scan (Fig. 4a) of a rat with an implanted osseosurface electronic
device, where the device body is anchored subdermally around
the lumbar vertebra and connection to the biointerface, which is
located on the left femur, is accomplished via self-similar ser-
pentine interconnects35. The durability of the serpentine inter-
connect is critically important for reliable in vivo operation. FEA
simulation-guided design enables reliable performance under
repeated strains of over 250% while maintaining a maximum
strain of ~0.7% in the copper traces which is below 1%, the failure
strain of copper (Fig. 4b)35. Chronic electro-mechanical stability
is conﬁrmed by cyclic straining to 250% for 10,000 cycles, with
negligible change in conductivity (Fig. 4c). Critical to the stability
of sensor readings during behavior is the mechanical isolation of
the stretchable interconnect and the strain sensor, this includes
introduction of strain to the bone during deformation of the
serpentine interconnect. The biointerface is mechanically isolated
by the serpentine interconnects designed to transfer minimal
strain during deformation to the bone and the strain sensor
biointerface, as conﬁrmed by FEA in Fig. 4d (Supplementary
Fig. 16) showing that stretching the serpentine by 250% does not
inﬂuence the sensitivity or accuracy of the strain gauge (Fig. 4e, f
and Supplementary Fig. 17, details in the “Methods” section).
Further evaluation of serpentine electro-mechanics are performed
with benchtop experiments using a servo-hydraulic materials
testing system (MTS) indicating stable operations of recording
capabilities under multiple cycles of high strains (Supplementary
Fig. 18) above physiological strains as means to evaluate
robustness of the approach. Both benchtop electro-mechanical
testings of the monolithic serpentine structure with FEA simu-
lations of the serpentine show solid performance in strain isola-
tion enabling ﬂexible sensor placement to distal regions with
minimal effect of sensor readouts.
In vivo studies in rodents. The subdermally implantable form
factor and wireless, battery-free operation enable an in vivo
multimodal bi-directional interface with the musculoskeletal
system without compromising the free motion of subjects in
various test arenas (Fig. 5). The implantation of osseosurface
electronics in rats involves a skin incision on the back of the
subject, device placement into the subcutaneous space, sub-
cutaneously tunneling the biointerface to the limb, attaching the
biointerface to the femur with cyanoacrylate, and closing the skin
with resorbable sutures (details provided in the “Methods” sec-
tion and Supplementary Fig. 19), following the University of
Arizona Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved
protocol (19–572 IACUC). Devices are tracked and monitored
after surgery to gain insight into failure mechanisms. Majority of
device failures examined after explanation indicate defects in the
Parylene-C encapsulation induced by surgical tools (Supple-
mentary Table 1). Mitigation of these issues in later experiments
utilized sutures to manipulate and position the biosensor,
resulting in lower failure rates. The optoelectronic interface
attached on the bone surface allows for direct optical stimulation
of skeletal muscles in freely moving subjects, as shown in Fig. 5a
where illumination of the muscle is visually validated, high-
lighting a systematic advantage over traditional transdermal light
sources30 or optical ﬁber-based techniques29, which are challen-
ging to implement in highly mobile areas. Light delivery can be
programmed to control frequency and duty cycle of stimulation
5 mm
50
4500
9500
με  
1.5
3
4.5
6
Strain (%)
i
ii
ΔL = 5 cm  
1 cm
b
c
a
e
f
1 cm
d
ADC (arb. units)
ADC (arb. units)
Fig. 4 Mechanical design and characterization of osseosurface electronic devices designed for rodents. a Micro-CT scan of a rat implanted with an
osseosurface electronic device. The device is highlighted in yellow. b Photograph of the self-similar serpentine interconnects stretched to 250% (upper)
and FEA strain proﬁle of the serpentine interconnects stretched to 250% (lower). c Resistance of the interconnects at 0% and 250% strain during cyclic
stretching to 250% for 10,000 cycles. d FEA of the biointerface when the bone is compressed by 1000 με while the serpentine interconnects are in two
states: i. relaxed (0% strain); and ii. stretched (250% strain). e Wirelessly recorded ADC values when the strain gauge is cyclically loaded and unloaded
while the serpentine interconnect is strained to 250%, the inset shows the test setup with 250% strain applied. f Wirelessly recorded ADC values when
the strain gauge is cyclically loaded and unloaded after the serpentine interconnect has been strained for 0, 5000, and 10,000 cycles.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

each with 16-bit precision. Chronic functionality is demonstrated
with in frame analysis of tracked red pixel intensity over time
(Supplementary Fig. 20) from video recordings 22 days post
implantation (Supplementary Video 1). In vivo device operation
of temperature-sensing capabilities is tested over extended time
periods demonstrated by a 10 min moving window of thermo-
graphic recording that show recovery of the animal post-surgery
for over 11 h in the home cage (blue) with a standard deviation
within the 10 min moving window (pink) (Fig. 5b). Following the
surgical implantation of the device, a dip in local body tem-
perature during the ﬁrst half-hour of recovery after implantation
is observed, which is an expected hypothermic response to iso-
ﬂurane anesthesia36 and transfer from a warmed surgical table to
a cooler recovery area. Following recovery from anesthesia, the
limb temperature remained within the published range of normal
body temperature for male Sprague Dawley rats36. Strain proﬁle
recorded wirelessly in a custom treadmill arena with the
45 cm × 12 cm primary antenna reveals characteristic loading and
unloading phases with absolute strain values comparable to lit-
erature values for the rat femur obtained by tethered sensors22.
Time-synced wireless recording of strain are compared with video
recording of the animal during walking periods after a week of
recovery (Supplementary Video 2). Analysis enables intimate
insight into bone strain of the femur during gate. The recordings
of strain show four distinct points during a gate cycle: (1) mid-
stance, (2) lift-off, (3) mid-swing, and (4) touch-down37,38. These
points and their corresponding frames are shown in Fig. 5c.
Behavioral assays, gait analysis in particular, are useful tools to
investigate pathogenesis and develop new therapeutics for mus-
culoskeletal disorders such as osteoarthritis39. Therefore, a basic
requirement is that investigative devices do not alter gait per-
formance of the subjects, which is not easily achieved with teth-
ered
approaches.
Due
to
the
low-proﬁle
and
mechanical
compliance, osseosurface electronic implants do not affect the
subject’s gait, as revealed by deep neural network analysis of rats
with implants (Fig. 5d, e, details in the “Methods” section). The
heat maps displayed in Fig. 5d indicate that the trajectories of the
paw of naive and experimental subjects with implants remain
qualitatively the same and the spatial distribution of paw velocity
is unchanged at various stages of the study. Spatiotemporal gait
characteristics, including stride frequency, stride length, and duty
factor40, presented in Fig. 5e, provide quantitative evidence that
normal gait is sustained after implanting the osseosurface elec-
tronic device. The welfare of the test animals is also reﬂected by
the steady weight-gain from 2 days post-surgery until the study is
terminated (Supplementary Fig. 21). In addition, histological
Left Femur
Osseosurface
biointerface
Velocity (cm/s)
0
50
100
150
Before Surgery
1 week post surgery
2 weeks post surgery
3
2
1
0.5
2.5
1.5
0
2000
4000
0
TIme (s)
c
3
2
1
4
2
3
4
1
Δ Strain (με)  
a
d
b
e
Fig. 5 In vivo studies of OSE in rats. a Photograph of the rear part of a rat featuring the µ-ILED attached on the femur illuminating through muscle and skin.
b Temperature proﬁle recorded in vivo during the period of ~11.5 h following the implantation surgery. Inset, schematic of the rat residing in the home cage.
c Time-synchronized strain recording and corresponding video frames of the rat gait cycle. d, e Comparison of the rat’s gaits at different stages of the
study: before surgery, 1 week after surgery, and 2 weeks after surgery: photograph of rats walking on the treadmill overlaid with the trajectory of the ankle.
Color of the dots represents the velocity of the ankle (d). Key parameters: stride frequency (before: mean = 2.4293, SD = 0.4057, n = 7; 1 week:
mean = 2.1843, SD = 0.1692, n = 7; 2 week: mean = 2.3336, SD = 0.197, n = 7); stride length (before: mean = 9.3812, SD = 1.749, n = 7; 1 week:
mean = 9.1175, SD = 2.2686, n = 7; 2 week: mean = 8.8466, SD = 1.0577, n = 7); and duty factor (before: mean = 0.6558, SD = 0.2689, n = 7; 1 week:
mean = 0.6189, SD = 0.118, n = 7; 2 week: mean = 0.6182, SD = 0.0585, n = 7) that characterizes the rat gait before and after implantation (e).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

analysis shows that the subcutaneous implantation of the device
body in the lumbar vertebra region, is surrounded with ﬁbrous
tissue containing blood vessels without any evidence of inﬂam-
mation or signiﬁcant foreign body response after 2 weeks of
in vivo operation (Supplementary Fig. 22).
Permanently attached osseosurface electronics. The ultrathin
electronic platform enables direct lamination onto the bone,
which provides the opportunity to attach devices permanently to
gather information on bone health long term. Because of cell
turnover, any glue will exhibit limited lifetime and continuously
degrading biointerface quality. A solution to this problem is to
directly grow osseosurface devices to the bone using calcium
phosphate ceramic (CPC) particles41. For the use in animal
subjects, fast adhesion is critical to enable accelerated experi-
mental timelines, which can be accomplished by the addition of
transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1), an osteogenic pro-
tein that enables rapid bone bonding to the CPC particles42. We
use this scheme to bond CPC particles to the osseosurface elec-
tronics using implant-grade epoxy, and subsequently applying
TGF-β1 to the CPC particles. The resulting layered-device com-
position is shown in Fig. 6a. The exposed particles enable effective
bone bonding after implantation and temporary ﬁxation with
resorbable sutures (Fig. 6b). The efﬁcacy of this approach can be
observed in vivo by recording the average delta strain values of
gait on a treadmill. Figure 6c shows the evolution of the delta
strain over the course of several weeks, here we can observe weak
bonding of the stain gauge to the bone for the day of the surgery
with rapid increase in delta strain values in the following days and
a stable attachment after a week (Supplementary Fig. 23). The
successful growth of the device to the bone can also be observed
after explanation (day 27) and cross-section preparation, and
subsequent secondary electron imaging (Fig. 6d and Supple-
mentary Fig. 24; details in the “Methods” section). The micro-
graph shows successful growth of the bone to the particles that
permanently afﬁx the ﬂexible electronics enabling chronic
recording of bone health. The chronic application of these devices
enables a multitude of new studies, for example, strain-mediated
bone remodeling with experimental paradigms that involve
extensive mobility of subjects and longitudinal studies with
multiple cohabitating subjects, which is facilitated by complete
recovery after implantation of the wireless and battery-free device
as shown in Fig. 6e.
In situ studies in large animal models. The scalability of our
platform enables the use in large animal models with minimal
modiﬁcations. Immediately after euthanization, following the
University of Arizona Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee approved protocol (16–202 IACUC), in situ operation of
devices designed for large animals are demonstrated on sheep
humeri where small footprint and soft mechanics of the device
enable conformal application to the bone surface (Fig. 7a and
Supplementary Fig. 25a, b). The thermography function allows
for continuous monitoring of local temperature as an important
indicator of subject health throughout the surgical procedure. As
shown in Fig. 7b, distinct features can be identiﬁed and correlated
to events such as closing and reopening of the incision. Devices
implanted deep (>5 cm) in the body are warmed signiﬁcantly
faster to a saturation level close to the core body temperature
(Supplementary Fig. 25c, d) than those implanted shallower
(~2 cm). The wireless strain recording capability through thick
tissues is validated while the humerus is loaded in three-point
bending (Fig. 7c), successfully capturing the bending events with
well-discernable loading and unloading phases despite con-
siderably lower strain than those noted during gait measured
from active sheep43.
Discussion
Wide dissemination of osseosurface electronics requires an
implementation strategy that can be easily integrated into existing
orthopedic
surgical
procedures.
We
demonstrate
a
device
attachment strategy that is assisted by a 3D-printed applicator
and can be accomplished within 10 min, minimally altering
existing surgical protocols44,45 (Fig. 7d, details in the “Methods”
section). The applicator can be customized to match localized
anatomic structure
and
device dimensions
(Supplementary
Day 0
Day 13
Day 21
Day40
2
1
0
0
1
7
17
Δ Avg. Peak Strain (με)
Days Post Implantation
x103
Strain Gauge
Parylene
Epoxy
CPC &
Bone
TGF-β1
a
b
c
d
e
1 mm
Strain Gauge
LED
NTC
Strain Gauge
CPC
Bone Marrow
Bone
500 μm
2 mm
Fig. 6 Promotion of osteogenesis using surface-engineered calcium phosphate ceramic coatings. a Photograph of the bottom coated with CPC and a
side view diagram of layer composition of the strain gauge sensor with CPC. b Image of the device 3 weeks post implantation. c Wireless strain gauge data
collected over 2 weeks post implantation showing stable CPC adhesion. d Single electron microscope image of cross-section of CPC adhesion to bone. e
Animal healing after implantation.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Fig. 16), minimizing the impacts on the surrounding tissues, and
providing a path towards implementation as a diagnostic tool
following routine surgical procedures.
Easy readout with industry standard RF protocols and rapid
attachment with chronic interfaces enable osseosurface electronics
to provide signiﬁcant opportunities for the direct measurement of
crucial indicators of bone health in real time. Consequently, this
allows a point-of-care solution to monitoring post-fracture reha-
bilitation and managing musculoskeletal conditions. Here, we
demonstrate the successful device operation using an NFC-
enabled smartphone through tissues, as shown in Fig. 7e, where
the sensor signals from a device covered by a piece of porcine skin
(~1 cm thick) simulated human tissue on the tibia are directly
visualized in real time as the smartphone is used to provide power
to and wirelessly communicate with the device (Supplementary
Video 3). These results demonstrate the feasibility of operating
osseosurface electronics with a smartphone in an at-home setting.
Locations covered with several muscle layers such as the femur in
larger animals, can be accessed with a dedicated reader solution
with near-ﬁeld-enabled clothing for efﬁcient power transfer and
continuous communication during everyday behaviors46. Fig-
ure 7f plots the relative data rate and harvested power as functions
of tissue thickness between the reader and the device, showing no
degradation in either data rate or available power level at the
devices at tissue thickness up to 11.5 cm.
This highlights successful wireless power transmission and data
communication with a battery-free and soft implantable device
through thick tissues47,48, which enables implantation on almost
any location on the human skeletal system.
The miniaturized form factors, soft mechanics, versatile sen-
sing/stimulation options, as well as robust wireless power-
harvesting and communication capabilities make osseosurface
electronics a powerful platform to establish direct and chronic bi-
directional interface with the musculoskeletal system. This offers
unprecedented
opportunities
for
mechanistic
studies
of
osteogenesis and pathogenesis of musculoskeletal diseases, as well
as the development of new types of diagnostics and therapeutics.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the successful attachment of the
osseosurface electronic biointerface to the bone utilizing surface-
engineered CPC particles, an important aspect of this technology
that enables recording on the order of many years enabling device
operation for the lifetime of the subjects without requiring sec-
ondary surgery. This chronic platform can then enable acquisi-
tion of holistic data of bone health status and closed-loop
therapeutic intervention to facilitate treatment and rehabilitation.
Methods
Device fabrication. Flexible circuitries were fabricated by UV (355 nm) laser
ablation (ProtoLaser U4, LKPF, Germany) using a sheet of copper-clad polyimide
foil (Dupont, Pyralux AP8535R, copper /Polyimide/copper, 17.5 µm/75 µm/
17.5 µm) as substrate. Subsequent sonication in solder ﬂux and isopropanol
removed the surface oxides formed during laser ablation. Surface-mount compo-
nents, including passive components such as resistors (0201, 0.6 mm × 0.3 mm),
capacitors, Schottky diodes (Skyworks Inc.), Zener diodes (Comchip Technology
Corp., 5.6 V), µ-ILED (red, ES‐AEHRAX10, EPISTAR), and NTC thermistor
(NTCG064EF104FTBX, TDK), as well as active components such as MOSFET
(PMZ130UNE, Nexperia), low-dropout linear regulators (LDO, TCR2DG18,
Toshiba), instrumentation ampliﬁer (INA, AD8235, Analog Devices), and NFC
SoC (RF430FRL152H, Texas Instruments), were manually placed on the ﬂexible
circuit and reﬂowed with low-temperature solder (Indium Corp.). A metal-foil
strain gauge (N2A-06-S5182N-10C/E4, Micro-Measurements) was then integrated
by using a chisel-tipped soldering iron. Finally, the device was baked at 120 °C in
an oven for 30 min to remove residual ﬂux and solvents used during the assembling
process. Devices were treated with silane (A174, Sigma Aldrich) and encapsulated
with two layers of 9 µm Parylene-C using a Parylene coating system (Parylene P6,
Diener electronic GmbH). Devices were then coated with PDMS (Sylgard 184, Dow
Corning) by dip coating.
Circuit simulation. LTspice XVII was utilized to simulate the electrical char-
acteristics of the strain sensing and temperature-sensing AFE. The circuit diagram
and choice of components are shown in Fig. 5. The output voltage of the
Wheatstone bridge and instrumentation ampliﬁer were selected as the output
parameters. To simulate the basic characteristics of the strain sensor circuit
(Supplementary Fig. 5a, b), resistance of the strain gauge was varied sinusoidally
from 999 to 1001 Ω with a frequency of 20 Hz. To simulate the strain sensing
Fig. 7 In situ studies in sheep and diagnostic application. a Photograph of a wirelessly powered osseosurface electronic device attached on a sheep
humerus. b Temperature proﬁle during implantation surgery on sheep humerus recorded wirelessly through tissue. c Strain proﬁle of 3-point bending test
of sheep humerus recorded wirelessly through tissue. d Tools and strategy to attach osseosurface devices on the bone: i. bone surface is cleaned by
sanding; ii. device with applied glue is brought into contact with the bone surface with applicator; iii. device is pressed ﬁrmly with ﬁnger; and iv. applicator is
removed. e Photos of demonstration of real-time signal recording through porcine skin (~1 cm thick) using an NFC-enabled smartphone: i. device attached
on the sheep humerus; and ii. device covered by porcine skin and real-time signal readout with NFC-enabled smartphone. f Relative data rate and power
availability as functions of tissue thickness. Inset shows photograph of experimental setup.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

performance with various values of the bridge resistors (Rb) (Supplementary
Fig. 5c, d), Rb was varied linearly from 1 to 10 kΩ, at four values of the gauge
resistance (998, 999, 1001, and 1002 Ω). To simulate the basic characteristics of the
temperature-sensing circuit, the thermistor resistance was varied from 72.32 to
46.49 kΩ corresponding to the temperature range of 32–42 °C.
Device characterization
Wireless power-harvesting capability. RF power in the range of 2–8 W was provided
by a long-range RFID reader module (Feig Electronic GmbH, ID ISC.LRM2500-A).
The primary antenna was connected to a tuning/matching circuit board and tuned
at 13.56 MHz with a voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR) below 1.5. A 1-turn
circular primary antenna with diameter of 20 cm was used to power the devices for
large animals, while the devices for rodents were powered by two types of primary
antenna: a 45 cm × 12 cm, 2-turn (at heights of 3 and 6 cm) coil that encloses the
rat treadmill cage, and a 26 cm × 33 cm, 2-turn (at heights of 3 and 9 cm) coil that
encloses the rat home cage.
The completed wireless power-harvesting module was tuned to 13.56 MHz
using a spectrum analyzer with reﬂection bridge (SSA 3032X, Siglent). Capacitors
were added to tune the antenna to reach peak attenuation at 13.56 MHz. The
capacitors are used to calculate inductance of the antenna by matching the
reactance of the capacitor and inductor at 13.56 MHz. Power and voltage
characterization of the antenna was tested by placing the device in the center of the
test arena in parallel with the arena ﬂoor. The rectiﬁed voltage was then recorded
with a digital multimeter while the electrical load was varied from ~50 Ω to ~5 kΩ.
The spatial distribution of harvested power was measured at a ﬁxed load (300 or
900 Ω), while the device was placed at various locations and different heights (3
and 6 cm) in the test arena. The angular dependence of the power-harvesting
capability was measured by varying the angle of the device with respect to the arena
ﬂoor from 0° to 70° using a rotational jig. The dependence of harvested power on
curvature radius was measured by conforming the device to curved surfaces of 3D-
printed objects with varying radii of curvature (1.6–3.2 cm).
Wireless data communication. Wireless data reading was accomplished by ISOStart
(V10.09.00, Feig Electronic GmbH). In order to mimic the in vivo environment, the
device was placed at the bottom of a 250 ml beaker ﬁlled with 1x PBS (Sigma
Aldrich) solution. For the large animal device, data rate was measured while the
handheld primary antenna was held at various heights from the device. For the
rodent device, data rate was measured at representative locations in the test arenas
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Long-term data recording was performed using the rodent
device and the 45 cm × 12 cm primary antenna over a ~42 h period while the device
was immersed in PBS solution and constantly moving back-and-forth (25 cm s−1)
on a custom-built rat treadmill. A custom-built thermometer (LMT70, Texas
Instruments) was used to monitor the environment temperature. Device lifetime
estimation was calculated using an activation energy of 57,800 J mol−1 based on
device failure at 90 °C and latest measured operation of device at 60 °C. Using the
Arrhenius scaling equation, we estimated a device lifetime of 205 days at 37 °C49.
Characterization of the wireless strain sensor. Benchtop tests of the wireless strain
sensor were performed using an explanted sheep’s femur. The periosteum of the
mid-diaphysis was removed from the femur, and the metal-foil strain gauge (N2A-
06-S5182N-10C/E4, Micro-Measurements) of the wireless osseosurface system was
attached to the femur using a cyanoacrylate-based adhesive (M-Bond 200, Micro-
Measurements). A wired strain gauge was subsequently bonded on top of the
wireless gauge following the same procedure using a stereomicroscope to ensure
overlap and alignment of the sensing elements. The sheep femur was loaded in
four-point bending conﬁguration using a servo-hydraulic MTS (Series 810, MTS
Systems Corporation) while recording load and strain from the wired sensors using
standard data-acquisition system (System 8000 and StrainSmart, Micro-Measure-
ments). Measurements from the wireless gauge were recorded with a handheld
antenna using the Feig reader and ISOStart. Various load proﬁles were tested,
including a linear ramp load, and cyclic loading with a sinusoidal wave pattern, a
square wave pattern, and a triangle wave. The femur was loaded to a peak load of
190 kg at rates ranging from 5–60 kg s−1 in each proﬁle.
Characterization of the wireless optical stimulation module. The current–voltage
(I–V) characteristics of the µ-ILED was recorded with a source measurement unit
(SMU, Keithley 2450) operating in the linear sweeping mode. The optical power
was measured with an integration sphere (OceanOptics FOIS-1). The current
consumption of the µ-ILED was measured with an Oscilloscope (Siglent SDS
1202X-E) measuring the voltage across a 10 Ω resistor in series with the µ-ILED.
The wireless circuit uses a MOSFET (PMZ130UNE, Nexperia) to drive the µ-ILED
with programmed predeﬁned frequencies and duty cycles stored in the µC (ATTiny
13 A, Microchip Technology). Total current consumption of the device was mea-
sured using a benchtop power supply (1.8 V) with an Oscilloscope (Siglent SDS
1202X-E) recording the voltage drop across a 10 Ω resistor.
Characterization of the wireless thermography. The wireless temperature sensor was
immersed in a water bath whose temperature was varied from 33 to 41 °C using a
hotplate and monitored by a commercial thermocouple digital thermometer. The
sensor signal was wirelessly recorded with a handheld antenna using the Feig
reader and ISOStart and used for sensor calibration.
In order to characterize the resolution of the wireless thermographic
biointerface, the copper on the bottom side of the Pyralux substrate was laser
ablated to form a micro-heater beneath the NTC thermistor (design of the micro-
heater is shown in Supplementary Fig. 9a). The micro-heater was wirelessly
powered by the osseosurface device and the on-board voltage regulator was used to
drive PWM controlled 1.8 V with a heater element resistance of 5.36 Ω that was
characterized prior with a SMU (SMU, Keithley 2450) enabling a deﬁned heater
output. The µC was used to control a programmed sequence of duty cycles varying
from 4% to 12% to control the MOSFET that drives the micro-heater. The fully
encapsulated circuit was immersed in a water bath, and a handheld antenna was
used to wirelessly power the device and retrieve temperature recordings from the
NTC. The resolution of the temperature sensor was subsequently determined by
the smallest sensor response that could be distinguished from the background
noise.
A circuit with co-located NTC thermistor and µ-ILED (~0.1 mm apart) was
fabricated and used to demonstrate the capability to directly measure the thermal
impacts of optical stimulation. The thermistor and µ-ILED were immersed in a PBS
bath to mimic the in vivo environments and to prevent the device from overheating
at high optical power. A function generator (Siglent, SDG 1032X) was used to drive
power to the µ-ILED to test µ-ILED heating of surrounding tissue using a micro-
temperature sensor collocated by the µ-LED varying voltage (1.85, 2, and 2.12 V),
frequency (5–40 Hz), and duty cycle (5–80%), while the temperature sensor signal
was wirelessly read out with a handheld antenna.
Mechanical durability of serpentine interconnects. The serpentine interconnects
were mounted on a custom-built stretching stage and subjected to ~250% strain
and stretched cyclically for 10,000 cycles. The resistance of the serpentine copper
traces was measured with a digital multimeter.
The strain gauge of an osseosurface electronic system was bonded onto a piece
of Kapton foil (~75 µm thick). The Kapton foil was mounted on the stretching
stage and subjected to cyclic bending with a radius of curvature of ~2 cm, while the
serpentine interconnects were stretched to various lengths (ΔL ~3 and 5 cm) with a
separate stage. The strain sensor signal was wirelessly recorded with a circular
primary antenna (20 cm in diameter). The same measurement was repeated after
the serpentine had been stretched for 5000 and 10,000 cycles.
Mechanical simulation. Ansys® 2019 R2 Static Structural was utilized for static-
structural FEA simulations to study the strains induced in the copper traces of the
serpentine interconnects, and the effectiveness of mechanically isolating the strain
gauge from other parts of the device. The components of the devices, including the
copper and constantan traces, Pb-free solder, polyimide (PI), and Parylene-C
encapsulation layers, were modeled using the layouts used in device design. The
mechanical properties (Young’s Modulus (E) and Poisson’s Ratio (ν)) used for the
simulation were: EPI = 4 GPa, VPI = 2.7579, ECu = 121 GPa, VCu = 0.34, ECon-
stantan = 162 GPa, VConstantan = 0.32, EParylene = 2.7579 GPa, VParylene = 0.4, ESolder =
43 GPa, VSolder = 0.29.
Simulation of strain in serpentine interconnects. The model was simulated using the
following meshing parameters: program-controlled nonlinear mechanical elements
with an element size of 8.0 × 10−5 m, a body sizing insert condition with element
size 1.0 × 10−5 m applied to all the traces, and a body sizing insert condition with
element size 2.0 × 10−5 m applied to the PI layer. The simulation was performed by
ﬁxing one end of the selected serpentine segment and applying a displacement of
5.75 mm upwards to the other end as shown in Supplementary Fig. 15, producing a
deformation replicating that observed in benchtop testing of the serpentine
interconnects (Fig. 4b).
Mechanical isolation of the strain gauge. The model was simulated using the fol-
lowing meshing parameters: program-controlled mechanical elements with an
element resolution of 2, and a body sizing insert condition with element size
2.0 × 10−5 m applied to all the traces. Two simulations were performed, both with
1000 με applied to the bone model by ﬁxing one end while displacing the other end
by 7.9 × 10−6 m, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 15: (i) no strain was applied to the
serpentine interconnects; (ii) the serpentine interconnects were subjected to 3D
displacements (x: 1 mm, y: 3 mm, and z: 3 mm; details in Supplementary Fig. 10b).
Animal studies. All animal experiments were performed following a University of
Arizona Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved pro-
tocol (Sheep: 16–202, Rat: 19–572). For the in vivo study in rats, ﬁve male 450 g
Sprague Dawley rats were used. The implanted devices were sterilized using
ethylene oxide and aerated for 24 h prior to placement. Rats were anesthetized
using isoﬂurane and were given a subcutaneous injection of 1.0 mg kg−1 Bupre-
norphine SR prior to surgery. A 2 cm incision was made along the midline of the
back over the lumbar spine. A 1 cm incision was made over the lateral thigh, and
the anterior surface of the femur was exposed subperiosteally through a lateral
approach. The device was placed in a subcutaneous location through the back.
Passage of the strain gauge into the thigh via a subcutaneous tunnel was facilitated
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

by the serpentine interconnect. The strain gauge was ﬁxed to the femur using a
cyanoacrylate adhesive (M-Bond 200, Micro-Measurements). For implantation of
CPC-coated devices in small animals, a 5-0 vicryl suture lassoed around the bio-
sensor was used to pass the sensor from the lumbar region through the sub-
cutaneous tunnel to the thigh. This lasso technique was used to avoid manipulation
of the device with sharp surgical instruments and minimize the risk of damage to
the encapsulating layers. CPC-coated gauges were secured to bone using two 5-0
vicryl sutures without adhesive. Layered closure was performed using 5-0 vicryl for
fascia and 4-0 Quill for subcutaneous tissues prior to recovery from anesthesia.
During recovery, strain and temperature measurements were continuously
recorded with the 26 cm × 33 cm primary antenna while rat behavior was recorded
via a webcam. After 2 days, measurements were collected while rats walked on a
custom-built treadmill at 25 cm s−1. Sensor signals were recorded wirelessly with
the 45 cm × 12 cm primary antenna while high-speed (1920 × 1080, 120 frame
per second, iPhone 6 S) videos were recorded with a camera placed ~50 cm from
the treadmill for the purpose of deep neural network of the gait. Before each
exercise session, the rat received a minimum of 20 min of habituation to the
treadmill. Strain changes were observed during loading and unloading of the femur
(Fig. 5c). After 2 weeks the rats were euthanized. Following euthanasia, device
placement was characterized by scanning rats at 20 µm resolution using a Siemens
Inveon micro-CT Scanner. For histology, tissue surrounding the implanted device
was excised and imaged using an optical microscope (Wild M3Z Stereozoom
Microscope, Leica) with an attached camera (iPhone 12 Pro, Apple)
(Supplementary Fig. 22a–c), ﬁxed in 10% formaldehyde for 24 h and embedded in
parafﬁn. Ten-micron sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(Supplementary Fig. 22d–f). Slides were viewed using a Nikon microscope coupled
to a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera at magniﬁcations ranging from 20x to 100x.
In situ study in sheep. One male 2.5-year-old sheep was used to conﬁrm function of the
device in a large animal. The sheep was a control used in another study and had a
4.2 cm femoral defect created 6 months prior to use. Device placement occurred fol-
lowing administration of euthanasia medications for the other study and was completed
prior to signiﬁcant changes in body temperature. The anterior surface of the mid-
diaphyseal humerus was exposed subperiosteally through a lateral approach. The
wireless device was ﬁxed to the anterior surface of the humerus deep to brachialis. The
facia and skin were closed with running sutures. Measurements of strain and tem-
perature were collected continuously using a handheld antenna placed on the skin for
20 min following surgical placement of the device. Function of the strain sensor was
conﬁrmed by loading the sheep’s humerus in three-point bending (Fig. 6c).
Deep neural network analysis. DeepLabCut (version 2.2.b6) was used to perform
deep neural network analysis. The neural net was trained with a 1 min video clip
where 200 frames were extracted as training material. The training session was
performed with 200,000 iterations on the high-performance computer of Uni-
versity of Arizona. After training, a 3 s video clip with consistent gait was tracked
and analyzed by the software to extract the coordinates of the left hind paw for
each frame. The timestamp and coordinates were subsequently utilized to calculate
the spatiotemporal gait characteristics, including stride length, stride frequency,
duty factor, and the velocity of the paw.
Osseosurface electronics bone attachment. An applicator comprised of a 3D-
printed frame and an elastomeric membrane (Supplementary Fig. 26) was utilized
to facilitate fast attachment of the device on the bone surface. Before attaching the
device, the surface of the bone was abraded. The device was ﬁrst attached to the
applicator with the top side in contact with the elastomeric membrane. Adhesive
agent (M-Bond 200, Micro-Measurements) was then applied to the bottom side of
the device. The applicator was designed to make surgical process in large animals
easier by improving the ability to conformally mount the strain gauge to the bone
in one step. Once placed, the device was then ﬁrmly pressed against the bone with
an even force until the adhesive agent cured. Finally, the applicator was carefully
peeled off with minimal out-of-plane sheer force between the membrane, device
encapsulation, and adhesive agent.
Calcium phosphate ceramic coating. Implant-grade epoxy (Master Bond
EP42HT, Master Bond, Inc., Hackensack, NJ) was prepared according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and a thin even layer was blade coated to the bottom
surface of the strain gauge (N2A-06-S5182N-10C/E4, Micro-Measurements).
Spherical crystalline calcium phosphate ceramic (CPC2, CeraMed) was added to
cover the surface of the epoxy and silicone rubber was used to gently apply
downwards pressure on the CPC particles while curing the epoxy for 24 h at room
temperature. All CPC coatings were inspected for surface exposure without epoxy
coating to enable bonding to the bone. Devices were coated with TGF-β1 to
accelerate bone-to-CPC bonding.
Scanning electron microscope imaging of CPC–bone adhesion. A rat after
27 days post implantation was euthanized, and the femur was explanted along with
the attached strain gauge. The bone was cleaned, removing any soft tissue and ﬁxed
using a neutral-buffered formalin for 2 h. The bone was dehydrated in a solution of
ethanol (EtOH) starting at 70% for 2 h and increasing concentrations for at least
2 h as follows: 80% EtOH, 95% EtOH, 95% EtOH, 100% EtOH, 100% EtOH,
xylenes, and 100% EtOH. The bone was embedded in methyl methacrylate
(Technovit 9100 kit, Kulzer) through a pre-inﬁltration process for 2 h at room
temperature and an inﬁltration process within a vacuum chamber for 15 min to
remove any bubbles. The embedded bone is then cured at −4 °C over night. The
bone and strain gauge were cut exposing the cross-sectional view. The cross-section
surface was smoothed and polished using a grinding wheel (GP-25, Leco) from 120
to 600 grit. The surface was gold sputtered (Hummer 6.3, Anatech USA) allowing
for a gold thickness of 9 nm. SEM images were taken with various magniﬁcations
(60x, 120x, 280x, 300x, and 600x) around the bone–strain gauge interface using
(Inspect S50, FEI) operating at 30 kV.
Device operation in deep tissue. Slits of ~3 cm length were cut into the porcine
tissues and layers of tissue were stacked to increase device–primary antenna dis-
tance, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 27 for a test at 8 cm device–primary antenna
distance. The rectiﬁed voltage and data rate were recorded with a handheld pri-
mary antenna while the device was loaded with 1 kΩ and inserted into the slits to
result in device–primary antenna distances from 0 to 11.5 cm.
Real-time data visualization through tissues. A device was attached on a sheep’s
humerus following the device attachment procedures described above, and sub-
sequently covered by a piece of porcine skin (~1 cm thick). An NFC-enabled
smartphone running a custom software was brought in proximity to the porcine
skin. The NFC connection was subsequently established, and the sensor signals
were visualized on the smartphone in real time (Supplementary Video 3). To
demonstrate real-time readout, a device was attached onto a model of a human
femur, then covered with a piece of porcine skin, and subsequently operated
through the tissue with a smartphone while the femur model was strained to
induce signal change (Supplementary Video 4).
Data availability
All data needed to support the conclusions presented in this paper are available in the
manuscript and/or the Supplementary Information.
Code availability
Custom MATLAB code to decode wireless recording and data to support this study have
been deposited in the Center for Open Science database that can be accessed at [https://
osf.io/ucbjh/]50.
Received: 28 December 2020; Accepted: 27 October 2021;
References
1.
Koydemir, H. C. & Ozcan, A. Wearable and implantable sensors for
biomedical applications. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 11, 127–146 (2018).
2.
Rong, G., Mendez, A., Bou Assi, E., Zhao, B. & Sawan, M. Artiﬁcial
intelligence in healthcare: review and prediction case studies. Engineering 6,
291–301 (2020).
3.
Baldi, P. Deep learning in biomedical data science. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Data
Sci. 1, 181–205 (2018).
4.
Jin, X., Liu, C., Xu, T., Su, L. & Zhang, X. Artiﬁcial intelligence biosensors:
challenges and prospects. Biosens. Bioelectron. 165, 112412 (2020).
5.
Mathis, A. et al. DeepLabCut: markerless pose estimation of user-deﬁned body
parts with deep learning. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1281–1289 (2018).
6.
Amar, A., Kouki, A. & Cao, H. Power approaches for implantable medical
devices. Sensors 15, 28889–28914 (2015).
7.
Schiavone, G. & Lacour, S. P. Conformable bioelectronic interfaces: mapping
the road ahead. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw5858 (2019).
8.
Jastrzebska-Perfect, P. et al. Translational neuroelectronics. Adv. Funct. Mater.
30, 1909165 (2020).
9.
Fallegger, F., Schiavone, G. & Lacour, S. P. Conformable hybrid systems for
implantable bioelectronic interfaces. Adv. Mater. 32, 1903904 (2019)
10. Wang, C., Wang, C., Huang, Z. & Xu, S. Materials and structures toward soft
electronics. Adv. Mater. 30, 1801368 (2018).
11. Won, S. M., Song, E., Reeder, J. T. & Rogers, J. A. Emerging modalities and
implantable technologies for neuromodulation. Cell 181, 115–135 (2020).
12. Gutruf, P. & Rogers, J. A. Implantable, wireless device platforms for
neuroscience research. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 42–49 (2018).
13. Ledet, E. H., Liddle, B., Kradinova, K. & Harper, S. Smart implants in
orthopedic surgery, improving patient outcomes: a review. Innov. Entrep.
Health 5, 41–51 (2018).
14. World Health Organization. WHO Scientiﬁc Group on the Assessment of
Osteoporosis at Primary Health Care Level. Summary Meeting Report Vol.
2015 (WHO, 2004).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

15. Burge, R. et al. Incidence and economic burden of osteoporosis‐related fractures in
the United States, 2005–2025. J. Bone Miner. Res. 22, 465–475 (2007).
16. Szivek, J. A., Roberto, R. F. & Margolis, D. S. In vivo strain measurements
from hardware and lamina during spine fusion. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 75B,
243–250 (2005).
17. Lazaro, A., Villarino, R. & Girbau, D. A survey of NFC sensors based on
energy harvesting for IoT applications. Sensors 18, 3746 (2018).
18. Barman, S. Das, Reza, A. W., Kumar, N., Karim, M. E. & Munir, A. B. Wireless
powering by magnetic resonant coupling: recent trends in wireless power
transfer system and its applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 51,
1525–1552 (2015).
19. Jiang, C., Chau, K. T., Liu, C. & Lee, C. H. T. An overview of resonant circuits
for wireless power transfer. Energies 10, 894 (2017).
20. Liang, T. & Yuan, Y. J. Wearable medical monitoring systems based on
wireless networks: a review. IEEE Sens. J. 16, 8186–8199 (2016).
21. Shin, G. et al. Flexible near-ﬁeld wireless optoelectronics as subdermal implants for
broad applications in optogenetics. Neuron 93, 509–521.e3 (2017).
22. Rabkin, B. A., Szivek, J. A., Schonfeld, J. E. & Halloran, B. P. Long-term
measurement of bone strain in vivo: the rat tibia. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 58,
277–281 (2001).
23. Klosterhoff, B. S. et al. Wireless sensor enables longitudinal monitoring of
regenerative niche mechanics during rehabilitation that enhance bone repair.
Bone 135, 115311 (2020).
24. Karipott, S. S., Nelson, B. D., Guldberg, R. E. & Ong, K. G. Clinical potential of
implantable wireless sensors for orthopedic treatments. Expert Rev. Med.
Devices 15, 255–264 (2018).
25. Klosterhoff, B. S. et al. Wireless implantable sensor for noninvasive,
longitudinal quantiﬁcation of axial strain across rodent long bone defects. J.
Biomech. Eng. 139, 111004 (2017).
26. Umbrecht, F. et al. Wireless implantable passive strain sensor: design,
fabrication and characterization. J. Micromech. Microeng. 20, 85005 (2010).
27. Szivek, J. A., Nandakumar, V. S., Geffre, C. P. & Townsend, C. P. A handheld
computer as part of a portable in vivo knee joint load-monitoring system. J.
Med. Device. 2, 350011–350019 (2008).
28. Pinheiro, A. L. B. et al. Laser/LED phototherapy on the repair of tibial fracture
treated with wire osteosynthesis evaluated by Raman spectroscopy. Lasers
Med. Sci. 33, 1657–1666 (2018).
29. Gan, J. C. & Glazer, P. A. Electrical stimulation therapies for spinal fusions:
current concepts. Eur. Spine J. 15, 1301–1311 (2006).
30. Isler, S. C. et al. The effect of irrigation temperature on bone healing. Int. J.
Med. Sci. 8, 704 (2011).
31. Bruegmann, T. et al. Optogenetic control of contractile function in skeletal
muscle. Nat. Commun. 6, 7153 (2015).
32. Ganji, E., Chan, C. S., Ward, C. W. & Killian, M. L. Optogenetic activation of
muscle contraction in vivo. Connect. Tissue Res. 62, 15–23 (2021).
33. Gutruf, P. et al. Wireless, battery-free, fully implantable multimodal and
multisite pacemakers for applications in small animal models. Nat. Commun.
10, 5742 (2019).
34. Gutruf, P. et al. Fully implantable optoelectronic systems for battery-free,
multimodal operation in neuroscience research. Nat. Electron. 1, 652
(2018).
35. Xu, S. et al. Stretchable batteries with self-similar serpentine interconnects and
integrated wireless recharging systems. Nat. Commun. 4, 1543 (2013).
36. Ruﬁange, M., Leung, V. S. Y., Simpson, K. & Pang, D. S. J. Pre-warming before
general anesthesia with isoﬂurane delays the onset of hypothermia in rats.
PLoS ONE 15, e0219722–e0219722 (2020).
37. Fujiki, S. et al. Adaptive hindlimb split-belt treadmill walking in rats by
controlling basic muscle activation patterns via phase resetting. Sci. Rep. 8,
17341 (2018).
38. Dienes, J. A. et al. Analysis and modeling of rat gait biomechanical deﬁcits in
response to volumetric muscle loss injury. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 146 (2019).
39. Jacobs, B. Y., Kloefkorn, H. E. & Allen, K. D. Gait analysis methods for rodent
models of osteoarthritis. Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 18, 456 (2014).
40. Lakes, E. H. & Allen, K. D. Gait analysis methods for rodent models of
arthritic disorders: reviews and recommendations. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 24,
1837–1849 (2016).
41. Szivek, J. A., Anderson, P. L., Dishongh, T. J. & DeYoung, D. W. Evaluation of
factors affecting bonding rate of calcium phosphate ceramic coatings for
in vivo strain gauge attachment. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 33, 121–132 (1996).
42. Cordaro, N. M., Szivek, J. A. & DeYoung, D. W. Surface enhancements
accelerate bone bonding to CPC-coated strain gauges. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
56, 109–119 (2001).
43. Lanyon, L. E. In vivo bone strain recorded from thoracic vertebrae of sheep. J.
Biomech. 5, 277–281 (1972).
44. Gautier, E., Perren, S. M. & Cordey, J. Strain distribution in plated and
unplated sheep tibia an in vivo experiment. Injury 31, C37–C44 (2000).
45. Lanyon, L. E., Hampson, W. G. J., Goodship, A. E. & Shah, J. S. Bone
deformation recorded in vivo from strain gauges attached to the human tibial
shaft. Acta Orthop. Scand. 46, 256–268 (1975).
46. Lin, R. et al. Wireless battery-free body sensor networks using near-ﬁeld-
enabled clothing. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–10 (2020).
47. Thi, K. N. N., Ha-Van, N. & Seo, C. Mid-ﬁeld wireless power transfer for
deep-tissue biomedical implants. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 19,
2270–2274 (2020).
48. Ho, J. S. et al. Wireless power transfer to deep-tissue microimplants. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 111, 7974–7979 (2014).
49. Menon, P. R., Li, W., Tooker, A. & Tai, Y. C. Characterization of water vapor
permeation through thin ﬁlm Parylene C. In TRANSDUCERS 2009 - 2009
International Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Conference
1892–1895. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5285687 (2009).
50. Cai, L., et al. OsseoSurfaceDataset. Center for Open Science. https://osf.io/
ucbjh/ (2021).
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from University of Arizona Department of Biomedical
Engineering startup funds, the Improving Health Technology and Research Initiative
Fund (TRIF), the Craig M. Berge Faculty Fellowship and Core Facilities Pilot Program
(CA-CFPP NANO-3310342) (P.G.). We acknowledge support from the National Insti-
tute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health
T32EB000809 and the ARCS Foundation Spetzler Endowment (A.B.). We acknowledge
support from the Herbold Fellowship (K.A.K.).
Author contributions
L.C., A.B., J.A.S., D.S.M. and P.G. designed research; L.C., A.B., J.A.B.L. and E.C.R.
designed, prototyped, and fabricated devices; L.C., A.B., K.A.K., E.B.V. and D.A.G.
carried out benchtop characterization; L.C., A.B., K.A.K., E.B.V., D.A.G. and D.S.M.
carried out animal experiments; A.A. performed deep neural network analysis; R.P.
performed mechanical simulation; A.B. and M.J. wrote custom MATLAB and Android
software; L.C., A.B., A.A., R.P., D.S.M. and P.G. analyzed data; L.C., A.B., D.S.M. and
P.G. wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to David S. Margolis or
Philipp Gutruf.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks John Ho, Bozhi Tian and the
other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer
reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:6707 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27003-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

