Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Entorhinal grid-like codes and time-locked
network dynamics track others navigating
through space
Isabella C. Wagner
1,2,3
, Luise P. Graichen1, Boryana Todorova
1,
Andre Lüttig
1, David B. Omer
4, Matthias Stangl
5 & Claus Lamm
1
Navigating through crowded, dynamically changing environments requires
the ability to keep track of other individuals. Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex
are a central component of self-related navigation but whether they also track
others’ movement is unclear. Here, we propose that entorhinal grid-like codes
make an essential contribution to socio-spatial navigation. Sixty human par-
ticipants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while
observing and re-tracing different paths of a demonstrator that navigated a
virtual reality environment. Results revealed that grid-like codes in the
entorhinal cortex tracked the other individual navigating through space. The
activity of grid-like codes was time-locked to increases in co-activation and
entorhinal-cortical connectivity that included the striatum, the hippocampus,
parahippocampal and right posterior parietal cortices. Surprisingly, the grid-
related effects during observation were stronger the worse participants per-
formed when subsequently re-tracing the demonstrator’s paths. Our ﬁndings
suggests that network dynamics time-locked to entorhinal grid-cell-related
activity might serve to distribute information about the location of others
throughout the brain.
Maneuvering a crowded sidewalk or coordinating with one’s team
members to move towards the goal on a soccer ﬁeld not only requires
the planning of one’s own movement through space, but depends
upon the ability to track the location of conspeciﬁcs. Such socio-spatial
navigation was recently tied to neuronal processes similar to self-
related spatial navigation. For instance, work using intracranial
recordings from the human medial temporal lobe revealed repre-
sentations thatcoded for environmental boundaries when participants
or others moved through space1, and hippocampal social place cells
were found to code for the location of others in bats2 and rodents3. A
central component of navigation is the integrity of grid cells in the
entorhinal cortex that express periodic ﬁring ﬁelds arranged along the
vertices of regular hexagons, tessellating the environment and pro-
viding a spatial map4,5. In humans, it has been discussed that the neural
ﬁring signature of grid cell populations might relate to measures
obtained non-invasively using fMRI (for a recent discussion, see6), in
the form of so-called “grid-like codes”7. Moreover, these grid-like
codes were shown to support spatial7–12 as well as mental self-related
navigation13,14, but whether they also track others’ movement (or the
movement of non-social features) through space is unclear. Here, we
propose that entorhinal grid cells (and related grid-like codes) make an
essential contribution to (socio-)spatial navigation in humans.
Similar to the joint actions of different spatial cell types such as
place and grid cells15–18, ﬂexible navigation relies on the orchestration of
Received: 15 February 2022
Accepted: 3 January 2023
Check for updates
1Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Unit, Department of Cognition, Emotion, and Methods in Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of
Vienna, 1010 Vienna, Austria. 2Vienna Cognitive Science Hub, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. 3Centre for Microbiology and Environmental Systems
Science, University of Vienna, 1030 Vienna, Austria. 4Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram,
9190401 Jerusalem, Israel. 5Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Jane and Terry Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
e-mail: isabella.wagner@univie.ac.at
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

a set of regions including medial temporal, posterior-medial, parietal,
striatal
and prefrontal
structures19–23. Beyond
the
hippocampal-
entorhinal circuit, the parahippocampal and retrosplenial cortices are
regarded as key players involved in the visuospatial processing of
scenes and their orientation in the broader spatial environment24–27. The
retrosplenial cortex speciﬁcally was proposed to translate information
between allocentric (as supported by the hippocampus28) and ego-
centric reference frames23,24,26, interacting with the (right) posterior
parietal cortex to guide the visuospatial coordination of locomotion29–31
and the coding of spatial routes32. Similar aspects of navigation such as
goal-directed behavior19 and route following33 were linked to dorsal
striatal processes. Presumably, the dorsal striatum contributes to navi-
gation via associative reinforcement and thus functions in parallel to the
hippocampal system that rapidly encodes new experiences19,34,35. Inter-
actions between these two systems appear mediated by the prefrontal
cortex34, which also regulates the top-down control of navigation via
planning and goal tracking20. Since socio-spatial navigation also
involves tracing others’ movement through space, it likely engages
additional brain regions concerned with biological motion processing,
such as the posterior superior temporal sulcus36,37. Altogether, this
suggests a complex interplay of multiple brain regions, but it remains
elusive how they interact with the putative “spatial map” hosted by
entorhinal grid cells. We thus asked whether the activity of entorhinal
grid-like codes is coupled to functional connectivity changes with
medial temporal, parietal, striatal, and prefrontal areas and whether
such
network
dynamics
may
explain
differences
in
navigation
performance.
To tackle these questions, we built upon the design of previous
animal work that investigated social place cells in bats2 and translated it
into the human context. Sixty healthy participants underwent func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Our modiﬁed navigation
task projected them into a ﬁrst-person perspective within a virtual
reality (VR) environment while they were asked to observe different
paths of a demonstrator (Fig. 1a, b). The paths had to be held in memory
and needed to be re-traced after a short delay. Crucially, participants
were positioned at a ﬁxed viewpoint during observation, allowing us to
dissociate potential grid-like codes between other- and self-related
movements. Behavioral performance was quantiﬁed as cumulative
distance error in virtual meters (vm) indicating the deviation from the
demonstrator’s paths (Fig. 1c). We reasoned that if underlying grid cells
supported the tracking of others, we should observe increased grid-like
codes in the entorhinal cortex during observation of the demonstrator
moving through VR-space. Furthermore, we expected entorhinal grid-
like codes to be dovetailed by entorhinal-cortical connectivity changes
with regions typically involved in spatial navigation and visuospatial
processing, altogether modulated by behavioral performance.
Fig. 1 | Modiﬁed navigation task. a The task projected participants into a ﬁrst-
person perspective within a virtual reality (VR) environment while they were asked
to observe and subsequently re-trace the paths of a demonstrator. The movement
area was marked with a red circle on the sandy desert plane and was surrounded by
an observation area (solid and dashed circles in bird’s eye and street views,
respectively). During observation (left panel), participants were placed directly
behind the demonstrator’s starting point, were not able to move, and viewed the
demonstrator walking through the circular arena (movement trajectory schemati-
cally indicated). During navigation (right panel), the demonstrator disappeared and
the participant was projected onto the same starting position to re-trace the pre-
viously observed path. b Timeline of one example trial during the modiﬁed navi-
gation task (s, seconds). A performance threshold of 20 virtual meters (vm)
determined the feedback that participants received on each trial (i.e., happy emoji,
cumulative distance error ≤20 vm; sad emoji, cumulative distance error > 20 vm).
c Example path of demonstrator and participant obtained from observation and
navigation periods, respectively. A trial comprised three random path segments
that each started and ended at the edge of the movement area (i.e., participants
observed/walked paths from one edge to the other and were not able to stop and
turn within the movement area). We then calculated the distance error per path
segment, yielding the cumulative distance error per trial. d Average cumulative
distance error within the sample (N = 58). Error bars reﬂect the standard error of the
mean, s.e.m. e Permutation distribution obtained from simulating the paths of a
random agent 5000 times (“Methods”). Chance level was calculated as the 5th
percentile of the distribution, yielding a value of 39.3 vm (red line). The dashed line
indicates the value of the observed group mean (17.57 vm, shown in d). Source data
are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
2

Results
Participants are successfully able to re-trace the demonstra-
tor’s paths
Participants completed a single MRI session that started out with an
initial task familiarization period, followed by four runs of the modiﬁed
navigation task, each involving different paths. Across the four task
runs, participants reached an average cumulative distance error of
17.57 ± 0.54 vm (mean ± standard error of the mean, s.e.m.; calculated
as the average distance between the demonstrator’s and the partici-
pant’s endpoints across the three different segments of a given path,
Fig. 1c, d; N = 58, 2 participants were excluded from this and all
following analyses, see “Methods”). To determine whether participants
performed better than chance, we simulated the performance of a
random agent using permutation testing (see “Methods”). Navigation
performance in our sample was signiﬁcantly below the permutation-
based chance level of 39.3 vm (one-sample t-test, N = 58, t(57) = −39.6,
ptwo-tailed < 0.0001;
Fig.
1e). Moreover, performance
was
stable
throughout the experiment (Supplementary Fig. S1), showing that
participants were successfully able to re-trace the demonstrator’s
paths, and providing us with a solid basis for investigating grid-like
codes during both observation and navigation.
We next took a closer look at navigation performance on indivi-
dual segments of a given path (each path consisted of three segments).
We found that across-run performance was signiﬁcantly better when
participants re-traced the ﬁrst path segment (6.86 ± 0.16 vm) com-
pared to the second (23.3 ± 0.32 vm) or third (22.64 ± 0.37 vm; as
indicated by the path segment-wise distance error; Supplementary
Fig. S1). This pattern was evident in each of the four runs (Supple-
mentary Fig. S1) and was likely due to the fact that the observer’s
viewpoint was directly ﬁxed behind the demonstrator’s starting posi-
tion at the beginning of each trial.
Observation is associated with increased activation in the hip-
pocampus and striatum
We then turned towards the fMRI data and started out by investigating
changes in brain activation when participants tracked and re-traced
the paths of others, irrespective of potential grid-like codes. We
hypothesized largely overlapping activation proﬁles during both
observation and navigation periods, involving regions typically
engaged in spatial navigation and visuospatial processing, such as
medial temporal, posterior-medial, parietal, striatal, and prefrontal
areas19–23. Additionally, we expected that observation of the demon-
strator’s paths would be associated with increased activation in brain
areas associated with biological motion processing, including the
posterior superior temporal sulcus36,37.
While participants observed the demonstrator’s paths a set of
regions showed increased activation, including a large cluster centered
on the bilateral hippocampus and adjacent structures of the medial
temporal lobe (MTL), extending towards the anterior temporal pole, the
caudate nucleus, pre- and post-central gyri, as well as the ventromedial
prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortices (one-sample t-test, N = 58,
contrast observation > navigation; Fig. 2a, Supplementary Table S1).
Results further included stronger bilateral activation in lateral occipital
areas, the fusiform gyrus, and the posterior superior temporal sulcus.
When participants re-traced the previously observed paths during
navigation periods an activation proﬁle with strongest response in the
bilateral occipital cortex, including the fusiform gyrus and the right
temporo-parietal junction emerged (one-sample t-test, N = 58, contrast
navigation > observation; Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table S1). Activation
was also increased in the bilateral caudate nucleus and putamen, the
insula, as well as the adjacent inferior prefrontal cortex.
Since visual input was considerably different between observation
and navigation conditions (stationary viewpoint vs. navigation), we
also compared each of the conditions against the (ﬁxation) baseline.
Activation changes appeared largely similar for both conditions,
including increased activation in visual, parietal and lateral prefrontal
regions (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Fig. S2, Supplementary Table S1).
Notably, the general effect of navigation (contrast navigation > base-
line) was also associated with increased activation in the hippocampus
and entorhinal cortex.
Altogether, observing the demonstrator’s paths rather than re-
tracing them was associated with stronger brain activity in a set of
regions that included the hippocampus and adjacent MTL structures,
the striatum, anterior and posterior midline regions, as well as superior
and inferior temporal areas.
Increased activation in the right posterior parietal cortex during
observation is associated with better performance
To investigate whether brain activation during observation and navi-
gation scaled with individual performance, we went on to test the
cross-participant relationship between whole-brain activity during the
modiﬁed navigation task and the average cumulative distance error
when re-tracing the demonstrator’s paths. We performed this analysis
in two steps to be able to clearly interpret the direction of potential
effects, ﬁrst focusing on observation and then on navigation periods
(each contrasted against baseline). Results showed an activation
increase within the right posterior parietal cortex (x = 44, y = −78,
z = 24, z-value = 4.68, 297 voxels) during observation that negatively
correlated with the individual cumulative distance error [linear
regression, N = 58, contrast observation > baseline, cumulative dis-
tance error added as a covariate of interest; p < 0.05 family-wise-error
(FWE) corrected at cluster level using a cluster-deﬁning threshold of
p < 0.001, cluster size = 80 voxels; Fig. 2d]. In other words, stronger
activation in this region was coupled to better subsequent perfor-
mance as participants observed the demonstrator’s paths (and see
Supplementary Information for additional analysis). We did not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant relationship between behavioral performance and brain
activation during navigation periods.
Entorhinal grid-like codes when observing the demonstra-
tor’s paths
Central to our analyses was the question whether grid-like codes
supported the tracking of others. We were motivated by ﬁndings of
place cells in animals that were recently shown to signal the location of
conspeciﬁcs2,3, as well as by previous work probing entorhinal grid cell
activity (or grid-like codes) during spatial (and mental) self-navigation
in both animals4 and humans7–14. Hence, we expected to ﬁnd a sig-
niﬁcant hexadirectional modulation (i.e., a 6-fold periodicity) of the
fMRI signal in the entorhinal cortex during observation and possibly
also during navigation periods.
To test this, we split the fMRI data of each task run into inde-
pendent sets and estimated/tested individual grid orientations using a
12-fold cross-validation regime (Fig. 3a–c; for a detailed description,
please see “Methods”). We used 11 trials (each trial included an
observation and a navigation period) to estimate individual grid
orientations based on the demonstrator’s (or the participant’s)
movement trajectories through VR-space using a General Linear Model
(GLM1; note that grid orientations were estimated separately for
observation and navigation periods). The grid orientations’ ﬁt was then
tested on the path segments of the remaining trial, which served to
quantify the magnitude of grid-like codes in the left-out data set
(GLM2). This procedure was repeated for each cross-validation fold
and the resulting grid magnitudes were averaged across the different
iterations. Note that grid analyses were based on a reduced participant
sample (entorhinal cortex: automatic segmentation, N = 49; manual
segmentation, N = 51; control regions: N = 58; see “Methods”).
We found signiﬁcant grid-like codes in the entorhinal cortex as
participants were observing the demonstrator’s paths. This effect was
only present for the 6-fold symmetrical model [mean grid magnitude
(arbitrary units, arb. units) ± s.e.m., 0.158 ± 0.06; one-sample t-test,
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
3

N = 47 (excluding 2 outliers); t(46) = 2.73, d = 0.4, 95% CI = [0.04, 0.3],
pone-tailed = 0.005, Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons using
a threshold of αBonferroni = 0.05 / a total of 6 entorhinal and control ROIs
= 0.008; Fig. 3d; results for this and all following analyses of this section
remained stable when using the full data set of N = 49 and when using a
robust test framework, see also Supplementary Table S2]. To establish
the reliability of results obtained from the 6-fold symmetrical model,
we repeated the analysis with different control symmetries that were
not expected to yield signiﬁcantly increased grid magnitudes. Different
symmetrical models such as 5-fold or 7-fold signal periodicities did
not yield signiﬁcant results [separate one-sample t-tests; 5-fold:
N = 42
(excluding
7
outliers);
pone-tailed = 0.245;
7-fold:
N = 48
Fig. 2 | Brain activation proﬁles during observation and navigation, and asso-
ciation with performance. Brain activation a during observation (compared to
navigation) periods, and b vice versa (separate one-sample t-tests, N = 58; Supple-
mentary Table S1). c Brain activation changes when contrasting each condition
against the implicit (ﬁxation) baseline (separate one-sample t-tests, N = 58; see also
Supplementary Fig. S2, Supplementary Table S1). d Brain activation during obser-
vation (compared to implicit baseline) and association with performance across
participants (indexed by the average cumulative distance error in virtual meters,
vm; linear regression, N = 58). The scatter plot shows the relationship between the
change in parameter estimates (arbitrary units, arb. units) extracted from the sig-
niﬁcant cluster and the cumulative distance error (vm; Supplementary Informa-
tion). Given the clear inferential circularity, we would like to highlight that this
plot serves visualization purposes only, solely illustrating the direction of the
brain-behavior relationship. All results are shown at p < 0.05 FWE-corrected at
cluster level (cluster-deﬁning threshold of p < 0.001). L, Left; R, Right; H,
Hemisphere. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
4

(excluding 1 outlier), pone-tailed = 0.489; Fig. 3d]. The same pattern of
ﬁndings emerged when we delineated the entorhinal cortex using
manual segmentation (results in Supplementary Information and in
Supplementary Fig. S3) and when using a different, less nested cross-
validation regime that split each task run into four data parts (Supple-
mentary Information). Grid orientations also partly generalized across
separate task runs (Supplementary Information). Exploratory follow-up
analysis showed that grid-like codes during observation appeared pre-
dominantly left lateralized (Supplementary Information). Additionally,
prior work reported 4-fold modulation of entorhinal cortex signal
during self-related navigation11. We thus tested whether such an effect
was also present during observation but did not ﬁnd evidence for a
4-fold signal periodicity in the entorhinal cortex [N = 47 (2 outliers
excluded), 0.07 ± 0.05, pone-tailed = 0.082, Supplementary Fig. S4; N = 49
(full sample), 0.07 ± 0.06, pone-tailed = 0.113].
To test whether grid-like codes were also present in other areas,
we chose several control ROIs known to be involved in spatial navi-
gation and visuo-spatial processing but for which no grid-like codes
have been reported so far (including the hippocampus, para-
hippocampal cortex, anterior thalamus, and the primary visual cortex/
V1; Fig. 3e, see “Methods”). There were no signiﬁcantly increased grid-
like codes in any of the control ROIs [separate one-sample t-tests;
hippocampus: N = 56 (excluding 2 outliers), pone-tailed = 0.271; para-
hippocampal cortex: N = 55 (excluding 3 outliers), pone-tailed = 0.264;
Fig. 3 | Grid-like codes during observation. a We calculated path-wise trajectory
angles α1–α3 referenced to an arbitrary point on the VR desert plane (dashed lines,
angles indicated in gray). b Schematic of the trial composition within a task run,
showing observation (black) and navigation (red) periods that consisted of three
path segments each (1 trial = 1 observation period followed by 1 navigation period).
Grid orientations were estimated and tested by employing a 12-fold cross-validation
(CV) regime. c Schematic of angular differences in 360°-VR-space. We expected
increased entorhinal cortex signal for directions observed/walked that were
aligned to individual grid orientations (in gray). Entorhinal cortex region-of-interest
(ROI, in yellow) projected onto the T2-weighted structural scan of one participant.
d Magnitude of symmetrical codes (separate one-sample t-tests, one-tailed, mul-
tiple comparisons corrected; 6-fold: N = 47, p = 0.005; 5-fold: N = 42, p = 0.245; 7-
fold: N = 48, p = 0.489) in the entorhinal cortex during observation periods
(arbitrary units, arb. units.; Supplementary Information). e Magnitude of
observation-related symmetrical codes (sixfold periodicity) in the control ROIs
(separate one-sample t-tests, one-tailed, multiple comparisons corrected; hippo-
campus: N = 56, p = 0.271; parahippocampal cortex: N = 55, p = 0.264; anterior tha-
lamus: N = 56, p = 0.159; V1: N = 58, p < 0.0001). f Pearson-correlation (two-tailed,
N = 47, p = 0.003) between grid magnitudes (6-fold periodicity) and the cumulative
distance error across participants (vm; Supplementary Information). g No sig-
niﬁcant entorhinal grid-like codes (6-fold periodicity) during navigation periods
(one-sample t-test, one-tailed, N = 45, p = 0.233; Supplementary Information).
h Spatial stability of entorhinal grid-like codes (paired-sample t-test, two-tailed,
N = 44, p = 0.048). ***p < 0.0001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05; error bars reﬂect the standard
error of the mean, s.e.m. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
5

anterior thalamus: N = 56 (excluding 2 outliers), pone-tailed = 0.159; V1:
N = 58 (full data set, no outliers excluded), signiﬁcantly negative grid
magnitude, d = −0.59, 95% CI = [−1.1, −0.4], pone-tailed < 0.0001; Fig. 3e;
and see Supplementary Table S2 for virtually identical results when
including the full data set]. We further explored the ﬁnding of negative
grid-like codes in V1 during observation with additional analyses. First,
results remained stable when using a different, less-nested cross-vali-
dation regime (mitigating the potential effect of speciﬁc directions
that could have affected grid magnitudes disproportionally, Supple-
mentary Information). Second, we found that V1 activation levels
appeared increased for observed directions that were misaligned with
the individual V1 grid orientation (0 modulo 30°) compared to aligned
directions (0 modulo 60°). This effect was not driven by single direc-
tional bins but appeared relatively consistent across the range of all
misaligned directions (Supplementary Fig. S5). We provide an in-depth
discussion of this ﬁnding in our supplementary materials (Supple-
mentary Information).
In summary, we found signiﬁcantly increased grid-like signals in
the entorhinal cortex (as well as signiﬁcantly decreased grid-like codes
in V1) when participants were observing and putatively encoding the
demonstrator’s paths.
Entorhinal grid-like codes during observation are stronger at
lower performance
Previous
studies
highlighted
a
signiﬁcant
association
between
entorhinal
grid-like
codes
during
navigation
and
behavioral
performance7–10,38. We thus reasoned that variations in observation-
based grid-like codes (as indexed by grid magnitudes) should be
coupled to individual differences in the average cumulative distance
error during navigation periods. Interestingly, results yielded a sig-
niﬁcant positive association such that increased observation-based
grid magnitudes were coupled to larger cumulative distance errors
(N = 47, same sample as for main analysis above: rPearson = 0.42, 95%
CI = [0.15, 0.63], ptwo-tailed = 0.003; Fig. 3f).
We performed several control analyses to validate the brain-
behavior relationship. First, we could show that the results did not
stem from speciﬁc path patterns, such as potentially longer paths
during low- compared to high-performance trials (the paths of low-
performance trials could have crossed the center of the movement
area more often, yielding a longer average path length and thus per-
haps a stronger grid-like signal, but this was not the case; Supple-
mentary Information). Second, we repeated the correlation analysis
with a newly-deﬁned performance measure, taking into account that
chance performance for re-tracing a given path correctly differed for
different endpoints along the circumference of the movement area.
Using this normalized accuracy measure39, results remained virtually
identical (results in Supplementary Information and in Supplementary
Fig. S6). Altogether, these analyses corroborated our result of stronger
grid-like codes the worse participants performed.
No signiﬁcant entorhinal grid-like codes when re-tracing the
demonstrator’s paths
In analogy to previous work that reported entorhinal grid cell activity, or
grid-like codes, during spatial (and mental) self-navigation7–14, we
expected to replicate this ﬁnding in our data set and hypothesized
signiﬁcant grid-like codes in the entorhinal cortex as participants were
re-tracing
the
demonstrator’s
paths
during
navigation
periods
(see “Methods”). Surprisingly, results did not show signiﬁcantly
increased grid-like codes in the entorhinal cortex [separate one-sample
t-tests for all following analyses; N = 45 (excluding 4 outliers), pone-
tailed = 0.233; Fig. 3g; as above, results for this and all following analyses
of this section remained the same when using the full data set and when
using a robust test framework, Supplementary Table S3], also not when
manually delineating the region (Supplementary Information), when
using a reduced data set (Supplementary Information), when using a
different cross-validation regime (Supplementary Information), or
when testing for grid-like codes in the left and right hemisphere sepa-
rately (but note that grid magnitudes appeared numerically increased in
the right hemisphere and were signiﬁcantly negative in the left hemi-
sphere; Supplementary Information). When investigating grid-like
codes in the control ROIs, we found signiﬁcantly increased grid mag-
nitudes in the anterior thalamus during navigation but not in any of the
other regions (results in Supplementary Information and in Supple-
mentary Fig. S3). As above, we also tested for a potential 4-fold signal
periodicity since previous work demonstrated such an effect during
navigation11. Indeed, we found that the 4-fold symmetrical model yiel-
ded signiﬁcantly increased navigation-related responses in the entorh-
inal cortex [N = 43 (6 outliers excluded), mean grid magnitude (arbitrary
units, arb. units) ± s.e.m., 0.1 ± 0.05, t(42) = 1.83, Cohen’s d = 0.28, 95%
CI = [−0.01, 0.21], pone-tailed = 0.037, Supplementary Fig. S4; N = 49
(full sample), 0.15 ± 0.13, pone-tailed = 0.137].
We also explored whether grid orientations during observation
periods served as spatial reference frames when participants re-traced
the demonstrator’s paths during navigation. If this was the case, we
should ﬁnd matching grid orientations between the two conditions,
leading to signiﬁcantly increased grid magnitudes when testing grid
orientations obtained from observation on navigation periods. How-
ever, results did not yield any signiﬁcant results, indicating grid-like
codes during observation but neither the same nor differently-
oriented grid-like codes during navigation periods (results in Supple-
mentary Information and in Supplementary Fig. S7).
Control analyses: unbiased estimation of grid orientations
We performed several control analyses to verify that our results were
actually related to entorhinal grid-like codes that represented the
demonstrator’s path in space. For instance, the estimation of indivi-
dual grid orientations can be biased by the distance walked along
different directions in space (in other words, it would not be possible
to estimate individual grid orientations for a speciﬁc direction if the
participants never walked in that direction). To circumvent this issue,
we designed our task such that each segment of an individual path was
oriented along one of 36 directions that could be divided into 6
directional bins, spanning the 360°-VR-space with 10° angular
resolution7. We then generated the demonstrator’s paths (i.e., the
entire trajectories that consisted of three path segments each) to
maximize the distance walked in each of the directional bins and could
thus avoid any biases in the estimation of individual grid orientations
during observation periods (see “Methods”, Supplementary Fig. S8).
Since participants were not always able to perfectly re-trace the
demonstrator’s paths, we also checked whether there was a difference
in the participant’s distance walked across the 6 directional bins. As
above, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the average distance
walked suggesting that we were able to avoid any biases in grid
orientation
estimation
during
navigation
periods
(Supplemen-
tary Fig. S8).
Control analyses: Higher spatial stability of entorhinal grid-like
codes during observation
Grid-like codes might be affected by variations in spatial and temporal
signal stability8. In the case of spatial instability, estimated grid orien-
tations are assumed to vary across the different voxels within the ROI,
resulting in more variable mean grid orientations and an overall
decrease in grid magnitude. To test whether differences in spatial
stability between observation and navigation conditions contributed
to our results, we calculated individual voxel-wise grid orientations
within the bilateral entorhinal cortex ROI (see “Methods”).
Results revealed that the spatial stability [quantiﬁed as Rayleigh’s
z that describes non-uniformity of circular data; i.e., data clustering
towards a speciﬁc (grid) orientation] was signiﬁcantly higher for grid-
like codes during observation compared to navigation periods [paired-
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
6

sample t-test, N = 44, participant sample from which both observation-
and navigation-based grid values were available, t(43) = 2.04, d = 0.28,
95% CI = [0.01, 2.4], ptwo-tailed = 0.048; Fig. 3h]. Voxel-wise entorhinal
grid orientations thus varied more when participants re-traced the
demonstrator’s paths, potentially contributing to the lack of signiﬁcant
grid magnitudes during navigation.
This led us to reason that it might still be possible to obtain sig-
niﬁcant grid-like coding during navigation when performing the ana-
lysis separately for each voxel (i.e., when estimating and testing grid
orientations on a voxel-by-voxel basis rather than averaging across the
entorhinal cortex ROI). We thus repeated the abovementioned analysis
of representational stability for which we had partitioned each task run
into data halves and adopted the approach to quantify grid magni-
tudes during navigation on a voxel-by-voxel basis (that is, we repeated
GLM2 for each voxel within the bilateral entorhinal cortex ROI), and
then averaged across grid magnitudes to obtain a summary score.
However, in line with all previous analyses, results did not yield sig-
niﬁcant grid-like coding during navigation [one-sample t-test, N = 46 (3
outliers excluded), mean grid magnitude (arbitrary units, arb. units) ±
s.e.m., −0.02 ± 0.03, pone-tailed = 0.199; N = 49 (full sample), 0.09 ± 0.08,
pone-tailed = 0.14].
Regarding temporal stability, there was no signiﬁcant difference
between voxel-wise entorhinal grid magnitudes of observation and
navigation periods over time (i.e., no difference in grid orientations in
the estimation and test data sets, quantiﬁed as % voxels with same/
different orientations across time; see “Methods”, Supplemen-
tary Fig. S8).
Control analyses: no effect of neural adaption during navigation
Another possible reason for the lack of signiﬁcant entorhinal grid-like
codes during navigation could be neural adaption (or “repetition
suppression”) during navigation. Neural adaption describes the phe-
nomenon that the neural signal is reduced upon repeated presentation
of the same stimulus or when associated stimuli are presented in
succession (compared to the sequential presentation of two unrelated
stimuli), potentially reﬂecting the presence of a “memory trace” (for a
review, see ref. 40). In the current task, observation periods were fol-
lowed by navigation periods and neural adaption might thus indicate
an association (or similarity) between the periods. To be able to
compare between navigation periods with high/low similarity to the
previous observation period, we took into account individual perfor-
mance: we expected that the observation-navigation similarity should
be stronger for trials during which participants performed well
(compared to trials during which participants performed less well; i.e.,
smaller vs. larger cumulative distance error, respectively). In other
words, during high-performance trials, participants should have
encoded the path trajectory well during observation, indicated by
stronger neural adaption during the subsequent navigation period.
However, we did not ﬁnd evidence for neural adaption (results in
Supplementary Information and in Supplementary Fig. S9), suggesting
that this phenomenon did not impact our ability to detect grid-like
codes during navigation periods. Additionally, it could be the case that
overall entorhinal activation levels were stronger during observation
compared to navigation periods, leading to signiﬁcantly increased
grid-like codes during observation (and no signiﬁcant ﬁndings during
navigation). Analysis showed that we could rule out this potential
explanation as overall activation levels appeared comparable between
the conditions (results in Supplementary Information and in Supple-
mentary Fig. S9).
Control analyses: no effects of eye movements on grid-like codes
To account for the potential impact of eye movements on grid-like
codes41–44, we recorded eye gaze during the modiﬁed navigation task
and leveraged the saccade directions of each participant during
observation and navigation periods (note that this analysis included a
subset of 37 participants from which both eye-tracking and entorhinal
fMRI data were available). We repeated our initial grid analysis but now
modeled eye gaze directions (i.e., the angle between successive sac-
cades with respect to an arbitrary reference point on the computer
screen) instead of movement trajectories in VR-space (Supplementary
Information). Findings did not reveal a signiﬁcant increase in entorhinal
saccade-based grid magnitudes when testing for a 6-fold symmetrical
model during observation (or navigation) periods (separate one-sample
t-tests, all ptwo-tailed > 0.05; results in Supplementary Information and in
Supplementary Fig. S8). Additionally, we tested whether the magnitude
of grid-like codes in the entorhinal cortex during observation scaled
with the average number of saccades that participants performed.
Correlation analysis showed that this was not the case [N = 37 (same
sample as above); ptwo-tailed = 0.427], altogether suggesting that our
result of signiﬁcant grid-like codes in the entorhinal cortex when
observing the demonstrator’s paths was based on spatial information
rather than the number or direction of saccadic eye movements.
We also veriﬁed whether participants were actually following the
demonstrator with their eye gaze during observation by deﬁning an
area-of-interest (AOI) for each path segment. AOIs were deﬁned by the
two-dimensional coordinates of a given path trajectory on the compu-
ter screen as well as by the demonstrator’s height, and we calculated the
percentage of eye movements that were located within the AOI
boundaries. The majority of eye movements were located within AOIs,
emphasizing that participants’ viewing behavior was related to the
observation of the demonstrator (Supplementary Information).
Striatal activation increases are time-locked to entorhinal grid-
like codes during observation and negatively scale with
performance
We next asked whether the activity of entorhinal grid-like codes during
observation was paralleled by activation changes of regions typically
involved in spatial navigation and visuospatial processing (e.g., medial
temporal, parietal, striatal, and prefrontal structures19–23), and whether
this would be linked to behavioral performance. Similar to above, we
modeled observation and navigation periods based on the individual
path segments but now added the participant- and path segment-
speciﬁc grid magnitudes (obtained from the previous grid code analy-
sis) as parametric modulators (GLM3; grid magnitudes were obtained
from GLM2 and were then averaged across the 12 cross-validation folds,
Fig. 4a, see “Methods”). We then performed group comparisons to
estimate voxel-wise activation changes that scaled with participant- and
path segment-speciﬁc grid magnitudes (i.e., contrasting the parametric
modulation regressor that captured ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid
magnitude during observation/navigation against the implicit baseline).
During observation periods, we found signiﬁcantly increased acti-
vation in the right putamen and caudate nucleus (x = 30, y = 8, z = −6, z-
value = 4.96, 102 voxels) that positively scaled with individual entorhinal
grid magnitudes as participants were observing the demonstrator’s
paths (one-sample t-test, N = 47, same participant sample as during
initial grid analysis, contrast parametric modulation through entorhinal
grid magnitude during observation > baseline, p < 0.05 FWE-corrected
at cluster level using a cluster-deﬁning threshold of p < 0.001, cluster
size = 68 voxels; Fig. 4b). Put differently, striatal activation was stronger
when participants observed the demonstrator walking aligned with
their individual entorhinal grid orientation. There were no signiﬁcant
activation changes during navigation periods.
We next explored whether such grid-related activation increases
were associated with individual variations in performance across parti-
cipants. In line with our result of increased observation-based grid-like
codes in the entorhinal cortex at lower performance (Fig. 3f), we found
signiﬁcantly increased activation in the bilateral putamen and caudate
nucleus (left: x = −18, y = −2, z = 12, z-value = 3.72, 222 voxels; right: x = 14,
y = 4, z = 18, z-value = 3.68, 245 voxels), as well as in the right orbito-
frontal cortex (x = 32, y = 54, z = −9, z-value = 4.18, 197 voxels) that was
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
7

time-locked to ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid magnitude (i.e., stronger
when participants observed the demonstrator walking aligned with their
individual entorhinal grid orientation) and larger the worse participants
performed when re-tracing the demonstrator’s paths (linear regression,
N = 47, same participant sample as during initial grid analysis, contrast
parametric modulation through entorhinal grid magnitude during
observation > baseline, cumulative distance error across all paths added
as a covariate of interest; please note that we here deviated from our a
priori cluster-deﬁning threshold of p < 0.001, showing results that
reached signiﬁcance only at a more lenient statistical threshold, p < 0.05
FWE-corrected at cluster level using a cluster-deﬁning threshold of
p < 0.005, cluster size = 157 voxels; Fig. 4c). To restate, the activation in
these regions scaled more strongly with entorhinal grid-like codes
during observation the worse participants performed in re-tracing the
demonstrator’s paths thereafter. There were no signiﬁcant activation
changes related to better navigation performance.
Entorhinal connectivity with striatum and right posterior par-
ietal cortex is time-locked to grid-like codes during observation
and negatively scales with performance
So far, we presented evidence that grid-like codes in the entorhinal
cortex were signiﬁcantly enhanced during observation periods and
Fig. 4 | Brain activation proﬁles and connectivity changes time-locked to
entorhinal grid-like codes during observation, and association with perfor-
mance. a Grid orientations and magnitudes were estimated and tested on inde-
pendent data sets (GLM1 and GLM2), focusing on data within the entorhinal cortex
(yellow). This yielded participant- and path segment-speciﬁc grid magnitudes for
each of the 36 path segments per condition and task run. Observation periods are
indicated in black (navigation periods in red, 1 example task run). Segment-wise
grid magnitudes were then used to parametrically modulate observation/naviga-
tion events in a third, independent analysis (GLM3) that tested for voxel-wise brain
activation/connectivity changes time-locked to ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid
magnitude during observation. b Increased brain activation during observation
periods (compared to the implicit baseline), positively scaling with entorhinal grid
magnitudes (one-sample t-test, N = 47). c Same contrast associated with behavioral
performance (linear regression, N = 47). d Entorhinal connectivity changes during
observation periods, time-locked to increased entorhinal grid magnitudes and
associated with behavioral performance (linear regression, N = 47; Supplementary
Table S4). c, d The scatter plots show the relationships between the changes in
parameter estimates (arbitrary units, arb. units) extracted from the respective
clusters (black outlines in glass brains) and the cumulative distance error (vm).
Given the clear inferential circularity, we would like to highlight that these plots
serve visualization purposes only, solely illustrating the direction of the brain-
behavior relationship. Connectivity is schematically indicated through dashed
line. Results are shown at p < 0.05 FWE-corrected at cluster level [cluster-deﬁning
threshold of (a, d) p < 0.001 or (c) p < 0.005]. L, Left; R, Right. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
8

that striatal activation was time-locked to such entorhinal signals.
These results were stronger the less accurately participants performed
when re-tracing the demonstrator’s paths during navigation periods.
To tackle entorhinal-cortical interactions45 potentially underlying
socio-spatial navigation, we tested functional connectivity changes
during observation and navigation. More speciﬁcally, we asked whe-
ther entorhinal grid-like codes would trigger changes in network
connectivity whenever participants would observe the demonstrator
walking aligned with their individual grid orientation, and whether
such changes would be associated with individual differences in
performance.
We tested this using the above model (GLM3) and performed
generalized psychophysiological interaction analysis (gPPI, see “Meth-
ods”). In brief, we took the anatomical boundaries of the bilateral
entorhinal cortex as a seed, calculated its whole-brain connectivity
during observation (and navigation) periods (i.e., contrasting the
parametric modulation regressor that captured ﬂuctuations time-
locked to participant- and path segment-speciﬁc entorhinal grid
magnitudes with the implicit baseline), and tested whether changes in
connectivity varied as a function of the average cumulative distance
error per participant.
Results showed that functional connectivity between the entorh-
inal cortex with the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex, as well
as with the inferior temporal and left lateral prefrontal cortex posi-
tively scaled with entorhinal grid magnitudes and that this relationship
was stronger at lower performance [linear regression; N = 47 (same
participant sample as during initial grid analysis), contrast parametric
modulation through entorhinal grid magnitude during observation >
baseline, cumulative distance error across all paths added as a cov-
ariate of interest, p < 0.05 FWE-corrected at cluster level using a
cluster-deﬁning threshold of p < 0.001, cluster size = 61 voxels; Fig. 4d,
Supplementary Table S4]. This connectivity proﬁle further included
enhanced entorhinal coupling with the bilateral striatum and the right
posterior parietal cortex (see also Supplementary Fig. S10 showing the
overlap with the right posterior parietal cluster from the grid-
independent activation analysis that we reported in Fig. 2d). Again,
these ﬁndings appeared speciﬁc to lower performance (there were no
signiﬁcant connectivity changes related to better performance) and to
observation periods (there were no signiﬁcant effects during naviga-
tion). General connectivity changes (independent of grid-like coding)
further showed that entorhinal-cortical coupling was increased during
both observation and navigation periods (but stronger during obser-
vation; Supplementary Fig. S11, Supplementary Table S5).
Taken together, functional connectivity between the entorhinal
cortex, striatum, right posterior parietal cortex and a wide-spread set
of cortical regions was time-locked to ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid
magnitudes when participants were tracking the demonstrator’s paths
during observation periods and this relationship was stronger at lower
individual performance.
Discussion
In the current study, we investigated whether grid-like codes in the
human entorhinal cortex supported participants as they tracked and
subsequently re-traced the paths of a virtual demonstrator. Our key
ﬁndings advance current knowledge in several ways: We found that
entorhinal grid-like codes supported the tracking of another indivi-
dual’s movement through space. Crucially, these signals were decou-
pled
from
self-movement
as
participants’
viewpoint
remained
stationary while observing the demonstrator. Fluctuations in grid
magnitudes were associated with the co-activation of striatal regions
during observation and these results appeared stronger the less
accurate participants performed when subsequently re-tracing the
demonstrator’s paths. The proﬁle of co-activation was paralleled by
entorhinal connectivity increases with the striatum and the hippo-
campus,
parahippocampal,
right
posterior
parietal
and
lateral
prefrontal cortices when participants observed the demonstrator
walking aligned with their internal grid orientations, and this pattern
was again more pronounced the worse participants performed. The
study yielded several surprising ﬁndings as well: we found signiﬁcantly
negative grid-like codes in V1 during observation and we did not detect
signiﬁcant grid-like codes during navigation periods. Overall, our
ﬁndings are the ﬁrst to demonstrate that grid-like signaling in the
human entorhinal cortex is related to the spatial tracking of others,
that it is linked to network dynamics, and modulated by individual task
performance.
The main goal of our research was to probe whether grid-like
codes in the entorhinal cortex supported the tracking of others,
potentially yielding insights into human socio-spatial navigation.
Conﬁrming our hypothesis, results showed a signiﬁcant increase in
grid magnitudes (thought of as a proxy for putative grid-cell-related
activity) while participants were observing the demonstrator’s paths
from a stationary viewpoint (Fig. 3d). This was speciﬁc to hexadirec-
tional coding (i.e., a 6-fold, grid-like modulation of the fMRI signal),
speciﬁc to the entorhinal cortex where grid cells were previously
detected4, and speciﬁc to spatial information rather than being driven
by the direction of saccadic eye movements41–44. Several recent ﬁnd-
ings suggest that socio-spatial navigation relies on neuronal substrates
similar to those that process self-related spatial navigation. For
instance, Stangl et al.1 used intracranial recordings from the human
MTL to reveal boundary-anchored representations during self-
navigation as well as during the observation of others moving
through space, highlighting a neural mechanism that signals an indi-
vidual’s vicinity to environmental borders. Further evidence comes
from animal work with bats2 and rodents3 showing so-called “social”
place cells in the hippocampus that were speciﬁcally tuned to the
location of others in space. In contrast, separate subpopulations of CA1
pyramidal cells exclusively coded for self-location or showed a con-
joint ﬁring pattern for both self- and other-related location informa-
tion (but see ref. 46 who did not ﬁnd evidence for “social” coding).
Besides hippocampal place cells, grid cell activity (or fMRI-based grid-
like coding) is considered central to spatial4,5,7–10 and mental
navigation13,14 but was so far not discussed in the context of socio-
spatial navigation. Our ﬁndings suggest that grid-like codes in the
human entorhinal cortex are indeed involved in such a process,
allowing us to learn about the spatial routes that others take, and so
potentially contributing to our ability to maneuver through crowded
and dynamically changing environments as we encounter them in
everyday situations.
On the broader scale of cortical structures, ﬂexible self-navigation
through the physical environment has been associated with an
ensemble of brain regions that includes MTL structures, posterior-
medial, parietal, striatal and prefrontal areas19–23. Our results are in line
with this notion as we found that observing a demonstrator moving
through space was associated with increased activation in the hippo-
campus and adjacent MTL, the caudate nucleus, as well as the ven-
tromedial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortices (contrast
observation > navigation, Fig. 2a). The hippocampus is regarded as
crucial for spatial navigation21,22,47–49, and is assumed to work in parallel
with the dorsal striatum (including the caudate nucleus) which was
associated with response-learning and goal-directed navigation19,34,35,
as well as route following33. Especially the latter aspect seems impor-
tant in the context of the present task since participants were asked to
observe, memorize, and to re-trace the paths of a virtual demonstrator
akin to following spatial routes. The ventromedial prefrontal and
posterior cingulate cortices are often linked to successful memory
retrieval50–52 rather than encoding53–55. However, encoding and retrieval
processes may act in parallel56,57, especially for tasks that require the
association
of
novel
information
with
previously
encountered
material58. In the present modiﬁed navigation task, participants were
required to encode a series of three path segments that constituted an
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
9

entire path trajectory. While observing the demonstrator moving from
one path segment to the next, participants probably retrieved pre-
vious path segments as well. Furthermore, the ventromedial prefrontal
and posterior cingulate cortices have also been linked to social
cognition59–65, suggesting that they likely supported memory encoding
of the different paths in the present socio-spatial setting. Observation
additionally triggered activation changes in the posterior superior
temporal sulcus and fusiform gyrus, which have both been shown to
process biological motion36,37. Thus, we revealed a proﬁle of brain
regions speciﬁcally concerned with tracking others’ complex and goal-
directed movements through space.
Evidence on how such macro-scale activation proﬁles might
interact with the putative “spatial map” supported by entorhinal grid
codes is sparse. The entorhinal cortex is located at the interface of the
hippocampal-neocortical information processing system66,67. Its med-
ial entorhinal division, which houses grid cells4, receives anatomical
projections from the hippocampus67, the parahippocampal (or post-
rhinal cortex in rodents68), retrosplenial and posterior parietal
cortices69, as well as from prefrontal areas70,71. In turn, output from the
medial entorhinal cortex is routed back towards the hippocampus72–74
and to a distributed set of cortical areas66,75. As such, the entorhinal
cortex seems ideally positioned to integrate information and to com-
municate the current layout of the “spatial map” to the brain-wide
navigation network45. In the present study, we attempted to char-
acterize whether the activity of entorhinal grid-like codes was time-
locked to co-activation of and to communication with regions involved
in spatial navigation and visuospatial processing. Results indeed yiel-
ded increased co-activation of the striatum (caudate nucleus and
putamen) when participants observed the demonstrator walking
aligned with their individual entorhinal grid orientation and this effect
was stronger the worse participants performed when subsequently re-
tracing the paths (Fig. 4b, c). Going further, we next tested for func-
tional interactions and found increased entorhinal connectivity with
the caudate nucleus and hippocampus, the parahippocampal, pos-
terior parietal and left lateral prefrontal cortex at larger grid magni-
tudes during observation, again negatively scaling with performance
across participants (Fig. 4d). Chen et al.76 recently investigated the
relationship between grid-like codes in the entorhinal and ven-
tromedial prefrontal cortex using human intracranial recordings dur-
ing virtual, self-related spatial navigation. The authors could show that
prefrontal theta oscillations exhibited a hexadirectional signal mod-
ulation similar to theta power in the entorhinal cortex and that both
types of grid-like codes revealed a comparable grid orientation. These
results resonate with our ﬁndings of increased co-activation and
entorhinal-cortical connectivity as participants observed another
individual walking aligned with their internal grid orientation. Given
that human grid-like signals have been detected not only in the
entorhinal cortex but also in other brain regions76,77, it will be inter-
esting to test how regions beyond the entorhinal cortex support the
tracking of others. One could envision a mechanism of time-locked
network dynamics that are triggered by the activity of grid-like codes
in the entorhinal cortex, potentially coordinating information transfer
about the current “socio-spatial map” across the brain, informing the
observer about how to navigate space either by recalling their own
movements, or by learning through observation, as shown here. We
would like to highlight that this interpretation is speculative and in
need of follow-up veriﬁcation, and that we encourage others to pro-
vide more insights into the causal role of entorhinal grid-like signals
within the broader network of brain regions representing (socio-)
spatial information.
Our analyses revealed several surprising ﬁndings as well. For
instance, we found that entorhinal grid-like codes, as well as co-
activation and entorhinal-cortical connectivity that were timed to the
activity of entorhinal grid-like codes, were associated with perfor-
mance in the modiﬁed navigation task. In other words, participants
with higher grid magnitudes during observation performed worse
when re-tracing the demonstrator’s paths (Fig. 3f). This ﬁts with a
recent ﬁnding by Nau et al.78 who reported stronger fMRI-based
directional coding in the medial temporal lobe (including the
posterior-medial entorhinal cortex) in participants who displayed low
memory performance in a virtual spatial navigation task (i.e., measured
by a larger drop-error when trying to place objects at their correct
locations). We speculate that accurate performance might go hand-in-
hand with neuronally efﬁcient processing79, which would be indexed
by lower entorhinal grid magnitudes and a reduced need to employ
additional co-activation of and connectivity with other brain regions.
To provide an example, memory training was shown to decrease brain
activity during memory processing while increasing performance80.
Individual inability to accurately memorize and re-trace paths might
thus be coupled to higher grid-like signals as there was increased need
for support through the cognitive map provided by the entorhinal
cortex. Notably, previous research reported mixed results, showing
increased grid-like codes at better spatial memory performance7–9 (i.e.,
a smaller drop-error when trying to place objects at their correct
locations), or not showing any signiﬁcant association14,41. Under-
standing the behavioral implications as well as the exact mechanistic
contributions of grid-like codes for observation and navigation thus
requires further scrutiny. Moreover, our grid-independent analyses
showed that increased activation levels in the right posterior parietal
cortex during observation were related to better performance when
re-tracing the paths thereafter (Fig. 2d). The posterior parietal cortex
was implicated in converging information about target location,
movement, and the position of body parts to be able to plan or make
movements towards a target30, as well as in tracking spatial routes32.
This activation cluster was only partly overlapping with grid-
modulated voxels (Supplementary Fig. S10) but highlights a possible
dissociation between overall activation levels and grid-like codes
within
an
anatomical
region, and how
those
signals
support
performance.
Furthermore, we found a strong effect of negative grid-like codes
in V1 during observation (Fig. 3e, Supplementary Fig. S5). V1 activation
levels were increased for observed directions that were misaligned
with the individual V1 grid orientation (0 modulo 30°) compared to
aligned directions (0 modulo 60°). Multiple explanations of how grid
cell ﬁring activity relates to macroscopic (fMRI-based) signals exist (for
a discussion, see6). One possibility is that grid cells repeatedly ﬁre
during aligned movement and that this repetition would cause neural
adaption (leading to a relative increase in the fMRI signal for mis-
aligned directions). Signals might potentially be triggered by grid cells
in the visual system (although it is currently unclear whether grid cells
exist in V1) or by (entorhinal) mechanisms upstream. At present, we do
not know which factors drive this effect and thus cannot provide a ﬁrm
interpretation of why negative grid-like coding in V1 appears asso-
ciated with tracking others navigating through space. We encourage
future research to elucidate this ﬁnding, as well as the relationship
between grid-like codes in the medial temporal lobe and visuals
systems.
Contrary to previous work7–14,81, we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcantly
increased entorhinal grid-like codes during self-navigation (Fig. 3g; see
Supplementary Information for numerically increased, as well as sig-
niﬁcantly decreased grid-like codes in the right and left entorhinal
cortex, respectively, and see Supplementary Fig. S3 for signiﬁcant grid-
like coding in the anterior thalamus). The spatial stability of entorhinal
grid-like codes was signiﬁcantly decreased during navigation com-
pared to observation periods (Fig. 3h), indicating that grid orientations
in the entorhinal cortex were less clustered towards a speciﬁc direc-
tion. Grid orientations hence displayed larger variability across voxels,
which might have resulted in an overall decrease in grid magnitude
values during navigation. The ﬁnding might also be explained by the
speciﬁc setup of our modiﬁed navigation task, which differed from
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
10

previous setups in several points. Participants were passively moved
(after indicating and conﬁrming their intended walking direction with
a button press) and were required to re-trace path trajectories rather
than freely navigating towards object locations in virtual reality space.
Also, participant’s viewpoints were directly placed behind the
demonstrator’s starting positions (but note that these randomly varied
across trials). This design aspect could have enforced egocentric
(striatal) rather than allocentric (hippocampal) processing19, and could
explain the striatal co-activation and connectivity time-locked to
observation-related entorhinal grid-like codes. We speculate that
decoupling the participant’s viewpoint from the starting position
might have rendered the task more hippocampal dependent47. In
contrast to this argument, however, it appears that participants
formed an allocentric representation since we detected entorhinal
grid-like codes during observation, and since results showed generally
increased activation levels in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex
during navigation (Fig. 2c). Future research might resolve this issue by
expanding our current task-setup and decoupling view- and starting
points. Interestingly, we found a signiﬁcant 4-fold symmetrical mod-
ulation of the entorhinal cortex signal during navigation, in line with
previous work11. A signiﬁcant 4-fold modulation could reﬂect increased
activation when moving in the cardinal directions (north, south, east,
west). It is currently unclear whether such modulation is driven by grid
cells but we speculate that the cardinal directions might act as mental
coordinate system, allowing us to compare other movement direc-
tions with these major axes. He and Brown11 reported such 4-fold
modulation when barriers compartmentalized the environment and
disrupted grid-like coding. Thus, it is possible that the “borders” of our
movement area (indicated on the sandy desert plane) within the larger
environment disrupted grid-like codes, pushing towards a 4-fold
modulation of the entorhinal cortex signal.
On a ﬁnal note, we would like to discuss two potential limitations
of the present study. First, the design of the modiﬁed navigation task
did not allow us to disentangle the tracking of others through space
from participants planning their own future paths. Prior work
demonstrated that entorhinal grid-like codes could be detected as
participants imagined movement through space while they remained
stationary13,14. It is possible that participants were imaging their own
movements while observing the demonstrator and that this mental
navigation caused elevated grid-like codes during observation. How-
ever, we consider this an unlikely explanation of the results. Partici-
pants completed a post-MRI interview regarding their individual
strategies that they had adopted during observation periods. From the
47 participants that were included in the main grid analysis, only one
person reported to have imagined the demonstrator’s perspective. We
excluded this participant from the sample and repeated the main
analysis which left the results unchanged (see Supplementary Infor-
mation, also for a general description of the reported strategies). We
acknowledge that this does not fully preclude that processes related to
planning and mental navigation contributed to our ﬁndings. Future
studies might adjust our task design to disentangle potential grid-like
processes related to planning, mental navigation, and observation.
Second, while it is plausible that entorhinal grid-like codes sup-
port socio-spatial navigation, we would like to emphasize that we are
unable to make claims about the social speciﬁcity of our results.
Entorhinal grid-like codes during observation might also be triggered
by non-social features that need to be tracked (such as moving cars
when crossing the road) and might be related to feature relevance
(keeping an eye on the moving car is important to cross the road
safely). While such results would speak for a general role of entorhinal
grid-like codes in tracking moving features82, the debate on the social
speciﬁcity of brain processes83 is fueled by initial evidence for “social”
and “non-social” place cells2. Omer and colleagues dissociated signals
by either presenting another individual (a demonstrator bat) or an
object (a football) moving through space while the observer bat
remained stationary. A similar task design might be helpful to resolve
this issue in follow-up work with humans. Hence, we cannot draw ﬁrm
conclusions regarding the involvement of entorhinal grid-like coding
speciﬁcally in socio-spatial navigation but consider our work an
important ﬁrst step in this direction.
To summarize, we found that grid-like codes in the human
entorhinal cortex track other individuals that navigate through space.
Grid signals during observation were tied to increases in co-activation
and entorhinal-cortical connectivity with an ensemble of regions,
including the striatum, hippocampus, parahippocampal and right
posterior parietal cortices, altogether modulated by accuracy when
subsequently re-tracing the paths. While we are currently unable to
answer whether these results are speciﬁcally related to social proces-
sing, ﬁndings might indicate that grid-like codes could be involved in
socio-spatial navigation, concerned with tracking others’ complex and
goal-directed movements through space. We suggest that grid-like
codes and their associated network dynamics could serve to distribute
information about the location of others throughout the brain, laying
the foundation for an internal “compass” that enables us to maneuver
through crowded and dynamically changing environments as we
encounter them in everyday situations.
Methods
Participant sample
Sixty participants volunteered for this study (aged 18–29 years, mean =
22 years, 45 females, biological sex determined by self-report, 7 left-
handed). All participants were healthy, had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision, gave written informed consent prior to participation,
and received monetary compensation. Two participants were exclu-
ded from data analyses (one participant due to an anatomical brain
abnormality, and one participant due to low performance in the
modiﬁed navigation task), which left 58 participants for all following
analyses (aged 18-28 years, mean = 22 years, 44 females, 7 left-handed).
The study was reviewed and ethically approved by the ethics com-
mittee of the University of Vienna (Vienna, Austria; reference num-
ber 00538).
Study procedures
Each participant underwent a single MRI session, starting out with the
acquisition of the structural brain images while completing the task
familiarization period (participants trained the subsequent modiﬁed
navigation task during one run, all completed the same trials). This was
followed by four runs of the actual modiﬁed navigation task and the
acquisition of functional brain images.
Modiﬁed navigation task: Virtual reality environment
To investigate whether grid-like codes supported the tracking of oth-
ers, we translated previous animal work2 to the human context. Our
task projected participants into a ﬁrst-person perspective within a
virtual reality (VR) environment and asked them to observe a
demonstrator moving through a circular arena. The path had to be
held in memory and had to be re-traced after a short delay (for an
example video, see https://osf.io/mhtgp/).
The VR environment depicted a desert scene with landmarks
(sandstone towers, Joshua trees, cacti and other desert plants) and
objects (railway wagons, car wrecks, an old gas station, wooden sheds,
barrels, water towers, and wind turbines) that were placed around a
circular arena. The sandy ground was contrasted by a blue sky ﬁlled
with clouds, while the sun was ﬁxed at the circular arena’s zenith. The
circular arena consisted of a movement area inside which the avatar
(i.e., the demonstrator) and the participants could walk (radius = 60
virtual meters, vm; marked in red), as well as an observation area
surrounding it (radius = 90 vm, marked in white; Fig. 1a). All landmarks,
objects, and avatars were retrieved from the Unity asset store (https://
assetstore.unity.com)
and
Sketchfab
(https://sketchfab.com).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
11

Movement speed of both the demonstrator and participant was set to
15 vm/sec and it was not possible to make rotational and translational
movements at the same time (it was only possible to walk straight lines
but not curves). The rotation speed was set to 50 deg/s and the par-
ticipant’s camera height was ﬁxed to 1.7 vm. The VR environment and
task were developed using Unity (software version 2019.4.5f1, https://
unity.com).
Each trial consisted of an observation and a navigation period
(Fig. 1b). Starting out, a cue signaled participants to pay attention to the
demonstrator’s upcoming path (2 s, “Please pay attention to the person
and copy the path afterwards!”). To be able to visually follow the
demonstrator’s path throughout the entire movement area, the obser-
ver (i.e., the participant) was projected onto the border of the sur-
rounding observation area, directly placed behind the demonstrator’s
starting point. The observer remained stationary during the entire
observation period (i.e., the observer could not move or rotate but was
able to see the entire movement area) since our goal was to disentangle
potential grid-like codes supporting the tracking of others from those
associated with self-related spatial navigation. A path consisted of three
path segments between successive locations, each segment with a
random length between 60–120 vm. Thus, single segments could be
walked within 4–8 s and an entire observation period could last between
18–30 s (consisting of three consecutive segments, the rotation periods,
plus a 1.5 s duration before/after the path was started/concluded). This
was followed by a jittered delay during which a ﬁxation cross was pre-
sented on the computer screen (ranging between 2–7 s, mean = 5 s).
At the start of the navigation period, the participant (i.e., the
former observer) was projected onto the demonstrator’s starting point
and was asked to re-trace the path. Using an MR-compatible button
box, participants could adjust their orientation and, once conﬁrmed
through button press, automatically walked to the opposite border of
the movement area (it was not possible to pause and re-adjust inside
the movement area). Participants were instructed to follow the pre-
viously observed path as close as possible without spending too much
time on orientation adjustments. After 30 s, a time warning appeared
(a red frame was shown around the screen), signaling that participants
needed to reach the path’s end point within the next 10 s.
Once the border of the movement area was reached for the third
time, performance was quantiﬁed as (Euclidian) cumulative distance
error (vm) averaged across all three points that were visited along the
circumference of the movement area (thus, the average difference
between the correct and actually visited points). Participants then
received feedback about their navigation performance (1 s; happy
emoji, distance error ≤20 vm; sad emoji, distance error > 20 vm). The
choice of a 20 vm feedback threshold was inspired by previous work
from Stangl et al.8 who investigated grid-like coding as participants
navigated through a virtual reality environment to place objects at
their correct location. We subsequently conﬁrmed that this threshold
was appropriate by performing a small behavioral pre-test (with N = 4
participants) which showed that participants’ performance stabilized
at a cumulative distance error of ~20 vm after one training run. The
feedback period was followed by another jittered delay (ﬁxation cross
presented on computer screen, duration ranging between 2–7 s, mean
= 5 s), and a new trial started.
Participants engaged in four task runs of 12 trials each (i.e., con-
sisting of 12 observation and 12 navigation periods). One run had a
maximum duration of approx. 17 min.
Modiﬁed navigation task: Path randomization
Each of the demonstrator’s paths was oriented along one of 36 direc-
tions that could be divided into 6 directional bins, spanning the 360°-
space with 10° angular resolution (see also Supplementary Fig. S8). To
estimate individual grid orientations in unbiased fashion7, we max-
imized the distance walked (vm) across the different directional bins in
two steps.
First, a complete path within one trial consisted of three con-
secutive path segments. To evenly sample directions from the differ-
ent directional bins, each individual segment was drawn from a
different directional bin (thus, a trial included three path segments
sampled from three different directional bins). Across the 12 trials per
run (3 path segments per trial), we sampled from each directional bin 6
times (6 × 6 = 36 segments per run). Participants completed a total of
four runs of the navigation task; each directional bin thus appeared 24
times throughout the experiment. Second, to maximize the distance
walked per path segment, we divided the movement area into six
equally-sized sectors. Consecutive segments were randomized so that
transitions between directly neighboring sectors were prohibited,
enforcing a minimum path segment length of 60 vm (the length of a
given path segment could vary between 60–120 vm). Starting points of
paths were randomly generated within a sector and each sector hosted
a start position twice within the same run, whereby the endpoint of the
ﬁrst path segment represented the starting point of the next path
segment (and so forth).
Based on these restrictions, we created two trial sequences that
were counter-balanced across the full sample of 60 participants.
Overall, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the distance walked
across the 6 directional bins [one-way ANOVA, N = 48 (each data point
indicating the trial-wise distance walked in each of the directional bins
and in each of the four task runs), no signiﬁcant main effect of direc-
tional bin, ptwo-tailed = 0.896, see Supplementary Fig. S8a). The speciﬁc
order of trials was randomly shufﬂed for each participant.
Modiﬁed navigation task: determining chancel level perfor-
mance with permutation testing
To determine whether participants performed better than chance (i.e.,
whether they were able to re-trace the demonstrator’s paths more
accurately than a random agent), we performed permutation-based
testing. We pooled all paths that were presented to participants during
the observation period, randomly selected paths, and simulated the
performance of a “random agent”. That is, we randomly chose three
endpoints (for each of the three path segments) out of all possible
endpoints along the circumference of the movement area (spanning
the circular border in 1°-degree steps). We then calculated the Eucli-
dean distance between each randomized endpoint and the “correct”
endpoint of a speciﬁc path segment that was selected from the pool of
possible paths, averaged across the three error distances, and accu-
mulated a permutation distribution by iterating over these steps 5000
times (Fig. 1d). We then determined the performance value (cumula-
tive distance error, vm) at the 5th percentile (39.3 vm), representing
the chance level of a random participant. Finally, we tested whether the
observed group performance was below this permutation-based
chance level using a one-sample t-test.
Eye tracking acquisition and data processing
To account for the potential impact of eye movements on grid-like
codes41–44, and to validate that participants were attending to the
demonstrator’s paths, we recorded horizontal and vertical eye gaze, as
well as pupil size of each participant’s right eye using a video-based
infrared eye tracker (EyeLink 1000 Plus, SR Research, Ontario,
Canada). Prior to each recording, raw eye movement data was mapped
onto screen coordinates by means of a calibration procedure. Partici-
pants sequentially ﬁxated on nine ﬁxation points on the screen,
arranged in a 3 × 3 grid. This was followed by a validation procedure
during which the nine ﬁxation points were presented once more while
the differences between the current and previously obtained gaze
ﬁxations (from the calibration period) were measured. If these differ-
ences were <1° of visual angle, the calibration settings were accepted
and the eye tracker recording was started. During recording, the data
was digitized at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz and a potential drift in eye
movements was corrected for every four trials (i.e., approx. every
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
12

1.4 min). Due to technical problems eye tracking was only possible in a
subsample of 47 participants.
Data was corrected for eye blinks by removing samples for which
the pupil size deviated more than one standard deviation (s.d.) from
the mean across the entire time series. To determine saccadic eye
movements, vertical and horizontal eye gaze was transformed into
velocities (implemented using Fieldtrip’s “ft_detect_movement”; latest
software version downloaded on 4 March 2021, updated daily; https://
www.ﬁeldtriptoolbox.org). In brief, velocities exceeding a threshold of
6 × the s.d. of the velocity distribution and exceeding a duration of
12 ms were deﬁned as saccades84. Saccade onsets during individual
path segments (while observing or navigating, excluding any standing
or rotation periods) were extracted. To avoid potential artifacts from
other eye movements, and since eye movements typically occur every
200-300 ms85, only events free of saccades and blinks in a 200 ms-
interval prior to saccade onset were included (in other words, only
events with a pre-saccadic ﬁxation period were considered). We
detected a total of 8720 saccades across all participants, across the
four task runs, and across both observation and navigation periods
(N = 47, mean number of saccades ± s.d., overall: 181.7 ± 57.7; obser-
vation periods: 97.2 ± 36; navigation periods: 85.45 ± 27.9).
Imaging parameters
All imaging data were collected at the Neuroimaging Center of the
University of Vienna, using a 3T Skyra MR-scanner (Siemens, Erlangen,
Germany) equipped with a 32-channel head coil. During each of the four
task runs, we acquired on average 474 (±7, s.d.) T2*-weighted blood
oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) images, using a partial-volume
echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with the following parameters:
repetition time (TR) = 2.029 s, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, number of slices
= 30 axial slices, slice order = interleaved acquisition, ﬁeld of view (FoV)
= 216 mm, ﬂip angle = 90°, slice thickness = 3 mm, in-place resolution = 2
× 2 mm, using parallel imaging with a GRAPPA acceleration factor of 2.
Slices were oriented parallel to the long axis of the hippocampus.
Since the entorhinal cortices are susceptible to image distortions
due to their vicinity to air-ﬁlled cavities, we acquired 30 images for
post-hoc artifact correction using the abovementioned functional
sequence but reversing the phase-encoding direction (thereby
stretching potential image distortions into the opposite direction).
Additionally, to facilitate the co-registration of anatomical entorhinal
cortex masks to the partial-volume EPI images, we acquired 10 whole-
brain EPI images with the following parameters: repetition time
(TR) = 2.832 s, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, number of slices = 42 axial sli-
ces, slice order = interleaved acquisition, ﬁeld of view (FoV) = 216 mm,
ﬂip angle = 90°, slice thickness = 3 mm, in-place resolution = 2 × 2 mm,
using parallel imaging with a GRAPPA acceleration factor of 2. This
sequence was thus similar to the partial-volume EPIs (but had a longer
TR to allow for whole-brain coverage). As above, slices were oriented
parallel to the long axis of the hippocampus.
The
T1-weighted
structural
image
was
acquired
using
a
Magnetization-Prepared Rapid Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) sequence
with the following parameters: TR = 2.3 s; TE = 2.43 ms; FoV = 240 mm,
ﬂip angle = 8°, voxel size = 0.8 mm isotropic. To delineate the
entorhinal cortex, we acquired a T2-weighted structural image using a
turbo-spin-echo (TSE) Sampling Perfection with Application optimized
Contrasts using different ﬂip angle Evolution (SPACE) sequence with
the following parameters: TR = 3.2 s; TE = 564 ms; FoV = 256 mm, voxel
size = 0.8 mm isotropic. These slices were oriented perpendicular to
the long axis of the hippocampus.
MRI data preprocessing
The MRI data were processed using SPM (software version 12, http://
www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) in combination with Matlab (software
version R2019b, The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) and the Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library
(FSL, software version 5.0.1; https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/)86.
The ﬁrst six volumes were excluded to allow for T1-equilibration. The
remaining volumes were slice-time-corrected to the middle slice and
realigned to the mean image calculated across the four task runs.
Potential image distortions were corrected by applying FSL’s “topup”
command: we calculated the mean image based on the additional
volumes acquired (phase-encoding direction reversed). Together with
the original fMRI data, this image was then used to estimate and cor-
rect susceptibility-induced distortions. Since grid-like codes were
analyzed in the participant-speciﬁc image space, we refrained from
normalizing the data but applied a 3D Gaussian smoothing kernel
(5 mm full-width at half maximum, FWHM).
For the whole-brain group analyses, the distortion-corrected data
was additionally normalized into standard space. The structural scan
was co-registered to the mean functional image and segmented into
gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid using the “New
Segmentation” algorithm. All images (functional and structural) were
spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) EPI
template (MNI-152) using Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration
Through Exponentiated Lie Algebra (DARTEL)87, and functional images
were smoothed with a 3D Gaussian kernel (5 mm FWHM).
Whole-brain univariate fMRI analysis
We ﬁrst set out to test whole-brain activation changes during obser-
vation and navigation, independent of grid-like codes. Using a Gen-
eralized Linear Modeling (GLM) approach, the BOLD response during
the modiﬁed navigation task was modeled using separate task
regressors, time-locked to the onsets of the respective events (cues,
observation periods, navigation periods, feedback). All events were
estimated as boxcar functions of speciﬁc durations and were con-
volved with the SPM default canonical hemodynamic response func-
tion (HRF). Cue and Feedback periods were modeled with a duration of
2 and 1 s, respectively. The duration of observation and navigation
periods varied depending on the path length and the participant’s
behavior, and was deﬁned through the on- and offsets of the VR
environment on the computer screen (ranging between 18–40 s; see
above). This included events such as orientation adjustments (rota-
tions), walked path segments (translation periods), and time periods
during which no movement occurred (short standing periods in-
between). Thus, the implicit baseline consisted of the ﬁxation cross. To
account for noise due to head movement, we included the six rea-
lignment parameters, their ﬁrst derivatives, and the squared ﬁrst
derivatives into the design matrix. A high-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff at
128 s was applied. The four runs of the modiﬁed navigation task were
combined into one ﬁrst-level model and contrasts were created
([observation ∩navigation] > implicit baseline, observation/navigation
> implicit baseline, observation > navigation and vice versa), collapsing
across the different runs. To test for group effects, these contrast
images were submitted to one-sample t-tests.
Additionally, we were interested in whether activation changes
during observation and/or navigation scaled with individual perfor-
mance. We thus ran two linear regression analyses (contrasts obser-
vation/navigation > implicit baseline) and added the cumulative
distance error (vm, obtained during navigation periods and averaged
across all three points of a path trajectory) as a covariate of interest.
Deﬁnition of regions-of-interest (ROIs): entorhinal cortex ROIs
and participant exclusions
We used the T2-weighted structural scans to anatomically delineate
individual entorhinal cortices. First, ROIs were automatically generated
using Automated Segmentation of the Hippocampal Subﬁelds (ASHS,
software version 1.0.0, https://sites.google.com/site/hipposubﬁelds/)88.
Second, to verify the ASHS-based segmentation, we also performed
manual delineation of the entorhinal cortex by tracing its anatomical
borders on the structural image. This was done using ITK-SNAP
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
13

(software version 3.6.; www.itksnap.org)89, following the segmentation
protocol provided by Berron et al.90.
As we initially did not have a speciﬁc hypothesis regarding the
laterality of brain effects, we collapsed the left and right masks into a
bilateral entorhinal cortex image (for both the ASHS- and the ITK-
SNAP-based delineations; but see Supplementary Information for
separate analyses of ROIs in the left and right hemispheres). These
masks were then binarized and transformed into the participant-
speciﬁc space of the functional images. Since the functional images
were only partial-volume slabs, co-registration was aided by an addi-
tional intermediate step that involved the mean whole-brain functional
image8. First, each participant’s T2-weighted structural image (toge-
ther with the individual entorhinal mask) was co-registered to match
the orientation of the mean whole-brain functional image. Second, the
mean whole-brain functional image (together with the co-registered
individual entorhinal mask) was co-registered to match the orientation
of the mean partial-volume functional image. The quality of co-
registration was conﬁrmed through visual inspection of each mask’s
overlap with the individual (co-registered) structural and functional
data (mean ± s.d.; ASHS, 56 ± 13 voxels; ITK-SNAP, 104 ± 23 voxels).
The entorhinal cortex lies in close proximity to the temporal horn
of the lateral ventricle. Such tissue borders are often associated with
lower signal-to-noise ratio, which is also what we experienced in a
subsample of participants. To circumvent the issue of including noise,
we only considered voxels that exceeded a signal-to-noise threshold of
0.8, leading to the fact that voxels along the anterior-medial entorhinal
cortex border were partly dropped from the analyses (participants
were excluded if there were less than 5 voxels left in the mask, and two
participants were fully excluded from all grid code analyses involving
the entorhinal cortex). We thus exclusively focused all analyses on the
posterior-medial entorhinal cortex. After applying these restrictions,
the ﬁnal participant sample for which entorhinal cortex data was
available comprised 49 (ASHS; 23 ± 13 voxels) or 51 (ITK-SNAP; 38 ± 25
voxels) participants.
Control ROIs
To test whether grid-like codes were also detectable in other
regions, we chose several control ROIs known to be involved in
spatial navigation and visual processing but for which no signiﬁcant
grid-like coding was reported so far. These included the adjacent
hippocampus, the parahippocampal cortex, the anterior thalamus,
and the primary visual cortex (V1). Both the hippocampus and
parahippocampal cortex masks were deﬁned using the ASHS algo-
rithm (the hippocampus was deﬁned by merging the hippocampal
subﬁelds cornu ammonis (CA) 1–4 and the subiculum). To delineate
the anterior thalamus, we used the stereotactic mean anatomical
atlas provided by Krauth et al.91 (© University of Zurich and ETH
Zurich, Axel Krauth, Rémi Blanc, Alejandra Poveda, Daniel Jeanmo-
nod, Anne Morel, Gábor Székely), which is based on histological,
cytoarchitectural features deﬁned ex vivo92. We speciﬁed the ante-
rior thalamus by combining the anterior dorsal, -medial, and -ventral
nucleus masks. The V1 mask was created using the Automatic Ana-
tomical Labeling (AAL) atlas93.
As above, left and right masks were combined into bilateral
volumes and were transformed into the participant-speciﬁc image
space
(hippocampus, 447 ± 56 voxels;
parahippocampal cortex,
160 ± 26 voxels; anterior thalamus, 41 ± 6 voxels; V1, 1136 ± 297 voxels).
The quality of co-registration was conﬁrmed through visual inspection
of each mask’s overlap with the individual structural and functional
data of each participant (ﬁnal sample, N = 58 participants).
Analysis of grid-like codes
We next asked whether grid-like codes supported the tracking of
others. All analyses were based on the openly available source code of
the Grid Code Analysis Toolbox (GridCAT, software version 1.0.4,
https://www.nitrc.org/projects/gridcat)94, which follows the proce-
dures established by Doeller et al.7.
Estimating grid orientations (GLM1)
Data was modeled identical to above with the exception that each path
segment was included as a separate event and was modulated by its
direction. In brief, the BOLD response during the modiﬁed navigation
task was modeled using separate task regressors, time-locked to the
onsets of the respective events (cues, path segments observed during
observation periods, path segments walked during navigation periods,
feedback).
Translational
events
(i.e.,
individual
path
segments
observed by the participant/walked by the demonstrator, and path
segments walked by the participant) were modeled from the start of
the movement until the next point was reached (thus, the duration was
depended on the path segment length). To obtain the direction of each
segment (i.e., translational event t), we calculated the translation angle
(αt) based on the path segment coordinates within the movement area
and referenced them to an arbitrary zero coordinate on the horizontal
VR plane. The translational direction was then modeled using two
parametric modulators, deﬁned as sin(αt*6) and cos(αt*6). Orientation
adjustments (rotations) and time periods during which no movement
occurred (standing periods) were not explicitly modeled as these
durations were typically very short (<2 s). The implicit baseline thus
consisted of ﬁxation periods as well as short rotation/standing events.
Grid code analysis was performed in the native-space of each
participant.
We then estimated individual grid orientations by partitioning
each fMRI task run into estimation and test sets. To allow for stable
estimations, we maximized the data available for grid orientation
estimation by leveraging the inherent trial-design of each run. Speci-
ﬁcally, we used a 12-fold cross-validation (CV) regime during whichgrid
orientations were estimated on the path segments of 11 trials (con-
sisting of 11 observation and 11 navigation periods) and tested on the
path segments of the remaining trial (consisting of 1 observation and 1
navigation period). This was iterated until every trial was tested once.
During each CV-fold, voxel-wise grid orientations for observation/
navigation conditions were estimated by ﬁtting the fMRI data using
GLM1. We then calculated the mean grid orientation (ϕ) of each par-
ticipant based on the average beta estimates (β1 and β2) of the two
parametric modulators, extracted from all voxels within the respective
ROI and calculated using arctan[mean(β1)/mean(β2)]/6.
We speciﬁcally opted for a cross-validation regime within-runs in
order to attenuate potential confounds often associated with the
analysis of fMRI-based grid-like codes. First, we aimed to minimize
noise due to signal drifts, as well as noise due to potential imprecisions
stemming from the spatial co-registration across task runs. Second,
our goal was to avoid changes in grid orientation, or “remapping”,
which might occur under speciﬁc circumstances. Although rodent
work suggests that grid cell remapping is triggered by changes in the
environment15, the precise conditions that trigger grid cell remapping
in humans are so far unknown. One possibility is that memory and
spatial representations remap based on the temporal order of events
(for example, due to so-called “event-boundaries”, such as the begin-
ning and the end of a scanning session or a task run), presumably to
facilitate a cognitive separation of different experiences even in the
same environment95,96. We did not set out to test any hypotheses
regarding the temporal stability of such signals and thus addressed our
questions by cross-validating within runs, reasoning that this approach
would provide us with the most reliable measure of grid-like activation.
Testing grid orientations (GLM2)
This model was identical to GLM1 but instead modeled each transla-
tional event modulated by the difference between the event’s trans-
lational direction (αt) and the participant’s mean grid orientation (ϕ)
using cos[6*(αt−ϕ)]. This analysis yielded a voxel-wise grid magnitude
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
14

value for each path segment (i.e., the strength of grid-like signal per
path segment that was observed or walked).
Finally, results were averaged across CV-folds and across voxels
within the respective ROI, and data was analyzed using a set of one-
sample t-tests. We hypothesized that signiﬁcant grid-like coding
should be associated with an increase in the entorhinal cortex sig-
nal. This is based on the assumption that participants cross more
grid cell ﬁring ﬁelds as they, for instance, walk aligned with the
underlying grid axes. The choice of statistical test thus reﬂected an a
priori expectation, which is why we adopted an α-level of 0.05 (one-
tailed). Additionally, we applied Bonferroni-correction to account
for multiple comparisons (2 entorhinal cortex ROIs and 4 control
ROIs), using a threshold of αBonferroni = 0.05/6 ROIs = 0.008. Grid
magnitude values exceeding the median value ± 3 × the median
absolute deviation were excluded from the analyses97. Results
remained stable when basing calculations on the full data set (i.e.,
not excluding any outliers, see Supplementary Tables S2 and S3)
and the raw data is publicly provided (see below). To establish the
reliability of results obtained from the 6-fold symmetrical model,
we repeated the analysis with different control symmetries that
were not expected to yield signiﬁcantly increased grid magnitudes
(see also ref. 8).
Representational stability of grid-like codes
Grid-like codes might be affected by variations in spatial and temporal
signalstability8. Inthe case of high spatialinstability, the estimated grid
orientations might differ across the voxels within a ROI, resulting in
random mean grid orientations and decreased grid magnitudes of
grid-like codes. In the presence of low temporal stability, decreased
grid magnitudes could be caused by varying grid orientations over
time (for example, different grid orientations present in the estimation
vs. test set).
To estimate the extent to which such stability aspects affected
our results, we repeated the abovementioned analysis (GLM1, which
served to quantify voxel-wise grid orientations) but partitioned
each run into data halves (this way, we were able to estimate tem-
poral stability in equally-sized data parts which would not have been
possible with the CV-regime). To obtain a metric of spatial stability,
we then calculated the coherence of estimated voxel-wise grid
orientations between all voxels within the ROI using Rayleigh’s test
for non-uniformity of circular data. Higher z-values were associated
with higher spatial stability (thus, signiﬁcantly clustered grid
orientations within the ROI). To obtain a metric of temporal stabi-
lity, we compared the voxel-wise grid orientation between the ﬁrst
and second data half. A voxel was classiﬁed as “stable” if the dif-
ferences in grid orientations was within ± 15° and temporal stability
was quantiﬁed by the proportion (%) of “stable” voxels within
the ROI.
Brain activation time-locked to grid-like codes
Next, we asked whether the activity of entorhinal grid-like codes was
time-locked
to
voxel-wise
changes
in
cortical
activation
and
entorhinal-cortical connectivity, and whether such dynamics were
modulated by individual performance. To obtain a value of grid-like
codes for each path segment observed or walked, we leveraged GLM2
(which was estimated in each of the 12 CV-folds) and extracted the grid
magnitudes from the parametric modulation regressor for each path
segment (i.e., relying on the difference between each event’s transla-
tional direction and the mean grid orientation of the participant,
whereby a smaller difference should be associated with a stronger grid-
like signal within the entorhinal cortex ROI that was automatically
segmented with ASHS). Data was then modeled similar to above
(GLM1, GLM2) but translational events were modulated by the path
segment-speciﬁc grid magnitudes. To perform group-level analyses,
the GLM3 was estimated based on fMRI data in MNI standard-space.
We contrasted the parametric modulation regressors that the
captured path segment-wise ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid magnitude
against baseline (entorhinal grid magnitude during observation/navi-
gation > implicit baseline) and tested for group effects by submitting
the individual contrast images to separate one-sample t-tests. Addi-
tionally, to test whether activation changes time-locked to ﬂuctuations
in entorhinal grid magnitude scaled with performance, we ran linear
regression analyses and added the cumulative distance error (vm,
obtained during navigation periods and averaged across all three
points of a path) as a covariate of interest.
Connectivity time-locked to grid-like codes
Moreover, our goal was to probe whether ﬂuctuations in entorhinal
grid magnitude (i.e., the strength of the grid-like signal during each
path segment) would be associated with entorhinal-cortical func-
tional connectivity changes. To achieve this, we used the above-
mentioned
model
(GLM3)
and
performed
generalized
psychophysiological interaction analysis (gPPI)98. We took the ana-
tomical boundaries of the bilateral posterior-medial entorhinal
cortex as a seed99, extracted the ﬁrst eigenvariate of its functional
timecourse and adjusted for average activation levels using an
F-contrast. The timecourse was then deconvolved to estimate the
putative neural activity of the seed region (i.e., the physiological
factor) and was multiplied with boxcar functions that deﬁned the
speciﬁc task events (i.e., the psychological factor). The resulting
vectors were convolved with the canonical HRF, yielding one psy-
chophysiological interaction regressor per condition-of-interest
(i.e., for parametric modulation regressors that captured ﬂuctua-
tions in entorhinal grid magnitude during path segments of obser-
vation/navigation periods), and were contrasted against the implicit
baseline.
Group-level connectivity analyses were performed using a set of
one-sample t-tests.Again, linear regression analysis was used to test for
connectivity changes time-locked to ﬂuctuations in entorhinal grid
magnitude that potentially scaled with performance by adding the
cumulative distance error as a covariate of interest.
Statistical analysis of behavioral data and ROI-based fMRI
results
Analyses of navigation performance (distance error, vm) and ROI-
based fMRI results (magnitude of grid-like codes, directional bins and
representational stability) were carried out using R (software version
4.0.5; https://www.r-project.org), using a set of t-tests and ANOVA
models. Signiﬁcant interaction effects were followed-up with pair-wise
comparisons using the R-package emmeans (software version 1.5.5.;
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/emmeans/index.html)
and
were corrected for multiple comparisons (Tukey’s HSD). Effect sizes
were calculated as Cohen’s d or eta squared (η2) for t-test and ANOVA
models, respectively100. As mentioned above, we hypothesized that
signiﬁcant grid-like coding should be associated with an increase in the
entorhinal cortex signal. This is based on the assumption that parti-
cipants cross more grid cell ﬁring ﬁelds as they, for instance, walk
aligned with the underlying grid axes. The choice of statistical test thus
reﬂected an a priori expectation, which is why we adapted an α-level
of 0.05 (one-tailed). Additionally, we applied Bonferroni-correction
to
account
for
multiple
comparisons,
using
a
threshold
of
αBonferroni = 0.05/6 ROIs = 0.008. For all other cases, the α-level was set
to 0.05 (two-tailed). Any exploratory analyses are explicitly described
as such. Grid magnitude values exceeding the median value ± 3 × the
median absolute deviation (MAD) were excluded from the analyses.
We chose this method because the mean and standard deviation are
particularly sensitive to outliers whereas the median is not97. Results
regarding grid-like codes remained stable when basing calculations on
the full data set (i.e., not excluding any outliers) and are reported in
Supplementary Tables S2 and S3.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
15

Statistical thresholding of whole-brain fMRI results and anato-
mical labeling
Unless stated otherwise, signiﬁcance for all whole-brain fMRI analyses
was assessed using cluster-inference with a cluster-deﬁning threshold of
p < 0.001 and a cluster-probability of p < 0.05 family-wise error (FWE)
corrected for multiple comparisons. We only deviate from this a priori
deﬁned threshold to show exploratory results that might be of interest
to the ﬁeld, which is still in its early stages and where we thus think that a
balance between exploratory and conﬁrmatory ﬁndings is necessary.
The corrected cluster size (i.e., the spatial extent of a cluster that is
required in order to be labeled as signiﬁcant) was calculated using the
SPM extension “CorrClusTh.m” and the Newton–Raphson search
method (script provided by Thomas Nichols, University of Warwick,
United Kingdom, and Marko Wilke, University of Tübingen, Germany;
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/staff/academic-research/
nichols/scripts/spm/). Anatomical nomenclature for all tables was
obtained from the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging (LONI) Brain Atlas
(LBPA40, http://www.loni.usc.edu/atlases/).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Raw, anonymized fMRI data are available upon request to the corre-
sponding author (isabella.wagner@univie.ac.at). At present, partici-
pant informed consent does not allow for depositing the full data set.
All analyses are based on openly available software (see section “Code
availability” below). Source data to reproduce all graphs (behavioral
performance and ROI-based results of all grid analyses), as well as (un-)
thresholded statistical whole- brain fMRI maps and their correspond-
ing results tables are openly available at the Open Science Framework
(https://osf.io/mhtgp/). Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
All analysis is based on openly available software or custom code which
is provided on the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/mhtgp/).
Software codes for the modiﬁed navigation task are available upon
request to the corresponding author (isabella.wagner@univie.ac.at).
References
1.
Stangl, M. et al. Boundary-anchored neural mechanisms of
location-encoding for self and others. Nature 589, 420–425
(2021).
2.
Omer, D. B., Maimon, S. R., Las, L. & Ulanovsky, N. Social place-
cells in the bat hippocampus. Science 359, 218–224 (2018).
3.
Danjo, T., Toyoizumi, T. & Fujisawa, S. Spatial representations of
self and other in the hippocampus. Science 359, 213–218 (2018).
4.
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I.
Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature
436, 801–806 (2005).
5.
Jacobs, J. et al. Direct recordings of grid-like neuronal activity in
human spatial navigation. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1188–1190 (2013).
6.
Kunz, L. et al. Mesoscopic neural representations in spatial navi-
gation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 615–630 (2019).
7.
Doeller, C. F., Barry, C. & Burgess, N. Evidence for grid cells in a
human memory network. Nature 463, 657–661 (2010).
8.
Stangl, M. et al. Compromised grid-cell-like representations in old
age as a key mechanism to explain age-related navigational deﬁ-
cits. Curr. Biol. 28, 1108–1115.e6 (2018).
9.
Kunz, L. et al. Reduced grid-cell-like representations in adults at
genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Science 350, 430–433 (2015).
10.
Bierbrauer, A. et al. Unmasking selective path integration deﬁcits
in Alzheimer’s disease risk carriers. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba1394 (2020).
11.
He, Q. & Brown, T. I. Environmental barriers disrupt grid-like
representations in humans during navigation. Curr. Biol. 29,
2718–2722.e3 (2019).
12.
Julian, J. B. & Doeller, C. F. Remapping and realignment in the
human hippocampal formation predict context-dependent spatial
behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 863–872 (2021).
13.
Bellmund, J. L., Deuker, L., Navarro Schröder, T. &Doeller, C. F. Grid-
cell representations in mental simulation. Elife 5 e17089 (2016).
14.
Horner, A. J., Bisby, J. A., Zotow, E., Bush, D. & Burgess, N. Grid-like
processing of imagined navigation. Curr. Biol. 26, 842–847 (2016).
15.
Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., Treves, A., Moser, M. & Moser, E. Hippo-
campal remapping and grid realignment in entorhinal cortex.
Nature 446, 190–194 (2007).
16.
Moser, E. I., Kropff, E. & Moser, M.-B. Place cells, grid cells, and the
brain’s spatial representation system. Annu Rev. Neurosci. 31,
69–89 (2008).
17.
Bush, D., Barry, C. & Burgess, N. What do grid cells contribute to
place cell ﬁring. Trends Neurosci. 37, 136–145 (2014).
18.
Zhang, S. J. et al. Optogenetic dissection of entorhinal-
hippocampal functional connectivity. Science 340, 44 (2013).
19.
Chersi, F. & Burgess, N. The cognitive architecture of spatial
navigation: hippocampal and striatal contributions. Neuron 88,
64–77 (2015).
20.
Patai, E. Z. & Spiers, H. J. The versatile wayﬁnder: prefrontal con-
tributions to spatial navigation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 25,
520–533 (2021).
21.
Epstein, R. A., Patai, E. Z., Julian, J. B. & Spiers, H. J. The cognitive
map in humans: spatial navigation and beyond. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
1504–1513 (2017).
22.
Maguire, E. A. et al. Knowing where and getting there: a human
navigation network. Science 280, 921–924 (1998).
23.
Ekstrom, A. D., Huffman, D. J. & Starrett, M. Interacting networks of
brain regions underlie human spatial navigation: A review and novel
synthesis of the literature. J. Neurophysiol. 118, 3328–3344 (2017).
24.
Epstein, R. A. Parahippocampal and retrosplenial contributions to
human spatial navigation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 388–396 (2008).
25.
Epstein, R. & Kanwisher, N. A cortical representation the local
visual environment. Nature 392, 598–601 (1998).
26.
Vann, S. D., Aggleton, J. P. & Maguire, E. A. What does the retro-
splenial cortex do? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 792–802 (2009).
27.
Maguire, E. The retrosplenial contribution to human navigation: a
review of lesion and neuroimaging ﬁndings. Scand. J. Psychol. 42,
225–238 (2001).
28.
Danjo, T. Allocentric representations of space in the hippo-
campus. Neurosci. Res. 153, 1–7 (2020).
29.
McNaughton, B. L. et al. Cortical representation of motion during
unrestrained spatial navigation in the rat. Cereb. Cortex 4,
27–39 (1994).
30.
Whitlock, J. R., Sutherland, R. J., Witter, M. P., Moser, M. B. & Moser,
E. I. Navigating from hippocampus to parietal cortex. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 14755–14762 (2008).
31.
Ciaramelli, E., Rosenbaum, R. S., Solcz, S., Levine, B. & Moscov-
itch, M. Mental space travel: damage to posterior parietal cortex
prevents egocentric navigation and reexperiencing of remote
spatial memories. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cognition 36,
619–634 (2010).
32.
Nitz, D. A. Tracking route progression in the posterior parietal
cortex. Neuron 49, 747–756 (2006).
33.
Hartley, T., Maguire, E. A., Spiers, H. J. & Burgess, N. The well-worn
route and the path less traveled: distinct neural bases of route
following and wayﬁnding in humans. Neuron 37, 877–888 (2003).
34.
Doeller, C. F., King, J. A. & Burgess, N. Parallel striatal and hippo-
campal systems for landmarks and boundaries in spatial memory.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 5915–5920 (2008).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
16

35.
Iaria, G., Petrides, M., Dagher, A., Pike, B. & Bohbot, V. D. Cognitive
strategies dependent on the hippocampus and caudate nucleus in
human navigation: variability and change with practice. J. Neu-
rosci. 23, 5945–5952 (2003).
36.
Sokolov, A. A. et al. Structural and effective brain connectivity
underlying biological motion detection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
115, E12034–E12042 (2018).
37.
Herrington, J., Nymberg, C. & Schultz, R. Biological motion task
performance predicts superior temporal sulcus activity. Brain
Cogn. 77, 372–381 (2011).
38.
Maidenbaum, S., Miller, J., Stein, J. M. & Jacobs, J. Grid-like hex-
adirectional modulation of human entorhinal theta oscillations.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 10798–10803 (2018).
39.
Miller, J. et al. Lateralized hippocampal oscillations underlie dis-
tinct aspects of human spatial memory and navigation. Nat.
Commun. 9, 2423 (2018).
40.
Barron, H. C., Garvert, M. M. & Behrens, T. E. J. Repetition sup-
pression: a means to index neural representations using BOLD?
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B. 371, 20150355 (2016).
41.
Nau, M., Navarro Schröder, T., Bellmund, J. L. S. & Doeller, C. F.
Hexadirectional coding of visual space in human entorhinal cor-
tex. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 188–190 (2018).
42.
Staudigl, T. et al. Hexadirectional modulation of high-frequency
electrophysiological activity in the human anterior medial tem-
poral lobe maps visual space. Curr. Biol. 28, 3325–3329.e4
(2018).
43.
Killian, N. J., Jutras, M. J. & Buffalo, E. A. A map of visual space in
the primate entorhinal cortex. Nature 491, 761–764 (2012).
44.
Julian, J. B., Keinath, A. T., Frazzetta, G. & Epstein, R. A. Human
entorhinal cortex represents visual space using a boundary-
anchored grid. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 191–194 (2018).
45.
Gerlei, K. Z., Brown, C. M., Sürmeli, G. & Nolan, M. F. Deep
entorhinal cortex: from circuit organization to spatial cognition
and memory. Trends Neurosci. 44, 876–887 (2021).
46.
Dotson, N. M. & Yartsev, M. M. Nonlocal spatiotemporal repre-
sentation in the hippocampus of freely ﬂying bats. Science 373,
242–247 (2021).
47.
Morris, R. G., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J. N. & O’Keefe, J. Place naviga-
tion impaired in rats with hippocampal lesions. Nature 297,
681–683 (1982).
48.
O’Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. The hippocampus as a spatial map.
Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat.
Brain Res. 34, 171–175 (1971).
49.
Maguire, E. A. et al. Navigation-related structural change in the
hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
4398–4403 (2000).
50.
Rugg, M. D. & Vilberg, K. L. Brain networks underlying episodic
memory retrieval. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 255–260 (2012).
51.
Watrous, A. J., Tandon, N., Conner, C. R., Pieters, T. & Ekstrom, A.
D. Frequency-speciﬁc network connectivity increases underlie
accurate spatiotemporal memory retrieval. Nat. Neurosci. 16,
349–356 (2013).
52.
King, D. R., de Chastelaine, M., Elward, R. L., Wang, T. H. & Rugg, M.
D. Recollection-related increases in functional connectivity pre-
dict individual differences in memory accuracy. J. Neurosci. 35,
1763–1772 (2015).
53.
Daselaar, S. M., Prince, S. E. & Cabeza, R. When less means more:
deactivations during encoding that predict subsequent memory.
Neuroimage 23, 921–927 (2004).
54.
Daselaar, S. M. et al. Posterior midline and ventral parietal activity
is associated with retrieval success and encoding failure. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 3, 13 (2009).
55.
Huijbers, W. et al. Explaining the encoding/retrieval ﬂip: memory-
related deactivations and activations in the posteromedial cortex.
Neuropsychologia 50, 3764–3774 (2012).
56.
Kragel, J. E. & Voss, J. L. Looking for the neural basis of memory.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 26, 53–65 (2022).
57.
Wagner, I. C., van Buuren, M., Bovy, L. & Fernandez, G. Parallel
engagement of regions associated with encoding and later
retrieval forms durable memories. J. Neurosci. 36,
7985–7995 (2016).
58.
van Kesteren, M. T. R., Ruiter, D. J., Fernández, G. & Henson, R. N.
How schema and novelty augment memory formation. Trends
Neurosci. 35, 211–219 (2012).
59.
Gallagher, H. L. et al. Reading the mind in cartoons and stories: an
fMRI study of “theory of mind” in verbal and nonverbal tasks.
Neuropsychologia 38, 11–21 (2000).
60.
Gallagher, H. L., Jack, A. I., Roepstorff, A. & Frith, C. D. Imaging the
intentional stance in a competitive game. Neuroimage 16,
814–821 (2002).
61.
Gaesser, B., Hirschfeld-Kroen, J., Wasserman, E. A., Horn, M. &
Young, L. A role for the medial temporal lobe subsystem in guid-
ing prosociality: the effect of episodic processes on willingness to
help others. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.1093/
scan/nsz014 (2019).
62.
Amodio, D. M. & Frith, C. D. Meeting of minds: the medial frontal
cortex and social cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 268–277
(2006).
63.
Saxe, R. & Powell, L. J. It’s the thought that counts. Psychol. Sci. 17,
692–699 (2006).
64.
Spreng, R. N. & Mar, R. A. I remember you: a role for memory in
social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their inter-
action. Brain Res. 1428, 43–50 (2012).
65.
Wagner, I. C., Rütgen, M. & Lamm, C. Pattern similarity and con-
nectivity of hippocampal-neocortical regions support empathy for
pain. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 15, 273–284 (2020).
66.
Muñoz, M. & Insausti, R. Cortical efferents of the entorhinal cortex
and the adjacent parahippocampal region in the monkey (Macaca
fascicularis). Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 1368–1388 (2005).
67.
van Strien, N. M., Cappaert, N. L. M. & Witter, M. P. The anatomy of
memory: an interactive overview of the parahippocampal-
hippocampal network. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 272–282 (2009).
68.
Burwell, R. D. & Amaral, D. G. Cortical afferents of the perirhinal,
postrhinal, and entorhinal cortices of the rat. J. Comp. Neurol.
398, 179–205 (1998).
69.
Kerr, K. M., Agster, K. L., Furtak, S. C. & Burwell, R. D. Functional
neuroanatomy of the parahippocampal region: the lateral and
medial entorhinal areas. Hippocampus 17, 697–708 (2007).
70.
Kondo, H. & Witter, M. P. Topographic organization of orbitofrontal
projections to the parahippocampal region in rats. J. Comp. Neu-
rol. 522, 772–793 (2014).
71.
Garcia, A. D. & Buffalo, E. A. Anatomy and function of the primate
entorhinal cortex. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 6, 411–432 (2020).
72.
Brun, V. et al. Impaired spatial representation in CA1 after lesion of
direct input from entorhinal cortex. Neuron 57, 290–302 (2008).
73.
Remondes, M. & Schuman, E. M. Role for a cortical input to hip-
pocampal area CA1 in the consolidation of a long-term memory.
Nature 431, 699–703 (2004).
74.
Cholvin, T., Hainmueller, T. & Bartos, M. The hippocampus con-
verts dynamic entorhinal inputs into stable spatial maps. Neuron
109, 3135–3148.e7 (2021).
75.
Insausti, R., Herrero, M. T. & Witter, M. P. Entorhinal cortex of the
rat: cytoarchitectonic subdivisions and the origin and distribution
of cortical efferents. Hippocampus 7, 146–183 (1997).
76.
Chen, D. et al. Theta oscillations coordinate grid-like representa-
tions between ventromedial prefrontal and entorhinal cortex. Sci.
Adv. 7, eabj0200 (2021).
77.
Constantinescu, A. O., O’Reilly, J. X. & Behrens, T. E. J. Organizing
conceptual knowledge in humans with a gridlike code. Science
352, 1464–1468 (2016).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
17

78.
Nau, M., Navarro Schröder, T., Frey, M. & Doeller, C. F. Behavior-
dependent directional tuning in the human visual-navigation
network. Nat. Commun. 11, 3247 (2020).
79.
Neubauer, A. C. & Fink, A. Intelligence and neural efﬁciency.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 33, 1004–1023 (2009).
80.
Wagner, I. C. et al. Durable memories and efﬁcient neural coding
through mnemonic training using the method of loci. Sci. Adv. 7,
eabc7606 (2021).
81.
Chen, D. et al. Hexadirectional modulation of theta power in
human entorhinal cortex during spatial navigation. Curr. Biol. 28,
3310–3315.e4 (2018).
82.
Wilming, N., König, P., König, S. & Buffalo, E. A. Entorhinal cortex
receptive ﬁelds are modulated by spatial attention, even without
movement. Elife 7, e31745 (2018).
83.
Lockwood, P. L., Apps, M. A. J. & Chang, S. W. C. Is There a ‘Social’
Brain? Implementations and algorithms. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24,
802–813 (2020).
84.
Engbert, R. & Kliegl, R. Microsaccades uncover the orientation of
covert attention. Vis. Res. 43, 1035–1045 (2003).
85.
Rayner, K., Smith, T. J., Malcolm, G. L. & Henderson, J. M. Eye
movements and visual encoding during scene perception. Psy-
chol. Sci. 20, 6–10 (2009).
86.
Jenkinson, M., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W. &
Smith, S. M. FSL. Neuroimage 62, 782–790 (2012).
87.
Ashburner, J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm.
Neuroimage 38, 95–113 (2007).
88.
Yushkevich, P. A. et al. Automated volumetry and regional thick-
ness analysis of hippocampal subﬁelds and medial temporal
cortical structures in mild cognitive impairment. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 36, 258–287 (2015).
89.
Yushkevich, P. A. et al. User-guided 3D active contour segmen-
tation of anatomical structures: Signiﬁcantly improved efﬁciency
and reliability. Neuroimage 31, 1116–1128 (2006).
90.
Berron, D. et al. A protocol for manual segmentation of medial
temporal lobe subregions in 7 Tesla MRI. NeuroImage Clin. 15,
466–482 (2017).
91.
Krauth, A. et al. A mean three-dimensional atlas of the human
thalamus: generation from multiple histological data. Neuroimage
49, 2053–2062 (2010).
92.
Morel, A. Stereotactic Atlas of the Human Thalamus and Basal
Ganglia (Informa Healthcare, 2007).
93.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. et al. Automated anatomical labeling of acti-
vations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the
MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage 15, 273–289 (2002).
94.
Stangl, M., Shine, J. & Wolbers, T. The GridCAT: a toolbox for
automated analysis of human grid cell codes in fMRI. Front. Neu-
roinf 11, 47 (2017).
95.
Radvansky, G. A. & Zacks, J. M. Event boundaries in memory and
cognition. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 17, 133–140 (2017).
96.
Brunec, I. K., Moscovitch, M. & Barense, M. D. Boundaries shape
cognitive representations of spaces and events. Trends Cogn. Sci.
22, 637–650 (2018).
97.
Leys, C., Ley, C., Klein, O., Bernard, P. & Licata, L. Detecting out-
liers: do not use standard deviation around the mean, use absolute
deviation around the median. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 49,
764–766 (2013).
98.
McLaren, D. G., Ries, M. L., Xu, G. & Johnson, S. C. A generalized
form of context-dependent psychophysiological interactions
(gPPI): a comparison to standard approaches. Neuroimage 61,
1277–1286 (2012).
99.
Maass, A., Berron, D., Libby, L. A., Ranganath, C. & Düzel, E.
Functional subregions of the human entorhinal cortex. Elife 4,
1–20 (2015).
100. Lakens, D. Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate
cumulative science: a practical primer for t-tests and ANOVAs.
Front. Psychol. 4, 863 (2013).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Paul Anderson for excellent discussions,
Ronald Sladky for support with the MRI sequences, and Magdalena Boch
for advice on the eye-tracker setup. I.C.W. is supported by the Austrian
Science Fund (FWF, P 34775). M.S. is supported by the National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH, K99NS126715).
Author contributions
Conceptualization: I.C.W. and D.B.O.; Methodology: I.C.W. and M.S.;
Software: I.C.W., M.S., and A.L.; Validation: I.C.W. and L.P.G.; Formal
analysis: I.C.W.; Investigation: I.C.W., B.T., and L.P.G.; Resources: I.C.W.
and C.L.; Data curation: I.C.W.; Writing – Original draft: I.C.W.; Writing –
reviewing & editing: all authors; Visualization: I.C.W.; Supervision: I.C.W.;
Project administration: I.C.W.; Funding acquisition: I.C.W.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Isabella C. Wagner.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this
work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35819-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:231 
18

