BDJ IN PRACTICE | VOL 36 | ISSUE 4
5
 UPFRONT
Sir, I would like to bring to you attention the 
technological phenomenon that’s creating 
buzz across the world. ChatGPT (Generative 
pre-training Transformer) is a large language 
model (LLM) developed by OpenAI and 
has shown considerable innovation in NLPs 
(Natural Language Processing), which is a 
field of artificial intelligence (AI) that focuses 
on interactions between computer models 
and the human interactions.1
This AI model has shown endless potential 
applications in the field of science and 
technology, and medicine and dentistry are 
no different. Here are some of the potential 
applications of ChatGPT in dentistry as 
described by the AI itself as follows:
‘Potential applications of ChatGPT in 
dentistry include: 
1.	 Providing dental health information: 
ChatGPT can assist in providing patients 
with accurate and reliable information 
about their dental health and hygiene. 
Patients can ask questions and receive 
personalised responses, which can help 
them on various dental issues. 
2.	 Dental education: ChatGPT can be used 
a potential tool for education, providing 
students and professionals with access 
to a vast amount of knowledge and 
information regarding different realms of 
dentistry, which can help in training and 
professional development. 
3.	 Personalised patient care, scheduling 
and billing services: ChatGPT can help 
dental professionals to better understand 
their patients’ concerns and provide 
personalised treatment options as well 
as help in maintaining schedules and 
optimising billing and coding services. 
4.	 Diagnosis and treatment planning: 
ChatGPT can assist in diagnosis of dental 
conditions and treatment planning. 
5.	 Patient monitoring: ChatGPT can be 
used to monitor patients‘ dental health 
and hygiene, providing regular reminders 
and check-ins.’
The above points were generated in the 
chatbox of the ChatGPT interface and edited 
by us.2 This was one example of the plethora 
of data and potential answers ChatGPT 
can provide and help us in our practice, 
training and development. However, we need 
to tread with caution as there are several 
important limiting factors that need to be 
noted. Major concerns regarding the use of 
AI models like ChatGPT are ethics and legal 
issues. Potential plagiarism is a big factor as 
in its current iteration, this interface does 
not provide adequate citations and if used 
for the purpose of writing, plagiarism is 
highly possible. Accuracy and bias may also 
be potential limiting factors as the engine 
works on data already available which may 
or may not have previous bias, additioanlly, 
accuracy of the data cannot be confirmed.3 In 
the use of diagnosis and treatment planning, 
although ChatGPT provided relatively sound 
answers to our queries, we cannot rely on it 
for this purpose as the needs of every patient 
are different and this model may not possess 
the ability to create a personalised plan yet. 
I believe ChatGPT and AI models 
like this have great potential in the field 
of dentistry and can provide valuable 
information and support patients, students, 
and professionals alike but we need to be 
wary of its limitations.
M. Pahadia, Florida, via email
References
1.	 ChatGPT. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/ 
(accessed February 13, 2023).
2.	 ChatGPT. https://chat.openai.com/chat 
(accessed February 13, 2023).
3.	 Biswas S. ChatGPT and the Future of Medical 
Writing. Radiol 2023; 223312. Advance 
online publication. https://doi.org/10.1148/
radiol.223312.
LETTER TO THE EDITOR
ChatGPT in dentistry: Is it worth the hype?
The British Dental Association has warned 
that Ministers need to step up on oral health 
inequality, as the first oral health survey of 
5-year-olds published since lockdown shows 
once again no improvements in decay levels 
and a widening gap between rich and poor. 
23.7% of 5-year-old children in England 
had experience of obvious dentinal decay. 
This was a marginal increase on the previous 
survey of 5-year-olds in 2019, where figures 
stood at 23.4%. 
The report concludes that while absolute 
inequalities in tooth decay prevalence in 
5-year-olds reduced from 2008 to 2015, 
there have been no further reductions in 
inequalities since then. In 2022 the slope 
index of inequality for the prevalence of 
experience of dentinal decay in 5-year-olds 
was 27.7%. An increase in the previous survey 
in 2019, when the slope index was 26.8%.
In the 2019 survey the prevalence of dental 
decay was higher in children from more 
deprived areas (34.3%) than in children from 
less deprived areas (13.7%) – an oral health 
gap of 20.6 percentage points. In 2022 data 
that gap has widened with the prevalence of 
dental decay in more deprived areas being 
35.1% compared to 13.5% in the more 
affluent – an oral health gap of over 21.6 
percentage points. Recent data on hospital 
tooth extractions among 0- to 19-year-olds 
confirmed that tooth decay remains the most 
common reason for hospital admissions in 
children aged between 6 and 10 years – and 
that rates for children and young people 
living in the most deprived communities are 
nearly 3.5 times that of those living in the 
most affluent.
While supervised brushing programmes 
in nurseries and primary schools are key 
parts of funded national programmes in 
Wales and Scotland, the UK government 
has failed to even bring forward pledges to 
consult on expanding efforts in England. 
While measures to simplify the rollout of 
water fluoridation were contained in the 
Health and Care Act that gained royal assent 
in April 2022, not a single new programme 
has been announced.
BDA chair Eddie Crouch said: ‘England’s 
oral health gap is widening, but ministers 
remain asleep at the wheel. Time and again 
we hear the right noises but see literally no 
action to break the link between decay and 
deprivation.
‘Whether it’s providing access to 
basic care, rolling out tried and tested 
programmes in schools or fluoridating 
water, our youngest patients require deeds 
not words.’
Child oral health gap widens
²© British Dental Association.2022 ª© 2022 The Author(s), under exclusive licence to British Dental Association.
ª
²

