Nature Human Behaviour
nature human behaviour
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Article
Neuronal activity in the human amygdala 
and hippocampus enhances emotional 
memory encoding
Salman E. Qasim 
  1 
, Uma R. Mohan2, Joel M. Stein 
  3 & Joshua Jacobs 
  4,5 
Emotional events comprise our strongest and most valuable memories. 
Here we examined how the brain prioritizes emotional information for 
storage using direct brain recording and deep brain stimulation. First, 
148 participants undergoing intracranial electroencephalographic (iEEG) 
recording performed an episodic memory task. Participants were most 
successful at remembering emotionally arousing stimuli. High-frequency 
activity (HFA), a correlate of neuronal spiking activity, increased in both 
the hippocampus and the amygdala when participants successfully 
encoded emotional stimuli. Next, in a subset of participants (N = 19), 
we show that applying high-frequency electrical stimulation to the 
hippocampus selectively diminished memory for emotional stimuli and 
specifically decreased HFA. Finally, we show that individuals with depression 
(N = 19) also exhibit diminished emotion-mediated memory and HFA. By 
demonstrating how direct stimulation and symptoms of depression unlink 
HFA, emotion and memory, we show the causal and translational potential 
of neural activity in the amygdalohippocampal circuit for prioritizing 
emotionally arousing memories.
We remember emotional events better than neutral ones1. This 
enhanced recollection of emotional information is important practi-
cally for protecting our most important memories and may also provide 
generalizable clues about the fundamental nature of memory2, by 
explaining how the brain remembers some events better than others. 
One of the critical brain regions for processing emotional stimuli3—
the amygdala—is an early target of Alzheimer’s disease4 and abuts the 
anterior portion of the hippocampus, the brain region most strongly 
associated with declarative memory5. This aetiological and anatomical 
proximity converges with behavioural, imaging and lesion evidence 
that the amygdala may be critical for memory of emotional events6–10.
One prominent theory of the amygdala’s role in memory proposes 
that the amygdala boosts hippocampal encoding and consolidation of 
emotional stimuli by facilitating the release of norepinephrine from 
the locus coeruleus11,12. While it is difficult to directly measure human 
norepinephrine fluctuations, there is indirect evidence for this theory 
from pharmacological studies showing that enhancing13,14 or disrupt-
ing15,16 noradrenergic transmission, respectively, enhances and impairs 
memory for arousing stimuli. Noradrenergic inputs may modulate the 
amygdalohippocampal circuit by upregulating the mean rate of neu-
ronal activity, as suggested by both direct recordings of neuronal activ-
ity17,18 and recordings of high-frequency activity (HFA) in limbic local 
field potentials (LFPs)19,20. Similarly, data from patients with depression 
also show links between emotional memory, norepinephrine and 
amygdala activity. Individuals with depression, who exhibit impaired 
emotional memory21, show improvement in symptoms of depression 
when treated by norepinephrine agonists22 or when receiving brain 
stimulation that increases amygdala HFA23. Together, these findings 
Received: 14 January 2022
Accepted: 25 November 2022
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
1Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 2Surgical Neurology Branch, NINDS, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. 3Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 4Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA. 5Department of Neurological Surgery, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
 e-mail: salman.qasim@mssm.edu; 
joshua.jacobs@columbia.edu

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
has limited task relevance, it drives memory enhancement and is thus 
likely predictive of participants’ implicit emotional associations. 
Because the amygdala is broadly involved in the enhancement of 
memory for emotional events6–9, and delayed free recall tasks depend 
on the hippocampus36, we hypothesized that the joint activation of the 
amygdala and hippocampus was responsible for this phenomenon.
HFA predicts successful emotional memory encoding
We next tested how neuronal activity in the hippocampus and amyg-
dala corresponded to the effects of emotional context on memory. We 
analysed brain recordings from intracranial electroencephalographic 
(iEEG) electrodes (n = 473 electrodes in the hippocampus and n = 273 
electrodes in the amygdala passed exclusion criteria) implanted in these 
participants while undergoing intracranial monitoring for epilepsy 
treatment (Fig. 2a). The majority of amygdala electrodes were located in 
the basolateral nuclei (Extended Data Fig. 2). First, we assessed whether 
spectral power of the signals at each electrode during encoding was 
predictive of subsequent recall by comparing the power spectrum of 
the iEEG signals during encoding between remembered and forgotten 
items37,38. Previous iEEG studies have identified a characteristic decrease 
in LFP in the hippocampus associated with encoding of successfully 
recalled words35,39,40, which we replicated in both hemispheres (Fig. 2b). 
In addition, we also demonstrated that the amygdala showed similar 
iEEG power changes during encoding of subsequently remembered 
items, particularly in the left hemisphere (Fig. 2b). These subsequent 
memory effects (SMEs) were not a result of differences in spectral tilt41 
or changes to the height or frequency of the spectral peaks (Extended 
Data Fig. 3).
We next assessed whether memory-related spectral dynamics were 
mediated by the emotional features of each word, as we hypothesized 
that such stimuli might upregulate noradrenergic release related to 
emotional processing, eliciting increased neuronal spiking. Figure 
2c shows an example of the signals we observed in the hippocampus 
and amygdala, depicting z-scored power spectra from individual trials 
when participants viewed words. For words that were subsequently 
recalled (left panel), HFA (defined as 30–128 Hz, following previous 
work40,42,43) in both regions was elevated for more arousing words. This 
arousal-related elevation in HFA was absent for words that participants 
would subsequently forget (right panel), suggesting that HFA increases 
correlate with successful memory primarily when participants encoded 
high-arousal words. We extended our mixed-effects logistic regression 
model to include trial-wise HFA as a predictor of subsequent recall in 
addition to arousal and valence, while accounting for electrode region 
and hemisphere (Methods and Supplementary Table 3). Consistent 
with the behavioural results, and the examples shown above, increases 
in amygdalohippocampal HFA during encoding of high-arousal words 
predicted subsequent recall (HFA:arousal, β = 0.08, 95% HDI = [0.006, 
0.15]; Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). This was particularly true for more nega-
tive words (HFA:arousal:valence, β = −0.5, 95% HDI = [−0.9, −0.1]; Fig. 
2d), although not when assessing valence alone (Supplementary Table 
3). In contrast to arousal, valence-driven HFA increases during success-
ful memory encoding varied significantly between hemispheres and 
regions and along the anterior–posterior axis of the hippocampus, 
suggesting that valence elicits more localized memory-related neural 
activity than arousal (Extended Data Fig. 5a–c and Supplementary Table 
3). Increases in arousal-mediated HFA occurred across multiple time-
points during successful memory encoding in both the hippocampus 
and the amygdala (Extended Data Fig. 6).
Because low-frequency differences dominated the overall SME 
effect computed across all words (Fig. 2b), we next assessed whether 
theta (2–8 Hz) power also correlated with increased memory for 
emotional words. Theta power did not show a consistent relationship 
with arousal- or valence-mediated memory (Supplementary Table 4), 
suggesting that arousal-mediated memory specifically elicited HFA 
increases in the amygdalohippocampal circuit. Still, we tested the 
suggest that HFA in the hippocampus and amygdala is, at least in part, 
driven by noradrenergic upregulation of neural activity24.
Building off these ideas, here, we hypothesized that our ability to 
prioritize emotionally salient information for improved memory would 
rely on this upregulation of neuronal activity within the amygdala and 
hippocampus during encoding. We tested this hypothesis in humans 
using a novel tripartite approach that combined three complementary 
methods: direct human brain recordings, deep brain stimulation and 
psychometric assessment of symptoms of depression in patients with 
epilepsy performing a verbal free recall task. Free recall is an episodic 
memory task in which participants exhibit enhanced memory for 
emotional words25,26 and elicits pupil dilation (thought to reflect nor-
epinephrine release27) during successful memory encoding28. Thus, 
we hypothesized that direct brain recordings from participants per-
forming this task would reveal whether HFA, a proxy for local neuronal 
spiking29, reflected noradrenergic dynamics during the prioritized 
encoding of emotional events. Consistent with these predictions, we 
found that the amplitude of HFA in the amygdala and hippocampus 
predicted the successful encoding of emotional words30,31. We inte-
grated these findings with electrical stimulation and psychometric 
data to demonstrate how perturbations to the amygdalohippocampal 
circuit diminished the linkage between HFA, emotion and memory. 
Specifically, we found that inhibitory brain stimulation weakened HFA 
and selectively impaired recall of emotional words, suggesting that 
there is a causal relationship in this circuit between neuronal spiking 
and the enhanced memory for emotional items. We then demonstrated 
that participants with depression—whose impaired emotional process-
ing is characterized by disruption of noradrenergic neurotransmis-
sion32—exhibited a similar reduction in emotion-mediated memory 
and concurrent HFA in the hippocampus and amygdala. Overall, our 
findings demonstrate that neuronal activity in the human amygdala 
and hippocampus, a potential correlate of noradrenergic upregula-
tion, may causally support the prioritization of emotional memories.
Results
Emotional stimuli are better remembered
We analysed data from 148 participants (Supplementary Table 1) who 
performed a verbal episodic memory task where they viewed and 
remembered lists of words. After each list, participants performed a 
math distractor task to prevent rehearsal and were then told to recall 
as many words as possible, in any order (Fig. 1a). We quantified the 
emotional properties of each word using valence and arousal typically 
associated with each word (Fig. 1b). Valence ratings, which capture 
how positive or negative a word is, and arousal ratings, which capture 
the emotional intensity of a word, were drawn from a publicly avail-
able database. We employed a Bayesian mixed-effects logistic regres-
sion approach33 to assess how the emotional properties of each word 
impacted participant’s memory encoding34 (Fig. 1c; see Methods for 
detail) and report the posterior estimate of the mean coefficient (β). We 
consider an effect to be consistently and meaningfully different from 0 
if the 95% high-density interval (HDI) does not include 0 (see Methods 
for detail). While arousal and valence showed some correlation (Spear-
man’s ρ = −0.12, P = 0.0005; Fig. 1b), participants best remembered 
words that were highly arousing (β = 0.34, 95% HDI = [0.21, 0.48]; Fig. 
1d and Supplementary Table 2), while the effects of valence on recall 
were more variable. To ensure that this distinction between valence and 
arousal was not driven by the choice of rating scale, we replicated our 
main behavioural finding using an alternative rating scale (Methods 
and Supplementary Fig. 1). High arousal also modulated clustering 
during recall, consistent with earlier work35 (Extended Data Fig. 1).
The emotional features of each word, particularly arousal, were 
thus predictive of participants’ memory performance, even as the 
task did not explicitly depend on the emotional features of the words, 
consistent with earlier work in healthy (non-epileptic) participants25,26. 
These behavioural results suggest that even when emotional context 

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
possibility that the increases in HFA were coordinated by the phase 
of low-frequency activity but discovered no evidence for significant 
cross-frequency coupling between theta and HFA in the amygdalohip-
pocampal circuit (P > 0.05, cluster-based permutation test, Supple-
mentary Fig. 2). These results thus demonstrate that emotional words, 
particularly those that were highly arousing, specifically upregulated 
HFA throughout the amygdalohippocampal circuit during encoding 
of subsequently remembered words.
Hippocampal stimulation disrupts emotional memory  
and HFA
To better understand whether the HFA we observed reflects neural 
mechanisms underlying emotional memory encoding, we next tested 
whether disrupting HFA would impair memory for emotional informa-
tion. To do so, we analysed the effect of high-frequency (50 Hz) deep 
brain stimulation on memory performance. This type of stimulation 
has been shown to modulate HFA44 and impair memory when applied 
to medial temporal lobe (MTL)45. A group of 19 participants performed 
32 sessions of the free recall task, while direct electrical stimulation was 
applied to their hippocampus (n = 28 sessions) and amygdala (n = 4 ses-
sions) (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Table 5, Extended Data Fig. 7 and Meth-
ods). In addition, 8 participants were stimulated in MTL-neocortical 
regions, such as the parahippocampal gyrus and perirhinal cortex, 
which served as nearby control regions that are outside of the amyg-
dalohippocampal circuit but still provide input to the hippocampus 
(n = 25 sessions). We excluded amygdala stimulation data from further 
analysis due to the small sample size.
We analysed these data to test how stimulation impacted memory 
for words of varying arousal and valence, accounting for electrode hem-
isphere and region. Figure 3b shows that high-frequency stimulation, 
when applied to the hippocampus, specifically impaired encoding for 
emotional words. Specifically, stimulation had a strong, consistent del-
eterious effect on recall for more negative words (stimulation:valence, 
β = 0.7, 95% HDI = [1.38, 0.003], Fig. 3b). A similar but inconsistent 
trend was observable for high-arousal words (Supplementary Table 
6), although we could not examine whether this trend was driven by 
negative words due to insufficient sample size to test the interac-
tion between arousal and valence. These results suggest that emo-
tional memory encoding is selectively diminished by hippocampal 
stimulation.
One alternative possibility was that stimulation simply dimin-
ished memory more for any high-memorability word. To rule out this 
possibility, we tested whether hippocampal stimulation impaired 
memory for words as a function of serial position, which strongly 
predicts free recall memorability46. Stimulation did not more strongly 
affect early-position words, despite their increased memorability 
over late-position words (Supplementary Table 6 and Extended Data 
Fig. 8), demonstrating that hippocampal stimulation specifically tar-
geted emotional memory-encoding processes. Moreover, stimula-
tion applied to the MTL-neocortical regions did not elicit consistent 
differences in recall performance related to either valence or arousal, 
suggesting that hippocampal stimulation was selectively disrupting 
neural dynamics related to the emotional enhancement of memory 
(Supplementary Table 6).
0
2
Density
–0.5
0
0.5
2
Valence
ρ = –0.12
a
b
c
d
Density
0
1
Arousal
p(recall)
NRC lexicon
Free-recall
word pool
Bag
Encoding
Distractor
Retrieval
1.6 s
20 s
30 s
0.75–1 s
Clock
Sign
Dog
Farm
Knife
...
...
X + Y + Z = ??
a = 0.25
v = 0.0
a = 0.17
v = 0.18
a = 0.48
v = 0.12
a = 0.50
v = 0.20
a = 0.33
v = 0.22
a = 0.71
v = –0.16
Valence
~
normal
Arousal
~
normal
n = 148
Arousal:valence
~
normal
Recalled
~
Bernoulli
1|sub sigma
~
halfNormal
1|sub
~
deterministic
Intercept
~
normal
1|sub oﬀset
~
normal
0.2
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.30
0.32
0.34
0.6
1.0
Arousal
–0.5
0
0.5
Valence
Fig. 1 | Emotional features of stimuli in a verbal free recall task influence 
recall performance. a, Schematic of task design showing the time intervals 
during and between task stages. Participants encoded 12 words per list. Arousal 
(a) and valence (v) ratings for example words depicted below each word (these 
were not visible to participants during the task). b, Joint scatterplot and marginal 
distributions of valence and arousal ratings in the National Research Council 
(NRC) Lexicon (grey) and the word pool for the free recall tasks performed 
by participants (black). Spearman rank correlation coefficient is indicated in 
the bottom-left corner. c, Graphical model of Bayesian mixed-effects logistic 
regression used to assess the influence of word features on subsequent recall. 
Each node depicts a feature of the model and the corresponding distribution 
(indicated by a tilde). Shading indicates node with estimated 95% HDI excluding 
0. d, Probability of recall as a function of arousal (left) and valence (right), fit by 
a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of 
bootstrapped model fits.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
To explain how stimulation specifically modulated the encoding 
of emotionally relevant stimuli associated with increased HFA, we com-
pared spectral power in the hippocampus pre- versus post-stimulation 
(Fig. 3c). Stimulation caused a significant reduction in hippocampal 
HFA when applied to the hippocampus (post- versus pre-stimulation, 
β = −0.11, 95% HDI = [−0.18, −0.03], Supplementary Table 7), but not 
when applied to adjacent MTL-neocortical regions (Fig. 3c and Supple-
mentary Table 7). Next, to assess the specificity of this effect to HFA, we 
tested whether hippocampal stimulation had a similar effect on power 
in other frequency bands including theta (2–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz) and 
Recalled–forgotten
c
d
a
b
Power (z)
Amygdala
Power (z)
Hippocampus
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
2
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
2
Encoding trial (forgotten)
‘Map’
‘Spark’
‘Map’
‘Spark’
Frequency (Hz)
0
25
50
75
100
125
Encoding trial (recalled)
‘Purse’
‘Jail’
‘Purse’
‘Jail’
High arousal
Low arousal
Frequency (Hz)
0
25
50
75
100
125
Frequency (Hz)
Left
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere
Right
∆ encoding power (t)
0
25
50
75
100
125
0
25
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.2
0
50
75
100
125
–6
6
9
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
p(recall)
–6
6
9
–3
3
0
–3
3
0
–6
6
9
–3
3
0
High arousal
Low arousal
Medium arousal
Negative valence
Positive valence
Neutral valence
HFA (z)
HFA (z)
HFA (z)
Fig. 2 | High-frequency activity predicts successful emotional memory 
encoding in the hippocampus and amygdala. a, Location of all 744 electrodes 
recorded across all participants. Purple circles indicate electrodes localized 
to the hippocampus, and orange circles indicate electrodes localized to 
the amygdala. b, Comparison of subsequent memory effect between the 
hippocampus (purple) and the amygdala (orange). Solid line denotes within-
session t-statistic for comparison between remembered and forgotten trials, 
averaged over hippocampal and amygdala electrodes in the left and right 
hemispheres. Horizontal lines denote SMEs that significantly deviate from 0 for 
electrodes in the hippocampus (t(1) < −2.1, P = 0.001, Cohen’s d < −0.3, two-sided 
cluster-based permutation test) and the amygdala (t(1) < −2.4, P = 0.001, Cohen’s 
d = −0.12, two-sided cluster-based permutation test). Shading indicates standard 
deviation. c, Within-list z-scored power during example encoding trials from 
a single amygdala (top) and hippocampal (bottom) electrode in an example 
participant during memory encoding. Power during encoding of a high-arousal 
word from the list is depicted in dark blue, while power for a low-arousal word 
from the list is depicted in light blue. HFA increases during successful encoding 
(left) of high-arousal words versus low-arousal words, but not during failed 
encoding (right). d, Probability of recall as a function of HFA (z-scored), binned 
by valence and arousal for visualization, fit by a logistic regression model (solid 
line). As arousal increases, the slope indicating the relationship between HFA and 
recall probability increases in both regions. Shading indicates standard deviation 
of bootstrapped model fits.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
beta (13–30 Hz). Hippocampal stimulation did not significantly affect 
the hippocampal LFP in any of these frequency bands (Supplementary 
Table 8 and Extended Data Fig. 9), suggesting that hippocampal HFA, 
specifically, underlies the stimulation-induced disruption of emotional 
memory enhancement.
Depression impairs linkage between emotion, memory and 
HFA
A prominent theory of affective disorders hypothesizes that deficien-
cies in noradrenergic neurotransmission underlie symptoms of depres-
sion32. Therefore, we next assessed whether such disorders elicited 
concurrent changes in emotional memory performance and amygda-
lohippocampal HFA. We examined this by integrating psychometric 
information about the severity of affective disorders from a subset of 
the patients in our dataset who had completed the Beck Depression 
Inventory (BDI-II) and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). We found that 
only participants with higher depression scores (Fig. 4a) exhibited 
worse memory (BDI, β = −0.05, 95% HDI = [−0.08, −0.02]; Fig. 4b and 
Supplementary Table 9), as expected from earlier work47. We next exam-
ined how the memory encoding from individuals with depression cor-
related with the emotional features of each to-be-remembered word.
Notably, higher depression scores corresponded to dimin-
ished memory for arousing words (BDI:arousal, β = −0.012, 95% 
HDI = [−0.022, −0.001]; Supplementary Table 10). As seen in Fig. 4c, this 
means that the enhanced memory previously seen for arousing words 
was selectively disrupted in participants with higher depression scores. 
We assessed whether this decrease in emotion-mediated memory 
encoding was associated with changes to the observed increases in 
amygdalohippocampal HFA. In line with these behavioural effects, 
the strong positive relationship observed between HFA, arousal and 
memory (Fig. 2d) was abolished in participants with higher depression 
scores (BDI:HFA:arousal, β = −0.017, 95% HDI = [−0.029, −0.002]; Fig. 4d 
and Supplementary Table 11). This effect was specific to high-arousal 
words (Supplementary Fig. 3). In line with our initial analysis of HFA and 
memory, the effect of valence was more variable—higher depression 
scores only showed a trend towards diminishing memory for negative 
words (Extended Data Fig. 10a and Supplementary Table 10), while 
associated with a reversal in the relationship between HFA, valence 
and memory (BDI:HFA:valence, β = 0.017, 95% HDI = [0.003, 0.029]; 
Extended Data Fig. 10b and Supplementary Table 11). These results 
thus suggest that participants with higher depression scores may 
experience an overall decrease in emotional memory (particularly for 
highly arousing stimuli) associated with a concurrent degradation of 
the link between HFA, emotion and memory. Conversely, theta power 
did not show any correspondence with BDI, emotion and memory 
(Supplementary Table 12), suggesting that the mnemonic changes 
associated with depression may be tied specifically to the concurrent 
changes to amygdalohippocampal HFA.
Discussion
The emotional context of an event often determines how that event is 
remembered. Here, we investigate the neural basis of our enhanced 
memory for emotional events by using direct recordings, brain 
stimulation and psychometric assessment in human neurosurgical 
Time (s)
MTL-neocortical stimulation
a
Bag
Encoding
Distractor
Retrieval
4.6 s
20 s
30 s
Clock
Sign
Dog
Farm
Knife
...
...
X + Y + Z = ?
4.6 s
b
c
d
e
Voltage (µV)
Post
–1
–400
400
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Word 1
Word 2
0
Stim on
Stim oﬀ
Hippocampal stimulation
p(recall)
0.1
0.3
0.5
Arousal
–0.5
0.5
0
0
Valence
0
1
Stim on
Stim oﬀ
p(recall)
0.1
0.3
0.5
Arousal
–0.5
0.5
Valence
0
1
Pre
Hippocampal power
(post–pre)
Hippocampal
stimulation
MTL-neocortical
stimulation
0.1
0
Stim oﬀ
Stim on
Stim oﬀ
Stim on
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6
Fig. 3 | Direct stimulation of the hippocampus during encoding impairs 
emotion-mediated memory and decreases HFA. a, Schematic of task design 
showing the time intervals during direct brain stimulation. Stimulation was 
applied to alternating pairs of words in a list. b, Probability of recall as a function 
of arousal (left) and valence (right) for both the stimulation off (black) and on 
(yellow) conditions, in participants who underwent hippocampal stimulation, fit 
by a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation 
of bootstrapped model fits. c, Probability of recall as a function of arousal for 
both the stimulation off (black) and on (yellow) conditions, in participants who 
underwent stimulation in nearby control regions, fit by a logistic regression 
model (solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of bootstrapped model 
fits. d, Single-trial example of LFP during stimulation of a word pair. Shaded 
regions indicate pre- and post-periods used for analysis. Word presentation is 
indicated by horizontal lines. Red lines indicate onset and offset of stimulation. 
e, Post–pre-hippocampal HFA, averaged across trials (dot) within participant 
(n = 16), when stimulation was off versus when stimulation was turned on. 
Colours denote stimulation region, and vertical lines denote standard deviation.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
participants. By directly examining human hippocampal and amygdalar 
electrophysiology from participants performing a memory task, we 
assessed the role of these two brain structures in encoding memories 
with emotional associations. In both the hippocampus and the amyg-
dala, we found that HFA, a proxy for local neuronal spiking29, correlated 
with stimulus-induced arousal during successful memory encoding. We 
found that this phenomenon is causally important because perturba-
tions to this network, either through disruptive brain stimulation or 
symptoms of depression, selectively impaired the recall of emotional 
stimuli and the amygdalohippocampal HFA typically associated with 
their recall. These results (1) demonstrate that upregulation of amyg-
dalohippocampal activity during encoding is correlated with enhance-
ment of memory for emotionally engaging stimuli in humans and (2) 
show that modulating the activity within this circuit causally affects how 
the human brain prioritizes certain information for memory encoding, 
with relevance for psychiatric disorders, such as depression.
Substantial behavioural evidence has shown that the brain pri-
oritizes the encoding of emotional content1,25,26. Here, we show that 
primarily high-arousal words are remembered better than other words, 
although the task word pool may have been too limited in highly posi-
tive or negative words to show a consistent effect of valence, alone, on 
recall. While lesion studies have demonstrated the importance of both 
the amygdala and the hippocampus to the enhancement of emotional 
memory, our findings show a causal mechanism underlying this effect: 
increased neuronal activity in the amygdalohippocampal circuit, as 
indexed by HFA, enhances memory for emotional information during 
memory encoding. This finding bridges evidence from iEEG studies of 
memory that implicated increased HFA with successful word recall40 
and aversive image viewing48, with fMRI studies that have demonstrated 
increasing activation in the amygdala and hippocampus with recall of 
more emotional stimuli7,10.
Furthermore, the results from our stimulation experiments indi-
cate that hippocampal upregulation may be causally responsible for 
the emotional enhancement of memory, because stimulation reversed 
the memory enhancement and HFA increases associated with emo-
tional context. The behavioural effect of stimulation was most clear 
for negative words, although the large (if inconsistent) deleterious 
effect of stimulation on arousal-mediated memory suggests that future 
stimulation studies with increased statistical power may demonstrate 
that stimulation alters memory for both arousing and negative words. 
Furthermore, future work should examine how the HFA we identified 
might propagate within the amygdalohippocampal circuit49. For exam-
ple, stimulation studies with sufficient coverage of the anterior–pos-
terior axis of the hippocampus should probe whether the relationship 
we observed between stimulation, valence and memory differs along 
this axis. Unlike previous work examining passive viewing48, we did not 
observe significant cross-frequency coupling between the amygdala 
and the hippocampus conditional upon memory recall performance. 
It is possible that the reduction in low-frequency signals during suc-
cessful memory diminishes true phase estimates and, consequently, 
cross-frequency coupling. Another possibility is that the phenomenon 
we observed may reflect awake ripple activity, which may play a role 
in cross-regional synchronization and subsequent consolidation50.
While our study specifically examines the effects of direct stimula-
tion of the hippocampus on affective memory processes, two recent 
studies are related to ours because they separately probed the effect of 
amygdala stimulation on memory and affective disorders. In one study, 
the authors51 showed that amygdala stimulation enhanced memory 
overall, in contrast to our observed pattern of stimulation-induced 
memory impairment and HFA decreases. Two key methodological 
differences between the amygdala stimulation study and our work 
may explain the differing results. First, the stimuli used in the amyg-
dala stimulation study were neutral stimuli, which probably did not 
engage the same emotional memory processes as the stimuli in our 
task. Second, whereas in our study retrieval occurred a few minutes 
after encoding, the amygdala stimulation study demonstrated memory 
enhancement one day after stimulation, suggesting that amygdala 
stimulation may have affected later memory consolidation processes 
rather than strictly modifying memory encoding. The second study 
assessed how amygdala stimulation modulated human depression 
symptoms, showing that amygdala HFA was a successful biomarker 
for high-efficacy closed-loop stimulation to treat major depressive 
disorder in a single participant23. Not only was bilateral amygdala HFA 
sufficient to classify depressive states but also stimulation induced a 
reduction in HFA that improved symptom severity. Our work provides 
a potential mechanistic explanation for these stimulation results by 
demonstrating that amygdalar and hippocampal HFA correlate with 
memory for emotional stimuli. We believe that future work will be able 
to establish that amygdala stimulation has similar effects to those we 
observed with hippocampal stimulation, specifically given previous 
evidence that amygdala stimulation selectively increases gamma fre-
quency oscillations52. Future work should also assess whether stimu-
lation that reduces symptoms of depression also modulates memory 
for emotional content.
Examining the link between emotional state and memory is par-
ticularly important given our results showing a direct relation between 
HFA, depression and the emotional enhancement of memory. We found 
that participants with depression had worse memory, driven by dimin-
ished recall of emotional words—particularly arousing words. This 
is potentially important because one prominent theory53 suggested 
that valence-mediated memory is thought to engage prefrontal–hip-
pocampal pathways, in contrast to arousal-mediated memory, which 
BDI-II
Count
Count
Recalled (%)
0
0
0
10
20
30
40
0.2
–2
0.20
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.25
0.35
0.30
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
20
30
10
40
Mild
None
Moderate Severe
0
2
4
6
0
5
10
15
20
a
b
c
d
Arousal
HFA (z)
0.40
p(recall)
p(recall)
Without depression
With depression
0
2
4
6
8
10
Fig. 4 | Participants with depression exhibit diminished arousal-mediated 
memory and HFA. a, Histogram of BDI-II scores for patients, split by depressive 
characterization. b, Distribution of recall performance across participnts as 
a function of depression rating. Participants with higher depression scores 
exhibited worse memory (BDI, β = −0.05, 95% HDI = [−0.08, −0.02]). c, Probability 
of recall as a function of arousal for both participants with or without depression, 
fit by a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates standard 
deviation of bootstrapped model fits. Higher depression scores corresponded 
to diminished memory for arousing words (BDI:arousal, β = −0.012, 95% 
HDI = [−0.022, −0.001]). d, Probability of recall as a function of HFA (z-scored), 
binned by depression level for visualization, fit by a logistic regression model 
(solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of bootstrapped model fits.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
is thought to rely more heavily on amygdalohippocampal interaction. 
This hypothesis is consistent with our finding that arousal-mediated 
memory and amygdalohippocampal HFA are disrupted by depres-
sion, as well as previous imaging work showing altered amygdalohip-
pocampal activity in participants with depression54. Furthermore, 
previous research has demonstrated that cortisol, shown to enhance 
memory for arousing stimuli alongside noradrenergic activation of 
the amygdala55, also rescues memory performance in participants with 
depression and alters hippocampal responses56. Our data thus suggest 
that disrupting amygdalohippocampal noradrenergic transmission is 
responsible for the differences we observed in both memory perfor-
mance and HFA in participants with depression, in line with theories 
of depressive pathology32. Overall, our findings implicate HFA within 
the amygdala–hippocampus circuit in the emotional enhancement of 
memory in healthy individuals as well as its alteration in individuals 
with affective disorders, such as depression.
Although our study did not directly measure neuromodulatory 
signals, we believe that the emotion-related HFA signals we observed 
reflect neuromodulatory dynamics in the hippocampus and amyg-
dala—in particular, noradrenergic drive from the locus coeruleus24. Nor-
epinephrine release causes increases in HFA in many brain regions20,57, 
including the hippocampus58 and amygdala59, and has also been linked 
to sharp-wave ripples in the hippocampus60. Consistent with our 
hypothesis of a link between HFA and norepinephrine, previous studies 
of human verbal memory have demonstrated that successful memory 
encoding positively correlated with HFA in the medial temporal lobe40, 
as well as norepinephrine-related patterns, such as pupil dilation28, 
and autonomic measures, such as heart rate and skin conductance61. 
In addition to explaining our HFA findings, noradrenergic transmis-
sion might also explain our stimulation results. Work in rodents has 
demonstrated that memory deficits induced by amygdala stimulation 
are mitigated in the absence of noradrenergic release, suggesting 
that norepinephrine is critical for amygdala stimulation to modulate 
memory62. How would noradrenergic release improve memory? One 
possibility is that the norepinephrine release facilitates hippocampal 
spike-timing-dependent plasticity, leading to enhanced memory24,63,64. 
This idea is supported by the fact that norepinephrine release alone is 
not sufficient to enhance memory unless it also elicits neuronal spik-
ing in the amygdala65 and that noradrenergic activation of basolateral 
amygdala, the primary subregion examined in this study, enabled 
selective memory enhancement for arousing experiences in rodents55. 
Overall, these data support the view that noradrenergic upregulation 
of neuronal spiking in the amygdalohippocampal circuit, reflected by 
increases in HFA, is a generalizable mechanism for the prioritization 
of information processing in the brain66.
Emotional memories are some of the most valuable memories we 
have, and untangling the neural mechanisms underlying the relative 
robustness of such memories may prove critical to treating memory 
disorders2. Our work provides a bridge to basic science research in ani-
mals, providing new avenues for researchers to link midbrain noradr-
energic transmission to electrophysiological correlates of memory in 
the amygdala and hippocampus, such as the HFA observed here. Fur-
thermore, by demonstrating how activity in the amygdalohippocampal 
circuit supports the intersection of human memory and emotion, 
our findings provide mechanistic support to future therapeutic stud-
ies modulating this circuit to treat memory51 and mood disorders23. 
Overall, our findings suggest that upregulation of neuronal activity 
within the amygdalohippocampal circuit during encoding may be 
a generalizable mechanism for the prioritization of information for 
memory encoding in humans.
Methods
Data recording and participants
We analysed publicly available data recorded from patients under-
going invasive iEEG monitoring in the course of their treatment for 
drug-resistant epilepsy. Patients were recruited to participate in a 
multicentre project, with data collected at Thomas Jefferson Univer-
sity Hospital, Mayo Clinic, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 
Emory University Hospital, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Columbia University 
Medical Center, National Institutes of Health and University of Wash-
ington Medical Center. Experimental protocol was approved by the 
Institutional Review Board at each institution, and informed consent 
was obtained from each participant. Data acquisition and storage 
was coordinated by the Data Coordinating Center at the University of 
Pennsylvania (Institutional Review Board protocol 820553). Electrodes 
were implanted using localized, penetrating depth electrodes (Ad-Tech 
Medical Instruments). Electrodes were spaced 10 mm apart, and data 
were recorded using either the Nihon Kohden EEG-1200, Natus XLTek 
EMU 128 or Grass Aura-LTM64. iEEG signals were sampled at either 
500 Hz, 1,000 Hz or 1,600 Hz and referenced to an intracranial elec-
trode or a contact on the scalp or mastoid process. Bipolar referencing 
was applied during post hoc analyses.
Statistical analysis
To determine the features predicting successful memory retrieval, we 
used a Bayesian mixed-effects logistic regression modelling frame-
work33. Within this framework, we first assessed the influence of 
non-neural fixed effects by constructing models of the form
p(recall = 1) ∼X + (1|subject)
(1)
where the probability of recall is modelled as a logit-link binary out-
come approximated (as indicated by the tilde) by X, which includes 
combinations of word features (arousal, valence, stimulation) and par-
ticipant features (BDI score) depending on the specific question, while 
accounting for participant-level random effects. To ascertain the best 
formulation of the valence factor, we performed a model comparison 
between the basic recall model (depicted in Fig. 1c) utilizing valence 
and the same model utilizing squared valence and compared these 
models using the Watanabe–Akaike information criterion67. Because 
the model utilizing valence fared better, we retain that formulation 
throughout all subsequent models. We then assessed the influence of 
neural fixed effects by constructing models of the form
p(recall = 1) ∼X + (1|subject) + (1|subject ∶electrode)
(2)
where X includes combinations of word features, participant features, 
electrode features (hemisphere, region, stimulation site, recording 
site), and neural features (power), depending on the specific question, 
while accounting for participant-level and electrode-level random 
effects. We also utilized a similar Bayesian mixed-effects linear regres-
sion to analyse how stimulation modulated power, using a model of 
the form
∆power(post −pre) ∼X + (1|subject) + (1|subject ∶electrode)
(3)
where X includes electrode features (hemisphere, region, stimula-
tion site, recording site) while accounting for participant-level and 
electrode-level random effects. Individual word features were not 
included because stimulation was applied continuously during pairs 
of word presentations. These models were fitted using the Python 
library Bambi68, which generates weakly informative (broad) priors 
for all model variables69 that are scaled to regularize the model rather 
than integrate domain knowledge. To fit models, we used 4 Markov 
chain Monte Carlo No-U-Turn (NUTS) samplers, drawing 1,500 samples 
from the posterior for each chain, after a minimum of 1,000 burn-in 
samples. All posteriors for independent variables were checked for 
convergence using the Gelman–Rubin statistic, which was less than 
1.01 in all cases, indicating good convergence. We computed the 95% 

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
HDI for each model parameter to quantify the uncertainty around the 
true value of the parameter70. We considered there to be significant 
evidence for the influence of a fixed effect if the 95% HDI did not include 
zero71. Interaction terms were included where sample size allowed.
Task
Participants participated in a delayed free recall verbal memory task. 
During this task, a 10 s countdown preceded each list of 12 words, 
which were presented for 1,600 ms each with interstimulus intervals 
randomly sampled from between 750 ms and 1,000 ms. Each list was 
followed by a math distractor task to prevent rehearsal, lasting at 
least 20 s, during which simple math problems were presented until a 
response was entered or recall began. A visual cue paired with an 800 Hz 
tone signalled the start of each recall period, and participants had 30 s 
to verbally recall as many words from the list of 12 words they had just 
seen, in any order. These vocal responses were recorded and annotated 
offline to assess recall accuracy. Participants encoded and recalled 25 
lists in each session and did not see the same list twice across sessions.
Participants performed one or both versions of this task that dif-
fered in the semantic structure of the word lists. The uncategorized 
version of the task utilizes a word pool of 300 words, constructed by 
selecting words from the Toronto word pool with intermediate recall 
performance (after accounting for recall dynamics and clustering 
effects inherent to free recall). This word pool was split into lists of 12 
words such that the mean pairwise semantic similarity within list was 
relatively constant across lists. For the categorized free recall task, 
the word pool was drawn from user-rated semantic categories (using 
Amazon Mechanical Turk). Words were sequentially presented as cat-
egorical pairs (drawn from the same category), and each list consisted 
of four words drawn from each of the three categories. Two pairs drawn 
from the same semantic category were never presented consecutively72.
Characterizing emotional context during encoding
We utilized a publicly available rating scale, the National Research 
Council Lexicon34, to quantify the emotional context of the words 
present in the word pool for each task. We selected this rating scale, as 
opposed to other commonly used rating scales, such as the Affective 
Norms for English Words database73, because of the higher number 
of independent raters involved, higher split-half reliability for rat-
ings (particularly for arousal ratings) and higher discriminant validity 
between valence and arousal ratings. In sum, 97% of the words tested 
had ratings in the National Research Council lexicon and were analysed 
in this study.
Electrode localization
To localize the depth electrodes to the different subregions of the 
amygdala, we used the CIT168 atlas74. Due to the bipolar reference 
scheme we utilized, we localized the resulting ‘virtual’ electrodes using 
the averaged Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates of the two 
referenced electrodes. Virtual electrodes were labelled according to the 
nearest subregion in the CIT168 atlas, within a 5 mm diameter (which 
corresponds to the inter-electrode distance).
Spectral analysis
All data were band-stop filtered around 60 Hz to minimize line noise, 
and data were bipolar referenced to eliminate reference channel arte-
facts and noise40. LFP data were downsampled to 256 Hz for analyses. 
Before analysis, we had excluded electrodes if an expert neurologist 
determined that the electrode had a damaged lead; was placed in white 
matter, a seizure onset zone, or lesioned brain tissue; or exhibited sig-
nificant electrical or mechanical noise. We used a continuous wavelet 
transform (Morlet wavelets, wave number 6) with 30 log-spaced frequen-
cies between 2 Hz and 128 Hz and 1,000 ms buffer windows to attenuate 
convolution edge effects. Spectral analysis was performed using the mne 
toolbox75. We averaged power into two bands: theta (2–8 Hz) and HFA 
(30–128 Hz). To assess the putative effect of spectral tilt, peak height 
and peak frequency, we utilized the ‘Fitting Oscillations & One Over F’ 
algorithm for parameterizing power spectra across trials, separately 
for all remembered and forgotten words in each session76. We restricted 
our analysis to frequencies below 32 Hz because only frequencies in this 
range were treated as potential narrowband oscillations. Furthermore, 
we restricted our analysis to no more than 4 peaks that were narrower 
than 4 Hz and at least 1 standard deviation above the detrended baseline. 
When testing for significant clusters (either across time or frequency), we 
utilized non-parametric cluster-based permutation tests77 to compare 
between remembered and forgotten encoding trials.
Spectral connectivity
To compute the normalized coherence between the amygdala and 
hippocampus, we generated surrogate timeseries by swapping time 
blocks and then z-scored the true coherence estimate relative to the 
coherence computed for this surrogate distribution. We computed the 
phase–amplitude coupling (PAC) using the modulation index method78. 
We also normalized our PAC estimates using the same approach as 
for coherence and tested for significant PAC using a non-parametric 
cluster-based permutation test.
Stimulation during verbal free recall memory task
Stimulation was applied only after a neurologist determined safe ampli-
tudes using an iterative mapping procedure, stepping up stimulation in 
0.5 mA increments and monitoring for after-discharges. The maximum 
amplitude selected (1.5 mA) fell well below standard safety boundaries 
for charge density79. We applied stimulation in a bipolar configuration, 
with current passing through a single pair of adjacent electrodes. 
Stimulation consisted of charge-balanced biphasic rectangular pulses 
(width 300 μs) applied continuously at 50 Hz frequency for 4.6 s while 
participants encoded two consecutive words. Then, stimulation was 
paused for the following 2 words, and then applied again, for each 
list of 12 words. Stimulation began 200 ms before word presentation 
and lasted until 200–450 ms after the offset of the second word in the 
stimulated pair. We applied stimulation during 20/25 of the lists in a 
session, so participants were stimulated during encoding for 120 words 
and not stimulated for 180 words per session.
Directly stimulating the brain while simultaneously recording 
iEEG signals often results in the appearance of artefactual signals while 
stimulation is delivered and following stimulation offset. We thus 
analysed the effect of stimulation by assessing neural signals before 
and after the stimulation. Because the post-stimulation period of the 
second word in a pair overlapped with the pre-stimulation period of 
the first word in the subsequent pair, we only analysed the effect of 
stimulation on power before and after the second word in each pair. 
To measure true physiological signals before and after stimulation, 
we followed previous methods in implementing an artefact detec-
tion algorithm to identify trials and channels to exclude from analysis 
with either complete signal saturation or gradual post-stimulation 
artefact44. We assessed the effect of stimulation on HFA using a Bayes-
ian mixed-effects linear regression model accounting for stimulation 
condition, stimulation location and LFP recording location as fixed 
effects while treating participant as a random effect.
Depression ratings
A subset of participants performed the BDI-II, a self-assessment rating 
scale for symptoms of depression80. We utilized the conventional scor-
ing criteria to categorize participants as depressed or not depressed, 
as well as for the further categorization of depression severity. While 
we excluded participants with BDI-II scores between 6 and 13 to match 
the number of participants with depression (n = 19) to those without 
depression (n = 20) for direct visual comparisons between binned cat-
egories (as in Fig. 4a–c), all mixed-effects models utilized continuous 
BDI-II scores for all patients.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The raw electrophysiological data used in this study are available at 
http://memory.psych.upenn.edu/RAM. Word valence and arousal rat-
ings are available at http://saifmohammad.com/WebPages/lexicons.
html34 and http://crr.ugent.be/archives/100373. The CIT168 atlas is 
available at https://osf.io/r2hvk/74.
Code availability
Custom analysis and modelling code is available at https://github.com/
seqasim/NHB_EmotionMemory_Models.
References
1.	
Kensinger, E. A. & Corkin, S. Memory enhancement for emotional 
words: are emotional words more vividly remembered than 
neutral words? Mem. Cogn. 31, 1169–1180 (2003).
2.	
Klein-Koerkamp, Y., Baciu, M. & Hot, P. Preserved and impaired 
emotional memory in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Psychol. 3,  
331 (2012).
3.	
Weiskrantz, L. Behavioral changes associated with ablation of the 
amygdaloid complex in monkeys. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 49, 
381–391 (1956).
4.	
Poulin, S. P. et al. Amygdala atrophy is prominent in early 
Alzheimer’s disease and relates to symptom severity. Psychiatry 
Res. 194, 7–13 (2011).
5.	
Tulving, E. & Markowitsch, H. J. Episodic and declarative  
memory: role of the hippocampus. Hippocampus 8,  
198–204 (1998).
6.	
Adolphs, R., Cahill, L., Schul, R. & Babinsky, R. Impaired 
declarative memory for emotional material following bilateral 
amygdala damage in humans. Learn. Mem. 4, 291–300 (1997).
7.	
Canli, T., Zhao, Z., Brewer, J., Gabrieli, J. D. & Cahill, L. 
Event-related activation in the human amygdala associates with 
later memory for individual emotional experience. J. Neurosci. 20, 
RC99 (2000).
8.	
Anderson, A. K. & Phelps, E. A. Lesions of the human amygdala 
impair enhanced perception of emotionally salient events. Nature 
411, 305–309 (2001).
9.	
Sharot, T. & Phelps, E. A. How arousal modulates memory: 
disentangling the effects of attention and retention. Cogn. Affect. 
Behav. Neurosci. 4, 294–306 (2004).
10.	 Dolcos, F., LaBar, K. & Cabeza, R. Interaction between the 
amygdala and the medial temporal lobe memory system  
predicts better memory for emotional events. Neuron 42, 
855–863 (2004).
11.	
McGaugh, J. L. The amygdala modulates the consolidation 
of memories of emotionally arousing experiences. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 27, 1–28 (2004).
12.	 Atucha, E. et al. Noradrenergic activation of the basolateral 
amygdala maintains hippocampus-dependent accuracy of 
remote memory. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 9176–9181 (2017).
13.	 Cahill, L. & Alkire, M. T. Epinephrine enhancement of human 
memory consolidation: interaction with arousal at encoding. 
Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 79, 194–198 (2003).
14.	 Hurlemann, R. et al. Noradrenergic modulation of 
emotion-induced forgetting and remembering. J. Neurosci. 25, 
6343–6349 (2005).
15.	 Cahill, L., Prins, B., Weber, M. & McGaugh, J. L. Beta-adrenergic 
activation and memory for emotional events. Nature 371,  
702–704 (1994).
16.	 van Stegeren, A. H. The role of the noradrenergic system in 
emotional memory. Acta Psychol. 127, 532–541 (2008).
17.	 Hagena, H., Hansen, N. & Manahan-Vaughan, D. β-adrenergic 
control of hippocampal function: subserving the choreography 
of synaptic information storage and memory. Cereb. Cortex 26, 
1349–1364 (2016).
18.	 Bacon, T. J., Pickering, A. E. & Mellor, J. R. Noradrenaline release 
from locus coeruleus terminals in the hippocampus enhances 
excitation–spike coupling in CA1 pyramidal neurons via 
β-adrenoceptors. Cereb. Cortex 30, 6135–6151 (2020).
19.	 Haggerty, D. C., Glykos, V., Adams, N. E. & Lebeau, F. E. N. 
Bidirectional modulation of hippocampal gamma (20–80 Hz) 
frequency activity in vitro via alpha(α)- and beta(β)-adrenergic 
receptors (AR). Neuroscience 253, 142–154 (2013).
20.	 Cape, E. G. & Jones, B. E. Differential modulation of 
high-frequency gamma-electroencephalogram activity and 
sleep–wake state by noradrenaline and serotonin microinjections 
into the region of cholinergic basalis neurons. J. Neurosci. 18, 
2653–2666 (1998).
21.	 Ridout, N., Astell, A., Reid, I., Glen, T. & O’Carroll, R. Memory bias 
for emotional facial expressions in major depression. Cogn. Emot. 
17, 101–122 (2003).
22.	 Pringle, A., McCabe, C., Cowen, P. J. & Harmer, C. J. 
Antidepressant treatment and emotional processing: can 
we dissociate the roles of serotonin and noradrenaline? J. 
Psychopharmacol. 27, 719–731 (2013).
23.	 Scangos, K. W. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation in an 
individual with treatment-resistant depression. Nat. Med. 27, 
1696–1700 (2021).
24.	 Mather, M., Clewett, D., Sakaki, M. & Harley, C. W. Norepinephrine 
ignites local hotspots of neuronal excitation: how arousal 
amplifies selectivity in perception and memory. Behav. Brain Sci. 
39, e200 (2016).
25.	 Madan, C. R. Exploring word memorability: how well do different 
word properties explain item free-recall probability? Psychon. 
Bull. Rev 28, 583–595 (2020).
26.	 Aka, A., Phan, T. D. & Kahana, M. J. Predicting recall of words and 
lists. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn 47, 765–784 (2020).
27.	 Larsen, R. S. & Waters, J. Neuromodulatory correlates of pupil 
dilation. Front. Neural Circuits 12, 21 (2018).
28.	 Kucewicz, M. T. et al. Pupil size reflects successful encoding and 
recall of memory in humans. Sci. Rep. 8, 4949 (2018).
29.	 Manning, J. R., Jacobs, J., Fried, I. & Kahana, M. J. Broadband 
shifts in local field potential power spectra are correlated  
with single-neuron spiking in humans. J. Neurosci. 29,  
13613–13620 (2009).
30.	 Posner, J., Russell, J. A. & Peterson, B. S. The circumplex model 
of affect: an integrative approach to affective neuroscience, 
cognitive development, and psychopathology. Dev. Psychopathol. 
17, 715–734 (2005).
31.	 LaBar, K. S. & Cabeza, R. Cognitive neuroscience of emotional 
memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 54–64 (2006).
32.	 Schildkraut, J. J. The catecholamine hypothesis of affective 
disorders: a review of supporting evidence. J. Neuropsychiatry 
Clin. Neurosci. 7, 524–533 (1965).
33.	 Popov, V., Marevic, I., Rummel, J. & Reder, L. M. Forgetting is a 
feature, not a bug: intentionally forgetting some things helps 
us remember others by freeing up working memory resources. 
Psychol. Sci. 30, 1303–1317 (2019).
34.	 Mohammad, S. M. Obtaining reliable human ratings of valence, 
arousal, and dominance for 20,000 English words. In Proc. Annual 
Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
174–184 (ACL, 2018).
35.	 Long, N. M., Burke, J. F. & Kahana, M. J. Subsequent memory effect 
in intracranial and scalp EEG. NeuroImage 84, 488–494 (2014).
36.	 Kramer, J. H. et al. Hippocampal volume and retention in 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 10, 639–643 (2004).

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
37.	 Paller, K. A. & Wagner, A. D. Observing the transformation of 
experience into memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 93–102 (2002).
38.	 Prince, S., Daselaar, S. & Cabeza, R. Neural correlates of relational 
memory: successful encoding and retrieval of semantic and 
perceptual associations. J. Neurosci. 25, 1203–1210 (2005).
39.	 Lega, B., Jacobs, J. & Kahana, M. Human hippocampal 
theta oscillations and the formation of episodic memories. 
Hippocampus 22, 748–761 (2012).
40.	 Burke, J. F. et al. Human intracranial high-frequency activity maps 
episodic memory formation in space and time. NeuroImage 85, 
834–843 (2014).
41.	 Fellner, M.-C. et al. Spectral fingerprints or spectral tilt? Evidence 
for distinct oscillatory signatures of memory formation. PLoS Biol. 
17, e3000403 (2019).
42.	 Kucewicz, M. T. et al. High frequency oscillations are associated 
with cognitive processing in human recognition memory. Brain 
137, 2231–2244 (2014).
43.	 Long, N. M. et al. Contextually mediated spontaneous retrieval is 
specific to the hippocampus. Curr. Biol. 27, 1074–1079 (2017).
44.	 Mohan, U. R. et al. The effects of direct brain stimulation in 
humans depend on frequency, amplitude, and white-matter 
proximity. Brain Stimul. 13, 1183–1195 (2020).
45.	 Jacobs, J. et al. Direct electrical stimulation of the human 
entorhinal region and hippocampus impairs memory. Neuron 92, 
983–990 (2016).
46.	 Deese, J. & Kaufman, R. A. Serial effects in recall of unorganized 
and sequentially organized verbal material. J. Exp. Psychol. 54, 
180–187 (1957).
47.	 Ilsley, J. E., Moffoot, A. P. & O’Carroll, R. E. An analysis of  
memory dysfunction in major depression. J. Affect. Disord. 35,  
1–9 (1995).
48.	 Zheng, J. et al. Amygdala–hippocampal dynamics during salient 
information processing. Nat. Commun. 8, 14413 (2017).
49.	 Costa, M. et al. Aversive memory formation in humans involves  
an amygdala–hippocampus phase code. Nat. Commun. 13,  
6403 (2022).
50.	 Zhang, H. et al. Awake ripples enhance emotional memory 
encoding in the human brain. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/2021.11.17.469047 (2021).
51.	 Inman, C. S. et al. Direct electrical stimulation of the amygdala 
enhances declarative memory in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 115, 98–103 (2018).
52.	 Sendi, M. S. E. et al. Identifying the neurophysiological effects of 
memory-enhancing amygdala stimulation using interpretable 
machine learning. Brain Stimul. 14, 1511–1519 (2021).
53.	 Kensinger, E. A. & Corkin, S. Two routes to emotional memory: 
distinct neural processes for valence and arousal. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 101, 3310–3315 (2004).
54.	 Leal, S. L., Tighe, S. K., Jones, C. K. & Yassa, M. A. Pattern 
separation of emotional information in hippocampal dentate and 
CA3. Hippocampus 24, 1146–1155 (2014).
55.	 Roozendaal, B., Okuda, S., Van der Zee, E. A. & McGaugh, 
J. L. Glucocorticoid enhancement of memory requires 
arousal-induced noradrenergic activation in the basolateral 
amygdala. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 6741–6746 (2006).
56.	 Abercrombie, H. C. et al. Cortisol’s effects on hippocampal 
activation in depressed patients are related to alterations in 
memory formation. J. Psychiatr. Res. 45, 15–23 (2011).
57.	 Marzo, A., Totah, N. K., Neves, R. M., Logothetis, N. K. & Eschenko, 
O. Unilateral electrical stimulation of rat locus coeruleus elicits 
bilateral response of norepinephrine neurons and sustained 
activation of medial prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 111, 
2570–2588 (2014).
58.	 Hajós, M., Hoffmann, W. E., Robinson, D. D., Yu, J. H. & 
Hajós-Korcsok, É. Norepinephrine but not serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors enhance theta and gamma activity of the 
septo-hippocampal system. Neuropsychopharmacology 28, 
857–864 (2003).
59.	 Headley, D. B. & Weinberger, N. M. Fear conditioning enhances 
γ oscillations and their entrainment of neurons representing the 
conditioned stimulus. J. Neurosci. 33, 5705–5717 (2013).
60.	 Ul Haq, R. et al. Adrenergic modulation of sharp wave- 
ripple activity in rat hippocampal slices. Hippocampus 22, 
516–533 (2012).
61.	 Buchanan, T. W., Etzel, J. A., Adolphs, R. & Tranel, D. The influence 
of autonomic arousal and semantic relatedness on memory for 
emotional words. Int J. Psychophysiol. 61, 26–33 (2006).
62.	 Bennett, C., Liang, K. C. & McGaugh, J. L. Depletion of adrenal 
catecholamines alters the amnestic effect of amygdala 
stimulation. Behav. Brain Res. 15, 83–91 (1985).
63.	 Manns, J. R. & Bass, D. I. The amygdala and prioritization of 
declarative memories. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 25, 261–265 (2016).
64.	 Liu, Y., Cui, L., Schwarz, M. K., Dong, Y. & Schlüter, O. M. 
Adrenergic gate release for spike timing-dependent synaptic 
potentiation. Neuron 93, 394–408 (2017).
65.	 de Voogd, L. D., Fernández, G. & Hermans, E. J. Disentangling the 
roles of arousal and amygdala activation in emotional declarative 
memory. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 1471–1480 (2016).
66.	 Dahl, M. J., Mather, M. & Werkle-Bergner, M. Noradrenergic 
modulation of rhythmic neural activity shapes selective attention. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 26, 38–52 (2021).
67.	 Vehtari, A., Gelman, A. & Gabry, J. Practical Bayesian model 
evaluation using leave-one-out cross-validation and WAIC. Stat. 
Comput. 27, 1413–1432 (2016).
68.	 Capretto, T. et al. Bambi: a simple interface for fitting Bayesian 
linear models in Python. J. Stat. Software 103, 1–29 (2022).
69.	 Gelman, A., Jakulin, A., Pittau, M. G. & Su, Y.-S. A weakly 
informative default prior distribution for logistic and other 
regression models. Ann. Appl. Stat. 2, 1360–1383 (2008).
70.	 Morey, R. D., Hoekstra, R., Rouder, J. N., Lee, M. D. & Wagenmakers, 
E.-J. The fallacy of placing confidence in confidence intervals. 
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 23, 103–123 (2016).
71.	 Bartsch, L. M. & Oberauer, K. The effects of elaboration on 
working memory and long-term memory across age. J. Mem. 
Lang. 118, 104215 (2021).
72.	 Weidemann, C. T. et al. Neural activity reveals interactions 
between episodic and semantic memory systems during retrieval. 
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen 148, 1–12 (2019).
73.	 Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V. & Brysbaert, M. Norms of valence, 
arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English lemmas. Behav. Res. 
Methods 45, 1191–1207 (2013).
74.	 Pauli, W. M., Nili, A. N. & Tyszka, J. M. A high-resolution 
probabilistic in vivo atlas of human subcortical brain nuclei.  
Sci. Data 5, 180063 (2018).
75.	 Gramfort, A. et al. MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python. 
Front. Neurosci. 7, 267 (2013).
76.	 Donoghue, T. et al. Parameterizing neural power spectra  
into periodic and aperiodic components. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 
1655–1665 (2020).
77.	 Maris, E. & Oostenveld, R. Nonparametric statistical testing of 
EEG- and MEG-data. J. Neurosci. Methods 164, 177–190 (2007).
78.	 Tort, A. et al. Dynamic cross-frequency couplings of local field 
potential oscillations in rat striatum and hippocampus during 
performance of a T-maze task. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 
20517 (2008).
79.	 Shannon, R. V. A model of safe levels for electrical stimulation. 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 39, 424–426 (1992).
80.	 Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R. & Ranieri, W. Comparison of beck 
depression inventories -IA and -II in psychiatric outpatients. J. 
Pers. Assess. 67, 588–597 (1996).

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the patients for participating in our study. This work 
was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and National 
Institute of Health (NIH) grants U01-NS113198 and R01-MH104606 
(to J.J.). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and 
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. We 
thank M. Hermiller and L. Kunz for helpful comments and suggestions. 
We thank M. Kahana for help with data collection.
Author contributions
S.E.Q. conceived the study; S.E.Q. and U.R.M. analysed the data; J.M.S. 
processed neuroimaging data; all authors interpreted the results, and 
S.E.Q. and J.J. wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Salman E. Qasim or Joshua Jacobs.
Peer review information Nature Human Behaviour thanks Jon Kleen 
and Tommaso Fedele for their contribution to the peer review of this 
work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with  
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and  
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner)  
holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing  
agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is 
solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 
2023

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Emotional context modulates recall dynamics. A) 
Conditional response probability based on valence, averaged across sessions 
for each participant (n=147). The height of each bar depicts the probability, 
averaged across participants, of making a transition to a particular valence word 
(denoted by the color of the bar) as a function of the just recalled word’s valence 
(denoted by the x-axis label). Error bars denote standard deviation. T-statistics 
denote the relative proportion of within-valence transitions versus across-
valence transitions, across participants. The largest t-statistic is bolded, denoting 
the relative prevalence of neutral-neutral transitions. B) Conditional response 
probability based on arousal, averaged across sessions for each participant 
(n=140). The height of each bar depicts the probability, averaged across 
participants, of making a transition to a particular arousal word (denoted by the 
color of the bar) as a function of the just recalled word’s arousal (denoted by the 
x-axis label). Error bars denote standard deviation. T-statistics denote the relative 
proportion of within-arousal transitions versus across-arousal transitions, across 
participants. The largest t-statistic is bolded, denoting the relative prevalence of 
arousing-arousing transitions. Related to Fig. 1.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Segmentation of electrodes to different amygdala 
nuclei. Count of electrodes categorized to different amygdala nuclei on 
the basis of post-implant imaging. BLN = basolateral nuclei, ATA = amygdala 
transition areas, AAA = anterior amygdala area, CMN = cortical and medial 
nuclei, CEN = central nucleus, AMY = could not be localized to specific 
subregion. Related to Fig. 2.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Memory-related power changes are not due to changes 
in spectra characteristics. A) Power spectra slope across the entire session 
for both remembered (dark shade) and forgotten (light shade) trials in both 
hippocampus (purple) and amygdala (orange) for all participants (n=147). 
Asterisk denote significant difference (t(3397)= 4.4, p= 1.1 x 10−5, Cohen’s d= 0.14, 
CI= [0.03, 0.09], two-sided t-test). Error bars denote standard deviation. B) Peak 
frequency across the entire session for both remembered and forgotten trials 
in both hippocampus and amygdala for all participants (n=147). Asterisk denote 
significant difference (t(3262)= -7.6, p= 4.3 x 10−14, Cohen’s d= -0.24, CI= [-2.2, 1.3], 
two-sided t-test). Error bars denote standard deviation. C) Peak height across the 
entire session for both remembered and forgotten trials in both hippocampus 
and amygdala for all participants (n=147). Asterisk denote significant difference 
(t(3030)= 4.6, p= 4 x 10−6, d= 0.15, CI= [0.01, 0.03], two-sided t-test). Error bars 
denote standard deviation. Related to Fig. 2.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Word-level SME for high arousal and low arousal 
words averaged across the population. A) Heatmaps of hippocampal power 
(z-scored within session) for specific words from the task wordpool, averaged 
across sessions and participants. Words were selected from the 30 words with 
the highest arousal ratings (left) or lowest arousal ratings (right). Warm colors 
indicate higher values while cool colors indicate lower values. Above each 
heatmap is the averaged z-scored power across the words in the heatmap. B) 
Same as panel A), but for amygdalar power. Related to Fig. 2.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Regional differences in the relationship between 
neuronal activity, memory and valence. A) Probability of recall as a function 
of HFA (z-scored) in the hippocampus and amygdala, binned by valence and 
split by hemisphere, fit by a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading 
indicates standard deviation of bootstrapped model fits. B) Probability of recall 
as a function of HFA (z-scored), binned by valence and split by region, fit by a 
logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of 
bootstrapped model fits. C) Probability of recall as a function of HFA (z-scored) in 
the hippocampus, binned by valence and split by longitudinal axis position, fit by 
a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of 
bootstrapped model fits. Related to Fig. 2.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Hippocampal and amygdalar spectrogram depicting 
difference in power between remembered and forgotten trials across 
all electrodes. A) Median z-scored spectrogram for hippocampal (left) and 
amygdalar (right) electrodes showing difference between remembered and 
forgotten words. Warm colors indicate an increase in power during encoding of 
remembered words, while cool colors indicate a decrease in power. B) Median 
HFA difference between remembered and forgotten words across all electrodes 
in the hippocampus (left) and amygdala (right), split by binned arousal rating. 
Horizontal bars indicate significant clusters of time-points when comparing 
remembered and forgotten high arousal words (t(1)’s > 2.5, p’s < 0.05, Cohen’s 
d’s > 0.1, two-sided cluster-based permutation test). Related to Fig. 2.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Location of stimulation electrodes. Hippocampal electrodes (purple), amygdala electrodes (orange) and nonhippocampal MTL electrodes 
(teal) where direct stimulation was applied. Black electrodes were used for recording, only. Related to Fig. 3.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Stimulation does not impair early-position words more 
than late-position words. Probability of recall as a function of serial position for 
both the stimulation off (black) and on (yellow) conditions, in participants who 
underwent hippocampal stimulation, fit by a logistic regression model (solid 
line). Shading indicates standard deviation of bootstrapped model fits. Related 
to Fig. 3.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Hippocampal stimulation selectively decreases HFA. 
Change in hippocampal power (post–pre) when stimulation was applied to the 
hippocampus (left, averaged across n=16 electrodes) and nearby control regions 
(right, averaged across n=8 electrodes), compared between stimulation (dark) 
and no stimulation (light) conditions. Frequency bands are defined as follows: 
theta (2–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz) and HFA (30–128 Hz). Error bars 
denote standard deviation. Related to Fig. 3.

Nature Human Behaviour
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01502-8
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Depression reverses HFA-memory relationship 
for negative words. A) Probability of recall as a function of valence for both 
depressed and non-depressed participants, fit by a logistic regression model 
(solid line). Shading indicates standard deviation of bootstrapped model fits. 
B) Probability of recall as a function of HFA (z-scored), binned by valence and 
depression level, fit by a logistic regression model (solid line). Shading indicates 
standard deviation of bootstrapped model fits. Related to Fig. 4.

1
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
Corresponding author(s):
Salman E. Qasim, Joshua Jacobs
Last updated by author(s): Oct 31, 2022
Reporting Summary
Nature Portfolio wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Portfolio policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
No software was used for data collection. 
Data analysis
Analysis was performed in Python (v. 3.9), using publicly available libraries such as mne (v. 0.23.0) and bambi (v. 0.8.0). Custom code is 
available at https://github.com/seqasim/NHB_EmotionMemory_Models. 
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Portfolio guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability 
- For clinical datasets or third party data, please ensure that the statement adheres to our policy 
 
The raw electrophysiological data used in this study are available at http://memory.psych.upenn.edu/RAM. Word valence and arousal ratings are available at http://
saifmohammad.com/WebPages/lexicons.html and http://crr.ugent.be/archives/1003. The CIT168 atlas is avilable at https://neurovault.org/images/56791/.

2
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants and Sex and Gender in Research. 
Reporting on sex and gender
Sex and gender were not relevant variables in our analysis; sex (as provided to clinical centers) is included in the demographic 
information provided in Table S1.
Population characteristics
All demographic information is detailed in Table S1 of the manuscript. 
Recruitment
Data were drawn from a publicly available database, meaning active recruitment was not a part of this research. Details on 
subject recruitment are available in prior studies from the group that collected the data (ex. PMID: 29167419). In brief, 
subjects were recruited from pools of epilepsy patients between 18-65, with close to normal neuropsych evaluation, who 
were undergoing chronic implantation of subdural and/or intracortical electrodes with longterm EEG recording for clinical 
purposes. 
Ethics oversight
Data was collected at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Mayo Clinic, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Emory 
University Hospital, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Columbia 
University Medical Center, National Institutes of Health, and University of Washington Medical Center. Experimental protocol 
was approved by the IRB at each institution and informed consent was obtained from each participant. Data acquisition and 
storage was coordinated by the Data Coordinating Center (DCC) at the University of Pennsylvania (IRB protocol 820553).
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size
No statistical methods were used to determine sample size, as we utilized every sample in the database that featured electrodes in our 
regions of interest (amygdala and hippocampus). The resulting sample size is similar to prior work (ex. PMID 29167419).
Data exclusions
We removed  electrodes from the neural analysis if an expert neurologist determined the electrode: had a damaged lead, was placed in white 
matter, a seizure onset zone, or lesioned brain tissue, or exhibited significant electrical or mechanical noise.
Replication
Findings are replicable across multiple subjects, and multiple sessions within some subjects, as subjects performed 2.4 ± 1.2 sessions of the 
task. While we did not perform replication of these results, data are publicly available enabling independent researchers to replicate these 
findings.
Randomization
Subjects were allocated into groups based on the availability of stimulation of psychometric data.
Blinding
Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiment. Blinding was not relevant to our study, and study 
authors did not perform data collection as data was pulled from a publicly available database. 
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 

3
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type
MRI were acquired purely for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement, and were not a part of the experiment. 
Design specifications
MRI were acquired purely for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement, and were not a part of the experiment. 
Behavioral performance measures
MRI were acquired purely for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement, and were not a part of the experiment. 
Acquisition
Imaging type(s)
Structural MRI and CT 
Field strength
3T MRI - before electrode implantation, 1.5 T MRI - after implantation
Sequence & imaging parameters
Sequence & imaging parameters: Imaging parameters varied somewhat among institutions in this multisite study. In 
general, sequences required for macroelectrode and microwire localization included 3D Tl-weighted with 1 mm or less 
isotropic resolution, coronal fast spin echo T2-weighted with 0.4 x 0.4 mm in-plane resolution and 2 mm slice thickness, 
and CT with less than 1 mm slice thickness. Representative examples are as follows: Pre-implant 3D Tl-weighted 
MPRAGE (TR 1900 ms, TE 2.52 ms, flip angle 9, 1 mm isotropic resolution, 216 x 256 x 174 matrix), pre-implant coronal 
FSE T2-weighted (TR 7200 ms, 76 ms, ETL 15, flip angle 139, 0.4 x 0.4 x 2 mm, 448 x 448 x 30), post-implant CT (0.5 x 0.5 
x 0.625 mm, 512 x 512 x 384). 
Area of acquisition
Tl - whole brain, T2 - temporal lobes spanning and oriented perpendicular to the hippocampal long axis 
Diffusion MRI
Used
Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software
Segmentations of amygdalar subfields were generated from 3D Tl-weighted and coronal T2-weighted images using ITK-SNAP 
software. 
Normalization
Pre-implant MRI, post-implant CT, and when available post-implant MRI scans were all aligned to each other using rigid 
registration based on mutual information with Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTS) software. 
Normalization template
Amygdala nuclei were delineated and parcel lated using the CIT168 human brain template.
Noise and artifact removal
No noise or artifact removal was used. 
Volume censoring
No volume censoring was used. 
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings
No statistical modeling was used as MRI were acquired for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement. 
Effect(s) tested
No effects tested as MRI were acquired for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement. 
Specify type of analysis:
Whole brain
ROI-based
Both
Anatomical location(s)
Amygdala nuclei were delineated and parcel lated using the CIT168 human brain template. This was 
conducted using a high-precision nonlinear volumetric coregistration of preoperative structural Tl and T2 
imaging onto the template brain.
Statistic type for inference
(See Eklund et al. 2016)
No inference was done as MRI were acquired for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement. 
Correction
No correction was used as MRI were acquired for clinical purposes to indicate electrode placement. 

4
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis

