Research briefing
Using machine 
learning to 
optimize the 
search for 
biosignatures
A probabilistic machine 
learning-based framework for 
recognizing and predicting 
microbial landscape patterns 
at nested spatial scales was 
developed. The approach 
substantially increased the 
probability of detecting 
biosignatures when tested 
at a Martian analogue in the 
high Andes. This search tool 
has applications for detecting 
biosignatures on terrestrial or icy 
planets.
The question
Discovering life beyond Earth would 
change our understanding of the origins 
and evolution of life. Evidence for liquid 
water — an essential condition for life — 
makes Mars one of the most promising 
places to search for signs of life in our Solar 
System. There is an abundance of data 
from orbiters and rovers to characterize 
global and regional habitability on Mars; 
however, there is much less information 
available at the scales and resolutions of 
microbial habitats and biosignatures. 
In extreme environments on Earth, the 
distribution of life is strongly influenced 
by the complex interdependencies of 
geological, physicochemical, and biologi-
cal processes. To date, few studies have sys-
tematically examined these relationships 
across a range of spatial scales or applied 
machine learning to predict the probability 
of detecting biosignatures in different 
terrestrial locations at the extremes of 
habitability. Understanding the spatial 
patterns of terrestrial biosignatures — and 
whether they are predictable — could help 
to optimize the search for life on Mars.
The solution
We studied a 2.78 km2 landscape of the 
paleolake basin, Salar de Pajonales (SdP), 
Chile, which has a uniform mineral com-
position1. The landscape morphology was 
classified and quantified using remote 
surveys performed by drones and with five 
in situ nested landscape ecology studies, 
which zoom in on areas of interest with 
increasing resolution2 (Fig. 1a). Visual field 
assessments and optical image analyses 
confirmed the presence or absence of 
biosignatures. Raman and visible shortwave 
infrared spectroscopy, multiplex micro-
array immunoassays and 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing of pigmented samples revealed 
distinctive markers for life.
We then developed an adaptable frame-
work that couples statistical ecology with 
deep learning to recognize and predict spa-
tial patterns in biosignature distributions in 
a polyextreme terrestrial environment. Both 
the data and models (Fig. 1) revealed predict-
able patterns in biosignature distribution 
that are linked to environmental factors, 
such as the availability of water. We trained 
convolutional neural network (CNN) models 
on drone- and ground-acquired images 
to identify geological features with high 
probabilities of containing biosignatures 
at spatial scales relevant to astrobiology ex-
plorations3. We found that random searches 
for biosignatures had a less than 10% chance 
of success, whereas targeted explorations 
augmented by our deep learning approach 
had a 56.9–87.5% probability of biosignature 
detection. Additionally, by focusing on 
areas with high probabilities of containing 
biosignatures the deep learning method 
reduced the search area by 85–97%. This 
study pioneers the compilation of libraries 
of biosignature distributions, detection 
probabilities4, predictive models and search 
roadmaps for terrestrial environments, 
which will help to standardize analogue re-
search and maximize the probability of find-
ing life in extra-terrestrial environments.
Future directions
Earth-based studies are foundational for 
successful exploration on Mars5. Our study 
provides a clear path for astrobiological  
exploration on a range of spatial scales, 
which has been tested and applied 
at a specific Mars analogue site. The 
deep-learningbased approach used in this 
work for predictive biosignature exploration 
is a first step towards standardizing astrobi-
ology research across terrestrial analogue 
sites, geological features, instrument suites, 
and (bio)signatures.
Spectral analyses on Mars rely on libraries 
of reference spectra obtained in controlled 
settings on Earth; similarly, a library of bi-
osignature distributions and ecological data 
from many Earth-based analogues compiled 
with a coherent methodological frame-
work could be used to interpret data from 
Martian environments. Such a library could 
assist future mission scientists in selecting 
geological features, mineral assemblages, 
and micro-facies with the highest chance of 
containing biosignatures.
The next step is to expand the capabilities 
of the CNN model so it can account for the 
physical size of the geological features of 
interest and interpret data from additional 
instrumentation such as reflectance and 
Raman spectroscopy. In addition to CNNs, 
generative models could be used to explore 
the interactions between life and the physi-
cal environment, such as, self-organization 
and coevolution. Ultimately, our approach 
will facilitate the compilation of a databank 
of biosignature probability and habitability 
algorithms, roadmaps and models, and 
serve as a guide for exploration on Mars.  
The framework could also be applied to 
other astrobiology targets, including the 
surface of Titan, the plumes of Enceladus,  
or the ice cover of Europa.
Kim Warren-Rhodes1, Nathalie A. Cabrol1 & 
Michael Phillips2
1The SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA, USA. 
2The Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Labora-
tory, Laurel, MD, USA.
This is a summary of: 
Warren-Rhodes, K. et al. Orbit-to-ground 
framework to decode and predict biosigna-
ture patterns in terrestrial analogues. Nat. 
Astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-
01882-x (2023).
Publisher’s note 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
Nature Astronomy

References
1.	
Hinman, N. S. et al. Surface 
morphologies in a Mars analog 
Ca-sulfate Salar, High Andes, Northern 
Chile. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8,  
797591 (2022).  
An article that presents observations on 
the origins of salt structures in the SdP.
2.	
Mony, C., Vandenkoomhuyse, P., 
Bohannan, B. J., Peay, K. & Leibold, M. A. 
A landscape of opportunities  
for microbial ecology research.  
Front. Microbiol. 11, 2964 (2020).  
A review article that presents the  
main concepts, current applications 
and future directions in microbial 
landscape ecology.
3.	
Phillips, M. S. et al. Planetary mapping 
using deep learning: A method 
to evaluate feature identification 
confidence applied to habitats in 
Mars-analog terrain. Astrobiology 23, 
76–93 (2023).  
An article demonstrating how deep 
learning can be used to quantify 
the confidence with which features 
of astrobiological interest can be 
identified.
4.	
Sephton, M. A. & Carter, J. N. The 
chances of detecting life on Mars.  
Planet. Space Sci. 112, 15–22 (2015).  
This paper elucidates possible 
probabilistic approaches and 
constraints to biosignature detection 
on Mars.
5.	
Fairen, A. G. et al. Astrobiology through 
the ages of Mars: The study of terrestrial 
analogues to understand the habitability 
of Mars. Astrobiology 10, 821–843 (2010).  
This article assesses the habitability 
of Mars and explores how terrestrial 
analogues assist in understanding the 
likelihood of organic and inorganic 
biosignature preservation.
Low probability
Moderate probability
High probability
Aerial view
a
50 m
Life
(prediction)
Alabaster
(prediction)
Sand (prediction)
T1 crystal
(prediction)
T2 crystal
(prediction)
Life (true)
Alabaster (true)
Sand (true)
T1 crystal (true)
T2 crystal (true)
Dome face
1 m
1 m
x
y
x
y
b
0.50
1.00
0.75
Test
Val.
Test
Val.
Test
Val.
Test
Val.
Fig. 1 | Biosignature probability maps from CNN models and statistical ecology data. a, A virtual image 
derived from data acquired by drones of geological features (microhabitats) at SdP. The colours indicate 
the probability of biosignature detection, which was calculated by combining data from the CNN with the 
results of the statistical ecological survey. b, A visible image of a gypsum dome geological feature (left) 
with biosignature probability maps for various microhabitats within it. The plots show experimentally 
measured field data (top row), CNN predictions (middle row) and classification accuracy of the CNN 
across ten randomized runs (bottom row), summarized by boxplots, each defined by mean, standard 
deviation, minimum, and maximum. Test, test dataset; Val., validation dataset for CNN training. © 2023, 
Warren-Rhodes, K. et al.
Expert opinion
“This paper seeks to make a highly significant 
contribution to an extremely important line 
of investigation: the search for life beyond 
Earth. The originality here is that the authors 
are attempting to synthesize data acquired 
over a wide range of distance scales, and in 
doing so, create a framework for future life 
detection missions in which the chances 
of selecting high-bioload samples is 
maximized.” An anonymous reviewer.
Behind the paper
Since the early 2000s, our team has been 
working on the application of landscape 
microbial ecology to astrobiology and 
thinking about the problem posed by the 
gap between the scale of microbial activity 
and the resolution of orbital data. We were 
inspired to apply CNNs to explore the spatial 
patterns and algorithmic rules that microbial 
life manifests and follows. We wanted to 
know whether macro- and micro-scale 
features can be linked to microbial 
colonization and identified from orbit and 
drone surveys.
SdP is an ideal location for our experiment 
owing to its uniform mineralogy and outcrops 
that are observable in drone and ground 
surveys. We needed to collect a high volume 
of ecological data to train the machine 
learning models. To collect these data, 
we designed a spatially nested ecological 
survey that led to a demanding field season 
sampling hundreds of locations across 
multiple spatial scales. K.W-R., N.A.C. & M.P.
From the editor
“How do we go from finding a habitable 
planet to locating habitats and then detecting 
biosignatures? Maps taken from orbit can 
be integrated with drone footage and with 
3D topographical maps and site sampling 
and spectroscopy to recognize patterns 
at different scales. Such probability maps 
developed in conjunction with extensive  
field work on the high Andes can help 
reduce the search area in extraterrestrial 
biosignature detection.” May Chiao,  
Chief Editor, Nature Astronomy.
Figure
Nature Astronomy

