Nature Methods
nature methods
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Brief Communication
CD-CODE: crowdsourcing condensate 
database and encyclopedia
Nadia Rostam 
  1,2,5, Soumyadeep Ghosh 
  1,2,5, Chi Fung Willis Chow 
  1,2,3, 
Anna Hadarovich1,2, Cedric Landerer 
  1,2, Rajat Ghosh1,2, HongKee Moon 
  1, 
Lena Hersemann 
  1, Diana M. Mitrea4, Isaac A. Klein4, Anthony A. Hyman 
  1,2,3 & 
Agnes Toth-Petroczy 
  1,2,3 
The discovery of biomolecular condensates transformed our understanding 
of intracellular compartmentalization of molecules. To integrate 
interdisciplinary scientific knowledge about the function and composition 
of biomolecular condensates, we developed the crowdsourcing 
condensate database and encyclopedia (cd-code.org). CD-CODE is a 
community-editable platform, which includes a database of biomolecular 
condensates based on the literature, an encyclopedia of relevant scientific 
terms and a crowdsourcing web application. Our platform will accelerate the 
discovery and validation of biomolecular condensates, and facilitate efforts 
to understand their role in disease and as therapeutic targets.
Biomolecular condensates are membraneless organelles that selec-
tively concentrate biomolecules (for example, proteins and nucleic 
acids) in the cell, with spatial and temporal precision1. In recent years, 
their role was implicated in several biochemical processes, in physiol-
ogy and disease2. Consequently, biomolecular condensates are now 
leveraged as a new class of therapeutic targets3,4.
Basic science and drug discovery advances build upon published 
reports and the rate of new discoveries depends on timely accessi-
bility to relevant data. However, as with every novel paradigm, new 
terms and concepts emerge and evolve as the field develops. Accord-
ingly, currently available databases which catalog proteins involved 
in condensate formation use various definitions and criteria to define 
condensates and their constituent proteins and RNAs5–8. These are 
excellent databases curating proteins that phase separate. Specifi-
cally, LLPSDB7 and PhaSePro6 collect proteins that are thought to drive 
liquid–liquid phase separation, with the former curating exclusively 
in vitro data.
However, these databases do not answer the following questions 
regarding biomolecular condensates: What are the biomolecular con-
densates discovered and verified to date? What are their known protein 
components? Which condensates is a given protein known to belong 
to? What are the experimental evidences supporting the existence of 
a particular condensate? Our goal is to generate answers for these and 
other important questions, and to create a community-editable data-
base to facilitate the dynamic data updates. Therefore, we designed a 
condensate-centric database, which is based on the scientific literature, 
and provides experimental evidences, scores and references for each 
condensate–protein relationship (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2). This 
database is updated dynamically by contributors to keep up with the 
growing knowledge in the field. We call our platform CD-CODE, which 
consists of three main parts: (1) a database of biomolecular condensates 
and their protein constituents; (2) an encyclopedia for the scientific 
terms used in condensate biology; and (3) a crowdsourcing web appli-
cation (Extended Data Fig. 3).
CD-CODE is a ‘living database’ designed for dynamic and rapid 
addition and review of information about condensates and proteins 
by users (Fig. 1) and is open to any expert researcher who wishes to 
contribute. Our user management system supports three types of 
users: viewers, contributors and maintainers. Viewers can read and 
download the curated information. Contributors can suggest edits 
and propose new condensate and protein entries (Extended Data Figs. 
4 and 5). Maintainers are part of the development team, who curate 
the changes and accept or reject suggestions by contributors, who are 
then notified about the status of their suggestions and can engage in 
further discussion. To keep up with the rapidly evolving definitions, 
nomenclature and growing scientific evidence, the crowdsourcing 
Received: 13 July 2022
Accepted: 27 February 2023
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
1Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany. 2Center for Systems Biology Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 3Cluster of 
Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 4Dewpoint Therapeutics, Boston, MA, USA. 5These authors contributed equally: Nadia Rostam, 
Soumyadeep Ghosh. 
 e-mail: toth-petroczy@mpi-cbg.de

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
condensate proteomes is substantial (Fig. 2b). While proteins may 
localize to multiple condensates (members), a few are obligate and 
essential components (drivers). We annotated 205 driver proteins 
in specific condensates, providing the corresponding experimen-
tal evidences. Our database revealed that several proteins that are 
drivers in one condensate are nonessential members of another (for 
example, G3BP1, a driver of stress granules, is also present in pro-
cessing bodies (P-bodies) and neuronal ribonucleoprotein particle 
granules). CD-CODE will aid our understanding of the determinants 
of condensate-specific driver behavior, and whether a driver protein 
can be used as a ‘marker’ of a condensate in experiments.
Marker proteins are used to define the identity of the conden-
sates and inform designing of condensate-targeting drug screening 
pipelines3. They are thought to be uniquely associated with a given 
condensate, and are commonly used to visualize condensates using 
microscopy, for example, in colocalization experiments to prove the 
localization of proteins into condensates. Our database revealed that 
several known marker proteins are not specific to a condensate. For 
example, whilst DCP1A is used as a marker for P-bodies, it also localizes 
to stress granules and nucleoli. Knowing specific protein components 
will facilitate the experimental design for accurate, specific identifica-
tion of condensates.
CD-CODE enables us to answer the questions posed at the begin-
ning: (1) there are currently 136 unique biomolecular condensates 
documented in the literature; (2) as an example, P-granules, which are 
the germ granules of Caenorhabditis elegans, have 190 documented 
protein components: one of them, pgl-3 (PGL3_CAEEL), is a driver 
for P-granule formation, and its presence within P-granules is sup-
ported by in vivo experimental evidence (5 star). Pgl-3 is exclusively 
reported to be associated with P-granules; thus, it is a P-granule-specific  
marker protein.
Databases that curate proteins undergoing liquid–liquid phase 
separation have facilitated the development of machine learning 
algorithms to predict phase separation13–15 and the discovery of what 
protein properties drive phase separation15. The next open question 
is which biomolecular condensate does a specific protein belong to. 
Our database contains a curated list of condensate proteomes (Fig. 2c), 
which can facilitate investigations of protein recruitment into specific 
condensates. Our resource can provide high-quality benchmarking 
data for machine learning algorithms aimed at predicting the protein 
components of condensates.
Furthermore, our comprehensive curation of condensate types 
and their respective composition in multiple species, and the level of 
experimental support, provides a valuable resource for drug hunters, 
which can inform the design of assays and screening pipelines. For 
example, in high-content imaging phenotypic screens, it is desired 
that the protein or protein combination chosen to be monitored is/
are selective for the target condensate3. Additionally, through regular 
updating of the database by the community and via curation of new 
publications, CD-CODE supports and accelerates nomination of new 
condensate-associated drug targets.
The field of biomolecular condensates is highly transdisciplinary 
and ever-developing, where definitions and terms keep changing, 
creating a need for constant updates that require consensus within 
the community. The encyclopedia, as a standalone wiki, serves as a 
platform to aggregate knowledge about condensate research. In the 
future, we are planning weekly updates to integrate new data from 
the users, and yearly updates with new features and data points that 
become relevant to store, as the research field develops.
The main feature of CD-CODE is that it contains experimentally 
validated entries. However, caution should be exercised by users when 
interpreting lack of data on a particular protein, condensate or spe-
cies, as this may simply reflect the biased interest of the community 
towards particular model systems and biological pathways. Any miss-
ing information could mean that (1) the protein or condensate has not 
platform allows the community to aggregate scientific findings in 
condensate biology.
At the time of this report, CD-CODE (cd-code.org) contains 9,861 
proteins linked to 244 unique biomolecular condensates (and 375 
in vitro synthetic condensates) across 49 different organisms. Notably, 
these numbers are continuously changing as contributors add and 
review more data. CD-CODE, as a semi-manually curated and annotated 
resource, aggregates information from the primary literature (to date, 
PubMed references published until 1 June 2022 were manually curated) 
and other databases5–8 (Extended Data Fig. 6 and Extended Data Tables 1  
and 2). To promote easy integration with other resources, protein 
entries are cross-referenced with UniProt9, Ensembl10 and the Human 
Protein Atlas (proteinatlas.org)11. Common sequence properties of 
condensate proteins are also displayed graphically, such as disorder 
score12 and amino acid composition (Extended Data Fig. 7), facilitating 
the identification of regions that may drive condensate partitioning.
We standardized the names of condensates by creating an ontol-
ogy from the literature and grouped condensates by functional cat-
egories (Supplementary Table 1) to reveal the evolutionary history 
of condensates. Most known condensates are found in mammals and 
many are clade-specific (Fig. 2a). Since our current knowledge is sparse 
and likely biased, the evolutionary origin of condensates remains an 
open future research direction that CD-CODE can facilitate.
While many proteins undergo liquid–liquid phase separation 
in vitro, it is unclear which proteins form condensates in cells and which 
condensates they partition into. To facilitate our understanding of 
condensate-specificity of proteins, we collected all known condensates 
a given protein was found in, and we curated the experimental evidence 
for association of each protein with a given condensate (confidence 
score, corresponding to zero to five stars: 1 star: literature evidence, 
PubMed identifier (ID); 2 stars, high-throughput; 3 stars, in vitro; 4 
stars, in cellulo; and 5 stars, in vivo evidence). Condensates and proteins 
that have zero or one star rating have not been manually curated yet.
As expected, for dynamic cellular compartments, many pro-
teins partition into different condensates and the overlap between 
Maintainers
Edit
View
Users and
contributors
Condensates
Proteins
Curate
>200
>10,000
Fig. 1 | CD-CODE information flow. Users can view and search the data, or 
become contributors after registration and edit the content of the database via 
the community-editable web application. The maintainers assure quality control 
and only approved edits will be part of the dynamically updated database. Figure 
created with BioRender.com.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
been studied yet; (2) there is a research paper but the information has 
not been added to the database yet; (3) the condensate truly does not 
exist; or (4) the protein truly does not belong to a given condensate. 
As such, CD-CODE aims to highlight the unknowns in the field to guide 
future research questions to fill the gaps. These gaps in experimental 
evidence can be bridged by computational predictions16,17, which are 
beyond the scope of CD-CODE. Evolution of the CD-CODE database 
through ongoing curation of new experimental evidence will lead to a 
progressive increase in high-scoring condensate entries.
In summary, we present CD-CODE, a semi-manually curated con-
densate database, and a community-editable web application. The 
crowdsourcing platform allows the community to further scrutinize 
definitions and evidence as the field evolves. This will ensure that the 
ever-growing knowledge on condensate research is integrated into the 
database and into the encyclopedia in a timely manner.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting sum-
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contri-
butions and competing interests; and statements of data and code avail-
ability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0.
References
1.	
Banani, S. F., Lee, H. O., Hyman, A. A. & Rosen, M. K. Biomolecular 
condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. 
Cell Biol. 18, 285–298 (2017).
2.	
Alberti, S. & Dormann, D. Liquid-liquid phase separation in 
disease. Annu. Rev. Genet. 53, 171–194 (2019).
3.	
Mitrea, D. M., Mittasch, M., Gomes, B. F., Klein, I. A. & Murcko, M. A. 
Modulating biomolecular condensates: a novel approach to drug 
discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21, 841–862 (2022).
4.	
Conti, B. A. & Oppikofer, M. Biomolecular condensates:  
new opportunities for drug discovery and RNA therapeutics. 
Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 43, 820–837 (2022).
5.	
Ning, W. et al. DrLLPS: a data resource of liquid-liquid  
phase separation in eukaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res. 48,  
D288–D295 (2020).
6.	
Mészáros, B. et al. PhaSePro: the database of proteins  
driving liquid-liquid phase separation. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, 
D360–D367 (2020).
7.	
Li, Q. et al. LLPSDB: a database of proteins undergoing 
liquid-liquid phase separation in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, 
D320–D327 (2020).
8.	
You, K. et al. PhaSepDB: a database of liquid-liquid phase separation 
related proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D354–D359 (2020).
9.	
UniProt Consortium. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase 
in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489 (2021).
10.	 Cunningham, F. et al. Ensembl 2022. Nucleic Acids Res. 50,  
D988–D995 (2022).
11.	
Thul, P. J. et al. A subcellular map of the human proteome. 
Science 356, eaal3321 (2017).
12.	 Mészáros, B., Erdos, G. & Dosztányi, Z. IUPred2A: 
context-dependent prediction of protein disorder as a function  
of redox state and protein binding. Nucleic Acids Res. 46,  
W329–W337 (2018).
13.	 Saar, K. L. et al. Learning the molecular grammar of protein 
condensates from sequence determinants and embeddings. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2019053118 (2021).
14.	 van Mierlo, G. et al. Predicting protein condensate formation 
using machine learning. Cell Rep. 34, 108705 (2021).
15.	 Hardenberg, M., Horvath, A., Ambrus, V., Fuxreiter, M. & 
Vendruscolo, M. Widespread occurrence of the droplet state of 
proteins in the human proteome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 
33254–33262 (2021).
Leptocardii
Aves
Hyperoartia
Nematoda
Sar
Amoebozoa
Virus
Diptera
Bacteria
Ascomycota
Amphibia
Actinopterygii
Viridiplantae
Mammalia
Average number
of proteins in 
condensate
≥1,000
≥500
≥300
≥200
≥100
≥50
≥1
Other
Stress response
Neuron function
Reproduction
Cell division
RNA metabolism
Expression regulation
Viral replication
Protein metabolism
Cell signaling
Immune response
Nuclear
Cell cycle regulation
a
Stress granule
b
Cajal body
Paraspeckle
Nucleolus
Postsynaptic
density
Centrosome
22
P-body
Nuclear speckle
≥50
≥100
≥200 ≥300
≥500
≥1,000
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
>100
Proteins in condensates
Condensates
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
PML body
Nuclear speckle
Centrosome
P-body
Stress granule
Postsynaptic density
Nucleolus
0
250
500
750
1,000 1,250
Proteins
c
110
158
64
284
59
39
56
29
75
29
32
71
174
253
230
Fig. 2 | Selected features available at CD-CODE. a, Biomolecular condensates 
across the tree of life. CD-CODE contains information about 244 condensates 
across 49 species. Here, only major clades are shown for clarity and condensates 
were grouped into functional categories. b, Many proteins localize to multiple 
condensates. There is a large overlap between the proteomes of different 
biomolecular condensates in humans. The largest condensates in humans are 
represented as circles and the shared proteins between every two condensates 
are shown (only condensates with >20 connections are shown). c, The 
distribution of condensate proteome sizes in humans. Most biomolecular 
condensates have a few known protein members. The largest condensates 
contain >1,000 different proteins (inset).

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
16.	 Hatos, A., Tosatto, S. C. E., Vendruscolo, M. & Fuxreiter, M. 
FuzDrop on AlphaFold: visualizing the sequence-dependent 
propensity of liquid-liquid phase separation and aggregation of 
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, W337–W344 (2022).
17.	 Chen, Z. et al. Screening membraneless organelle participants 
with machine-learning models that integrate multimodal 
features. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2115369119 (2022).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Methods
Technical architecture of the web application
The web application is internally divided into four distinct components 
(Extended Data Fig. 3).
	(1)	 The main database contains the condensates, proteins and 
other related datasets. The database service used for this  
component is MongoDB, where the interlinking of resources  
is done at the logical layer. The Application Programming  
Interface (API) layer exposes consumable data for the frontend 
to visualize data. This can also be used for programmatic access 
to the data by statisticians and bioinformaticians. It also facili-
tates filter, search, sort and some basic aggregate functionali-
ties. We used Flask, a simple lightweight Python framework,  
for this.
	(2)	 The frontend allows visualization of data—list and detail  
pages for condensates and proteins. It provides 
user-interactable controls for the addition/modification of 
data. The frontend is built using a Javascript framework called 
Vue.js. A subcomponent embedded within the frontend is the 
Content Management System (CMS), which facilitates user 
management and workflow of each update item submitted by 
users. The CMS also helps to maintain a history of contribution 
for each data record.
	(3)	 The contribution database stores the history of data from the 
crowdsourcing effort and helps versioning the database. All 
data edits submitted by contributors and review actions per-
formed by maintainers are stored here to aid transparency.
	(4)	 The Sync script is a scheduled process that runs at regular 
time intervals (daily/weekly) to copy the update items safely to 
the main database. This python program interacts with both 
PostgreSQL from CMS and MongoDB from the main database in 
a producer–consumer paradigm.
Data aggregation
The four most popular protein phase-separation databases are 
PhaSePro6, PhaSepDB8, LLPSDB7 and data resource of liquid–liquid 
phase separation (DrLLPS)5, which provide an excellent resource 
for phase-separating proteins along with their possible localization 
(membraneless organelles) and also synthetic condensates (in vitro 
experiments). However, all these databases are protein-centric and 
not condensate-centric, that is, a protein may or may not be part of 
a biomolecular condensate. To fill this gap and augment our current 
knowledge, we have built a condensate-centric database. At CD-CODE, 
we aggregated data from the four databases to create a seed dataset 
of condensates and their protein members (Extended Data Fig. 6). 
This was followed by a manual curation of the data and annotation of 
up-to-date evidences (PubMed references, experimental evidences, 
confidence scores explained below).
Literature curation
All the 674 condensate literature-related PubMed references which 
were published after the release of the last four databases were checked 
manually, and new condensates and proteins involved in condensates 
were identified and added to CD-CODE along with the relevant PubMed 
IDs. In total, 26 new biomolecular condensates and 224 new proteins 
were added to CD-CODE which were not part of the previous databases 
(Extended Data Fig. 6 and Extended Data Tables 1 and 2).
Data curation
Condensate names were standardized and condensates were merged 
based on synonyms that were manually assembled from the literature 
(Supplementary Table 1). In total, 9,916 protein–condensate relation-
ships are supported by a PubMed ID as evidence.
Annotation of driver proteins
We defined the ‘Role in condensate’ of a protein as the role it plays in a 
condensate formation and integrity. Based on their role in the forma-
tion of the condensate, proteins can be categorized into one of two 
classes—‘driver’ and ‘member’.
Drivers are defined based on the following criteria:
	(1)	 They induce the formation of a condensate.
	(2)	 They are essential for the integrity of a condensate.
Driver proteins are also called ‘scaffolds’ since they bind many 
other proteins. It is important to note that these annotations are valid 
in the context of a specific condensate. A protein acting as a driver for 
one condensate can be a member in another condensate.
Confidence scores
We designed the confidence score criteria and started manually adding 
the experimental evidences. 1 star, PubMed reference-annotated; 2 stars, 
high-throughput experiment (for example, mass spectrometry); 3 stars, 
in vitro evidence; 4 stars, in cellulo evidence; 5 stars, in vivo evidence. We 
also collected the experimental methodology, for example, fluorescence 
recovery after photobleaching or microscopy colocalization.
Crowdsourcing functionalities
Registered users can contribute to data curation, including any kind of 
attribute data update for any protein/condensate we already have at 
CD-CODE, such as marker addition, name change, description update, 
add/remove PubMed evidence and so on (Extended Data Fig. 4). Addi-
tionally, users can add new proteins to existing condensates and create 
new condensates by filling in a form.
Encyclopedia
The encyclopedia (wiki.cd-code.org), another crowdsourcing ele-
ment of CD-CODE, contains descriptive data related to definitions, 
synonyms and terminologies in the world of biomolecular condensates 
and liquid–liquid phase separation in biology. Contributors have the 
necessary credentials to create and edit content at the encyclopedia. It 
is powered by Wiki.js and provides easy content management function-
alities to users who are not equipped with programming or HTML skills.
Data analysis
Condensate counts for species were taken from CD-CODE v.1.01 and 
summarized by functional group annotation (Supplementary Table 1). 
The tree was downloaded from timetree.org (ref. 18) and scaled with 
the chronos function in the ape (5.6–2) R (v.4.2.0) package for better 
visualization. The tree was plotted using ggtree (v.3.4.4) and ggplot 
(v.3.4.0). Figure 2b,c was created using custom Python scripts (pandas: 
1.2.4; matplotlib: 3.3.4; networkx: 2.5).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Our database is available at cd-code.org and the encyclopedia at wiki.
cd-code.org. Rolling feature update releases and data dumps will be 
noted here: https://cd-code.org/release. Source data are provided 
with this paper.
Code availability
Software and documentation: https://git.mpi-cbg.de/dd-code-team/
dd-code-docs.
References
18.	 Kumar, S. et al. TimeTree 5: an expanded resource for species 
divergence times. Mol. Biol. Evol. 39, msac174 (2022).

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Acknowledgements
This project was funded by the Max Planck Gesellschaft (A.T.-P., 
A.A.H. and A.H.) and Dewpoint Therapeutics (A.T.-P.). C.F.W.C.  
was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft  
(DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence 
Strategy—EXC-2068 grant no. 390729961—Cluster of Excellence 
Physics of Life of TU Dresden. A.H. was supported by the ELBE 
postdoctoral fellowship. We thank F. Friedrich for logo design  
and MPI-CBG Computing Services, especially M. Boes, for setting  
up the server.
Author contributions
A.T.-P., A.A.H. and D.M.M. conceived the project with input 
from C.F.W.C., C.L. and S.G. S.G., H.M. and L.H. conceived the 
code concept and design. Backend coding development and 
implementation was done by S.G. Frontend coding development and 
implementation was done by H.M. and R.G. N.R. and C.F.W.C. created 
the content for the encyclopedia. N.R. curated the data manually 
and served as the maintainer of the data. S.G. collected data and 
designed the data structure. D.M.M. and I.A.K. provided resources. 
S.G., A.H. and C.L. analyzed the data. A.H., C.L., A.T.-P., S.G., H.M. and 
N.R. visualized data and prepared the figures. A.T.-P., L.H. and S.G. 
supervised the project. A.T.-P. wrote the main manuscript with input 
from all the coauthors. S.G. prepared supplementary information 
and documentation of the code. A.T.-P. acquired the funding and 
administered the project.
Funding
Open access funding provided by Max Planck Society.
Competing interests
A.A.H. is a founder and shareholder of Dewpoint Therapeutics. 
I.A.K. and D.M.M. are employees and shareholders of Dewpoint 
Therapeutics. A.T.-P. is a recipient of research support from Dewpoint 
Therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed  
to Agnes Toth-Petroczy.
Peer review information Nature Methods thanks the anonymous 
reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary 
Handling Editor: Arunima Singh, in collaboration with the Nature 
Methods team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Detail page of the biomolecular condensate, Leucocyte nuclear body in humans. The top section displays ‘General Information’ of the 
condensate whereas the section below shows ‘condensate-specific protein’ data in a tabular format.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 2 | CD-CODE is a condensate centric database. Example 
data structure of a condensate and one of its member proteins. We defined two 
distinct entity collections – one for condensates and one for proteins, the latter 
comprising of general details regarding the members of the former. We also store 
mappings collection of condensate-protein relations, comprising of data points 
that relate to specific condensate-protein pairs.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Schematics of the technical architecture of CD-CODE 
web application. The web application is internally divided into four distinct 
components. 1. The main database contains the condensates, proteins, and 
other related datasets. The API layer exposes consumable data for the frontend 
to visualize data. This can also be used for programmatic access to the data by 
statisticians and bioinformaticians. It also facilitates filter, search, sort, and some 
basic aggregate functionalities. 2. The frontend allows visualization of data, for 
example detail pages for condensates and proteins (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 7). 
A sub-component embedded within the frontend is the Content Management 
System (CMS) which facilitates user management, and workflow of each update 
item submitted by users. The CMS also helps maintain a history of contribution 
for each data record. 3. The contribution database stores the history of data 
from the crowdsourcing effort and helps versioning the database. All data edits 
submitted by contributors and review actions performed by maintainers are 
stored here to aid transparency. 4. The Sync script is a scheduled process that 
runs at regular time intervals (daily/weekly) to copy the update items safely to the 
main database. This python program interacts with both PostgreSQL from CMS 
and MongoDB from the main database in a producer-consumer paradigm.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Data curation from the user interface. a) Add new condensate form. b) Add new protein form. c) Edit data actions. d) History of entries is 
recorded.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Flowchart of contributions. After submitting the 
registration form, the user receives an email to confirm the given address by 
clicking a link. After the user’s email address is confirmed, an administrator 
checks the pending contributor signup requests and approves them. A signed-in 
contributor can see editable attributes besides selected data points on detail 
pages, in addition to a new webpage form for submission of novel condensates. 
The new submissions are then moderated by maintainers first and later by the 
Sync script.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Venn diagram to compare protein entries in 
condensate/liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) databases. The Venn 
diagram displays the overlap of the protein entries in CD-CODE and four other 
LLPS/condensate databases (LLPSD1, DrLLPS2, PhaSepDB3, PhaSePro4). CD-CODE 
incorporates data from all four databases and additionally, there are 224 new 
condensate-forming proteins in v1.01 that were added to CD-CODE from curating 
the literature.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Example detail page to illustrate the general 
information and data points stored in CD-CODE. a) General information 
about a protein is shown for the LAT Linker for activation of T-cells family 
member 1 protein (Uniprot ID: LAT_HUMAN). Links are provided to other popular 
protein-related databases (Uniprot, Ensembl, Human Protein Atlas). b) Disorder 
score computed by IUPred5; c) Barcode plot depicting amino acid composition 
bias; d) Table of PTMs affecting condensate behavior; e) List of biomolecular 
condensates of which the given protein is a member.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Table 1 | Biomolecular condensates across databases
Comparison of total number of data points presented by CD-CODE in comparison to other databases in the context of biomolecular condensates or membrane-less organelles (MLOs). We 
count the condensates from different species as separate counts of biomolecular condensates. The other three databases here also report phase-separating proteins without any condensate 
or with condensates named ‘Droplets’ and ‘Others’. Such entries are removed from CD-CODE by manual curation.

Nature Methods
Brief Communication
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01831-0
Extended Data Table 2 | Synthetic condensates across databases
Comparison of total number of proteins presented in CD-CODE to other databases in the context of synthetic condensates or in vitro experiments. Since LLPSDB only reports in vitro 
experiments, the condensate-related counts are not reported for that. *Out of the 273 proteins reported by LLPSDB, 198 are natural proteins, and 75 are designed proteins (not all experiments 
result in phase separation).



