nature photonics
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01137-1
Editorial
Metasurfaces go mainstream
Early research towards bulk 
metamaterials and exotic properties 
has been supplanted by work 
on thin metasurfaces ripe for 
commercialization, as outlined in 
this Focus issue.
R
esearchers often define metamateri-
als as manmade composite or struc-
tured media that exhibit properties 
that are not naturally available, such 
as negative refraction. However, 
‘unnatural’ properties are not a requirement 
for a media to be a metamaterial. Now, metama-
terials with less exotic optical property values, 
tailored into devices to achieve the functional-
ity of optical components in a compact format, 
or with new or superior capability, is arguably 
proving more useful than exotic effects.
Subwavelength structuring of materials for 
engineered wave propagation characteristics is 
not a new concept. In 1948 Winston Kock, while 
working at Bell Laboratories, introduced the 
concept ‘artificial dielectrics’ for microwaves. 
He used arrays of subwavelength metallic fins, 
or balls with thin conducting coatings and the 
work included equations for the effective 
refractive index. Various lens types were dem-
onstrated and in 1949 Kock and Harvey showed 
that the idea worked in acoustics too; in 1954, 
loudspeaker manufacturer JBL commercialized 
acoustic lenses. Even today, artificial dielectrics 
made from subwavelength metal fins are again 
a topic of research, for example for THz lenses.
However, it was the 1967 ‘negative index’ 
work by Victor Veselago, and subsequent 
works decades later by Sir John Pendry and 
others on ‘perfect lenses’ and ‘invisibility 
cloaks’, that fertilized the field we now know 
as metamaterials. Early works confirmed the 
predicted effects such as negative refraction, 
but the metamaterials field seemed hampered 
by the difficulty of fabricating many layers 
of resonators on top of each other to create 
bulk three-dimensional (3D) metamaterials. 
The inherent losses related to propagation 
through thick metamaterials, which typically 
contain dissipative metals, also didn’t help.
But do we always need bulk 3D metamateri-
als to achieve useful functionality? No. The 
strength of interaction of electromagnetic 
waves with a single subwavelength-thickness 
layer of resonators can be strong; enough 
for beam steering, lensing and similar appli-
cations with a single metamaterial layer, or 
‘metasurface’. The difficulty in fabricating 
bulk metamaterials actually steered the field 
to fruitful territory, and the desirability of 
ultra-thin optical components, often called 
flat optics, is undeniable. This issue of Nature 
Photonics is a Focus issue on metasurfaces.
While it’s true that metasurfaces have been 
‘on the block’ for some time, there is a now impe-
tus towards commercialization. Can metasur-
faces ‘make it’ against conventional options and 
tradition? Geoffroy Lerosey, co-founder and 
CSO of Greenerwave — a company that makes 
energy-efficient smart metasurfaces — believes 
that the answer is yes (see the Focus issue for a 
Q&A with Lerosey by David Pile). Greenerwave is 
now partnered with an automotive company to 
have reconfigurable metasurface-enabled RFID 
technology in vehicles in 2023. In early 2024 
they hope to have a satellite communications 
antenna on the market. They also announced 
a radar system being developed with Plastic 
Omnium as well as millimetre-wave technol-
ogy in co-operation with Japanese companies 
AGC and NTT Docomo. All of these products 
are underpinned by energy-efficient recon-
figurable metasurfaces. In a Review Article in 
the Focus issue, Tian Gu, Hyun Jung Kim, Clara 
Rivero-Baleine and Juejun Hu review reconfigur-
able metasurfaces and highlight the possibili-
ties for spaceborne remote sensing, active beam 
steering and light field displays.
The cost of fabrication may be crucial to the 
commercial success of metasurfaces. George 
Palikaras — President and CEO of Meta Materi-
als Inc., a Nasdaq-listed company — explains in a 
Q&A with David Pile in this Focus issue that they 
can make materials “at the scale of kilometres 
in length, and single-digit dollars per square 
metre, with tens-of-nanometres accuracy”. The 
company has also announced a large contract 
with a G10 central bank to produce security fea-
tures for bank notes. In the interview Palikaras 
explains their plans from aerospace and auto-
motive to healthcare, with frequency regimes 
ranging from microwave to optical.
One of the most exciting applications of meta-
surfaces is that of thin, compact metasurface- 
based lenses, or ‘metalenses’. Recently Metalenz 
— a Harvard spin-out company — announced a 
partnership with STMicroelectronics for fab-
rication of metasurface-based time-of-flight 
modules for cameras in consumer electronics; 
see the Q&A by Giampaolo Pitruzzello with 
Metalenz co-founder Federico Capasso in this 
Focus issue. The company already has product 
lines aimed at applications from 3D sensing to 
polarization-sensitive cameras.
In a Review Article in this Focus issue Amir 
Arbabi and Andrei Faraon review the capa-
bilities of metalenses, including their multi-
functionality and their ability to efficiently 
focus light tightly. They also provide some 
perspective on outstanding challenges as well 
as the key application areas for metalenses.
We also have a Review Article in this Focus 
issue from Dragomir Neshev and Andrey 
Miroshnichenko on smart vision enabled by 
metasurfaces. Today many devices, including 
robotic systems, rely on vision to operate. This 
review outlines the frontiers of the application 
of metasurfaces, and their promise of multiple 
optical functionalities, to the challenges of 
smart-vision-enabled systems.
While the commercialization of metasurfaces 
is central to the content in this Focus issue, there 
are still physical effects to be fully harnessed. 
Nonlocal effects are such an example; by ‘non-
local’ we mean that the field at a given point 
depends not only on the local properties at 
that point, but also on the field’s value at points 
nearby. This results in spatial dispersion; the per-
mittivity depends on wavevector. In a Review 
Article in this Focus issue Kunal Shastri and Franc-
esco Monticone explain that nonlocal effects 
are not a mere technical nuisance in the context 
of metasurfaces, but an emerging field of inter-
est. Nonlocality can in fact enrich metasurface 
responses and provide new opportunities.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
10 µm
400 nm
Credit: adapted under a Creative Commons licence CC BY 4.0

