Research briefing
People who 
are averse to 
uncertainty 
exhibit 
expanded 
semantic 
representa­
tions
Semantic representations 
enable humans to identify 
stimuli. We illustrate that 
the organization of semantic 
representations is in part shaped 
by psychological needs: people 
who are averse to uncertainty 
have more-differentiated 
and separable semantic 
representations than individuals 
who are tolerant of uncertainty, 
and this separation predicts 
improved discrimination but 
poorer generalization.
The project
Knowledge about the world is stored 
in our semantic representations (that 
is, concepts that correspond to our 
knowledge about and experiences with 
the world). These semantic repre-
sentations are structured following 
a similarity principle, such that the 
semantic representations of similar 
concepts are grouped closer together 
in neural and psychological space, and 
those of dissimilar concepts are farther 
apart1. Because stimuli often activate 
more than one concept, there is always 
some uncertainty when a person needs 
to identify which concept to retrieve. 
This mapping presents an ongoing 
challenge for those who are averse to 
uncertainty. One way to reduce this 
uncertainty is to separate the semantic 
representations that are activated by 
the same stimulus as much as possible 
in representational space. We posited 
that people structure their semantic 
representations in ways that satisfy 
their psychological needs, including the 
desire to reduce uncertainty. On the ba-
sis of classic work in cognitive science2, 
we hypothesized that to achieve this 
uncertainty-reduction goal, people who 
are averse to uncertainty should exhibit 
separated semantic representations, 
which would make each representation 
more easily identifiable.
The discovery
To demonstrate that people who are 
averse to uncertainty have an expanded 
semantic representational structure, 
we took a multipronged approach. We 
began by showing that when we asked 
participants to judge similarity between 
concepts, people’s semantic represen-
tations of concepts were separated in 
psychological space as a function of 
how averse the participants were to 
uncertainty (the more intolerant to 
uncertainty a person is, the more their 
semantic representations are sepa-
rated). In a different group of individu-
als, we measured which brain region 
was activated when the individuals 
answered questions about the similarity 
of concepts, and we observed that this 
distancing effect is localized to the left 
inferior frontal gyrus, a neural region 
that is traditionally known3 to resolve 
semantic ambiguity (Fig. 1). The final 
experiment was aimed at determining 
the behavioural consequences of having 
an expanded semantic representational 
structure. We found that the expansion 
effect has consequences for discrimi-
nating and generalizing. Those who are 
more intolerant to uncertainty are bet-
ter at discriminating between semantic 
concepts but are worse at generalizing 
across concepts than are individuals 
who are tolerant towards uncertainty. 
Thus, basic cognitive processes, such 
as our semantic representations, can 
satisfy psychological needs in a princi-
pled manner: in this case, by making the 
semantic system — and with that, the 
world — more identifiable.
Future directions
The study of how psychological needs 
affect the structure of cognitive pro-
cesses has been either largely ignored 
or mostly focused on the effect of 
expertise4. The reason might be because 
it is difficult to establish a directional 
relationship between a concrete psy-
chological need and a structural change 
in cognitive processing.
By mixing insights from clinical and 
personality research with classic work in 
cognitive science, we suggest a tether-
ing between a psychological need and 
cognitive structure. Even though our 
work establishes a robust link between 
uncertainty aversion and semantic ex-
pansion, neither the mechanism nor the 
cause is well understood. An expanded 
semantic space might be a function of 
an individual’s aversion to uncertainty, 
or it might be the opposite: expanded 
semantic representations cause in-
creased uncertainty intolerance. Future 
work can help to characterize the nature 
of the relationship between the need 
to reduce uncertainty and representa-
tional organization, while also testing 
the presence of such a relationship in 
other cognitive domains, such as basic 
perception.
One potential avenue to test the 
mechanism is to see whether increased 
separability between semantic rep-
resentations is achieved by simply 
increasing the number of dimensions 
that the representation is organized 
on or by creating a larger structural 
space using the same limited number 
of dimensions. Indeed, such research 
could capitalize on a current trend in 
neuroscience, which recognizes that 
high neural dimensionality enables to 
separate representations to facilitate 
specific cognitive processes5.
Marc-Lluís Vives1,2 & Oriel FeldmanHall2
1Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands. 
2Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
This is a summary of: 
 Vives, M.-L., de Bruin, D., van Baar, J. M., 
FeldmanHall, O. & Bhandari, A. Uncertainty 
aversion predicts the neural expansion of 
semantic representations . Nat. Hum. Behav., 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01561-5 
(2023).
Publisher’s note 
 Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
Nature Human Behaviour

References
1.	 Chadwick, M. J. et al. Semantic 
representations in the temporal pole 
predict false memories. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA. 11, 10180–10185 (2016).  
This paper demonstrates that similar 
neural representations cause increased 
confusability in recognition memory.
2.	 Roediger, H. L. & McDermott, K. B. Creating 
false memories: remembering words not 
presented in lists. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. 
Mem. Cogn. 21, 803–814 (1995).  
A classic demonstration of the 
relationship between high false-alarm 
rates and proximity in semantic space.
3.	 Grindrod, C. M., Bilenko, N. Y., Myers, E. 
B. & Blumstein, S. E. The role of the left 
inferior frontal gyrus in implicit semantic 
competition and selection: a event-related 
fMRI study. Brain Res 1229, 167–178 (2008).  
A paper linking activity in the left inferior 
frontal gyrus with semantic selection.
4.	 Wing, E. A., Burles, F., Ryan, J. D. & Gilboa, 
A. The structure of prior knowledge 
enhances memory in experts by reducing 
interference. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, 
e2204172119 (2022).  
A paper demonstrating how expertise 
can shape the structure of mental 
representations.
5.	 Fusi, S. et al. Why neurons mix: high 
dimensionality for higher cognition.  
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 37, 66–74 (2016).  
A review that presents the importance 
of high neural dimensionality for higher 
cognition.
6.	 Brooks, J. A. & Freeman, J. B. Conceptual 
knowledge predicts the representational 
structure of facial emotion perception. 
Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 581–591 (2018).  
This paper details the relationship 
between conceptual knowledge and 
emotion perception, which helped to 
inspire the current research question.
Expert opinion
“The authors present and test the novel idea 
that people who dislike uncertainty have 
more distinct semantic representations 
of different concepts. They argue that an 
intolerance for uncertainty results in greater 
differentiation of semantic concepts, which 
reduces ambiguity and associated effects, 
including subsequent memory errors. 
I find this to be a novel and interesting 
perspective on semantic ambiguity, owing 
to the focus on uncertainty and individual 
differences.” Rebecca Jackson, University 
of York, York, UK.
Behind the paper
Our research question came into focus after 
reading an article6 in which the authors 
showed that the representation of emotional 
concepts predicts how humans perceive 
emotional faces. The article included 
a schematic in which two concepts are 
represented by overlapping circles, and 
the degree to which the circles overlap 
dictates their conceptual similarity. Within 
the context of our own research agenda — 
improving our understanding of how the 
aversion to uncertainty biases different 
cognitive processes — it became clear that 
an open question is whether people who 
are averse to uncertainty tend to avoid 
conceptual overlap as much as possible to 
minimize semantic uncertainty. From that 
first insight more than two years ago, we 
continued to iterate over this question and 
refine how to study it, which resulted in a 
set of complementary empirical findings. 
M.-L.V. & O.F.H.
From the editor
“People who are averse to uncertainty 
usually have a strong motivation to mitigate 
uncertainty. In this work, the authors suggest 
that this motivation to decrease uncertainty 
might also affect semantic representations 
and related neural activity patterns. 
The reported findings are a fascinating 
demonstration of how individual differences 
can fundamentally affect our cognition.” 
Editorial Team, Nature Human  
Behaviour.
Figure
LIFG
Doctor
Hospital
Protection
Dimension 1
Dimension 2
Uncertainty tolerant
Uncertainty averse
4.0
3.0
2.0
0
1.0
–1.0
–2.0
–3.0
–4.0
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Fig. 1 | The neural expansion of semantic representations. The relationship between uncertainty aversion 
and representational distance between words in the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) is illustrated using two 
representative participants who differ in their attitudes towards uncertainty. The neural activity pattern 
associated with each concept (word) is represented by a point in the plane. Concepts are represented as more 
distanced from one another for the individual who is averse to uncertainty. © 2023, Vives, M.-L. et al.
Nature Human Behaviour

