Research briefing
Solar 
nanoflares 
erupt from 
a laboratory 
experiment
A laboratory experiment has 
replicated the braided strands of 
solar coronal loops and shown 
that the bursting of individual 
strands produces X-rays. 
Measurements of these braided 
strands and the generated X-rays 
reveal a multi-scale process that 
could be responsible for the 
energetic particles and X-rays 
that accompany solar flares.
The question
Solar flares contain intense bursts of  
X-rays and energetic particles1,2 from  
highly localized regions on the surface  
of the Sun. Solar flares are thought to be 
powered by the sudden release of magnetic 
energy stored in solar corona loops — the 
arched, plasma-filled magnetic flux tubes 
protruding from the surface of the Sun. 
Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) — the  
macroscopic theory of magnetically  
confined plasma — cannot explain how  
flares produce X-rays and energetic  
particles; thus, these features are thought  
to be described by physics beyond the  
scope of MHD. This non-MHD physics 
replaces MHD at very small length scales 
characterized by the ion skin depth  
(1–10 m in the solar corona). Although 
spacecraft and ground telescopes can 
measure solar energetic particles and X-ray 
bursts, the spatial resolution is insufficient 
to discern features with ion skin depth 
length scales; therefore, the mechanism 
by which X-rays and energetic particles are 
produced remains unknown.
The discovery
MHD provides an excellent description of 
the large-scale dynamics of solar corona 
loops. An important property of MHD is 
that it has no intrinsic time or length scale. 
Instead, MHD behaviour depends only on 
the ratio of the hydrodynamic to magnetic 
pressure (β); therefore, two plasmas with 
extremely different length and time scales, 
but the same β, behave identically3. We 
exploited this scalability to replicate solar 
MHD behaviour in a laboratory experiment 
where millions of metres are represented 
by centimetres and minutes are repre-
sented by microseconds. The experimental 
sequence started with magnetic flux tubes 
arching between two magnetic poles.  
Hydrogen gas was then injected and ion-
ized by a high voltage that drives an  
electric current along the plasma-filled 
magnetic flux tubes. Although initially  
in the MHD regime, an instability pushed 
the experiment beyond MHD. We observed 
that this transition leads to the production 
of X-ray bursts. It is easier to observe this 
transition in our experiment than on the 
Sun because the experiment can operate  
at the edge of MHD validity, is adjustable, 
and is reproducible.
Like real solar corona loops, our experi-
mental solar corona loop replica was com-
posed of braided plasma-filled magnetic  
flux tubes. The time evolution of these 
strands was recorded using camera, X-ray, 
voltage, and current measurements (Fig. 1). 
These measurements show that when  
the electric current is small, a strand  
expands benignly, but then when the  
current has increased, the strand suddenly 
develops an MHD instability; this instability 
stretches the strand and, because the  
instability is incompressible, reduces  
the strand radius. When the radius is  
decreased to the scale of the ion skin  
depth (~1 cm), where MHD fails, transient,  
localized X-ray bursts with associated  
voltage spikes are observed. These  
spikes indicate strong electric fields  
that accelerate charged particles to  
high energies. These observations  
reveal a pathway for the production  
of X-ray bursts and energetic particles in 
solar flares. Components of this pathway 
have been separately observed on the Sun; 
for example, an MHD instability has been 
observed to precede the X-ray burst in a 
solar flare4.
The implications
Our experiment demonstrates a cascade 
starting with a slow, MHD-governed loop 
expansion, followed by an MHD instability 
and then a non-MHD kinetic instability that 
generates electric fields that accelerate par-
ticles to such high energies that X-rays are 
produced when these particles collide. This 
cascade from MHD to non-MHD behaviour 
is likely to be relevant to many astrophysics 
scenarios in which X-rays and energetic par-
ticles are observed. For example, a similar 
localized electric field has been observed in 
the Earth’s plasma sheet, which accelerates 
ions and electrons5.
We used high-speed optical imaging  
to infer a change in the magnetic field  
topology of a breaking strand; but we  
did not measure the magnetic field  
directly. Previous studies used magnetic 
probes to measure the magnetic field;  
however, such probes would interfere  
with our measurement because they are 
similar in size to the instability we are trying 
to measure.
We hope to perform high-resolution, 
non-invasive spectroscopic measurements 
of the magnetic field evolution during 
strand breaking, but the feasibility of such a 
measurement is uncertain. Computer simu-
lations and analytical modelling character-
izing non-MHD dynamics such as particle 
acceleration are underway; these develop-
ments should provide a better understand-
ing of the fine-scale, non-MHD mechanisms 
involved in strand breaking.
Yang Zhang, Seth Pree & Paul M. Bellan
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
CA, USA.
This is a summary of: 
Zhang, Y. et al. Generation of laboratory 
nanoflares from multiple braided plasma 
loops. Nat. Astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41550-023-01941-x (2023).
Publisher’s note 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
Nature Astronomy

References
1.	 Benz, A. O. Flare observations. Living Rev. 
Sol. Phys. 14, 2 (2017).  
A review article about solar flares.
2.	 Miller, J. A. et al. Critical issues for 
understanding particle acceleration in 
impulsive solar flares. J. Geophys. Res. 
Space Phys. 102, 14631–14659 (1997).  
A review article about particle 
acceleration in impulsive solar flares.
3.	 Ryutov, D., Drake, R. & Remington, B. 
Criteria for scaled laboratory simulations 
of astrophysical MHD phenomena. 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 127, 465 (2000).  
An article describing how to perform 
scaled laboratory simulations of 
astrophysical MHD phenomena.
4.	 Kumar, P., Cho, K.-S., Bong, S.-C., Park, 
S.-H. & Kim, Y. Initiation of coronal mass 
ejection and associated flare caused by 
helical kink instability observed by SDO/
AIA. Astrophys. J. 746, 67 (2012).  
This paper reports the observation 
of a solar flare that is driven by kink 
instabilities.
5.	 Ergun, R. et al. Observations of double 
layers in Earth’s plasma sheet. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 102, 155002 (2009).  
This paper reports the observation of 
double layers in the Earth’s plasma sheet 
with localized voltage spike structures.
20
40
60
80
100
120
Pixel number
0 (mV)
50
100
150
200
250
0
100
200
X-ray signal (mV)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Time (µs)
–6
–4
–2
0
Vplasma (kV)
X-ray image
Voltage spike
b
c
d
Braided structure
Kink instability
X-ray bursts 
location
X-ray bursts 
location
a
`
1.08 µs
1.48 µs
1.88 µs
2.28 µs
2.68 µs
3.08 µs
3.48 µs
3.88 µs
5 cm
Electrodes
Fig. 1 | Time series of experimental plasma loop evolution. a, A time series of false-coloured visible-light 
images of hydrogen plasma loop evolution showing a two-strand braided structure. When the plasma loop 
expands, an instability occurs that reduces the radius of the strand until it breaks. A local X-ray burst is 
observed in the last two frames. b, A 1D X-ray ‘movie’ of the solar loop plasma showing that there is a localized 
X-ray source in pixels 20–30 at around 3.6 μs. The colour bar indicates the strength of the X-ray signal. c, The 
photomultiplier signal, showing that the X-ray event occurs at 3.6 μs. d, The voltage across the electrode 
(Vplasma), showing a transient voltage spike prior to the X-ray burst. This spike indicates a strong electric field 
that can accelerate particles to high energies. © 2023, Zhang, Y. et al.
Expert opinion
“This paper presents an interesting 
laboratory modelling of the transformation 
of magnetic energy into kinetic energy 
of plasma particles. Such modelling in 
combination with imaging data on solar 
flares can improve our understanding 
of magnetic reconnection (a process 
ubiquitous in astrophysics) and a chain 
of associated physical processes, such 
as particle acceleration, plasma heating 
and electromagnetic emission. Overall, 
the discussed physical phenomena and 
processes are highly relevant for modern 
astrophysics.” Gregory Fleishman,  
New Jersey Institute of Technology, 
Newark, NJ, USA.
Behind the paper
This work began with the realization 
that MHD can describe both laboratory 
fusion experiments and the solar corona, 
meaning that fusion technology could be 
re-purposed to simulate the solar corona. 
Unlike solar observations, laboratory 
experiments are repeatable and can be 
adjusted using the initial and boundary 
conditions. Once we had identified an 
interesting phenomenon, we could repeat 
it over and over again while improving the 
diagnostics to observe what is happening. 
It was also possible to vary the parameters 
to determine how the event was affected 
by different variables. We did not initially 
realize that the scaling of the experiments 
to actual solar phenomena is quite good 
nor that the experiments span the transition 
from MHD to non-MHD behaviour. We were 
very surprised to observe the production 
of X-rays in these experiments because 
the parameters initially appeared to be 
substantially insufficient for producing 
X-rays. Y.Z., S.P. & P.M.B.
From the editor
“Many processes on the Sun remain 
mysterious, despite its relative proximity 
to us. These experiments offer a way to 
connect what we can observe with solar 
satellites with the small-scale physics 
that has so far remained elusive. Not only 
could this unlock new understanding of 
our nearest star, but the applications and 
insights could extend to many other  
stars far beyond our own Solar System.” 
Editorial Team, Nature Astronomy.
Figure
Nature Astronomy

