Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
63
nature reviews neuroscience
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00655-9
Review article
Check for updates
From cognitive maps  
to spatial schemas
Delaram Farzanfar 
  1,2, Hugo J. Spiers 
  3, Morris Moscovitch2,4 & R. Shayna Rosenbaum 
  1,4 
Abstract
A schema refers to a structured body of prior knowledge that captures 
common patterns across related experiences. Schemas have been 
studied separately in the realms of episodic memory and spatial 
navigation across different species and have been grounded in theories 
of memory consolidation, but there has been little attempt to integrate 
our understanding across domains, particularly in humans. We propose 
that experiences during navigation with many similarly structured 
environments give rise to the formation of spatial schemas (for 
example, the expected layout of modern cities) that share properties 
with but are distinct from cognitive maps (for example, the memory of 
a modern city) and event schemas (such as expected events in a modern 
city) at both cognitive and neural levels. We describe earlier theoretical 
frameworks and empirical findings relevant to spatial schemas, along 
with more targeted investigations of spatial schemas in human and 
non-human animals. Consideration of architecture and urban analytics, 
including the influence of scale and regionalization, on different 
properties of spatial schemas may provide a powerful approach to 
advance our understanding of spatial schemas.
Sections
Introduction
Distinguishing a spatial 
schema
Mechanisms of spatial schema 
formation
Networks and hubs for spatial 
schemas
Insights from urban data 
analytics
Conclusions
1Department of Psychology, Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, Canada. 2Department of 
Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. 3Department of Experimental Psychology, University College 
London, London, UK. 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, Canada. 
 e-mail: shaynar@
yorku.ca

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
64
Review article
aspects and neural instantiation are highlighted. Next, we review find-
ings from rodent spatial navigation and human event schema stud-
ies, comparing them to our notion of spatial schemas in humans. We 
explore the influence of scale and regionalization in characterizing  
geometric properties and surface properties of real-world environments.  
These facilitate schema construction by helping statistical inferences 
to be drawn about common elements of different types of environ-
ments such as modern industrial cities40–44. We summarize key findings 
from neuroimaging and computational studies to propose a working 
neurocognitive framework for understanding the emergence and main-
tenance of spatial schemas and their application. The heterogeneity of 
schema operationalizations, which have been proposed to relate to sta-
tistical rule learning1,45–47, associative inference18,48–52, paired-associate 
learning53,54 and prior knowledge retrieval22,55–57, highlight the need for 
a theoretical framework to facilitate future investigations.
Distinguishing a spatial schema
Cognitive maps, spatial gists and spatial schemas
Contemporary discussions of how space is represented typically begin 
with consideration of cognitive maps. A cognitive map is a represen-
tation of allocentric spatial relations of objects with one another in a 
specific environment58. Tolman coined the term when he observed the 
ability of rodents to engineer a detour that had never been traversed 
between two known locations on the basis of previous experience navi-
gating to each location through another route58. Cognitive maps are 
typically derived from navigating to a rewarded goal destination from 
multiple start locations. Cognitive maps were given a neurobiological 
substrate upon the discovery of HPC place cells — first in rodents59,60 and 
later in humans61 — that fire maximally when an animal is occupying a 
particular location in an environment. Similar to schemas, which were 
originally described in terms of body representations62,63 and events 
or narratives21–23, cognitive maps took an opposite trajectory, first 
being described in terms of space58 but adapted to non-spatial domains 
such as narratives2. Owing to the large scope of the topic, this Review is  
centred on cognitive maps and schemas as they apply to space.
The gist of an environment may be dissociated from detailed 
features and resembles the gist of an experience: just as the gist of an 
experience refers to the core elements of a particular memory epi-
sode20,64, a spatial gist refers to the core features that characterize a 
particular environment. Whereas cognitive maps and spatial gists each 
relate to a particular environment, we argue that a spatial schema is a 
superordinate spatial representation that supports optimal decision-
making in multiple environments that share common geometric and 
visuospatial properties. As such, a spatial schema could be thought of 
as a generalizable spatial representation of the category of an environ-
ment, formed by integrating overlapping neural representations across 
similar environments. In this way, schemas may draw on multiple gists 
and, thus, are not specific to any particular environment or location.
However, gists and the cognitive maps that relate to them are not 
folded into schemas. They need to remain distinct from one another so 
that not all environments are viewed as alike — as would be the case if 
one only relied on schemas. A process known as pattern separation65,66 
keeps cognitive maps and gists distinct from one another but they can 
work in concert with schemas to aid in navigation38. We view this as a 
bidirectional process: by pointing to elements that cognitive maps 
and gists have in common, schemas bring into focus what is distinct67.
The difference between spatial gists and spatial schemas should 
be revealed at the neuroanatomical level. Spatial gists may be medi-
ated by the anterior HPC (Fig. 1), although there is lesion evidence  
Introduction
We learn against the backdrop of past experience1. The mammalian 
hippocampus (HPC) has a crucial role in creating this backdrop to serve 
mnemonic functions and spatial navigation2 in the context of a network 
of specialized neocortical regions. In humans, the hippocampal forma-
tion encodes the specific relations contained within experienced events 
and spaces to support episodic memory3–6 and spatial navigation7,8. 
Spatial navigation is thought to be guided by the internal representation 
of spatial relations in a specific environment, referred to as a cognitive 
map2,9. The HPC can store unique cognitive maps of different environ-
ments or of altered versions of the same environment2,10–13. At the same 
time, similar parts of one environment or multiple environments seem 
to be represented using generalizable spatial codes14–19, which refer to 
a set of abstract spatial relations that can be used flexibly to facilitate 
navigation. Like a cognitive map, a spatial gist is composed of key ele-
ments specific to a particular environment but may be viewed as a 
summary of the general layout extracted from experience navigating 
in that same environment, stripped of its perceptual details20. The inte-
gration of multiple gists, in turn, could give rise to spatial schemas that 
are independent of a specific environment and the HPC. This Review 
re-examines the notion of a schema as it relates to space, drawing on 
cognitive neuroscience and urban analytics.
A schema is an abstract knowledge structure that reflects the 
integration of common patterns that are extracted across multiple 
events to form a flexible reference template that is used for a particu-
lar function21–26. The concept of a schema in humans has been largely 
considered in the context of verbal memory of events, although space 
is viewed as a defining, and probably crucial, component27. Here, we 
consider the possibility of a spatial schema as separate from an event 
schema, instead reflecting learned recurring patterns of spatial rela-
tions among key elements of an environment14,18,28, and facilitated 
through the act of navigating in that environment29–32. For example, 
whereas an event schema might guide encoding of the events that occur 
in a particular type of city, a spatial schema would guide encoding of 
the layout and other spatial elements (that is, the spatial ontology)  
of such a city. A prominent urban theory identifies these elements of a  
city as landmarks, nodes, paths, districts and edges33–35. Instances of 
these elements in Toronto include the CN Tower as a landmark, Yonge 
Street as a path, Nathan Phillips Square as a node, the Annex as a district 
and Harbourfront as an edge. A spatial schema might be reinstated 
when one encounters similar elements in a novel environment or when 
one must assimilate previously encountered elements with novel 
elements when a portion of a familiar environment is substantially 
altered. This process of building on a pre-existing schema may draw 
on the same cognitive processes and neural interactions involved  
in schema formation, or it may occur independently. In both cases, spatial 
schemas would be used to guide navigation by enhancing expectations  
in predictive coding28.
The concept of a spatial schema is still emerging in the cognitive 
neuroscience of memory and navigation, with several recent attempts 
to operationalize36 and systematically examine spatial schemas in 
humans37–39. There are two aspects to spatial schemas: one that is  
psychological and relates to using previously formed schemas as ref-
erence templates for behaviour, and the other that is also neural and 
relates to schema formation via HPC–neocortical interaction.
We revisit theoretical frameworks and empirical investigations 
that are relevant to schemas and potential links between them towards 
a unified view. Before we do, it is important to distinguish between a 
spatial schema and a cognitive map. Differences in the behavioural 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
65
Review article
(reviewed below) to suggest that they do not depend on it, at least in 
humans. It is possible that spatial schemas are accessed through an HPC 
index formed by HPC–neocortical interactions that gave rise to sche-
mas, but we believe spatial schemas do not depend on the HPC for their 
maintenance or retrieval. This view is consistent with evidence that 
event schemas do not rely on the HPC22.
An important question is whether geometric resemblance 
between different navigation experiences facilitates or interferes with 
the acquisition of a cognitive map for a novel environment that shares 
common local and global properties with existing cognitive maps of 
previously learned environments38. Evidence suggests that an acquired 
cognitive map of a particular environment interferes with learning a 
novel environment that possesses features that are inconsistent with 
previous knowledge. In one study, experienced London taxi drivers 
were asked to learn the layout and scenes of a novel version of London 
using a reconstruction that included photographs of buildings with 
similar architectural style and historical period to those in London but 
from another UK city68. Performance on spatial memory tests, such as 
drawing the layout of the novel environment in a sketch map and reco­
gnizing scenes from photographs, indicated that, unlike non-expert 
controls, the taxi drivers had considerable difficulty learning a novel 
version of London that differed from their previously learned version of 
London68. A more recent study similarly showed proactive interference 
in participants who were navigating novel virtual reality environments 
that contained segments that overlapped with familiar environments 
learned the day before. However, interestingly, experience with  
the familiar environment facilitated navigation in the segments of the  
novel environment that did not overlap with the familiar environ-
ment37. These findings provide indirect evidence that prior knowledge 
can interfere with the acquisition of spatial knowledge for schema-
incongruent elements of a novel environment. The interfering effects of  
the original environment might suggest that a cognitive map or gist of the  
environment had formed. This is suggested by additional evidence that 
proactive interference increases as a function of cognitive mapping 
and self-reported sense of direction37. A schema, by contrast, might 
facilitate learning of a novel environment that resembles a familiar 
one. We return to the roles of geometric resemblance and local versus 
global scale in describing possible mechanisms of schema formation.
Spatial schemas in rodents
As was the case for early work on cognitive maps, the neurobiologi-
cal mechanisms of schemas have been primarily studied in rodents 
using spatial learning paradigms2,14,26, which serve as models of human 
episodic memory. In an influential study, rats were trained on a paired-
associate memory task in which they learned the spatial arrangement of 
several flavour–place associations in a testing environment53 (Fig. 2a). 
New paired associates that were consistent with learned associations 
were acquired in only a single trial. HPC lesions more than 24 h after 
paired-associate learning did not disrupt the recall of original or  
novel paired associates. However, HPC lesions did disrupt initial acquisi-
tion if they were applied before the representation had an opportunity 
to undergo rapid consolidation, that is, before 24 h. In a follow-up study,  
upregulated expression of immediate early genes in several regions of 
the neocortex, including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and ret-
rosplenial cortex (RSC), was associated with more rapid acquisition of 
novel paired associates in (non-lesioned) rats that were exposed to the 
original paired associates54. The more recently developed ‘HexMaze’, 
a large-scale, complex, gangway maze experienced by mice for differ-
ent durations, has been used to show that the passage of time, rather 
than the frequency of training, is responsible for the accumulation of 
spatial knowledge into a long-term representation69. The observed 
learning gains in these studies were attributed to the formation of a 
spatial schema53,54 (for a recent theoretical framework based on these 
findings, see ref.36).
An earlier study used a ‘village maze’ (Fig. 2b): a two-story, enriched 
environment that contains multiple rewards, which may enable  
the formation of a spatial schema70. After a few weeks’ experience in the  
village maze, the ability of rats to learn to flexibly navigate to different 
rewarded locations within the maze was tested. Rats with HPC lesions 
but extensive experience with the village maze acquired those associa-
tions as quickly as controls did, whereas inexperienced HPC-lesioned 
rats took much longer. Such rapid updating as seen in the experienced 
HPC-lesioned rats is consistent with the embedding of the novel paths 
to a goal into a schema of the environment rather than with completely 
new learning of novel paths. One possibility is that the rapid adoption of 
novel paths is mediated by schema information-guiding circuits in the 
dorsal striatum, which are used to update a stored transition structure 
(choices at junctions) that is linked to a particular goal71. The roles of 
other extra-HPC structures in schema formation and use also require 
specification (Fig. 1).
Spatial schemas in humans
The few studies explicitly designed to examine the presence of spatial 
schemas in humans were largely adaptations of earlier rodent studies. 
In a human analogue of the paired-associate memory task, participants 
acquired object–location associations over a period of 302 days72. Con-
sistent with previous findings73–75, functional MRI (fMRI) data showed 
an activity shift from the HPC to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(vmPFC) for the retrieval of learned associates after 24 h yet, with over-
learning (by 90 days), retrieval responses shifted to the ventrolateral 
PFC, representing a process of semanticization. Once knowledge was 
semanticized, the vmPFC was found to be active during retrieval of 
subsequently learned novel associates (from day 91 to 105) that were 
congruent with previously learned associates. This was accompanied 
by a more rapid shift of activity from the HPC to the ventrolateral PFC, 
reflecting reduced forgetting and accelerated systems consolidation.
Other human studies have used associative inference tasks to 
assess the degree to which neural representations of novel infer-
ences and prior knowledge are integrated in the posterior HPC and 
vmPFC22,49. Representational similarity analyses indicate that the rep-
resentations of learned associations, particularly those that are previ-
ously established in memory, are integrated in the anterior HPC and 
posterior mPFC but remain distinct in the posterior HPC and anterior 
mPFC49. These findings are consistent with a fine-to-coarse detail gra-
dient for encoding information along the posterior-to-anterior axis 
of the HPC76–78 (Fig. 1). Human HPC representations for context–item 
associations that are accumulated over multiple learning trials also 
seem to generalize across events that share similar item–context asso-
ciations79. However, specific experimental paradigms for schemas of 
space are needed to determine whether and how spatial schemas that 
arise from routine navigational experience in real-world environments 
differ from event schemas and what the precise role of the vmPFC is in 
learning, accessing and maintaining them (Box 1).
Human studies of remote spatial memories for familiar environ-
ments offer a starting point for investigating gist-like or ‘schematized’ 
spatial representations25,27,80. Schematic aspects of remote spatial 
memories are those features that survive HPC damage and continue 
to support navigation27,80. This was demonstrated in the case of K.C., 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
66
Review article
mPFC
Schema/
monitoring
aHPC
Gist
ERC 
Spatial
metrics
pHPC
Detail
Weak integration
Instantiation
PPC
Spatial
relations
Angular gyrus
Verbal
schemas
RSC
Spatial 
translation 
and integration
Parahippocampal cortex
Perceptual
appearance
Integration
Integration
Toronto harbour tour
Downtown Toronto
Grid-like city
a  Generic representation
b  Particular, coarse representation
c  Particular, detailed representation
d  Spatial schema
e  Spatial gist
f  Cognitive map
Landmark
Path
Node
Landmark
Path
Node
Get on small
white boat
Watch
skyline
reﬂection
Waterfront
schema
Boat terminal
Sandy beach
Coarse/global
Details/local

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
67
Review article
an individual with bilateral HPC damage, who could produce accurate 
sketch maps of the overall layout of his hometown (Fig. 3) and judge 
relative distances and directions between its major landmarks27,81,82. 
However, K.C. was impaired in remembering minor landmarks and per-
ceptual details of familiar environments, despite having largely intact 
visuoperceptual processing abilities and semantic knowledge of those 
same places. Notably, K.C. and other individuals with hippocampal 
amnesia were still able to navigate familiar environments using only  
a schematic form of their spatial representation81,82.
A spatial schema reflects the integration of spatial gists across 
multiple environments that have shared features, identified via statisti-
cal abstraction. Schematized spatial memories primarily include geo-
metric properties rather than surface properties27,70,80,83. As described 
above, in rats with pre-lesion experience in the complex village maze, 
allocentric navigation abilities are preserved after HPC lesions70. How-
ever, navigation ability in these animals was impaired after manipulat-
ing distal cues (for example, pictures on walls surrounding the maze), 
indicating that stable room geometry determined success. The village 
maze is a rare example of an animal task, designed based on findings 
in K.C., that serves as an experimental animal model of the use of pre-
existing spatial schemas in humans (Fig. 2b). It provided converging 
evidence that semantic-like spatial representations or spatial schemas 
exist independently of the HPC70. It remains to be determined if new 
schemas can be acquired and/or updated by individuals with HPC 
lesions; findings in an individual with developmental amnesia (owing 
to early HPC damage)82 and in another individual with adult-onset HPC 
damage84 suggest that this may indeed be possible.
Mechanisms of spatial schema formation
Memory consolidation, generalization and hippocampal 
replay
The idea of schemata21,23,62,74 or schemas22,63 was first introduced by 
Henry Head in 1926 as a psychological–neurological construct to 
explain the organization of knowledge accumulated throughout 
one’s lifetime22,85–87. Contemporary neurobiological theories of sche-
mas22,88,89 are based on the initial empirical observation that pre-existing 
knowledge accelerates the rate of systems consolidation26,53,54 via the 
formation of new synapses53,54 and laminar reorganization90, whereby 
transient memories originating in the HPC become stabilized in neo-
cortical regions, including the mPFC, vmPFC, posterior parietal cortex 
(PPC), anterior cingulate cortex and RSC22,25,26,90 (Fig. 1). It is important 
to keep in mind that, in this consolidation process, memories are trans-
formed from highly specific instances to more generalized representa-
tions, losing specificity in the process91. The process of generalization, 
by contrast, probably relies on the formation and use of gist-based 
representations in the HPC rather than on the formation and use of 
schemas per se. For example, the generalized representations formed 
by rodents in the studies reviewed above seem to rely on gist-like rep-
resentations rather than schemas18,53,54. Gist-like representations in  
the HPC may feed into schematic ones elsewhere in the brain, such as the  
mPFC in rodents and the vmPFC in humans (Box 1).
However, some spatial memories retain their detailed HPC rep-
resentations in perpetuity along with their schematic representa-
tion, and these representations interact with each other, with one or 
the other dominating depending on various conditions, including 
time since acquisition, task demands and retrieval cues92,93. This inter-
play is similar to that between event schemas and representations of 
event details, which coexist in both the HPC and neocortex94. Future 
work is needed to determine where and how detailed and schematic  
spatial (and event) representations coexist and the conditions that 
influence whether they compete and/or cooperate in storage and 
retrieval.
A plausible physiological mechanism by which schemas develop 
is through the integration of repeated memories with overlapping 
elements during HPC replay during slow-wave sleep89,95–98 through 
the coordination of neural network oscillations that facilitate HPC–­
neocortical interactions99,100. In rodents and humans, sleep has been 
found to enhance gist extraction from memory89, HPC spatial represen-
tations101 and explicit knowledge of regions in space29 — mechanisms  
that have been attributed to schema learning22,63. Disruption of replay 
of HPC neuronal sequences in rodents during slow-wave sleep101,102 
severely impairs the retrieval of spatial representations103, suggesting 
that replay mechanisms are needed for the consolidation of spatial 
memories. On the one hand, sleep enhances specific instances via HPC 
circuitry101,102. On the other, sleep enables the extraction of regularities 
across instances, the loss of contextual information and the retention 
of gist as seen in representations in extra-hippocampal regions89,97. The 
focus of schema research in humans has been almost exclusively on 
event schemas. Although spatial schemas in humans may be instantia­
ted through similar neurophysiological mechanisms to those underly-
ing event schema formation, the neural substrates for the integration 
of spatial representations learned through navigational experience 
remain to be fully understood.
Geometric resemblance
The extraction of the meaning of stimuli beyond their superficial 
sensory properties may be the first step in capturing the essence of 
a schema14,20,22, possibly mediated by gist representations. Human 
‘concept cells’ seem to encode a stable representation of a specific 
person or landmark, regardless of size or viewing angle104,105, providing  
sparse codes for visually invariant abstractions related to personal 
events106. Analogous to the selectivity of concept cells, the receptive 
fields of place cells in the rodent HPC are sensitive to specific locations 
in space60,61.
Fig. 1 | Neurocognitive framework of spatial gist and schema. Schemas 
are dynamic knowledge structures formed by extracting generalizable 
common features of particular, detailed episodic events. It follows that spatial 
representations may also reflect the accumulation of ‘spatial gists’ of an 
environment type (for example, a grid-like city) that are extracted from multiple 
experiences navigating similar or different environments. A spatial schema is 
a term used to describe the representation of a particular type of environment 
(such as a city central square or waterfront area; part d) rather than a specific 
environment (such as Nathan Phillips Square or Harbourfront in Toronto; part c). 
A spatial schema is a consolidated distribution of spatial gists for a given prototype 
(parts a,d). ‘Spatial gist’ is a term used to refer to abstract spatial elements 
that, if removed, alter the identity of a specific environment. This concept is 
depicted in parts b (scene level) and e (street level). A hippocampus (HPC)-based 
representation of an environment is highly linked with detailed perceptual features 
of episodic events (parts c,f). The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) facilitates 
schema development by linking spatial features with goal-relevant actions and 
behaviours. A network of posterior regions, including parahippocampal cortex 
(PHC) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC), is involved in representing perceptual 
features and spatial relations. The retrosplenial cortex (RSC) serves as a hub for 
translating and integrating information between two orthogonal frames: detailed 
or local cues versus coarse or global cues, and egocentric versus allocentric. 
Environment geometry input is received by the entorhinal cortex (ERC). Statistical 
learning of spatial context is integrated in the angular gyrus (AG) and mPFC into 
spatial schemas and is continuously updated through reciprocal connections with 
the HPC and other posterior regions. Importantly, although the various posterior 
regions play specialized roles in representing components of surface properties 
and their relations and/or coding of these properties within local or global scales, 
it is the interaction of hubs with networks of regions that eventually gives rise to 
spatial schemas. aHPC, anterior hippocampus; pHPC, posterior hippocampus. 
Photo of Toronto waterfront credit: rabbit75_ist/Getty.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
68
Review article
Geometric resemblance guides the generalization of spatial learn-
ing of locations from one environment to another14–18,53,107. Geometric 
features are the 3D structural features of an environment, such as the 
arrangement of walls, whereas surface properties include 2D features 
such as visual patterns, textures and colours. These two forms of spatial 
features have been described in the context of core systems of intuition 
(such as Euclidean geometry, natural numbers and symbols) in devel-
opmental studies108–111. Geometric resemblance might explain findings 
that people are less likely to detect changes in surface properties than 
in geometric properties of highly familiar and extensively experienced 
landmarks and scenes, whether tested directly by recognition or indi-
rectly by eye movements; if such changes are detected, the changes 
are at a global or coarse level112.
When geometric or surface features are modified, the firing pat-
terns of HPC place cells can change in a process known as remapping11,113. 
Geometric modifications are accompanied by more substantial changes 
a  Paired-associate task
b
Start box
Map
Flavour–place associations
Individual trial
Modiﬁcation of map
3 Pellets
Build-up 
9 weeks
Update
Flavoured pellets
Original paired 
associations
New paired 
associations
Day of testing
1
0
2
2
3
4
4
5
6
6
7
8
8
9
10
10
12
No. of errors
HPC
Control
Room change
Day of testing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cue distortion
Day of testing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Village rotation
Dig in a speciﬁc sandwell cued by ﬂavoured pellet given at start box
Fig. 2 | Spatial navigation paradigms. a, The event arena53 contains a 7 × 7 
grid of potential sandwell locations, from which a map of six distinct flavour–
location associations are formed over time (left). The lines between the wells 
represent an overall schema that the flavour–location pairs constitute. Four start 
boxes are located around the maze along with intra-maze and extra-maze cues 
(star, hexagon). In an individual trial (centre panel), the rat is given a flavoured 
pellet (such as a banana-flavoured pellet) in the start box, and the rat has to go 
directly to one of the six sandwells for additional banana pellets (red dashed 
arrow; repeated for the remaining five flavours). With extensive practice across 
3 months, the rats show improved performance, indicated by increased digging 
time in the correct location and fewer errors when choosing the location in 
which to dig first. After 9 weeks (right panel), an update to the flavour–place 
associations is made, with two new flavours placed in new locations, represented 
by red symbols on the maze. This update can be learned following a single 
exposure36. b, In the village maze paradigm70, rats were reared and trained to find 
rewards located in a multi-level environment over an extended period of time. 
Following lesions to the hippocampus (HPC group) or sham lesions (control 
groups), rats were tested over the course of 10 days in the original environment 
(not shown) or in a modified version of the pre-operative environment. The effect 
of HPC lesions on remote spatial memory in rats navigating altered environments 
was measured based on errors in finding reward locations. Experimental 
manipulations included moving the village apparatus to a different room 
with novel distal cues but the same room geometry (left graph), changing the 
identity of distal cues in the original room (middle graph) and rotating the village 
apparatus by 180 ° in the same room (right graph). Errors in the ability of rats to 
find reward locations were measured over the course of 10 days in HPC-lesioned 
rats and sham-lesioned (control) groups. HPC-lesioned rats were severely 
impaired in room change and village rotation conditions but performed well in 
the cue distortion condition. These findings indicate that HPC-lesioned rats used 
stable room geometry rather than distal or surface cues to navigate to correct 
goal locations. Therefore, geometric cues, rather than surface properties, seem 
to facilitate allocentric navigation in a highly familiar environment, despite HPC 
lesions70. Part a is adapted with permission from ref.36, Sage Publications. Part b is 
adapted from ref.70, Springer Nature Ltd.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
69
Review article
in the firing patterns of place cells than are surface modifications15,113,114, 
suggesting that HPC remapping actively supports the role of geometry 
in the stability of spatial representations115. Remapping is thought to 
underlie the ability of the HPC to store multiple unique representations 
of similar environments or altered states of the same environment12. Such 
remapping has been proposed to be conceived as the HPC performing 
‘hidden state inference’, whereby sensory information is integrated with 
stored representations to create a ‘belief’ about current occupancy in 
the environment116. One possibility is that many repeated experiences of 
environments with a particular geometry may bias the stored represen-
tations that are used to drive the hidden state inference117. Such biases 
could form part of the mechanism by which spatial schemas influence 
the encoding of novel environments. For example, repeated experi-
ences of similarly configured towns might lead to biases in the states 
stored in the HPC, in turn leading to a more effective remapping of HPC  
cells when visiting a novel town that is very similar to the other towns 
than when visiting a novel, dissimilar town. This process of biasing stored 
representations is akin to how schemas supported by the mPFC facilitate 
pattern separation to disambiguate overlapping representations: HPC 
cell remapping by modifying spatial firing patterns may enable the 
differentiation of similar experiences or locations. In line with these 
ideas, Zheng et al. showed that the mPFC represents a common spatial 
structure across environments that have shared and unique elements38 
(Box 1). In this way, the HPC, guided by schemas, could extract the  
particular gist of the environment without attention to specific details.
Cells in the macaque HPC, termed ‘schema cells’, have been found 
to encode task representations that encompass spatial and cognitive 
dimensions, dissociated from immediate visual properties of the envi-
ronment14. The increasing similarity between firing patterns of schema 
cells was not driven by visual similarity between environments, as 
indicated by point-of-gaze maps14,118, but by their common spatial 
geometry14 and by past and future actions within the task structure14,105. 
The latter links value-based judgements to specific spatial features, 
enabling rewards to guide the development of spatial schemas, par-
ticularly early in their formation. These putative schema cells in the 
macaque may be homologous to concept cells in humans, although 
it is not clear whether these schema cells differ from concept cells in 
their stimulus selectivity98,99. Multivoxel pattern similarity analyses 
in a recent fMRI study in which participants learned item–context 
associations showed that HPC responses to items that share a similar 
context, a likely requisite for schema formation, are more likely to 
occur in overlapping regions than responses to items that do not share 
a context79. Overlapping item–context associations may serve as the 
building blocks for schemas or for gists that combine to form schemas. 
Geometric resemblance could help drive spatial schema construction 
via HPC remapping115. However, schemas themselves may be better rep-
resented by cell assemblies outside of the HPC than by single schema 
cells, at least in humans.
Pattern recognition and gist versus detail
Pattern recognition is a neural mechanism for gist extraction and 
schema formation in mice1 and humans119,120. In a water-maze para-
digm, mice exposed to platform locations that were moved across 
trials according to selections from a normal distribution were able to 
Box 1
Contributions of ventromedial prefrontal cortex to spatial schemas
The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) features prominently  
in the literature on event schemas in humans22,191. Similar to a cognitive 
map, the vmFPC may support a flexible representation of the world, 
providing structure to make sense of an ongoing stream of sensory 
input to enable relational inferences192. The vmPFC and orbitofrontal 
cortex have been implicated in reward valuation, decision-making, 
social cognition and monitoring of the contents of memory retrieval. 
It is unclear whether and how these processes link together and 
factor into spatial schemas. One possibility is that these processes 
may interact with a spatial schema as it forms and acts as a scaffold 
for the unfolding of events20. Similar to the contents of an event 
schema, the contents of a spatial schema might take on value. This 
value attribution may be reflected in the finding that familiar places 
are drawn larger than unfamiliar places141 because well-known  
places are most likely to be valued or to contain reward.
Another possibility is that spatial schemas are instantiated 
separately from event schemas in a more dorsal region of the 
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), which has been associated 
with planning, goals and attention193. This possibility is further 
suggested by evidence of grid-like coding in the mPFC similar to 
that observed in the entorhinal cortex194. The proximity and strong 
interconnectedness of dorsomedial prefrontal regions with the 
premotor and supplementary motor cortex195 might help to facilitate 
the integration of planning and goals with locomotive aspects of 
navigation. Once formed, the spatial schema might interact with 
rewards and motivations via connectivity with more ventral regions 
of the prefrontal cortex, which, in turn, play a role in dimensionality 
reduction to enhance goal-relevant landmarks196. In this way, 
a schema may be necessary to make the goals more apparent for a 
particular task and to monitor attainment of a goal, where the goal 
is a spatial destination. Studies of consolidation and remote spatial 
memory in rodents have focused on more dorsal regions, particularly 
anterior cingulate cortex197,198, but evidence in humans is sparser. 
There is some functional MRI evidence of increased activation of 
the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex in highly familiar environments 
that had been navigated extensively over many years127,154, even 
following bilateral hippocampal lesions199, but the precise conditions 
in which this region is activated are unclear. Targeted studies 
asking individuals with mPFC lesions to describe a spatial schema 
are needed. In one such study, the difficulty that an individual 
with vmPFC damage, who was known as L.G., had in navigating in 
a familiar environment was found to relate to his inability to maintain a 
goal in mind rather than to a loss of schema representations per se200. 
L.G.’s knowledge of the routes and of the locations of landmarks along 
them were intact; he needed only to be reminded of the goal for the 
representation to be expressed appropriately during navigation.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
70
Review article
acquire a generalized representation of the spatial distribution that was 
disrupted by pharmacological inhibition of the mPFC1. Given the known 
role of the mPFC in monitoring the contents of memory retrieval22, this 
finding suggests that the mPFC is involved in monitoring the degree 
of consistency between existing schemas and novel information1,53,121. 
A recent study that used a similar distributional learning paradigm 
during spatial navigation suggests that statistical pattern recognition 
also underlies spatial gist extraction and navigation search patterns 
in humans119.
Neuropsychological evidence in individuals with bilateral HPC 
damage, such as K.C. described above80, indicates that the gist or over-
all layout of a familiar environment learned before the onset of HPC 
damage is preserved3,80–82,122–124 whereas memory for details or surface 
properties is lost80–82,123,124. This distinction is similar to that found in 
rodents with HPC lesions and extensive pre-lesion experience in an 
environment: they are able to use the overall layout of the learned envi-
ronment, or its spatial gist, and take detours to reach goal locations, 
although often not the most optimal ones70,125,126. Thus, whereas the 
(posterior) HPC seems to support detailed cognitive maps, a network of 
extra-HPC regions, including the parahippocampal cortex (PHC), RSC 
and PPC, seems to support cognitive maps that have been transformed 
over repeated experiences navigating in a particular environment to 
form a ‘spatial gist’ — a summary of a specific environment25,27,127,128. 
Human and rodent lesion studies suggest that, although the anterior 
HPC may help to generate and support a spatial gist, it is not necessarily 
required to maintain or retrieve spatial gists. A collection of multiple 
gists makes up a spatial schema, which we argue is probably supported 
by the mPFC, possibly together with the HPC and a network of posterior 
regions (Fig. 1). It remains for future work to determine if, and to what 
extent, individuals with amnesia with HPC damage can rely on statisti-
cal pattern recognition to guide navigation in novel environments that 
geometrically resemble spatial gists and schemas formed long ago.
Regionalization of space
The role of geometry in spatial schemas extends to complex human 
settlements129. Real-world spaces are segmented by physical barriers 
that yield various substructures or regions41,130–133. Recent findings 
indicate that spatial structure of a city is characterized by multiple 
subregions (such as urban zoning areas) connected via distribution net-
works (such as streets)40,43,134,135. However, regions and boundaries are 
determined not only by the physical structure of the built environment 
but also by the way we process the environment in relation to stored 
knowledge in semantic memory. For example, the financial district of 
Toronto is bounded by Lake Ontario as a natural barrier to the south 
K.C. (amnesia)
Control participant
Fig. 3 | Sketch map test of remote spatial memory. Sketch map of a highly 
familiar neighbourhood drawn by an individual with amnesia (known as 
K.C.; left) and a control participant who grew up in the same neighbourhood 
(right)190. Although the overall spatial configuration of K.C.’s sketch map was 
intact, he included fewer streets and landmarks than the control participant. 
Sketch maps drawn by other individuals with amnesia relating to bilateral 
hippocampal damage are similarly accurate in terms of overall layout yet 
similarly impoverished in detail81,82. This pattern of performance suggests that 
the hippocampus is needed for detailed spatial representations, similar to its role 
in episodic memory4–6,20. Figure reprinted with permission from ref.190, Elsevier.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
71
Review article
and by ‘Hospital Row’ to the north-west, the latter distinguished by its 
tree-lined boulevard as well as the style and purpose of its buildings.
The influence of stored knowledge on the segmentation of envi-
ronments into subregions is suggested by studies showing that human 
spatial representations are prone to systematic biases136,137 and may 
be hierarchically organized, similar to semantic and event knowl-
edge133,138,139. For example, distances between two locations are over-
estimated if they are separated by a barrier or boundary (such as state 
borders), and angles of intersections are remembered as being closer 
to 90 ° (ref.138). Familiarity with an environment produces other biases: 
distances from less familiar places to more familiar places are often 
underestimated compared with estimates of distances from more 
familiar to less familiar places136,140, and familiar locations are drawn 
larger on maps than are unfamiliar locations141 (Box 1). In a virtual maze 
task, landmarks belonging to a semantic category (vehicles, animals 
or buildings) were clustered to form implicit semantic regions that 
exerted an influence on navigation decisions. Specifically, individuals 
prefer to take routes that cross fewer semantic regions, even if they are 
the same length as routes that contain more regions29. These findings 
suggest that semantic cues influence spatial judgements, and that 
heuristic-based decisions in relation to space are based on parcellating 
the environment into semantic regions.
Sensitivity to region boundaries may reflect a neurophysiologi-
cal mechanism by which variations in different visuospatial forms 
in the environment are identified. Rodent HPC cells show repeated 
firing in multicompartment environments, with increased clustering 
of activity when the animal is near open doorways15,16. Consolidation 
mechanisms, such as sleep, seem to facilitate the explicit knowledge 
and retrieval of semantic regions and their boundaries29. A study in 
mice navigating environments with repeating connectivity patterns 
further shows that sleep contributes greatly to the development of 
spatial schemas69. These consolidation mechanisms might act on place 
cells in the HPC and on grid cells in the entorhinal cortex (ERC), which 
show repeating patterns of activity in an arrangement comparable to 
Glossary
Allocentric
A frame of the representation of spatial 
relationships among objects in an 
environment that is irrespective  
of an observer’s point of view.
Associative inference
Assesses learning of a third latent 
association B–C following direct 
learning of overlapping associations 
A–B and A–C.
Axial line
The longest straight line representing 
the maximum extension of a point  
of space.
Cognitive map
A representation of relationships among 
allocentric spatial elements or features 
in a particular or single environment.
Centrality
In network analyses, measures such as 
degree, betweenness and closeness 
that provide indices of connectivity.
Dimensionality reduction
A technique that is widely used in 
machine learning to reduce the 
number of attributes in a dataset while 
maintaining similar information.
Districts
Large-scale sections with a common 
identifying character, into which 
observers can enter.
Edges
Boundaries between two regions  
that break line continuity such  
as a waterfront.
Event schema
A structured body of prior knowledge 
that captures common patterns across 
related experiences of events.
Geometric properties
Three-dimensional structural 
features of an environment such as 
the arrangement of buildings at an 
intersection.
Geometric resemblance
Similarities in geometry within an 
environment or across multiple 
environments such as highly similar 
arrangements of buildings at two 
different intersections.
Gestalt
Principles to explain how individual 
elements are perceived as an organized 
whole.
HPC replay
Reactivation of the sequence of 
neuronal firing within the hippocampus 
(HPC) that occurred during a previous 
experience, believed to contribute 
to the long-term storage and 
reconsolidation of memories.
Landmarks
Defined physical elements, such as 
objects and buildings, that are salient 
and/or hold functional or navigational 
meaning.
Nodes
Strategic points of crossing  
or convergence.
Paths
Channels along which observers  
move such as streets or walkways.
Pattern separation
A process by which overlapping 
patterns of neural activity that represent 
highly similar items or events are made 
more distinct as they are encoded  
in memory.
Predictive coding
A neural process by which expectations 
or ‘mental models’ of the external 
world based on prior experience are 
compared against sensory input.
Repetition suppression
Reduced neural activity in response  
to repeated presentation of a  
stimulus.
Representational similarity 
analyses
Characterizations of the neural 
representation of a stimulus 
presentation through direct pairwise 
comparisons of imaged activity patterns 
associated with each experimental 
condition in selected brain regions  
of interest.
Sparse codes
Activation of a small subset of neurons 
representing a distinct item or event.
Spatial gist
Essential elements of a particular 
environment.
Spatial schemas
Generalizable spatial representations 
derived from experiencing many similar 
environments.
Surface properties
Two-dimensional features such as visual 
patterns, textures and colours.
Street segments
All the unique sections of a street 
between junctions that make up a street.
Topology
Mathematical property of geometric 
objects that are unaffected by 
continuous change of size and shape.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
72
Review article
a  Central city region layouts from Argentina and Romania
b  Screen shots from the virtual reality task
     Sea Hero Quest
c  Example trajectories from game levels
Buenos Aires
Cordoba
Argentina
Rosario
La Plata
Mar del Plata
Bucharest
Iasi
Romania
Cluj-Napoca
Timisoara
Craiova
Constanta
Galati
Brasov
Ploiesti
Braila
San Miguel
de Tucuman
Salta
Santa Fe
Vicente Lopez
Corrientes
Prague, Czech Republic
High entropy (SNE = 3.6)
Chicago, USA
Low entropy (SNE = 2.5)
d  Street network entropy (SNE)
e  Negative impact of growing up in a city on navigation
0°
180°
45°
90°
135°
225°
270°
315°
300
250
200
0°
180°
45°
90°
135°
225°
270°
315°
900
800
700
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
0.2
–0.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
–0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.08
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Environment eﬀect size
Game level entropy
High SNE
Low SNE
Romania
Austria
Switzerland
Ireland
Spain
Belgium
Czech Republic
Denmark
Malaysia
Slovakia
Albania
India
Indonesia
Poland
Netherlands
Italy
Croatia
Germany
France Sweden
Norway
UK
Russia
Vietnam
Iran
Ukraine
Hungary
Thailand
Greece
Finland
New Zealand
United Arab Emirates
Australia
South Africa
Saudi Arabia
USA
Argentina
Canada
f  Greater sensitivity of high SNE countries to SNE in game levels
Environment eﬀect size
High SNE
Low SNE
SNE

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
73
Review article
equilateral triangles that tile the environment11. As discussed below,  
the involvement of grid cells in the extraction of a gist and, ultimately, of  
a schema is supported by fMRI evidence showing that the presence  
of barriers that segment an environment modulates activity in several 
brain regions, including the human ERC131. The ERC may work with the 
HPC and occipital place area, which represent local geometry com-
mon across segments, and with the RSC, which integrates segments 
into a superordinate map, to give rise to a gist in the service of schema 
formation39.
Networks and hubs for spatial schemas
Interacting networks of brain regions including specialized ‘hubs’ 
help to support navigation and spatial memory61,142–144 (Fig. 1). Several 
brain regions have been implicated in neuroanatomical models of 
navigation, including the HPC, RSC, ERC, PHC, PPC, mPFC and inferior 
temporal cortex145. According to one model145, the HPC and RSC are 
hubs of two largely overlapping networks that preferentially support 
allocentric and egocentric spatial representations, respectively (see 
also ref.146). fMRI studies indicate that many of the same extra-HPC 
regions involved in the initial acquisition of spatial knowledge for 
large-scale environments are also involved in the retrieval of sche-
matized spatial memory27,83,128 and event schemas22, suggesting that 
the core elements of spatial schemas may be laid down at acquisi-
tion92,147–150. Given the importance of scale and regionalization for 
spatial schemas, this section focuses on key regions that encode these 
properties.
Neural mechanisms exist outside of the HPC to represent similar 
substructures of an environment that may give rise to spatial schemas. 
For example, RSC neurons encode common features of routes with 
repeating segments, periodically firing across segments of routes that 
share a similar shape151. Although this finding supports the importance 
of a global code in capturing similar spatial contexts, the repetition–
activation patterns reflect similarity between metric distances travelled 
in different directions from specified spatial boundaries, akin to a local 
code for the space traversed151. In either case, regionalization using 
physical barriers or metric distance travelled are both determined by 
the global properties of the environment.
The RSC has also been shown to integrate egocentric and allo-
centric spatial frames of reference (refs.146,152) and to generalize local 
codes (that is, codes for specific regions such as the south-west corner 
of a specific room) across geometrically similar environments (in this 
example, to the south-west corner of various rooms)19,39,152. In partici-
pants who learned the location of objects in geometrically similar but 
visually distinct (virtual) buildings152, the representation of facing direc-
tion (for example, south-west) was generalized across environments 
with similar geometry as indicated by fMRI activity pattern similarity 
in the RSC across multiple trials. In a follow-up study19, when asked to 
navigate to a target object, participants were more likely to navigate 
to an equivalent location in an incorrect building rather than to an 
incorrect location in the correct building. Similar findings have been 
reported in a virtual outdoor environment segmented into subspaces 
by a natural barrier (a river)39.
The RSC has also been implicated in the instantiation and rein-
statement of event schemas in a neuroanatomical model of schemas22. 
In our recent research, the RSC was found to code distance to goals 
in well-known, real-world environments but not in recently learned 
environments153. This is consistent with the RSC providing a long-term 
store of the spatial structure of the environment, for example, of the 
distance between locations in an integrated spatial map of a segmented 
environment39. Such a representation might take a schematic form, 
such that similar distances across different environments are processed 
similarly or by the same neural populations in the RSC153,154.
The ERC is another candidate for a hub involved in the formation of 
spatial schemas. Grid cells in the ERC are posited to provide a structural 
scaffold for episodic events and spatial representations7, with the ERC 
acting as a mediator between the HPC and neocortex by providing a 
geometric code for the global properties of the environment155,156. The 
ERC achieves this outcome by learning the transition structure of an 
environment and the regularities that occur within it, offering a more 
generalized code that is optimal for spatial schema instantiation157. 
Recent fMRI research has revealed that, like rodent grid cells, human 
ERC grid cell-like activity shifts from sixfold rotational symmetry in 
an open arena to fourfold rotational symmetry in an environment 
compartmentalized by barriers131, indicating that the structure of 
the environment has a strong impact on how the brain organizes its 
representation of space.
Determining how networks that support spatial navigation, event 
schemas and spatial memory relate to one another is necessary to gain 
a better understanding of the neural underpinnings of spatial schemas 
in humans. fMRI repetition suppression effects in several brain regions, 
including the RSC, HPC and PHC, in participants navigating to target 
landmarks in rooms within a virtual multi-level building revealed that 
the repetition suppression effect was similar across rooms that had the 
same layout, suggesting generalization of neural representations130. 
The posterior HPC showed abstraction over different views of a room 
across the building, suggesting that the posterior HPC might help 
build a more global map of the building; this contrasts with fMRI data 
from participants navigating city streets presented in film footage158. 
In this context, the anterior HPC provided a more global code (tracking 
global street connections), while the posterior HPC provided a more 
local code (tracking local street connections)158. One possible explana-
tion for the different engagement of the posterior and anterior HPC in 
generalization relates to spatial scale, with the posterior HPC encoding 
room or junction spaces and the anterior HPC encoding large-scale 
(outdoor) spaces76.
Representations of navigation plans159, the regionalization of 
physical environments and the neural representations of physical 
enviro­nments29,160 are all typically hierarchical, whereby a high-level 
structure encompasses multiple mid-level or low-level features. The PFC  
and PPC (particularly the angular gyrus) may sit atop such a functional 
Fig. 4 | Examples of street networks and their association with the 
development of navigation ability. a, Street networks for the centres of the 
10 most populous cities in Argentina and Romania; two countries that differ 
substantially in terms of the organized versus disorganized orientations of their 
streets115. b, Screen shots from the virtual navigation task Sea Hero Quest, in 
which participants navigate a boat to checkpoints. Trajectory data was collected 
from 3.9 million participants to estimate the population performance from 
38 countries. c, Example trajectories (overlaid density plots of thousands of 
participants) for nine environments tested, at increasing levels of difficulty in the 
game Sea Hero Quest. d, Calculation of the street network entropy (SNE), which 
measures the extent to which streets are misaligned with one another. Polar plots 
of the frequency of street misalignment in Prague (high SNE, 3.6) and Chicago 
(low SNE, 2.5). e, Association between SNE and the effect size for the negative 
impact of growing up in a city compared to non-city participants as well as the 
identification of two clusters of countries (with high and low SNE). Argentina and  
the USA have the largest gap in performance between those who grew up inside 
cites versus those who grew up outside cities, whereas Romania lies at the other 
end of the scale. f, Participants who reported growing up in cities from the  
low-SNE countries were most impacted by environments in Sea Hero Quest with 
a high SNE and marginally better at navigating grid-like environments with a low 
SNE. The repeated exposure to street network patterns during development are 
proposed to cause generalizations mediated through a learned spatial schema 
(for example, of what to expect in griddy or non-griddy environments)117. Figure 
adapted from ref.117, Springer Nature Ltd.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
74
Review article
cortical hierarchy and integrate low-level features with high-level 
categorical concepts to facilitate decision-making. Thus, it is likely 
that these regions are involved in integrating statistical regularities 
of visual percepts with high-level semantic concepts about spatial 
environments to aiding hierarchical structuring of the knowledge. 
Investigating possible spatial processing roles of regions such as the 
vmPFC and angular gyrus22,45,105 is important in filling the knowledge 
gap in this area. Regions implicated in scene processing, such as the 
parahippocampal place area and RSC, have a role in the integration of 
common local properties such as surface features. A posterior region, 
such as the angular gyrus, may bind the contents and the structure of 
experience at a higher level of abstraction than does the HPC161 and, 
thus, is probably an important area for relating spatial gists to spatial 
schema (summarized in Fig. 1).
Insights from urban data analytics
Above, we presented behavioural and neurobiological evidence to sug-
gest that spatial schemas are a type of extra-HPC spatial representation. 
We suggest that schema instantiation involves pattern recognition 
and the regionalization of previously encountered spaces to extract 
a common geometric structure. In this section, we draw on ideas from 
other disciplines to hypothesize about the forms of spatial schemas in 
real-world human environments (for example, urban and rural regions).
‘Form follows function’ is an influential design principle often 
followed by architects; the structure (or geometry) of an artefact is 
determined by the function it is meant to serve162–164. For example, a 
building regulates the flow of air and individuals across its boundaries, 
similar to a living system165. Buildings also establish social importance 
and ‘meaning’ through embellishments and modifications to their 
surface properties and structural features165. Buildings are similar to 
many objects, in that they are constructed by assembling smaller parts 
into a whole, whereas they differ from many objects in that buildings 
create volumes of space through the arrangement of objects such as 
walls166,167. The structures in the built environment have arisen mainly 
through the collective activity of humans sharing a common goal. This 
drive to make buildings for humans is accompanied by its own evolved 
functions in humans just as in other species, for example, termites, 
which create structures in their mounds. Future research may help 
us understand the links between the schemas created to navigate  
the built environment and the those that drive the construction of the  
urban realm.
One approach to understanding how the built environment is 
organized and related to human behaviour is through the field of 
space syntax166. Space syntax aims to identify the series of construction 
steps or local rules that result in a global spatial pattern. For example, 
if a small square cell is adjoined by other squares on three sides, and 
the process is repeated, a ‘courtyard complex’ scheme is generated166. 
Local rules often define the topological relations of containment and 
boundary165. These local rules give rise to the global form of real human 
settlements. For example, the global form of ‘beady-ring’ settlements 
of Les Yves in southern France results from a recursive addition of 
spatial units according to a local rule165. Space syntax theorists have 
identified other elementary formulae besides the courtyard complex 
and the beady-ring templates such as central spaces, blocks and ring 
streets. These investigations have shown that variations in local rules 
lead to different probabilities for different global spatial forms166.  
Box 2
Computational approaches to understanding spatial schemas
To establish whether a spatial schema of a real-world environment 
(such as a city) is formed, the degree of generalization of spatial 
learning across different environments must be systematically 
investigated. However, systematic measurement of quantitative 
differences in the spatial organization of real-world environments, 
which often have varied layout patterns and route morphologies,  
is a major challenge40–42,44,132,176,201.
Unravelling the complexities of the cognitive structure and 
neural basis of spatial schemas requires modern computational 
approaches, such as deep learning and urban analytics, to ascertain 
how perception and memory interact with built environments. Neural 
network models are powerful tools to understand pattern recognition 
mechanisms that underlie visual perception, whereas Bayesian 
generative models explain how abstract prior knowledge is used  
to make inferences about familiar and novel stimuli28,202–204.
Computational approaches have also provided converging 
evidence of a core network of brain regions that enable schemas 
as identified in patient-lesion and functional MRI studies. A neural 
network model of brain regions underlying spatial schemas, 
consisting of an HPC-supported indexing stream and a neocortex-
dominant representation stream202, replicates early experiments in 
rodents53,54. A deep neural network that mimics the computational 
mechanisms in the primate posterior parietal cortex suggests 
that high-dimensional sensory inputs from scenes (that is, global 
properties) are projected onto low-dimensional inputs (that is,  
local properties) according to a learned spatial structure akin to  
a spatial schema in this region160.
Formal artificial intelligence models provide flexibility in planning 
and account for a range of biological processes at neural and 
behavioural levels205. A model-based algorithm has been designed to 
optimally plan the shortest route between two points in a network by 
partitioning the environment into modules and planning first across 
modules and then within modules. Studies of navigation support the 
idea that navigation planning follows a hierarchical representation of 
space that consists of a series of contexts that, in humans, is mediated 
by the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex128,133,159,205. The regionalization 
of space provides an efficient heuristic for planning actions in spatial 
navigation29,131,159,206,207, and computational models are particularly 
useful in understanding the correlations between physical regions 
and substructures, and their representations in the brain. A helpful 
approach in future work will be the comparison of different simulated 
agents with rats and humans in an identical navigation task, which 
would enable the integration of human and rodent neuroscience 
methods with the study of artificial intelligence agents208.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
75
Review article
Different classes of spatial configurations are associated with differ-
ences in the connectedness of regions of space and thereby influence 
the movement and interactions of individuals in space168,169.
Graph-theoretic measures of street networks have also been used 
to operationalize the essential urban elements that characterize a city 
form, as theorized by the urban theorist Kevin Lynch33,34. Through quali-
tative analysis of verbal descriptions of Boston residents, Lynch found 
that the presence of these essential elements in their descriptions was 
associated with the ease with which navigators understand the spatial 
coherence of their environment33. Five elements — landmarks, paths, 
nodes, edges and districts — have been identified as building blocks of 
a common understanding of the space that is shared amongst people 
with extensive experience of the region. In a more recent computational 
study, the original sketch map of Boston consisting of elements col-
lectively described by its residents was recreated using graph-network 
indices such as betweenness centrality, incidence angle of vertices and 
modularity optimization34. As mentioned in the section on region-
alization of space, findings from spatial cognition studies in humans 
show that semantic knowledge and language cues exert a powerful 
influence on human spatial judgements29,138 and may contribute to 
spatial schemas. Spatial forms have also been proposed to be a ‘fossil’ 
that reflects the social and psychological characteristics of a group of 
people that share common linguistic and cultural values166,170. Similarly, 
virtual landmarks may help in navigating electronic space (such as the 
worldwide web) by influencing the frequency of visits and connectivity 
between related webpages171.
Space syntax has been used to study prototypical spatial patterns 
on a global scale (for example, across different street grids)166,172. First, a 
city street network is transformed into a network of lines using its topo-
logical properties34,173–175. For example, a long straight main road can 
be represented as a single axial line or as a large set of connected street 
segments. Space syntax-derived segment and axial maps can then be 
analysed as various types of graphs to derive spatial measures such 
as connectivity (measured using the graph-theoretic index of degree 
centrality), integration (closeness centrality) and choice (between-
ness centrality)175. A city street network can thus be represented as a 
graph in which street segments or axial lines are the units rather than 
the nodes. ‘Integration’ measures the extent to which a street is close 
to the topological centre of the network and is typically measured on 
an axial map, whereas ‘connectivity’ measures the number of immedi-
ately connected streets. ‘Choice’ measures the likelihood that a street 
segment would be traversed when all paths through the network are 
considered, and it typically includes a measurement of the angular 
displacement between segments173–175.
To understand how such space syntax measures might be 
reflected in neural dynamics during navigation, researchers have 
used fMRI to track responses to connectivity, integration and choice 
during the simulated navigation of a real city158. When navigating 
recently learned city streets in London, UK, activity in the anterior 
HPC increases when entering streets with greater global connections 
(that is, with higher integration) and decreases when entering streets 
that are less globally connected176. Such responses probably reflect 
the activity of neurons that, during exploration, learn the important, 
highly connected streets that maximally enable navigation across 
the network of city streets. The posterior HPC is also responsive on 
entering streets but rather than signalling a global code, it reacts to 
the connectivity (for example, showing higher activity when entering 
a road with many connections than a dead-end road). The different 
functional responses of the anterior and posterior HPC may reflect 
the role of these brain regions in simulating future routes through the  
street network.
Urban data analytics further show that industrial cities can be 
classified using characteristic spatial patterns and common prin-
ciples such as an organization centred around nodes of economic 
activity42,43,129,177. Industrial cities in different regions of the world are 
suggested to exhibit scale-invariant structural characteristics (for 
example, road networks)40,129, whereas the number of nodes and their 
configuration depends on infrastructure development, size and other 
sociocultural factors40.
Interestingly, the mobility patterns of individuals towards and 
away from nodes of economic activity in cities are consistent over time. 
Analysis of daily travel patterns of individuals using origin–destination 
matrices indicates stable movement patterns between functionally dis-
tinct regions (such as residential and commercial regions) in different 
cities177. Given that these statistical commonalities of mobility patterns 
characterize the underlying structure of a city41,43 and navigational 
behaviours34,117,178,179, they provide support for the notion of a spatial 
schema for an environment with key elements that can be generalized 
to other environments that belong to a superordinate category159.
The observation that local rules drive global form in human set-
tlements166 suggests a link between gestalt notions of grouping (or 
assembling parts into a unit) and configuration (or positioning the 
units in space)180. For example, the topological relations of contain-
ment and boundary resemble the gestalt grouping rules that organize 
visual percepts at a neuronal and behavioural level180–183. Similarly, 
Box 3
Topology and urban analytics
Topology is a mathematical concept that provides a quantitative 
measure of equivalence between different geometrical forms 
such that they can be continuously morphed into each other 
using scale-invariant transformations. For example, sections of 
the urban fabric of Mumbai can be deformed using topological 
transformations into the suburban neighbourhoods of Las Vegas 
or into the regular grid structure of New York city blocks209. Studies 
that focus on mathematical analyses of topology have helped 
us gain insight into spatial patterns that characterize different 
types of environments43,135,209. For example, a dominant model of 
modern city form is the clustering of economic activities in urban 
hubs, known as polycentricity43,210. The patterns of movement of 
individuals to and from urban hubs across cities can be collected 
using GIS (geographic information system) tools and phone-usage 
data40,43,177,211. The pattern of movements of an individual around a 
city seems to be highly consistent over an observational period of 
6 months177. Moreover, mobility patterns of 90% of the population 
in different countries can be captured by repeating ‘motifs’ of 
movements of individuals over time177. It is interesting to consider 
whether these motifs represent routine navigational behaviours 
or spatial regularities that constrain individual decisions. Spatial 
schemas are stable neural representations of such environmental 
regularities, similar to how statistical regularities form priors or 
expectations in visual perception28,47,212,213.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
76
Review article
studies of fractal geometries in urban scenes, in which smaller units 
reflect the statistical properties of the global geometry129,183,184, may 
help determine whether variations in fractal dimensions affect spatial 
judgements and navigation performance185.
Alongside allocentric graph-theoretic indices, such as integration 
and choice, measures that involve egocentric information have been 
derived within the space syntax framework to characterize spatial rela-
tionships in scenes (also known as vista spaces). For example, viewshed 
analysis (which uses 2D polygons known as isovists to represent the 
visible area from a given vantage point) have been used to characterize 
local scenes186. Future studies that combine fMRI and 3D simulations 
of real-world environments in virtual reality are needed to examine 
how the relationship between local indices, such as isovists, and global 
connectivity measures might be reflected in brain activity. Recent work 
has shown that the connectivity of a space in view is reflected in the 
activity of the occipital place area18 but how this connectivity extends  
to active navigation is not known. Longitudinal studies are also needed to  
investigate the interactions between early navigation experiences and 
the spatial cue preferences of individuals (for example, for geometric 
versus surface features) over the course of development108–111.
Recent evidence derived from testing virtual navigation ability in 
about 3.9 million people worldwide with the game Sea Hero Quest117,178 
has revealed that people who report having grown up in grid-like cities 
(such as New York and Buenos Aires; Fig. 4) are generally worse naviga-
tors than people who grow up in cities with disorganized layouts (such 
as Prague, London or Paris)117 or outside cities entirely. However, people 
who grew up in ‘griddy’ cities had a slight advantage at navigating grid-
like virtual environments in Sea Hero Quest (Fig. 4c), suggesting that 
experience with griddy cities does not have a purely negative effect on 
navigation skill117. These findings suggest that our early-life experiences 
of environments lead to the formation of spatial schemas that support 
particular navigational approaches that prepare us, to variable extents, 
for the navigation of different novel terrains187.
Conclusions
We have reviewed an interdisciplinary body of work to encourage 
future studies on the topic of spatial schemas. A cognitive map can 
vary in precision from a highly detailed map to a gist, whereas a schema 
is a knowledge structure that is extracted from multiple gist-like cog-
nitive maps in a way that is similar to how schemas form from events. 
Schemas may be built through specific expectations based on a store of 
many repeated cognitive maps, culminating in a meta-map prediction 
of what lies ahead in the environment in which we are navigating. We 
propose that the integration of overlapping features of similar environ-
ments results in prototypical spatial forms that act as templates for 
wayfinding behaviour in novel contexts. We have presented evidence 
from animal and human studies that suggests that geometric resem-
blance is a key feature of environments that gives rise to generalizable 
spatial representations. We have discussed the distinction between 
geometric and surface properties as two forms of spatial representa-
tion that parallel the dissociable gist and detailed aspects of remote 
spatial memories.
Several questions remain to be addressed. For example, do spatial 
schemas form along a posterior-to-anterior axis outside of the HPC, 
representing a gradient of detail similar to what has been found within 
the HPC76–78? How are schemas used to guide current navigation in 
novel and familiar environments, and when might schemas impede 
navigation? How might neural oscillations facilitate communication 
among the HPC and PFC via the RSC to instantiate spatial schemas188? 
To what extent does a spatial schema, once instantiated, interact with 
rewards and goals?
Future studies that are needed to address these questions require 
the convergence of computational techniques (Box 2) with theoretical 
frameworks of memory consolidation and spatial navigation in familiar, 
real-world environments. There is potential for the application of urban 
data-analytic methods, such as those involving space syntax and agent-
based modelling189, in paving the way for systematic investigations of 
navigational experience in real-world environments (Box 3). These 
techniques are needed to quantify geometric and surface properties of  
spaces at different scales. An interdisciplinary approach to the study  
of spatial schemas may inform urban planning policies of future human 
cities that better respond to the needs of diverse populations, includ-
ing individuals vulnerable to memory system (and thus navigational) 
deterioration.
Published online: 21 November 2022
References
1.	
Richards, B. A. et al. Patterns across multiple memories are identified over time.  
Nat. Neurosci. 17, 981–986 (2014).
2.	
Epstein, R. A., Patai, E. Z., Julian, J. B. & Spiers, H. J. The cognitive map in humans:  
spatial navigation and beyond. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1504–1513 (2017).
3.	
Robin, J., Rivest, J., Rosenbaum, R. S. & Moscovitch, M. Remote spatial and 
autobiographical memory in cases of episodic amnesia and topographical 
disorientation. Cortex 119, 237–257 (2019).
4.	
Miller, T. D. et al. Human hippocampal CA3 damage disrupts both recent and remote 
episodic memories. eLife 9, e41836 (2020).
5.	
Bartsch, T., Döhring, J., Rohr, A., Jansen, O. & Deuschl, G. CA1 neurons in the human 
hippocampus are critical for autobiographical memory, mental time travel, and 
autonoetic consciousness. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 17562–17567 (2011).
6.	
Rosenbaum, R. S. et al. Patterns of autobiographical memory loss in medial-temporal 
lobe amnesic patients. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 20, 1490–1506 (2008).
7.	
Bellmund, J. L. S., Gardenfors, P., Moser, E. I. & Doeller, C. F. Navigating cognition:  
spatial codes for human thinking. Science 362, eaat6766 (2018).
8.	
Brunec, I. K., Moscovitch, M. & Barense, M. D. Boundaries shape cognitive 
representations of spaces and events. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 637–650 (2018).
9.	
O’Keefe, J. & Nadel, L. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map (Clarendon Press, 1978).
10.	
Keinath, A. T., Rechnitz, O., Balasubramanian, V. & Epstein, R. A. Environmental 
deformations dynamically shift human spatial memory. Hippocampus 31, 89–101  
(2021).
11.	
Moser, E. I., Moser, M.-B. & McNaughton, B. L. Spatial representation in the hippocampal 
formation: a history. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1448 (2017).
12.	
Alme, C. B. et al. Place cells in the hippocampus: eleven maps for eleven rooms.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 18428–18435 (2014).
13.	
Leutgeb, S. et al. Independent codes for spatial and episodic memory in hippocampal 
neuronal ensembles. Science 309, 619–623 (2005).
14.	
Baraduc, P., Duhamel, J. R. & Wirth, S. Schema cells in the macaque hippocampus. 
Science 363, 635–639 (2019).  
Recordings from hippocampal neurons in the macaque monkey during virtual 
navigation show the existence of cells that generalize parts of similar environments 
across environments.
15.	
Spiers, H., Hayman, R. M., Jovalekic, A., Marozzi, E. & Jeffery, K. J. Place field repetition 
and purely local remapping in a multicompartment environment. Cereb. Cortex 25, 
10–25 (2015).
16.	
Derdikman, D. et al. Fragmentation of grid cell maps in a multicompartment 
environment. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1325–1332 (2009).
17.	
Singer, A. C., Karlsson, M. P., Nathe, A. R., Carr, M. F. & Frank, L. M. Experience-dependent 
development of coordinated hippocampal spatial activity representing the similarity  
of related locations. J. Neurosci. 30, 11586–11604 (2010).
18.	
McKenzie, S. et al. Hippocampal representation of related and opposing memories 
develop within distinct, hierarchically organized neural schemas. Neuron 83, 202–215 
(2014).
19.	
Marchette, S. A., Ryan, J. & Epstein, R. A. Schematic representations of local 
environmental space guide goal-directed navigation. Cognition 158, 68–80 (2017).
20.	 Robin, J. & Moscovitch, M. Details, gist and schema: hippocampal–neocortical 
interactions underlying recent and remote episodic and spatial memory. Curr. Opin. 
Behav. Sci. 17, 114–123 (2017).
21.	
Bartlett, F. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology (Cambridge 
University Press, 1932).
22.	 Gilboa, A. & Marlatte, H. Neurobiology of schemas and schema-mediated memory. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 618–631 (2017).
23.	 Piaget, J. The Origins of Intelligence in Children (International Universities Press, 1952).

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
77
Review article
24.	 Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E. & Williams, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating 
errors. Nature 323, 533–536 (1986).
25.	 Frankland, P. W. & Bontempi, B. The organization of recent and remote memories.  
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 119–130 (2005).
26.	 Tonegawa, S., Morrissey, M. D. & Kitamura, T. The role of engram cells in the systems 
consolidation of memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 485–498 (2018).
27.	
Spiers, H. J. & Maguire, E. A. The neuroscience of remote spatial memory: a tale of two 
cities. Neuroscience 149, 7–27 (2007).
28.	 de Lange, F. P., Heilbron, M. & Kok, P. How do expectations shape perception? Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 22, 764–779 (2018).
29.	 Noack, H., Schick, W., Mallot, H. & Born, J. Sleep enhances knowledge of routes and 
regions in spatial environments. Learn. Mem. 24, 140–144 (2017).
30.	 Brewer, W. F. & Treyens, J. C. Role of schemata in memory for places. Cogn. Psychol. 13, 
207–230 (1981).
31.	
Babichev, A., Cheng, S. & Dabaghian, Y. A. Topological schemas of cognitive maps and 
spatial learning. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10, 18 (2016).
32.	 Ocampo, A. C., Squire, L. R. & Clark, R. E. The beneficial effect of prior experience  
on the acquisition of spatial memory in rats with CA1, but not large hippocampal lesions:  
a possible role for schema formation. Learn. Mem. 25, 115–121 (2018).
33.	 Lynch, K. The Image of the City. Vol. 11 (MIT Press, 1960).
34.	 Filomena, G., Verstegen, J. & Manley, E. A computational approach to ‘The Image of the 
City’. Cities 89, 14–25 (2019).  
The authors apply a mathematical analysis to the layout of cities to identify hidden 
structures in the street layouts for regions.
35.	 Portugali, J. Complexity, Cognition and the City (Springer Science & Business Media, 
2011).
36.	 Alonso, A., van der Meij, J., Tse, D. & Genzel, L. Naïve to expert: considering the role  
of previous knowledge in memory. Brain Neurosci. Adv. 4, 2398212820948686 (2020).
37.	
He, Q., Beveridge, E. H., Starnes, J., Goodroe, S. C. & Brown, T. I. Environmental overlap 
and individual encoding strategy modulate memory interference in spatial navigation. 
Cognition 207, 104508 (2021).
38.	 Zheng, L., Gao, Z., McAvan, A. S., Isham, E. A. & Ekstrom, A. D. Partially overlapping 
spatial environments trigger reinstatement in hippocampus and schema representations 
in prefrontal cortex. Nat. Commun. 12, 6231 (2021).
39.	 Peer, M. & Epstein, R. A. The human brain uses spatial schemas to represent segmented 
environments. Curr. Biol. 31, 4677–4688.e8 (2021).  
Collectively, refs 37–39 investigate the cognitive and neural precursors to, and 
properties of, schema formation in humans, including the effects of overlap with 
previously learned environments, segmentation, and the roles of the hippocampus, 
retrosplenial cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex.
40.	 Lee, M., Barbosa, H., Youn, H., Holme, P. & Ghoshal, G. Morphology of travel routes  
and the organization of cities. Nat. Commun. 8, 2229 (2017).
41.	
Lämmer, S., Gehlsen, B. & Helbing, D. Scaling laws in the spatial structure of urban road 
networks. Phys. A Stat. Mech. Appl. 363, 89–95 (2006).
42.	 Strano, E. et al. Urban street networks, a comparative analysis of ten European cities. 
Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 40, 1071–1086 (2013).
43.	 Roth, C., Kang, S. M., Batty, M. & Barthelemy, M. Structure of urban movements: 
polycentric activity and entangled hierarchical flows. PLoS One 6, e15923 (2011).
44.	 Kostof, S. The City Shaped: Urban Patterns and Meanings Through History  
(Brown and Co., 1991).
45.	 Wagner, I. C. et al. Schematic memory components converge within angular gyrus 
during retrieval. eLife 4, e09668 (2015).
46.	 Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D. & McClelland, J. L. What learning systems do intelligent agents 
need? Complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 512–534 
(2016).
47.	
Mack, M. L., Love, B. C. & Preston, A. R. Dynamic updating of hippocampal object 
representations reflects new conceptual knowledge. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 
13203–13208 (2016).
48.	 Moses, S. N., Ostreicher, M. L., Rosenbaum, R. S. & Ryan, J. D. Successful transverse 
patterning in amnesia using semantic knowledge. Hippocampus 18, 121–124 (2008).
49.	 Schlichting, M. L., Mumford, J. A. & Preston, A. R. Learning-related representational 
changes reveal dissociable integration and separation signatures in the hippocampus 
and prefrontal cortex. Nat. Commun. 6, 8151 (2015).
50.	 Spalding, K. N., Jones, S. H., Duff, M. C., Tranel, D. & Warren, D. E. Investigating the neural 
correlates of schemas: ventromedial prefrontal cortex is necessary for normal schematic 
influence on memory. J. Neurosci. 35, 15746–15751 (2015).
51.	
Spalding, K. N. et al. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex is necessary for normal associative 
inference and memory integration. J. Neurosci. 38, 3767–3775 (2018).
52.	 Zeithamova, D., Dominick, A. L. & Preston, A. R. Hippocampal and ventral medial 
prefrontal activation during retrieval-mediated learning supports novel inference. 
Neuron 75, 168–179 (2012).
53.	 Tse, D. et al. Schemas and memory consolidation. Science 316, 76–82 (2007).  
This study in rodents with hippocampal lesions provides evidence for spatial schemas 
and the involvement of the hippocampus in rapid learning.
54.	 Tse, D. et al. Schema-dependent gene activation and memory encoding in neocortex. 
Science 333, 891–895 (2011).
55.	 Gilboa, A., Alain, C., He, Y., Stuss, D. T. & Moscovitch, M. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
lesions produce early functional alterations during remote memory retrieval. J. Neurosci. 
29, 4871–4881 (2009).
56.	 van Kesteren, M. T., Fernandez, G., Norris, D. G. & Hermans, E. J. Persistent schema-
dependent hippocampal-neocortical connectivity during memory encoding and 
postencoding rest in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 7550–7555 (2010).
57.	
van Kesteren, M. T., Rijpkema, M., Ruiter, D. J. & Fernandez, G. Retrieval of associative 
information congruent with prior knowledge is related to increased medial prefrontal 
activity and connectivity. J. Neurosci. 30, 15888–15894 (2010).
58.	 Tolman, E. C. Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol. Rev. 55, 189–208 (1948).
59.	 Morris, R. G., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J. N. & O’Keefe, J. Place navigation impaired in rats  
with hippocampal lesions. Nature 297, 681–683 (1982).
60.	 O’Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence  
from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 34, 171–175 (1971).
61.	
Ekstrom, A. D. et al. Cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation. Nature 425, 
184 (2003).
62.	 Head, H. & Holmes, G. Sensory disturbances from cerebral lesions. Brain 34, 102–254 
(1911).
63.	 Ghosh, V. E. & Gilboa, A. What is a memory schema? A historical perspective on current 
neuroscience literature. Neuropsychologia 53, 104–114 (2014).
64.	 Moscovitch, M., Cabeza, R., Winocur, G. & Nadel, L. Episodic memory and beyond:  
the hippocampus and neocortex in transformation. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67, 105–134 
(2016).
65.	 Rolls, E. T. On pattern separation in the primate, including human, hippocampus.  
Trends Cogn. Sci. 25, 920–922 (2021).
66.	 Yassa, M. A. & Stark, C. E. Pattern separation in the hippocampus. Trends Neurosci. 34, 
515–525 (2011).
67.	
Bein, O., Reggev, N. & Maril, A. Prior knowledge promotes hippocampal separation  
but cortical assimilation in the left inferior frontal gyrus. Nat. Comm. 11, 4590 (2020).
68.	 Woollett, K. & Maguire, E. A. The effect of navigational expertise on wayfinding in new 
environments. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 565–573 (2010).
69.	 Alonso, A. et al. The HexMaze: a previous knowledge task on map learning for mice. 
eNeuro 8, ENEURO.0554–20.2021 (2021).
70.	 Winocur, G., Moscovitch, M., Fogel, S., Rosenbaum, R. S. & Sekeres, M. Preserved spatial 
memory after hippocampal lesions: effects of extensive experience in a complex 
environment. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 273–275 (2005).
71.	
Gahnstrom, C. & Spiers, H. J. Striatal and hippocampal contributions to flexible 
navigation. Brain Neurosci. Adv. 4, 239821282097977 (2020).
72.	 Sommer, T. The emergence of knowledge and how it supports the memory for novel 
related information. Cereb. Cortex 27, 1906–1921 (2017).
73.	 van Buuren, M. et al. Initial investigation of the effects of an experimentally learned 
schema on spatial associative memory in humans. J. Neurosci. 34, 16662–16670 (2014).
74.	 Guo, D. & Yang, J. Interplay of the long axis of the hippocampus and ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex in schema-related memory retrieval. Hippocampus https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/hipo.23154 (2019).
75.	
van Kesteren, M. T. R., Brown, T. I. & Wagner, A. D. Learned spatial schemas and prospective 
hippocampal activity support navigation after one-shot learning. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12, 
486 (2018).
76.	 Poppenk, J., Evensmoen, H. R., Moscovitch, M. & Nadel, L. Long-axis specialization of the 
human hippocampus. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 230–240 (2013).
77.	
Brunec, I. K. et al. Multiple scales of representation along the hippocampal anteroposterior 
axis in humans. Curr. Biol. 28, 2129–2135.e6 (2018).
78.	 Poppenk, J. & Moscovitch, M. A hippocampal marker of recollection memory ability 
among healthy young adults: contributions of posterior and anterior segments. Neuron 
72, 931–937 (2011).
79.	 Libby, L. A., Reagh, Z. M., Bouffard, N. R., Ragland, J. D. & Ranganath, C. The hippocampus 
generalizes across memories that share item and context information. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 
31, 24–35 (2019).
80.	 Rosenbaum, R. S. et al. Remote spatial memory in an amnesic person with extensive 
bilateral hippocampal lesions. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1044–1048 (2000).
81.	
Herdman, K. A., Calarco, N., Moscovitch, M., Hirshhorn, M. & Rosenbaum, R. S. 
Impoverished descriptions of familiar routes in three cases of hippocampal/medial 
temporal lobe amnesia. Cortex 71, 248–263 (2015).  
This patient-lesion study provides converging evidence that the hippocampus is 
needed to support remote spatial memory for visuospatial details but not the gist  
of environments learned long ago.
82.	 Rosenbaum, R. S., Cassidy, B. N. & Herdman, K. A. Patterns of preserved and impaired 
spatial memory in a case of developmental amnesia. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9, 196 (2015).
83.	 Rosenbaum, R. S., Ziegler, M., Winocur, G., Grady, C. L. & Moscovitch, M. “I have often 
walked down this street before”: fMRI studies on the hippocampus and other structures 
during mental navigation of an old environment. Hippocampus 14, 826–835 (2004).
84.	 McAvan, A. S. et al. Largely intact memory for spatial locations during navigation  
in an individual with dense amnesia. Neuropsychologia 170, 108225 (2022).
85.	 Rumelhart, D. E. Schemata: the building blocks. in Theoretical Issues in Reading 
Comprehension: Perspectives from Cognitive Psychology, Linguistics, Artificial 
Intelligence, and Education (Routledge, 2017).
86.	 Preston, A. R. & Eichenbaum, H. Interplay of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex  
in memory. Curr. Biol. 23, R764–R773 (2013).
87.	
Preston, A., Molitor, R. J., Pudhiyidath, A. & Schlichting, M. L. in Learning and Memory:  
A Comprehensive Reference 125–132 (Elsevier Inc., 2017).
88.	 van Kesteren, M. T., Ruiter, D. J., Fernández, G. & Henson, R. N. How schema and novelty 
augment memory formation. Trends Neurosci. 35, 211–219 (2012).

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
78
Review article
89.	 Lewis, P. A. & Durrant, S. J. Overlapping memory replay during sleep builds cognitive 
schemata. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 343–351 (2011).
90.	 Maviel, T., Durkin, T. P., Menzaghi, F. & Bontempi, B. Sites of neocortical reorganization 
critical for remote spatial memory. Science 305, 96–99 (2004).
91.	
Ngo, C. T., Benear, S. L., Popal, H., Olson, I. R. & Newcombe, N. S. Contingency of 
semantic generalization on episodic specificity varies across development. Curr. Biol. 31, 
2690–2697.e5 (2021).
92.	 Winocur, G. & Moscovitch, M. Memory transformation and systems consolidation.  
J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 17, 766–780 (2011).
93.	 Sekeres, M. J., Winocur, G. & Moscovitch, M. The hippocampus and related neocortical 
structures in memory transformation. Neurosci. Lett. 680, 39–53 (2018).
94.	 Gilboa, A. & Moscovitch, M. No consolidation without representation: correspondence 
between neural and psychological representations in recent and remote memory. 
Neuron 109, 2239–2255 (2021).
95.	 Durrant, S. J., Taylor, C., Cairney, S. & Lewis, P. A. Sleep-dependent consolidation  
of statistical learning. Neuropsychologia 49, 1322–1331 (2011).
96.	 Peyrache, A., Khamassi, M., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I. & Battaglia, F. P. Replay of rule-
learning related neural patterns in the prefrontal cortex during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
919–926 (2009).
97.	
Stickgold, R. & Walker, M. P. Sleep-dependent memory triage: evolving generalization 
through selective processing. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 139–145 (2013).
98.	 Tamminen, J., Payne, J. D., Stickgold, R., Wamsley, E. J. & Gaskell, M. G. Sleep spindle 
activity is associated with the integration of new memories and existing knowledge.  
J. Neurosci. 30, 14356–14360 (2010).
99.	 Maingret, N., Girardeau, G., Todorova, R., Goutierre, M. & Zugaro, M. Hippocampo-
cortical coupling mediates memory consolidation during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 
959–964 (2016).
100.	 Ohki, T. & Takei, Y. Neural mechanisms of mental schema: a triplet of delta, low  
beta/spindle and ripple oscillations. Eur. J. Neurosci. 48, 2416–2430 (2018).
101.	 Lee, A. K. & Wilson, M. A. Memory of sequential experience in the hippocampus during 
slow wave sleep. Neuron 36, 1183–1194 (2002).
102.	 Wilson, M. A. & McNaughton, B. L. Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories 
during sleep. Science 265, 676–679 (1994).
103.	 Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., Buzsaki, G. & Zugaro, M. B. Selective 
suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1222–1223 
(2009).
104.	 Quiroga, R. Q., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C. & Fried, I. Invariant visual representation 
by single neurons in the human brain. Nature 435, 1102–1107 (2005).
105.	 Quiroga, R. Q. Neural representations across species. Science 363, 1388–1389 (2019).
106.	 Quiroga, R. Concept cells: the building blocks of declarative memory functions. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 13, 587–597 (2012).
107.	 Duvelle, É. et al. Hippocampal place cells encode global location but not connectivity  
in a complex space. Curr. Biol. 31, 1221–1233.e9 (2021).
108.	 Dillon, M. R., Huang, Y. & Spelke, E. S. Core foundations of abstract geometry. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 110, 14191–14195 (2013).
109.	 Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. S. A geometric process for spatial reorientation in young children. 
Nature 370, 57–59 (1994).
110.	 Lee, S. A., Shusterman, A. & Spelke, E. S. Reorientation and landmark-guided search  
by young children: evidence for two systems. Psychol. Sci. 17, 577–582 (2006).
111.	 Spelke, E. S. & Lee, S. A. Core systems of geometry in animal minds. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 367, 2784–2793 (2012).
112.	 Rosenbaum, R. S. et al. Dramatic changes to well-known places go unnoticed. Preprint at 
PsyArXiv https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ypg96 (2020).
113.	 Kubie, J. L., Levy, E. R. J. & Fenton, A. A. Is hippocampal remapping the physiological 
basis for context? Hippocampus https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.23160 (2019).
114.	 Latuske, P., Kornienko, O., Kohler, L. & Allen, K. Hippocampal remapping and its 
entorhinal origin. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 253 (2017).
115.	 Hartley, T., Burgess, N., Lever, C., Cacucci, F. & O’Keefe, J. Modeling place fields in terms 
of the cortical inputs to the hippocampus. Hippocampus 10, 369–379 (2000).
116.	 Sanders, H., Wilson, M. A. & Gershman, S. J. Hippocampal remapping as hidden state 
inference. eLife 9, e51140 (2020).
117.	 Coutrot, A. et al. Entropy of city street networks linked to future spatial navigation ability. 
Nature 604, 104–110 (2022).  
This study reports evidence that growing up in griddy cities adapts navigators 
to navigate better in grid-like environments but less so in more disorganized 
environments.
118.	 Wirth, S., Baraduc, P., Plante, A., Pinede, S. & Duhamel, J. R. Gaze-informed, task-situated 
representation of space in primate hippocampus during virtual navigation. PLoS Biol. 15, 
e2001045 (2017).
119.	 Antony, J. et al. Spatial gist extraction during human memory consolidation. J. Exp. 
Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 48, 929–941 (2022).  
Distributional learning during spatial navigation is examined in three behavioural 
experiments, demonstrating the extraction of spatial gist representations that 
decrease over time.
120.	 Schlichting, M. L., Guarino, K. F., Schapiro, A. C., Turk-Browne, N. B. & Preston, A. R. 
Hippocampal structure predicts statistical learning and associative inference abilities 
during development. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 29, 37–51 (2017).
121.	 Wang, S. H., Tse, D. & Morris, R. G. Anterior cingulate cortex in schema assimilation  
and expression. Learn. Mem. 19, 315–318 (2012).
122.	 Teng, E. & Squire, L. R. Memory for places learned long ago is intact after hippocampal 
damage. Nature 400, 675–677 (1999).
123.	 Rosenbaum, R. S., Gao, F., Richards, B., Black, S. E. & Moscovitch, M. “Where to?” remote 
memory for spatial relations and landmark identity in former taxi drivers with Alzheimer’s 
disease and encephalitis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 17, 446–462 (2005).
124.	 Maguire, E. A., Nannery, R. & Spiers, H. J. Navigation around London by a taxi driver  
with bilateral hippocampal lesions. Brain 129, 2894–2907 (2006).
125.	 Winocur, G., Moscovitch, M., Rosenbaum, R. S. & Sekeres, M. An investigation of the 
effects of hippocampal lesions in rats on pre- and postoperatively acquired spatial 
memory in a complex environment. Hippocampus 20, 1350–1365 (2010).
126.	 Spiers, H. J. & Gilbert, S. J. Solving the detour problem in navigation: a model of prefrontal 
and hippocampal interactions. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9, 125 (2015).
127.	 Rosenbaum, R. S. et al. fMRI studies of remote spatial memory in an amnesic person. 
Brain Cogn. 54, 170–172 (2004).
128.	 Hirshhorn, M., Grady, C., Rosenbaum, R. S., Winocur, G. & Moscovitch, M. Brain regions 
involved in the retrieval of spatial and episodic details associated with a familiar 
environment: an fMRI study. Neuropsychologia 50, 3094–3106 (2012).
129.	 Batty, M. Cities and Complexity: Understanding Cities with Cellular Automata, Agent-Based 
Models, and Fractals (The MIT Press, 2007).
130.	 Kim, M. & Maguire, E. A. Hippocampus, retrosplenial and parahippocampal cortices 
encode multicompartment 3D space in a hierarchical manner. Cereb. Cortex 28, 
1898–1909 (2018).
131.	 He, Q. & Brown, T. I. Environmental barriers disrupt grid-like representations in humans 
during navigation. Curr. Biol. 29, 2718–2722.e13 (2019).
132.	 Zhong, C., Arisona, S. M., Huang, X., Batty, M. & Schmitt, G. Detecting the dynamics of 
urban structure through spatial network analysis. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 28, 2178–2199 (2014).  
The authors apply network analysis to transport network travel data in Singapore  
to reveal hierarchies in human movement patterns and their change over time.
133.	 Schick, W., Halfmann, M., Hardiess, G. & Mallot, H. A. Language cues in the formation  
of hierarchical representation of space. Cogn. Process. 16, S78–S78 (2015).
134.	 Schirmer, P. M. & Axhausen, K. W. A multiscale classification of urban morphology.  
J. Transp. Land Use 9, 101–130 (2016).
135.	 Louail, T. et al. Uncovering the spatial structure of mobility networks. Nat. Commun. 6, 
6007 (2015).
136.	 Tversky, B. Distortions in cognitive maps. Geoforum 23, 131–138 (1992).
137.	 Poucet, B. Spatial cognitive maps in animals: new hypotheses on their structure and 
neural mechanisms. Psychol. Rev. 100, 163–182 (1993).
138.	 Waller, D. E. & Nadel, L. E. Handbook of Spatial Cognition (American Psychological 
Association, 2013).
139.	 Brunec, I. K. & Momennejad, I. Predictive representations in hippocampal and prefrontal 
hierarchies. J. Neurosci. 42, 299–312 (2022).
140.	 Tversky, B. Mind in Motion: How Action Shapes Thought (Hachette UK, 2019).
141.	 Jafarpour, A. & Spiers, H. Familiarity expands space and contracts time. Hippocampus 
27, 12–16 (2017).
142.	 Schedlbauer, A. M., Copara, M. S., Watrous, A. J. & Ekstrom, A. D. Multiple interacting 
brain areas underlie successful spatiotemporal memory retrieval in humans. Sci. Rep. 4, 
6431 (2014).
143.	 Watrous, A. J., Tandon, N., Conner, C. R., Pieters, T. & Ekstrom, A. D. Frequency-specific 
network connectivity increases underlie accurate spatiotemporal memory retrieval.  
Nat. Neurosci. 16, 349–356 (2013).
144.	 Ekstrom, A. D., Arnold, A. E. & Iaria, G. A critical review of the allocentric spatial 
representation and its neural underpinnings: toward a network-based perspective.  
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 803 (2014).
145.	 Ekstrom, A. D., Huffman, D. J. & Starrett, M. Interacting networks of brain regions underlie 
human spatial navigation: a review and novel synthesis of the literature. J. Neurophysiol. 
118, 3328–3344 (2017).
146.	 Bicanski, A. & Burgess, N. A neural-level model of spatial memory and imagery. eLife 7, 
e33752 (2018).
147.	 Jasnow, A. M., Lynch, J. F. III, Gilman, T. L. & Riccio, D. C. Perspectives on fear generalization 
and its implications for emotional disorders. J. Neurosci. Res. 95, 821–835 (2017).
148.	 Takehara-Nishiuchi, K. Prefrontal–hippocampal interaction during the encoding of new 
memories. Brain Neurosci. Adv. 4, 2398212820925580 (2020).
149.	 Sutherland, R. & Lehmann, H. Alternative conceptions of memory consolidation and 
the role of the hippocampus at the systems level in rodents. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 21, 
446–451 (2011).
150.	 Sutherland, R. J., Lee, J. Q., McDonald, R. J. & Lehmann, H. Has multiple trace theory been 
refuted? Hippocampus 30, 842–850 (2020).
151.	 Alexander, A. S. & Nitz, D. A. Retrosplenial cortex maps the conjunction of internal and 
external spaces. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1143–1151 (2015).
152.	 Marchette, S. A., Vass, L. K., Ryan, J. & Epstein, R. A. Anchoring the neural compass: 
coding of local spatial reference frames in human medial parietal lobe. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 
1598–1606 (2014).
153.	 Patai, E. Z. et al. Hippocampal and retrosplenial goal distance coding after long-term 
consolidation of a real-world environment. Cereb. Cortex 29, 2748–2758 (2019).  
This fMRI study provides evidence that the retrosplenial cortex codes spatial 
information in familiar environments in line with extraction of spatial knowledge  
to cortical regions.
154.	 Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2006). Thoughts, behaviour, and brain dynamics during 
navigation in the real world. Neuroimage, 31(4), 1826–1840.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Volume 24 | February 2023 | 63–79
79
Review article
155.	 Nau, M., Julian, J. B. & Doeller, C. F. How the brain’s navigation system shapes our visual 
experience. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 810–825 (2018).
156.	 Nau, M., Navarro Schroder, T., Bellmund, J. L. S. & Doeller, C. F. Hexadirectional coding  
of visual space in human entorhinal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 188–190 (2018).
157.	 Behrens, T. E. J. et al. What is a cognitive map? Organizing knowledge for flexible 
behavior. Neuron 100, 490–509 (2018).
158.	 Javadi, A. H. et al. Hippocampal and prefrontal processing of network topology  
to simulate the future. Nat. Commun. 8, 14652 (2017).
159.	 Balaguer, J., Spiers, H., Hassabis, D. & Summerfield, C. Neural mechanisms of 
hierarchical planning in a virtual subway network. Neuron 90, 893–903 (2016).
160.	 Schick, W., Halfmann, M., Hardiess, G. & Mallot, H. A. Language cues in the formation  
of hierarchical representation of space. Cogn. Process. 15, S63–S64 (2014).
161.	 Summerfield, C., Luyckx, F. & Sheahan, H. Structure learning and the parietal cortex. 
Prog. Neurobiol. 184, 101717 (2020).
162.	 Koolhaas, R. The Generic City (Sikkens Foundation, 1995).
163.	 Kristan, W. B. & Katz, P. Form and function in systems neuroscience. Curr. Biol. 16,  
R828–R831 (2006).
164.	 Hillier, B., Penn, A., Hanson, J., Grajewski, T. & Xu, J. Natural movement: or, configuration 
and attraction in urban pedestrian movement. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 20, 29–66 (1993).
165.	 Penn, A. & Turner, J. S. Can we identify general architectural principles that impact the 
collective behaviour of both human and animal systems? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 
373, 20180253 (2018).
166.	 Hillier, B. & Julienne, H. The Social Logic of Space (Cambridge University Press, 1989).
167.	 Pallasmaa, J. The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
168.	 Haq, S. & Zimring, C. Just down the road a piece: the development of topological 
knowledge of building layouts. Environ. Behav. 35, 132–160 (2003).
169.	 Hillier, B. Space is the Machine: A Configurational Theory of Architecture (Space Syntax, 
2007).
170.	 Levi-Strauss, C. Structural Anthropology Translated from the French by Jacobson, C.  
& Grundfest Schoepf, B. (Basic Books, 1963).
171.	 Sorrows, M. E. & Hirtle, S. C. The nature of landmarks for real and electronic spaces. 
Spatial Information Theory. Cognitive and Computational Foundations of Geographic 
Information Science, Vol. 1661, 37–50 (Springer, 1999).
172.	 Peponis, J., Zimring, C. & Choi, Y. K. Finding the building in wayfinding. Environ. Behav. 
22, 555–590 (1990).
173.	 Manley, E., Addison, J. & Cheng, T. Shortest path or anchor-based route choice: a large-
scale empirical analysis of minicab routing in London. J. Transp. Geogr. 43, 123–139 
(2015).
174.	 Manley, E., Orr, S. W. & Cheng, T. A heuristic model of bounded route choice in urban 
areas. Transp. Res. C. Emerg. Technol. 56, 195–209 (2015).
175.	 Emo, B. Seeing the axial line: evidence from wayfinding experiments. Behav. Sci. 4, 
167–180 (2014).
176.	 Bettencourt, L. & West, G. A unified theory of urban living. Nature 467, 912 (2010).
177.	 Schneider, C. M., Belik, V., Couronne, T., Smoreda, Z. & Gonzalez, M. C. Unravelling daily 
human mobility motifs. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 20130246 (2013).
178.	 Coutrot, A. et al. Global determinants of navigation ability. Curr. Biol. 28, 2861–2866.e4 
(2018).
179.	 Behrmann, M. & Kimchi, R. What does visual agnosia tell us about perceptual 
organization and its relationship to object perception? J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. 
Perform. 29, 19–42 (2003).
180.	 Elder, J. H. & Goldberg, R. M. Ecological statistics of Gestalt laws for the perceptual 
organization of contours. J. Vis. 2, 324–353 (2002).
181.	 Wannig, A., Stanisor, L. & Roelfsema, P. R. Automatic spread of attentional response 
modulation along Gestalt criteria in primary visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1243 (2011).
182.	 Wertheimer, M. in A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology (ed Willis. E) (Humanities Press, 
1950).
183.	 Juliani, A. W., Bies, A. J., Boydston, C. R., Taylor, R. P. & Sereno, M. E. Navigation 
performance in virtual environments varies with fractal dimension of landscape.  
J. Environ. Psychol. 47, 155–165 (2016).
184.	 Encarnacao, S., Gaudiano, M., Santos, F. C., Tenedorio, J. A. & Pacheco, J. M. Fractal 
cartography of urban areas. Sci. Rep. 2, 527 (2012).
185.	 Emo, B. Choice zones: architecturally relevant areas of interest. Spat. Cogn. Comput. 18, 
173–193 (2018).
186.	 Bonner, M. F. & Epstein, R. A. Computational mechanisms underlying cortical responses 
to the affordance properties of visual scenes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006111 (2018).
187.	 Barhorst-Cates, E. M., Meneghetti, C., Zhao, Y., Pazzaglia, F. & Creem-Regehr, S. H.  
Effects of home environment structure on navigation preference and performance:  
a comparison in Veneto, Italy and Utah, USA. J. Environ. Psychol. 74, 101580 (2021).
188.	 Nitzan, N. et al. Propagation of hippocampal ripples to the neocortex by way of a 
subiculum-retrosplenial pathway. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–17 (2020).
189.	 Crooks, A., Malleson, N., Manley, E. & Heppenstall, A. Agent-based Modelling and 
Geographical Information Systems: A Practical Primer (SAGE Publications Limited, 2018).
190.	 Rosenbaum, R. S. et al. The case of KC: contributions of a memory-impaired person to 
memory theory. Neuropsychologia 43, 989–1021 (2005).
191.	 Kan, I. P., Rosenbaum, R. S. & Verfaellie, M. Schema processing across the lifespan:  
from theory to applications. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 37, 1–7 (2020).
192.	 Yu, L. Q., Kan, I. P. & Kable, J. W. Beyond a rod through the skull: a systematic review of 
lesion studies of the human ventromedial frontal lobe. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 37, 97–141 
(2020).
193.	 Amodio, D. M. & Frith, C. D. Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social 
cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 268–277 (2006).
194.	 Doeller, C. F., Barry, C. & Burgess, N. Evidence for grid cells in a human memory network. 
Nature 463, 657–661 (2010).
195.	 Yeterian, E. H., Pandya, D. N., Tomaiuolo, F. & Petrides, M. (2012). The cortical connectivity 
of the prefrontal cortex in the monkey brain. Cortex 48, 58–81 (2012).
196.	 Mack, M. L., Preston, A. R. & Love, B. C. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex compression 
during concept learning. Nat. Commun. 11, 46 (2020).
197.	 Teixeira, C. M., Pomedli, S. R., Maei, H. R., Kee, N. & Frankland, P. W. Involvement of the 
anterior cingulate cortex in the expression of remote spatial memory. J. Neurosci. 26, 
7555–7564 (2006).
198.	 Ross, R. S. & Eichenbaum, H. Dynamics of hippocampal and cortical activation during 
consolidation of a nonspatial memory. J. Neurosci. 26, 4852–4859 (2006).
199.	 Rosenbaum, R. S., Winocur, G., Grady, C. L., Ziegler, M. & Moscovitch, M. Memory for 
familiar environments learned in the remote past: fMRI studies of healthy people and 
an amnesic person with extensive bilateral hippocampal lesions. Hippocampus 17, 
1241–1251 (2007).
200.	Ciaramelli, E. The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in navigation: a case of impaired 
wayfinding and rehabilitation. Neuropsychologia 46, 2099–2105 (2008).
201.	 Goh, S., Choi, M., Lee, K. & Kim, K.-M. How complexity emerges in urban systems: Theory 
of urban morphology. Phys. Rev. E 93, 052309 (2016).
202.	Hwu, T. & Krichmar, J. L. A neural model of schemas and memory encoding. Biol. Cybern. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-019-00808-7 (2019).
203.	Hindy, N. C., Ng, F. Y. & Turk-Browne, N. B. Linking pattern completion in the hippocampus 
to predictive coding in visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 665–667 (2016).
204.	Kriegeskorte, N. & Douglas, P. K. Cognitive computational neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 
21, 1148–1160 (2018).
205.	McNamee, D., Wolpert, D. & Lengyel, M. in Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 29 (NIPS, 2016).
206.	Wiener, J. M. & Mallot, H. A. ‘Fine-to-coarse’ route planning and navigation in regionalized 
environments. Spat. Cogn. Comput. 3, 331–358 (2003).
207.	 Brown, T. I. et al. Prospective representation of navigational goals in the human 
hippocampus. Science 352, 1323–1326 (2016).
208.	de Cothi, W. J. et al. Predictive maps in rats and humans for spatial navigation. Curr. Biol. 
32, 3676–3689.e5 (2022).
209.	Brelsford, C., Martin, T., Hand, J. & Bettencourt, L. M. A. Toward cities without slums: 
Topology and the spatial evolution of neighborhoods. Sci. Adv. 4, eaar4644 (2018).
210.	 Berry, B. J. & Garrison, W. L. The functional bases of the central place hierarchy. Econ. 
Geogr. 34, 145–154 (1958).
211.	 Jiang, S., Ferreira, J. & González, M. C. Clustering daily patterns of human activities  
in the city. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 25, 478–510 (2012).
212.	 Girshick, A. R., Landy, M. S. & Simoncelli, E. P. Cardinal rules: visual orientation perception 
reflects knowledge of environmental statistics. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 926–932 (2011).
213.	 Kok, P., Mostert, P. & de Lange, F. P. Prior expectations induce prestimulus sensory 
templates. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 10473–10478 (2017).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank E. Manley, R.G.M. Morris and D. Yesiltepe for their valuable insight. 
Preparation of this Review was supported by a Vision: Science to Applications (VISTA) York 
Research Chair to R.S.R. and funded by the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF), 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) grant to M.M. and R.S.R., and an Alzheimer’s 
Research UK grant to H.J.S.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to researching data for the article, to discussion of article content, and 
to reviewing and editing the manuscript before submission. R.S.R. and D.F. wrote a first draft 
of the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence should be addressed to R. Shayna Rosenbaum.
Peer review information Nature Reviews Neuroscience thanks H. Mallot and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims  
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-
archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms  
of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2022

