512  |  Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022
Article
A synergistic mindsets intervention protects 
adolescents from stress
David S. Yeager1 ✉, Christopher J. Bryan2 ✉, James J. Gross3, Jared S. Murray4,5, 
Danielle Krettek Cobb6, Pedro H. F. Santos4, Hannah Gravelding7, Meghann Johnson1 & 
Jeremy P. Jamieson7 ✉
Social-evaluative stressors—experiences in which people feel they could be judged 
negatively—pose a major threat to adolescent mental health1–3 and can cause young 
people to disengage from stressful pursuits, resulting in missed opportunities to 
acquire valuable skills. Here we show that replicable benefits for the stress responses 
of adolescents can be achieved with a short (around 30-min), scalable 'synergistic 
mindsets' intervention. This intervention, which is a self-administered online training 
module, synergistically targets both growth mindsets4 (the idea that intelligence  
can be developed) and stress-can-be-enhancing mindsets5 (the idea that one’s 
physiological stress response can fuel optimal performance). In six double-blind, 
randomized, controlled experiments that were conducted with secondary and 
post-secondary students in the United States, the synergistic mindsets intervention 
improved stress-related cognitions (study 1, n = 2,717; study 2, n = 755), cardiovascular 
reactivity (study 3, n = 160; study 4, n = 200), daily cortisol levels (study 5, n = 118 
students, n = 1,213 observations), psychological well-being (studies 4 and 5), academic 
success (study 5) and anxiety symptoms during the 2020 COVID-19 lockdowns (study 
6, n = 341). Heterogeneity analyses (studies 3, 5 and 6) and a four-cell experiment 
(study 4) showed that the benefits of the intervention depended on addressing both 
mindsets—growth and stress—synergistically. Confidence in these conclusions comes 
from a conservative, Bayesian machine-learning statistical method for detecting 
heterogeneous effects6. Thus, our research has identified a treatment for adolescent 
stress that could, in principle, be scaled nationally at low cost.
Adolescents today are suffering record levels of stress-related anxiety 
and depressive symptoms1–3. This has prompted public health experts 
to call for urgent action to mitigate the forthcoming ‘mental health 
pandemic’7 by understanding and addressing adolescent stress8,9.
Conventional thinking portrays stress as mostly a bad thing to be 
avoided or kept at bay10. But this ‘stress avoidance’ mentality ignores 
the reality that elevated levels of stress are a normal and, in many ways, 
even a desirable feature of adolescence11. Adolescents must acquire a 
wide and varied array of complicated social and intellectual skills as 
they transition to adult social roles and prepare for economic inde-
pendence. This developmental process is inherently stressful, but it is 
also essential to the task of becoming an adult11. The conventional view 
that high levels of stress are toxic is likely to lead many adolescents 
simply to disengage from stressors such as demanding coursework, 
putting them at a serious disadvantage in the future. Technology has 
displaced many low-skilled jobs and created more well-compensated 
but highly technical ones12. As a result, adolescents must complete 
more advanced coursework in mathematics and science than ever 
before to be competitive for many of the most attractive careers13. 
The demands of this advanced technical coursework are experienced 
by many adolescents as highly stressful14. Moreover, in recent years, 
the COVID-19 pandemic has created intense and unrelenting stress 
in the form of social isolation, uncertainty about the future and, for 
many families, financial distress1–3. To protect adolescents from nega-
tive mental health effects and help them to prepare for a competitive 
and technically demanding labour market, we must find a way to help 
young people to embrace and overcome the challenges that charac-
terize this life stage.
In consequence, affective scientists have increasingly advocated 
for a stress optimization approach, defined as learning to engage 
positively with rigorous but useful social and academic stressors, 
rather than seeking indiscriminately to minimize or avoid stress5. To 
date, however, the search for an intervention that effectively equips 
adolescents with stress optimization skills has been largely unsuc-
cessful. Although therapies can sometimes provide relief to those 
already suffering from stress-related clinical symptoms, interven-
tions aimed at the broader non-clinical population have been found 
to produce short-lived, mostly negligible protection, at best, from 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04907-7
Received: 22 May 2021
Accepted: 25 May 2022
Published online: 6 July 2022
Open access
 Check for updates
1Department of Psychology and Behavioral Science and Policy Institute, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 2Department of Business, Government, and Society and Behavioral 
Science and Policy Institute, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 3Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 4Department of Information, Risk and Operations 
Management, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 5Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 6Empathy Lab, Google, Mountain View, 
CA, USA. 7Department of Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. ✉e-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu; Christopher.Bryan@mccombs.utexas.edu; jeremy.jamieson@rochester.edu

Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022  |  513
the mental health risks that are associated with non-optimal stress 
management15.
In past laboratory experiments, teaching people to reappraise a 
specific stressful experience (that is, to reinterpret its meaning16), 
such that they see it as helpful and controllable (versus unhelpful and 
uncontrollable), has been shown to improve immediate cognitive, 
physiological and behavioural stress responses17. This reappraisal 
approach, however, suffers from the 'transfer problem': people typi-
cally fail to extrapolate from the specific instance of reappraising  
a single stressful experience to the general lesson that they can 
reappraise other stressful experiences in a similar manner18,19. In the 
present research, we build on the reappraisal approach by targeting 
mindsets—cognitive processes that operate at a more general level 
than situation-specific appraisals and can shape how people interpret 
the meaning of broad categories of situations (for example, strug-
gling to master a skill or negative emotions in general)20–22. Mindsets, 
therefore, can guide people’s appraisals of a wide range of situations 
within the relevant category, including completely novel situations 
like the need to keep up with academic work through remote learning 
during pandemic-related school closures.
Here we show that it is possible to achieve stress optimization by 
targeting adolescents’ mindsets about their stressful experiences. We 
demonstrate that a short (around 30-min) intervention that could, in 
principle, be administered at low cost to entire populations of ado-
lescents4 successfully optimized adolescents’ stress responses. We 
document these improvements using an array of complementary indi-
cators at multiple levels of analysis, including adolescents’ cognitive 
appraisals of a stressful demand on them, their cardiovascular and 
neuroendocrine responses to such stressors, and the emergence of 
downstream mental health symptoms from exposure to chronic daily 
stress (Fig. 1a,b).
The synergistic mindsets approach
We designed the intervention that we evaluate here to harness the com-
plementarity that we identified between two existing mindset interven-
tions, each of which targets a different aspect of people’s experience 
of stress. The first of these, the growth mindset4,20,23, centres on the 
belief that ability (for example, intellectual, athletic or musical) is not 
fixed but can be developed with effort, effective strategies and support 
from others. This mindset casts normal but challenging stressors (for 
example, rigorous, advanced coursework) as both helpful (because 
they provide opportunities for valuable learning and skill development) 
and controllable (because the abilities needed to overcome them can 
be developed). The second, known as the stress-can-be-enhancing 
mindset5,21, centres on the understanding that our psychophysiologi-
cal stress response (for example, sweaty palms, racing heart, deeper 
breathing and feeling anxious) can be positive (because these changes 
mobilize energy and deliver oxygenated blood to the brain and tissues) 
and can be controlled once you understand its purpose (because you 
can choose to take advantage of the enhanced capacity for performance 
it fuels rather than being worried and distracted by it).
These two mindsets were not presented as separate ideas, but rather 
as intertwined and complementary elements of a coherent whole. 
The growth mindset messaging was designed to shape adolescents’ 
appraisals of the stressful demands on them—encouraging them to 
think of difficult challenges not as hazards to be avoided but as valu-
able opportunities for self-improvement. The stress-can-be-enhancing 
mindset messaging encouraged adolescents to see the activation of 
their psychophysiological stress response, which often follows engage-
ment with challenging stressors, as a helpful resource that energizes 
their pursuit of valued goals, rather than as a problem.
We argue that these two mindsets need to be integrated to reliably 
optimize stress management in real-world settings (Fig. 1a,b). For 
Threat response
Prepare for defeat
Challenge response
Mobilize resources
External
stressor
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
Event appraisal
Response appraisal
Positive mindsets:
events and responses 
such as these can be helpful 
and/or controlled
Negative mindsets:
events and responses
such as these are harmful
and/or uncontrollable
Worse psychological,
physiological and
academic outcomes
Harmful and
uncontrollable
Event
appraisal
Response
appraisal
+
–
Threat response
Challenge response
Better psychological,
physiological and
academic outcomes
Repetition
over time
External
stressor
Harmful and
uncontrollable
Internal
stressor
Helpful and
controllable
Helpful and
controllable
a
b
SNS
recovery
Peripheral
blood ﬂow
HPA-axis
activation
Negative
affect
+
–
–
+
+
–
+
–
Event is an
Internal
stressor
Response is an
Harmful and
uncontrollable
Event appraisal
Response appraisal
Helpful and
controllable
Internal
stressor
Fig. 1 | How young people’s social-evaluative stressors accumulate 
consequences for healthy development. a,b, First, the individuals appraise 
both acute stressful events and their stress responses (a); and second, their 
mindset beliefs shape their appraisals and responses, which leads to 
differences in internalizing symptoms over time (b). This integrated model is 
rooted in established process models in affective science16,26, recursive process 
models in psychology44,47 and mindset models4,23,72. a, Stressful events, such as 
a challenging exam or an argument with a friend, are appraised as either 
harmful and uncontrollable or more helpful and controllable, cultivating threat 
or challenge response tendencies, respectively. Then, the meaning of the 
stress response is appraised as either distressing and non-functional (harmful 
and uncontrollable) or as a resource that helps one address situational 
demands (helpful and controllable), which results in further threat- or 
challenge-type stress responses, respectively25,26. Threat stimulates the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis in the brain, the end-product of 
which is the catabolic adrenal hormone cortisol, in anticipation of damage or 
social defeat31. Challenge is characterized by increased peripheral blood flow 
(hence the red depiction), and a faster return to homeostasis after stress offset. 
Threat, however, results in increased vascular resistance and less oxygenated 
blood flow to the periphery (hence the blue depiction) as HPA activation 
tempers sympathomedullary effects and produces a more prolonged stress 
response25,26,29. Threat leads to avoidance motivation and negative affect, 
whereas challenge elicits approach motivation and more positive affect 
relative to threat. SNS, sympathetic nervous system. b, Mindsets are 
situation-general beliefs about categories of events (for example, academic 
stressors) and responses (for example, feelings of worry) that shape appraisals 
at the event stage and next at the response stage5,21,23,29. Individuals who 
respond with an optimized challenge-type stress response engage with and 
respond to future stressors more adaptively in a self-reinforcing, positive 
feedback cycle that results in better coping and performance.

514  |  Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022
Article
example, if an adolescent believes that struggle can promote learning  
(an event-focused growth mindset), but also believes that their psy-
chophysiological stress response is harmful and uncontrollable  
(a response-focused stress-is-debilitating mindset5) the activation 
of that stress response might deter them from pursuing stressful but 
valuable learning experiences. Likewise, an adolescent who under-
stands that their psychophysiological stress response can be used as 
a resource (a response-focused stress-can-be-enhancing mindset) but 
sees difficulty and struggle as hazards to be avoided (an event-focused 
fixed mindset) is still at risk of disengaging from stressful demands 
any time that they encounter difficulty or failure. By targeting both 
mindsets simultaneously, the synergistic mindsets intervention can 
convey the empowering message that both stressful events and stress 
responses can be harnessed in support of valued goals.
Overview of six experiments
We assessed the effects of the synergistic mindsets intervention in six 
experiments. Approvals for these studies were obtained from the Insti-
tutional Review Boards at the University of Rochester or the University 
of Texas at Austin. Participants in all studies provided informed consent 
or assent. The studies all focused on the kinds of stressors that are com-
mon in educational contexts (for example, taking a timed quiz, giving 
a speech to classmates, transitioning to high school or keeping up with 
academic work during the social isolation of pandemic-related school 
closures) and that constitute a primary source of adolescents’ evalu-
ative stress as they navigate a sometimes-volatile social world while 
also acquiring the technical and intellectual skills that they need for 
adulthood24. Adolescents completed the online intervention module 
on their own, in a naturalistic school setting, without assistance and 
without discussing the content with each other or with instructors. 
Hence, the study procedures mirrored the routine conditions under 
which scale-up could occur.
Our aim, in every study, was to reduce threat-type stress responses. 
Threat-type stress responses begin with the appraisal that a stressor is 
harmful (that is, 'bad for me') and uncontrollable, which leads to the 
conclusion that one cannot handle the demands of the stressor (that 
is, a threat appraisal)25. Threat appraisals lead to a cascade of physi-
ological and psychological responses that follow from the expectation 
that one is about to experience potentially catastrophic damage and 
defeat25,26 (Fig. 1a,b). The order of the six experiments corresponds to 
the typical sequence that threat-type stress responses follow, from 
cognitive appraisals to physiological (cardiovascular and neuroen-
docrine) responses to internalizing symptoms27 (Fig. 1 and Table 1).
We used a Bayesian statistical analysis approach that uses machine- 
learning tools to model covariates (and their complex interactions), 
and to model heterogeneous effects. It uses Bayesian additive regres-
sion tree (BART) priors to make these models conservative. This miti-
gates the problem of arbitrary covariate or moderator specifications 
leading to spurious or overstated results. We focus on effect sizes 
and uncertainty intervals rather than on 'all-or-none' null hypothesis 
significance testing. All findings also met conventional frequentist 
standards for statistical significance (Extended Data Table 2 and Sup-
plementary Fig. 5).
Effects on cognitive appraisals
In two large, pre-registered experiments, we examined the effects of 
the intervention on the cognitive appraisal processes that comprise 
the first step in the threat-type stress response. Participants in study 1 
were 2,717 secondary school students in 35 public schools in the United 
States who, after completing the synergistic mindsets (or a control) 
intervention, were asked to imagine that the instructor of their most 
difficult course had just assigned a very demanding project with very 
little time to complete it and that they would be expected to present 
their work in front of their classmates. As expected, the intervention 
reduced negative event-focused appraisals of this hypothetical aca-
demic stressor relative to controls (for example, “How likely would you 
be to think that the very hard assignment in [your most stressful class] 
is a negative threat to you?”); average treatment effect (ATE) = −0.11 s.d. 
[−0.03, −0.20] (numbers in square brackets are the 10th and 90th per-
centiles). The intervention also reduced negative response-focused 
appraisals (for example, “I think my body’s stress responses would hurt 
my performance”); ATE = −0.19 s.d. [−0.08, −0.30]. These outcomes 
correspond to the first two steps depicted in Fig 1b.
Study 2 examined the effects of the intervention on appraisals of a 
real, acute stressor (Fig. 2). Participants were 755 students in a large, 
undergraduate introductory social science course at a selective pub-
lic university in the United States. Immediately after a timed, chal-
lenging quiz (which occurred one to three days after intervention and 
was not mentioned in the intervention content), treated participants 
made less-negative stress appraisals; ATE = −0.39 s.d. [−0.28, −0.51]. 
This effect persisted but was attenuated by around 50% when partici-
pants completed a subsequent timed quiz three weeks after the first; 
ATE = −0.18 s.d. [−0.05, −0.31]. Note that even the attenuated effect 
size at the three-week follow-up was indistinguishable in size from 
the effect on immediate appraisals of a hypothetical stressor in study 
1. Study 2 showed that participants transfer the lessons of a one-time, 
short, self-guided intervention, with no boosters, to the naturalistic 
stressors that they encounter in their daily lives, and that this protec-
tion endured for at least three weeks after treatment.
Effects on physiological responses
Study 3 used a well-validated, standardized acute stress induction 
paradigm (the Trier Social Stress Test28 (TSST), see also ref. 29) to assess 
whether the stress-optimizing effects of the intervention extend 
to people’s cardiovascular stress responses. Participants were 166 
university students who completed the study for course credit. Con-
sistent with standard TSST protocols, participants were informed 
Table 1 | Overview of studies
Studies (Sample 
size)
Population
Stressor
Measures of 
threat-type 
stress response
1 (n = 2,717)
13–18-year-old public 
school students in 
the USA during the 
COVID-19 pandemic
Anticipated 
timed 
assignment
Event- and 
response- 
focused 
appraisals
2 (n = 755)
Diverse 
undergraduate 
students attending a 
public university
Experienced 
timed 
assignment
Cognitive 
appraisals at 1–3 
days and 3 weeks 
after test
3 and 4 (3, n = 160; 
4, n = 200)
Undergraduate 
students at a private 
university
Trier Social 
Stress Test 
(TSST)
Peripheral blood 
flow
5 (n = 118 
individuals; 
n = 1,213 
observations)
14–16-year-old 
adolescents from 
racial or ethnic 
minority groups, 
facing economic 
disadvantages
Daily stressors in 
high school
Daily negative 
self-regard and 
activation of the 
HPA axis
6 (n = 341)
Same as study 2 but 
during the onset 
of the COVID-19 
pandemic in spring 
2020
Ongoing 
academic 
demands during 
COVID-19 
quarantines
Generalized 
internalizing 
symptoms
All experiments were conducted in the United States. Across the six experiments, the syner-
gistic mindsets intervention reduced maladaptive beliefs compared to the control condition 
by 0.25 s.d. or more, which means that each experiment passed the manipulation check  
(see Methods, 'Manipulation checks (all studies)' for more detail).

Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022  |  515
that they would be asked to deliver an impromptu speech about their 
personal strengths and weaknesses in front of an audience of peer 
evaluators. Evaluators were trained to provide negative nonverbal 
feedback (for example, furrowing brow, sighing, crossing arms and so 
on) and no positive feedback—either verbal or nonverbal—during the 
speech28. When the speech was complete—and without prior warn-
ing—participants were asked to do mental mathematics (counting 
backwards from 996 in increments of 7) as quickly as possible in front 
of the same unsupportive evaluators. Evaluators immediately called 
attention to any errors participants made in the mental mathematics 
task and instructed them to begin again. Figure 3a depicts the five 
TSST epochs during which electrocardiography (ECG), impedance 
cardiography (ICG) and blood pressure signals were monitored to 
assess stress responses, with the speech epoch expected to elicit 
the most distress. The focal outcome was total peripheral resistance 
(TPR), a measure of vasoconstriction in the body’s periphery (that is, 
the limbs) and a primary indicator of threat-type stress responses26,30 
(Fig. 1a). Therefore, we expected the intervention to reduce the levels 
of TPR.
Average effects
Control group participants exhibited an increase in TPR from the 
baseline to the active epochs (Fig. 3b). Consistent with existing lit-
erature31, increases in TPR were most pronounced during the epoch 
in which participants delivered the impromptu speech. Analyses, 
therefore, focus primarily on the effects of the intervention during 
the speech epoch.
The synergistic mindsets intervention reduced participants’ TPR, 
relative to controls, in every epoch of the TSST, and especially during 
the speech epoch—the most intense period of social-evaluative stress 
(Fig. 3b). The estimated conditional average treatment effect (CATE) 
was less than zero in every epoch (Fig. 3c). Analyses of other cardio-
vascular indicators of threat- versus challenge-type stress responses 
(stroke volume during active epochs, and pre-ejection period (PEP) 
during the post-stressor recovery epoch) revealed treatment effects 
consistent with those on TPR (Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3).
Heterogeneous effects
We assessed participants’ event- and response-focused mindsets 
by self-reporting before randomization, and tested for moderation 
by these variables. We expected negative prior mindsets to predict 
worse stress responses in the control condition, and this was confirmed 
(Extended Data Table 1). We also hypothesized that the synergistic 
mindsets intervention would provide the greatest benefit to partici-
pants who did not already endorse both positive mindsets (that is, 
growth and stress-can-be-enhancing), and who were therefore at 
greater risk of a threat-type response to the TSST. This is what we found 
(Extended Data Fig. 1). Indeed, participants with dual negative mindsets 
before the intervention who received the synergistic mindsets treat-
ment exhibited levels of TPR that were indistinguishable from controls 
with dual positive mindsets before intervention (Fig. 3c). Analyses of 
other, complementary cardiovascular indicators (for example, stroke 
volume) yielded the same pattern (Extended Data Fig. 2).
Replication of physiological effects
Study 4 was a pre-registered replication and extension of study 3. Par-
ticipants were 200 university students who completed the study for 
course credit.
Replication of effects on TPR
Directly replicating the findings in study 3, the synergistic mindset 
intervention again reduced TPR during the speech epoch of the TSST, 
relative to the control condition; ATE = −0.44 s.d. [−0.67, −0.20]; pos-
terior probability of a reduction in TPR = 0.994.
Baseline
self-reports
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
versus
Control
a
Procedures for study 1 
c
Procedures for study 2 
Mindset
beliefs
Baseline
self-reports
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
versus
Control
Timed
quiz 2
appraisals
Timed
quiz 1
appraisals
1–3 days
3 weeks
Scenario
appraisals
Mindset
beliefs
b
d
Event appraisals
Response appraisals
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
ATE for study 1 (s.d. units)
Quiz 1 appraisals
Quiz 2 appraisals
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
ATE for study 2 (s.d. units)
Fig. 2 | Procedures and results of studies 1 and 2. a–d, Studies 1 and 2 
(n = 2,534 and n = 790, respectively) showed that relative to the neutral control 
condition the synergistic mindsets intervention reduced negative appraisals 
of an immediate, hypothetical stressor (a,b), and an acute naturalistic stressor 
up to 3 weeks after the intervention (c,d). Participants were secondary school 
students (study 1) or undergraduates (study 2) attending public schools in the 
United States. Starbursts represent stressor onset. Dots correspond to the 
ATEs estimated with the Bayesian model. Thick lines represent the 10th to 90th 
percentiles; grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th percentiles. The appraisals 
for each study were coded so that higher values corresponded to more 
negative appraisals, so negative treatment effects are consistent with a 
beneficial stress optimization effect. Average effect sizes appear in the text. 
Study 1, control n = 1,326; treatment n = 1,208. Study 2, control n = 403; 
treatment n = 387.
Baseline
stress
physiology
(5 min)
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
versus
Control
(3 min)
(5 min)
(5 min)
Prepare
speech
(3 min)
Self-report
prior mindsets and
characteristics
Deliver
speech
Mental
maths
Recovery
and rest
ECG, ICG and
blood pressure
a
Procedures for study 3
TPR reactivity (Dyn s × cm5)
b
c
TPR
Stroke volume
and
PEP
Preparation
Speech
Maths
Recovery
Recovery
Recovery
Time
Control
Mindset treatment
10
15
20
CATE (Dyn s × cm5)
800
0
–100
–200
–300
600
400
200
0
Maths
Maths
Speech
Speech
Preparation
Preparation
Fig. 3 | In study 3, the synergistic mindsets intervention improved 
cardiovascular responses to the TSST. a–c, Participants in study 3 (n  = 160) were 
undergraduate students in a laboratory experiment. a, Procedures for study 3.  
b,c, Coloured lines (b) and dots (c) correspond to the expected value of the 
outcome (b) or the ATE (c), estimated with the Bayesian model. The thick bands 
represent the 10th to 90th percentiles of the posterior distributions; grey lines 
represent the 2.5th to 97.5th percentiles. TPR (b) is measured in Dyn s × cm5, where. 
Time indicates the elapsed, cumulative physiological recording. Starbursts 
indicate TSST epochs that presented acute demands (that is, the stressful epochs). 
Baseline measurements were taken before the stress induction and random 
assignment to condition. Baseline scores were subtracted from all active epochs to 
compute reactivity scores for each minute. Preparation measurements were taken 
after intervention materials when participants planned their speech; speech 
delivery and mental mathematics measurements were taken during the speech 
and maths tasks, respectively; and finally, measurements were taken during a 
recovery period in which evaluative pressure (stress) was removed. The differences 
in TPR for the two groups were similar at baseline (see propensity score comparisons 
in the Supplementary Information). In c, ATEs and 10th to 90th percentiles are: 
preparation = −168 Dyn s × cm5 [−217, −121], speech = −223 [−274, −172],  
maths = −128 [−175, −80], recovery = −90 [−139, −41]. Control, n = 86; treatment, 
n = 74.

516  |  Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022
Article
Comparison to single-mindset conditions
In addition to replicating the findings of study 3, study 4 included 
two additional conditions—a growth-mindset-only treatment and a 
stress-mindset-only treatment—to test whether the synergistic combi-
nation of positive event- and response-focused mindsets is truly essential 
to prevent threat-type responses, as our theoretical model predicts 
(Fig. 1), or whether one or the other of these component mindsets might 
be equally effective on its own. This four-cell experiment was analysed 
using a multi-arm implementation of the Bayesian causal forest (BCF) 
model, which was developed for the present research. Figure 4 shows that 
neither of the single-mindset treatments reliably reduced TPR relative to 
the neutral control condition: stress (but not growth) mindset, posterior 
probability of a reduction in TPR = 0.785; growth (but not stress) mindset, 
posterior probability = 0.578). As predicted, the ATE of the synergistic 
mindsets intervention was larger than the stress-mindset-only ATE by 
an average of −0.34 s.d. [−0.57, −0.10] (posterior probability of a nega-
tive difference = 0.971), and was −0.42 s.d. [−0.66, −0.18] larger than the 
growth-mindset-only ATE (posterior probability = 0.990; see Fig. 4c for 
a summary plot of the posterior distributions).
Extension to secondary cardiovascular outcomes
The conclusion that the synergistic combination of the two mindsets is 
more powerful than either of its component mindsets alone is further 
supported by an analysis of stroke volume during the speech epoch, 
and PEP during the recovery epoch—both of which are positive indi-
cators of a challenge-type stress response. The synergistic mindsets 
ATEs for stroke volume and PEP were 0.31 s.d. [0.18, 0.44] and 0.37 s.d. 
[0.11, 0.62], respectively (Fig 4b). Consistent with the TPR findings, 
these ATEs were both meaningfully larger than the ATEs for either the 
stress-mindset-only or the growth-mindset-only condition (posterior 
probabilities of a difference in ATEs for stroke volume = 0.999 and 
0.989, respectively; for PEP: 0.876 and 0.923 respectively; Fig 4c).
Understanding mechanisms
Study 4 also included, on an exploratory basis, two self-report measures 
that extended the model in Fig. 1. The first was a more direct measure of 
threat (versus challenge) appraisals (for example, ratings of the state-
ments “I felt threatened by the task” and “I felt that the task challenged me 
in a positive way”). The second was a measure of psychological well-being 
(for example, feeling more liked, powerful and high in self-esteem, and 
less rejected, insecure or disconnected). For each outcome, the syner-
gistic mindsets condition showed the predicted effects relative to the 
control condition (appraisals ATE =  −0.46 s.d. [−0.72, −0.20]; well-being 
ATE = 0.25 s.d. [0.04, 0.48]). The ATE of the synergistic mindsets inter-
vention was also meaningfully larger than those of either single-mindset 
treatment for both outcomes (Fig. 4c; all posterior probabilities of a 
difference in the direction of the point estimate > 0.884).
−1.0 −0.5
0
0.5
1.0 −1.0 −0.5
0
0.5
1.0 −1.0 −0.5
0
0.5
1.0 −1.0 −0.5
0
0.5
1.0 −1.0 −0.5
0
0.5
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
Posterior distributions of differences in ATEs across conditions (s.d. units)
Density
Synergistic mindsets minus growth only
Synergistic mindsets minus stress only
−0.5
0
0.5
ATE (s.d. units)
Growth only
Stress only
Synergistic mindsets
Baseline
stress
physiology
(5 min)
Synergistic mindsets versus
Growth only versus
Stress only versus
Control
(3 min)
(5 min)
Prepare
speech
(3 min)
Self-report
prior mindsets and
characteristics
Deliver
speech
Recovery
and rest
a
Procedures for study 4
b
c
Self-report
threat appraisals
and well-being
TPR during speech*
Stroke volume during speech
PEP during recovery
Threat appraisals
Well-being
TPR during speech*
Stroke volume during speech
PEP during recovery
Threat appraisals
Well-being
Fig. 4 | In study 4, the synergistic mindsets intervention improved 
cardiovascular responses to the TSST, and this effect was larger than the 
effects of single-mindset interventions. a–c, Participants in study 4 (n = 200) 
were undergraduate students in a laboratory experiment. a, Procedures for 
study 4. b, ATEs across outcomes. Dots correspond to the ATEs estimated with 
the Bayesian algorithm. Thick lines represent the 10th to 90th percentiles;  
grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th percentiles. c, The entire posterior 
distributions of a difference between the treatment effects of the conditions 
(synergistic mindset versus single mindset) (that is, a test of the interaction 
effect hypothesis), estimated in the Bayesian model. Study 4 streamlined the 
TSST procedures to allow for more efficient data collection, so the maths 
epoch was removed. The pre-registration stated that the primary outcome 
would be TPR during the speech delivery epoch. All results were estimated with 
the multi-arm implementation of the BCF algorithm; cardiovascular outcomes 
(TPR, stroke volume, PEP) used targeted smoothing. Additional details for the 
study procedures are provided in the legend of Fig. 3. In a, starbursts represent 
stressor onset. Asterisks in b,c indicate a pre-registered outcome. Control, 
n = 44; growth only, n = 52; stress only, n = 65; synergistic, n = 39.

Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022  |  517
Effects on daily stress responses
Study 5 assessed the longer-term protective effects of the synergistic 
mindsets intervention using psychological and hormonal indicators of 
repeated unhealthy responses to stress over time. Participants were 118 
adolescents who attended a rigorous, urban public charter high school in 
a low-income neighbourhood; 95% identified as Black/African-American 
or Hispanic/Latinx, and 99% were from economically disadvantaged 
families. We chose this population because students facing the com-
bination of socioeconomic disadvantage and demanding academic 
standards are especially likely to experience increased levels of chronic, 
daily stress32–34. In addition, because this sample is quite different demo-
graphically from the samples in our other studies, study 5 helps us to 
gauge the generalizability of the synergistic mindsets intervention to 
other population subgroups that might stand to benefit from it.
The study procedures are shown in Fig. 5a. Participants first com-
pleted a pre-intervention survey assessment of negative event- and 
response-focused mindsets, and then completed the synergistic mind-
sets (or control) intervention in a private room at school, with random 
assignment occurring at the individual level. Then, an average of 14 
days later, students completed brief (5-min) stress surveys twice daily 
over the course of one school week (4–5 consecutive days), yielding up 
to 10 daily stress reports per individual. The daily surveys measured 
the intensity of evaluative stress that participants were experiencing, 
and their global feelings of self-regard (“Overall, how good or bad did 
you feel about yourself today?”). Negative self-regard is a precursor 
of clinical anxiety and depression and a central symptom of clinical 
depression35. On the same days on which daily stress assessments were 
taken, students also provided up to three saliva samples (in the morning 
after arrival at school; during the lunch period; and after school ended) 
that were later assayed for cortisol levels using liquid chromatogra-
phy–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)36.
When individuals undergo a threat-type response to stress, cortisol 
levels rise immediately and remain increased after stress offset, as the 
hormone lingers in the body for approximately 1 h (refs. 25,31). Persis-
tently elevated cortisol levels across samples taken multiple times 
each day over multiple days, therefore, reflect chronic activation of 
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, a clear indication of 
threat-type responses to daily stressors. Affective states, by contrast, 
were assessed in reference to specific stressors that occurred in each 
survey period. Thus, these two indicators—self-reported daily stress 
intensity paired with negative self-regard, and overall cortisol levels 
across all days and times—can provide complementary information 
about daily stress responses.
Average effects: negative self-regard
The synergistic mindsets intervention reduced daily negative self- 
regard compared to controls overall by −0.19 s.d. [−0.33, −0.05]. This 
effect was more than twice as large on high-stress days, −0.32 s.d. [−0.54, 
−0.09] than on low-stress days, −0.15 s.d. [−0.37, −0.01], as one would 
expect of an intervention designed to optimize people’s responses 
to stress (Fig. 5b). Daily stress intensity was positively associated 
with negative self-regard in the control condition, r(532) = 0.38, but 
this association was attenuated by 50% in the treatment condition, 
r(521) = 0.19 (Fig. 5b). In sum, the synergistic mindsets intervention pro-
tected against the negative mental health effects of the most intense, 
negative stressors.
Heterogeneous effects: daily negative self-regard
The intervention’s buffering effect against negative self-regard on 
high-stress days was 40% larger (−0.38 s.d.), on average, among indi-
viduals who held negative event- and response-focused mindsets before 
the intervention, than among participants who held positive prior 
mindsets (−0.27 s.d.; Extended Data Fig. 4).
Average and heterogeneous effects: cortisol
The synergistic mindsets intervention reduced the chronic HPA-axis 
activation of participants, relative to controls, as assessed using the 
average cortisol levels of participants across all measurement days 
and times; ATE = −0.23 s.d. [−0.34, −0.12]. Self-reported daily stress 
intensity was unrelated to cortisol levels (r(1182) = 0.01), consistent 
with the interpretation of average cortisol levels across measurement 
days and as a global indicator of the functioning of the HPA system, not 
as an index of responses to specific stressors. No meaningful hetero-
geneity (across time, stress intensity or prior mindsets) was observed 
in the cortisol effects.
Academic achievement
As we explained above, the synergistic mindsets intervention is 
designed not only to prevent negative mental health effects of normal  
stress but also to help adolescents to engage with (rather than dis-
engaging from) useful but stressful learning opportunities such as 
rigorous academic coursework. Therefore, we sought to assess, on an 
exploratory basis, whether the synergistic mindsets intervention had a 
positive effect on students’ academic outcomes in study 5. We obtained 
data on the rate at which participants passed their core classes from 
official school transcripts. Notably, in the six to seven months from the 
end of the post-intervention daily diary measurement until the end of 
the school year when final grades were recorded, we had no contact 
with participants and they received no reminders of the intervention 
or its content. The school year in question was the one that ended in 
the spring of 2020 during the COVID-19 lockdowns. Using the highly 
conservative BCF method, we found that the synergistic mindsets 
intervention increased the overall rate at which students passed their 
core classes by 14.4 percentage points (pp) [0.4, 29.4]. These treat-
ment effects were driven by improvements in the most demanding 
and technical courses (mathematics and science), which students in 
Baseline
saliva
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
versus
Control
Diary 
day 1
Self-report
prior mindsets
and
characteristics
Diary 
day 3
Diary 
day 4
Diary 
day 5
Self-reports (2× daily)
Saliva samples (3× daily)
a
Procedures for study 5
b
c
Diary 
day 2
Around
14 days
Negative self-regard
Cortisol (ng ml–1)
Negative self-regard
3
4
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
–1.5
2
4
3
2
1
0
Course
credits
Around
7 months
Time of day
Time of day
Intensity of daily stressors
Intensity of daily stressors
Low intensity
Low intensity
High intensity
High intensity
Morning
Morning
Lunch
Lunch
Afternoon
Afternoon
Salivary cortisol (z-scores)
Control
Mindset treatment
Control
Mindset treatment
Fig. 5 | In study 5, the synergistic mindsets intervention reduced negative 
self-regard. a, Procedures for study 5. b,c, The synergistic mindsets intervention 
reduced negative self-regard (see Methods for the scoring of this measure) 
relative to controls overall and especially on intensely stressful days (b). The 
intervention also reduced (c) daily salivary cortisol levels overall relative to 
controls. Participants (n = 119 individuals; n ≤ 1,213 observations (total number  
of daily diary or cortisol observations for all participants)) were students from 
low-income families attending a public high school in the United States. 
Starbursts represent stressor measurements. Univariate marginal distribution 
plots are shown at the top in b,c. Thick coloured lines represent the 10th to 90th 
percentiles; grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th percentiles. The vertical 
dashed line in b represents the cut-off point for high versus low daily stress 
intensity that was used to estimate subgroup CATEs. The unstandardized CATE 
for negative self-regard for high daily stress intensity was −0.48 scale points 
[−0.81, −0.14]; for low daily stress intensity days it was −0.23 scale points  
[−0.44, −0.02]. The ATEs for academic course credits and cortisol are presented 
in the text. Control, n = 58; treatment, n = 61.

518  |  Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022
Article
the control condition passed at a rate of only 47%. By contrast, 63% of 
participants in the synergistic mindsets condition passed these courses; 
ATE = 14.5 pp [0.4, 31.7]. Smaller and less reliable effects were observed 
in non-STEM courses (English, language arts and social studies), which 
had a much higher overall pass rate and tend to be less stressful on 
average (control = 67%; mindset treatment = 73%; ATE = 5.3 pp [−4.8, 
17.2]). Treatment effects on course pass rates were not moderated by 
prior negative mindsets. This exploratory analysis provides direct 
evidence that, in addition to providing robust and enduring protection 
of adolescents’ mental (and physical) health during periods of high 
stress, the intervention also helps adolescents to take fuller advantage 
of stressful but valuable opportunities for learning and skill develop-
ment. Second, this analysis helps to allay any concerns that the findings 
of the study in the cortisol and daily diary data were inflated because 
the act of completing the daily diaries artificially boosted the salience 
of the intervention’s key ideas in participants.
Effects on overall anxiety symptoms
The results in studies 4 and 5 suggest the possibility for cumulative 
consequences of mindsets for mental health during times of negative 
stress37 (Fig. 1). This possibility was explored with a final experiment. In 
study 6, the environmental stressor was continued academic pressure 
and social isolation during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic 
in the United States in the spring of 2020, as students were forced to 
leave university housing and abstain from most normal, in-person social 
interaction (see study procedure in Fig. 6). Thus we thought that reshap-
ing adolescents’ appraisals of the normal social-evaluative demands 
of student life, which did not abate during the pandemic, might have 
had substantial protective effects on the mental health of participants 
during this period. The outcome of interest was participants’ levels of 
generalized anxiety symptoms, measured with the same standardized, 
widely used screening tool38 used in past representative sample surveys 
that have contributed to public concern about a mental health crisis 
in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic3.
Participants were 341 students in a section, offered during the spring 
semester of 2020, of the same large, undergraduate introductory social 
science course from which we sampled in study 2, but in the next semes-
ter. Participants completed either the synergistic mindsets or the con-
trol interventions—framed as a course activity—at the end of January 
2020, and participants completed the survey of generalized anxiety 
symptoms as part of a course activity on psychological disorders in 
mid-April—approximately one month after the university suspended 
all in-person teaching in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Partici-
pants were not made aware of any link between the intervention and 
the anxiety survey—both of which they saw as regular components of 
the course—thus providing a strong test of the transfer hypothesis.
Because studies 3 and 5 found stronger salutary effects of the syn-
ergistic mindsets intervention among those with negative event- and 
response-focused mindsets pre-intervention—and because those mind-
sets were positively associated with anxiety symptoms in the control 
condition (Extended Data Table 1)—we expected the Bayesian algorithm 
to again find stronger effects for this group in Study 6.
Among participants who had negative prior mindsets, those who 
received the synergistic mindsets (versus the control) intervention 
in January exhibited lower levels of generalized anxiety symptoms in 
April; CATE = −0.17 s.d. [−0.37, 0.00] (see Fig. 6b). Although the BCF 
model identified a small probability of a near-null effect in this sub-
group (Fig. 6b)—unsurprising because BCF uses a highly conservative 
prior distribution—that probability was considerably smaller than the 
probability that the treatment effect exceeded 0.30 s.d., which would 
be a large effect for real-world symptom reductions39. There was no 
discernible effect among adolescents with positive pre-intervention 
mindsets who, as noted, were less likely to show anxiety symptoms 
overall; CATE = −0.03 SD [−0.17, 0.12] (see also Extended Data Fig. 5).
Discussion
Across six randomized experiments using a range of outcome meas-
ures, levels of analysis and timescales, we found replicable evidence 
that a single-session, self-administered, synergistic mindsets interven-
tion can protect vulnerable adolescents against unhealthy threat-type 
responses to normal social-evaluative stress and the negative mental 
health outcomes associated with such stress responses. Although our 
focus has primarily been on the protective effects of this intervention 
against the negative mental health effects of treat-type responses, it is 
worth noting that the profile of cardiovascular responses that are char-
acteristic of threat-type stress responses (increased TPR and reduced 
stroke volume during active stress response, and a slower return to 
baseline PEP after stress offset)—and which the synergistic mindsets 
intervention protected vulnerable participants against—is known to 
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and premature death. Future 
studies should assess more directly whether this intervention might 
provide significant protection against the negative physical health 
effects of chronically elevated stress.
Because mindset interventions similar to the one tested here can 
be delivered in a cost-effective manner in national scale-up studies4, 
the present research represents a critical theoretical step from basic 
insights about affect regulation towards the discovery of actionable 
intervention methods that might be able to produce real, lasting 
change at scale. Although our evidence indicates that many of the 
intervention’s benefits were specific to participants with negative 
pre-intervention event- and response-focused mindsets, it makes 
the most sense to think of the synergistic mindsets intervention as a 
tool for universal prevention rather than targeted 'high risk' preven-
tion. We found no evidence that the intervention caused harm to any 
group, and we did find some evidence that it can have key benefits (for 
Baseline
self-reports
Synergistic
mindsets
treatment
versus
Control
Procedures for study 6
COVID-19
quarantines
and academic
stressors 
Anxiety
symptoms
Negative
prior mindsets
Negative
prior mindsets
Positive
prior mindsets
Positive
prior mindsets
a
b
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
Effect size (s.d. units)
0.2
0
Fig. 6 | In study 6, the synergistic mindsets intervention reduced symptoms 
of general anxiety relative to controls. Participants in study 6 (n = 351) were 
undergraduate students attending a public university in the United States.  
a, Procedures for study 6. b, The posterior distribution of treatment effects 
estimated by the Bayesian model, the red line is the CATE for each subgroup, 
the dark shading marks the interquartile range and the lighter shading marks 
the 10th to 90th percentiles. Although there was a small posterior probability 
of a null treatment effect among prior negative mindset participants, there was 
a higher probability of effects > 0.30 s.d. The prior mindset subgroups used to 
display treatment effects in b were generated by implementing a hands-off 
Bayesian decision-making algorithm that maximized the outcome differences 
among the mindset groups, without using information about magnitudes of 
treatment effects (see Supplementary Information). Control, n = 172; 
treatment, n = 179.

Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022  |  519
example, reduced global cortisol levels, improved academic achieve-
ment) to participants irrespective of their prior mindsets. For these 
reasons and because it would be prohibitively difficult and costly to 
accurately identify all those at increased risk of negative stress-related 
outcomes, interventions like this one, which aim to protect people 
against population-level risk factors, typically produce much larger 
improvements in public health when they are administered to entire 
populations40–42.
An important next step, however, will be to more fully assess the 
generalizability and heterogeneity of these effects with new large-scale 
trials in diverse populations and contexts43. These trials might reveal 
previously undiscovered context-, population- or individual-level 
moderators of the intervention’s effects that inform decisions about 
how best to scale the intervention; for example, by identifying envi-
ronmental conditions known as 'affordances' on which the beneficial 
effects of the intervention depend44,45. Doing so can also contribute to 
theory by shedding light on the psychological mechanisms by which 
the intervention has its effects43,46. The finding, in the present research, 
that many of the intervention’s effects were moderated by participants’ 
prior mindsets, for example, suggests that it works by interrupting 
the negative recursive process47 of appraisals stemming from nega-
tive mindsets that, if left unchecked, can have accumulating negative 
psychological consequences (Fig. 1b).
We emphasize that our claims about the benefits of synergistic mind-
sets are limited to how adolescents respond to the inevitable stress 
that comes from engaging with challenging opportunities for learning 
and skill development, such as formal education. The intervention is 
not designed to change people’s appraisals of serious, negative and 
uncontrollable stressors, such as trauma or abuse. With that said, we 
did find evidence that the synergistic mindsets intervention can help 
people cope better with the normal stress of preparing for adulthood 
in the modern economy, even when they are also facing harmful and 
uncontrollable stressors, such as economic disadvantage (study 5) or 
pandemic-related lockdowns (study 6). We are furthermore optimistic 
that synergistic mindsets could have protective effects in the face of a 
wide range of normal stressors (for example, in workplace, athletic or 
romantic contexts). To work effectively in such contexts, however, the 
details of the intervention content would probably need to be adapted 
to convey the relevance of synergistic mindsets to the stressors that 
people face in those settings.
Finally, our research suggests that the public discourse is at present 
operating under a flawed narrative about young people and what they 
are capable of. As we noted in the opening of this article, the predomi-
nant societal reaction to alarming levels of anxiety and stress has been 
to argue that we should expect less of young people. But, in a time 
characterized by political division and social unrest, climate change, 
rising inequality and geopolitical conflict, it is critical that young people 
gain the knowledge and skills that they will need to solve humanity’s 
challenges when they take over society’s important institutions. Ado-
lescence, after all, is a developmental stage that is uniquely suited to 
reshaping the future. Therefore, we propose an alternative narrative 
that emphasizes the role of young people in taking on the formidable 
challenges of the future. Our studies suggest that we might not teach 
adolescents that they are too fragile to overcome difficult struggles, 
but that we might, instead, provide them with the resources and guid-
ance that they need to unleash their skills and creativity in addressing 
big problems.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum-
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contri-
butions and competing interests; and statements of data and code avail-
ability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04907-7.
1.	
American Psychological Association. Stress in America 2021: One Year Later, a New Wave 
of Pandemic Health Concerns. American Psychological Association https://www.apa.org/
news/press/releases/stress/2021/one-year-pandemic-stress (2021).
2.	
Rideout, V., Fox, S., Peebles, A. & Robb, M. B. Coping with COVID-19: How Young People 
Use Digital Media To Manage Their Mental Health https://www.commonsensemedia.org/
sites/default/files/research/report/2021-coping-with-covid19-full-report.pdf (2021).
3.	
Keeter, S. Many Americans continue to experience mental health difficulties as pandemic 
enters second year. Pew Research Center https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/ 
2021/03/16/many-americans-continue-to-experience-mental-health-difficulties-as- 
pandemic-enters-second-year/ (2021).
4.	
Yeager, D. S. et al. A national experiment reveals where a growth mindset improves 
achievement. Nature 573, 364–369 (2019).
5.	
Crum, A. J., Jamieson, J. P. & Akinola, M. Optimizing stress: an integrated intervention for 
regulating stress responses. Emotion 20, 120–125 (2020).
6.	
Hahn, P. R., Murray, J. S. & Carvalho, C. M. Bayesian regression tree models for causal 
inference: regularization, confounding, and heterogeneous effects. Bayesian Anal. 15, 
965–1056 (2020).
7.	
Ellis, R. Fauci Worries About Possible ‘Mental Health Pandemic’. WebMD https://www.
webmd.com/lung/news/20210314/
fauci-worries-about-possible-mental-health-pandemic (2021).
8.	
Dahl, R. E., Allen, N. B., Wilbrecht, L. & Suleiman, A. B. Importance of investing in 
adolescence from a developmental science perspective. Nature 554, 441–450  
(2018).
9.	
U.S. Surgeon General. Protecting Youth Mental Health: The U.S. Surgeon General’s 
Advisory https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/
surgeon-general-youth-mental-health-advisory.pdf (2021).
10.	
Pope, D. C. Doing School: How We Are Creating a Generation of Stressed-Out, 
Materialistic, and Miseducated Students (Yale University Press, 2001).
11.	
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The Promise of 
Adolescence: Realizing Opportunity for All Youth (National Academies Press, 2019).
12.	
Autor, D. H. Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‘other 99 
percent’. Science 344, 843–851 (2014).
13.	
National Research Council. Education for Life and Work: Developing Transferable 
Knowledge and Skills in the 21st Century https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13398/
education-for-life-and-work-developing-transferable-knowledge-and-skills (2012).
14.	
Hembree, R. The nature, effects, and relief of mathematics anxiety. J. Res. Math. Educ. 21, 
33–46 (1990).
15.	
van Loon, A. W. G. et al. Can schools reduce adolescent psychological stress?  
A multilevel meta-analysis of the effectiveness of school-based intervention programs.  
J. Youth Adolesc. 49, 1127–1145 (2020).
16.	
Gross, J. J. Emotion regulation: current status and future prospects. Psychol. Inq. 26, 1–26 
(2015).
17.	
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B. & Nock, M. K. Improving acute stress responses: the power 
of reappraisal. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 22, 51–56 (2013).
18.	
Kassai, R., Futo, J., Demetrovics, Z. & Takacs, Z. K. A meta-analysis of the experial evidence 
on the near- and far-transfer effects among children’s executive function skills. Psychol. 
Bull. 145, 165–188 (2019).
19.	
De Voogd, E. L., Wiers, R. W. & Salemink, E. Online visual search attentional bias 
modification for adolescents with heightened anxiety and depressive symptoms: a 
randomized controlled trial. Behav. Res. Ther. 92, 57–67 (2017).
20.	 Yeager, D. S. & Dweck, C. S. What can be learned from growth mindset controversies? Am. 
Psychol. 75, 1269–1284 (2020).
21.	
Crum, A. J., Salovey, P. & Achor, S. Rethinking stress: The role of mindsets in determining 
the stress response. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 104, 716–733 (2013).
22.	 Ford, B. Q. & Gross, J. J. Why beliefs about emotion matter: an emotion-regulation 
perspective. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 28, 74–81 (2019).
23.	 Yeager, D. S. & Dweck, C. S. Mindsets that promote resilience: when students believe that 
personal characteristics can be developed. Educ. Psychol. 47, 302–314 (2012).
24.	 Crosnoe, R. Fitting In, Standing out: Navigating the Social Challenges of High School to 
Get an Education (Cambridge University Press, 2011).
25.	 Jamieson, J. P., Hangen, E. J., Lee, H. Y. & Yeager, D. S. Capitalizing on appraisal processes 
to improve affective responses to social stress. Emotion Rev. 10, 30–39 (2018).
26.	 Blascovich, J. & Mendes, W. B. in Handbook of Social Psychology (eds Fiske, S. T., Gilbert, 
D. T. & Lindzey, G.) 194–227 (John Wiley & Sons, 2010).
27.	
Poppelaars, E. S., Klackl, J., Pletzer, B., Wilhelm, F. H. & Jonas, E. Social-evaluative threat: 
stress response stages and influences of biological sex and neuroticism. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 109, 104378 (2019).
28.	 Kirschbaum, C., Pirke, K.-M. & Hellhammer, D. H. The ‘Trier Social Stress Test’–a tool for 
investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting. 
Neuropsychobiology 28, 76–81 (1993).
29.	 Yeager, D. S., Lee, H. Y. & Jamieson, J. P. How to improve adolescent stress responses: 
insights from integrating implicit theories of personality and biopsychosocial models. 
Psychol. Sci. 27, 1078–1091 (2016).
30.	 Blascovich, J. A biopsychosocial approach to arousal regulation. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 11, 
213–237 (1992).
31.	
Dickerson, S. S. & Kemeny, M. E. Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical 
integration and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychol. Bull. 130, 355–391 (2004).
32.	 Grant, K. E. et al. in Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology (eds Lewis, M. & 
Rudolph, K. D.) 205–223 (Springer, 2014).
33.	 Chen, E., Langer, D. A., Raphaelson, Y. E. & Matthews, K. A. Socioeconomic status and 
health in adolescents: the role of stress interpretations. Child Dev. 75, 1039–1052  
(2004).
34.	 Chan, M., Miller, G. E. & Chen, E. Early life socioeconomic status and metabolic outcomes 
in adolescents: the role of implicit affect about one’s family. Health Psychol. 35, 387–396 
(2016).
35.	 Mullarkey, M. C., Marchetti, I. & Beevers, C. G. Using network analysis to identify central 
symptoms of adolescent depression. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 48, 656–668 (2019).

520  |  Nature  |  Vol 607  |  21 July 2022
Article
36.	 Miller, R., Plessow, F., Rauh, M., Gröschl, M. & Kirschbaum, C. Comparison of salivary 
cortisol as measured by different immunoassays and tandem mass spectrometry. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 50–57 (2013).
37.	
Calvete, E. et al. The effect of an intervention teaching adolescents that people can 
change on depressive symptoms, cognitive schemas, and hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal axis hormones. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 47, 1533–1546 (2019).
38.	 Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B. W. & Löwe, B. A brief measure for assessing 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder: the GAD-7. Arch. Intern. Med. 166, 1092–1097 (2006).
39.	 Kraft, M. A. Interpreting effect sizes of education interventions. Educ. Res. 49, 241–253 
(2020).
40.	 Rose, G. Strategy of prevention: Lessons from cardiovascular disease. Br. Med. J. 282, 
1847–1851 (1981).
41.	
Rose, G. The Strategy of Preventive Medicine (Oxford University Press, 1992).
42.	 Bryan, C. J., Yeager, D. S. & Hinojosa, C. P. A values-alignment intervention protects 
adolescents from the effects of food marketing. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 596–603 (2019).
43.	 Bryan, C. J., Tipton, E. & Yeager, D. S. Behavioural science is unlikely to change the world 
without a heterogeneity revolution. Nat. Hum. Behav. 5, 980–989 (2021).
44.	 Walton, G. M. & Yeager, D. S. Seed and soil: psychological affordances in contexts help to 
explain where wise interventions succeed or fail. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 29, 219–226 
(2020).
45.	 Kaufman, T. M., Lee, H. Y., Benner, A. D. & Yeager, D. S. How school contexts shape the 
relations among adolescents’ beliefs, peer victimization, and depressive symptoms.  
J. Res. Adolec. 30, 769–786 (2020).
46.	 Yeager, D. S., Krosnick, J. A., Visser, P. S., Holbrook, A. L. & Tahk, A. M. Moderation of 
classic social psychological effects by demographics in the U.S. adult population:  
new opportunities for theoretical advancement. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 117, e84–e99 
(2019).
47.	
Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. Social-psychological interventions in education: they’re not 
magic. Rev. Educ. Res. 81, 267–301 (2011).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution 
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your 
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022

Methods
Ethics approval
Approvals for these studies were obtained from the Institutional Review 
Boards at the University of Rochester or the University of Texas at Aus-
tin. Participants in all studies provided informed consent or assent.
Study registration and efforts to curb researcher degrees of 
freedom
All studies are registered on the Open Science Framework (study 1: 
https://osf.io/tgysd; study 2: https://osf.io/hb6vs, study 3: https://osf.
io/x4a63; study 4: https://osf.io/fkgru; study 5: https://osf.io/9pfha; 
study 6: https://osf.io/mkqgf). Detailed descriptions of open science 
disclosures, links to study materials, analysis plans and deviations 
from analysis plans appear in the Supplementary Information. Studies 
1, 2 and 4 were registered before analysing the data. Studies 3, 5 and 6 
were registered after analysing the data. As explained in greater detail 
in the Supplementary Information, researcher degrees of freedom for 
Studies 3, 5 and 6 were constrained by following published and previ-
ously pre-registered standard operating procedures for TSST and daily 
diary studies29 (the focus on TPR, stroke volume and PEP in study 3 and 
the focus on the stressor intensity × treatment interaction in study 5), 
and by following the same analysis steps as the pre-registered stud-
ies (for example, the same core covariates and moderators whenever 
measured and the same conservative BCF modelling approach).
Intervention overview
The intervention consisted of a single self-administered online session 
lasting approximately 30 min. Random assignment to the intervention 
or control condition occurred in real time via the web-based software 
Qualtrics, as participants were completing the online intervention 
materials. Simple random assignment was used, with equal probabili-
ties of selection, but the actual observed proportions in treatment or 
control groups varied randomly across the six studies. Participants 
were blinded to the presence of different conditions, and teachers 
or others interacting with participants were blind to the intervention 
content and to condition assignment. Thus, the intervention experi-
ments used a double-blind design throughout.
Synergistic mindsets intervention
The intervention used methods for mindset interventions that are 
well-established in the literature and have been used successfully in 
national scale-up studies4. The intervention first aimed to convey the 
message that stressful events are controllable and potentially helpful. 
It did so by targeting negative fixed mindset beliefs, or the belief that 
intellectual ability is fixed and cannot change, which can lead to the 
appraisal that negative events are uncontrollable and harmful. In par-
ticular, the fixed mindset leads to a pattern of appraisals about effort 
(that having to try hard or ask for help means you lack ability), about 
causes of failures (the attribution that failure stems from low ability) 
and about the desired goal in a setting (the goal of not looking stupid in 
front of others)20,48. The intervention overcame these negative patterns 
of appraisals by conveying the growth mindset. The growth mindset 
promotes the appraisal that difficulties can be controlled and helpful. 
It argues that most people who became good at something important 
had to face and overcome struggles, and therefore, your own struggles 
should not be viewed as signs of deficient abilities but instead should 
be viewed as part of your path toward important skill development. 
To justify the controllable and helpful stressor appraisal, the interven-
tion drew on neuroscientific information about the brain’s potential 
to develop more efficient ('stronger') connections when it faces and 
overcomes challenges, using the analogy of muscles growing stronger 
when they are subjected to rigorous exercise49.
Second, the intervention targeted the stress-is-debilitating 
mindset50, which is the belief that stress is inherently negative and 
compromises performance, health and well-being; this mindset leads to 
the appraisal that a given stressor is uncontrollable and harmful. Coun-
ter to the stress-is-debilitating mindset, the intervention developed 
here introduced the stress-can-be-enhancing mindset50, which is the 
belief that stress can have beneficial effects on performance, health and 
well-being; this more adaptive belief system leads to the appraisal that 
stressors can be potentially helpful and controlled. The intervention 
explained that when people undergo challenges, they inevitably begin 
to experience stress, which can manifest in a racing heart, sweaty palms 
or possibly feelings of anxiety or worry. The intervention leads people 
to perceive those signals as information that the body is preparing to 
overcome the challenge; for instance, by providing more oxygenated 
blood to the brain and the muscles17. Thus, the stress response is framed 
as helpful for goal pursuit, not necessarily harmful. The intervention 
also argued that feelings of anxiety can be a sign that you have chosen 
a meaningful and ambitious set of goals to work on, and therefore can 
indicate a positive trajectory, not a negative one.
Notably, these two mindsets were conveyed synergistically, not 
independently, so that they built on one another. Participants were 
encouraged to view struggles as potentially positive and worth engag-
ing with, and then they were invited to view inevitable stress coming 
from this engagement as a part of the body’s natural way to help them 
overcome the stressor.
These mindset messages were couched within a summary of scien-
tific research on human performance and stress. Participants were 
not simply informed of these facts, but they were instead invited to 
engage with them, make them their own and plan how they could use 
them in the present and future. Participants heard stories from prior 
participants (older students in this case) who used these ideas to have 
success in important performance situations, and they also completed 
open-ended and expressive writing exercises. For instance, participants 
wrote about a time when they were worried about an upcoming stressor, 
and then later on they wrote advice for how someone else who might be 
undergoing a similar experience could use the two mindsets they learned 
about, which has been called a 'saying-is-believing' writing exercise51.
We defined adherence as completion of the last page of the inter-
vention. In the studies in which participants were closely supervised 
by researchers (studies 3, 4 and 5), adherence was high (97% to 99%). 
In the studies in which the intervention was self-administered with no 
supervision, adherence was lower but still acceptable: 85%, 88% and 82% 
for studies 1, 2 and 6, respectively. Because we conducted intent-to-treat 
analyses, participants were retained in the analytic sample regardless 
of intervention completion status.
Control group content
The control group intervention was also an online, self-administered 
activity lasting around 30 min. It was designed to be relatively indistin-
guishable from the intervention group by using similar visual layout, 
fonts, colours and images. The content was predominately from the 
control condition from a prior national growth mindset experiment4, 
which included basic information about the brain and human memory. 
It also involved open-ended writing activities and stories from older 
students. However, the control condition did not make any claims 
about the malleability of intelligence. To this standard content, we 
added basic information about the body’s stress response system (for 
example, the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system and the 
HPA axis) to control for the possibility that simply reflecting on stress 
and stress responses could account for the results. The latter content 
did not include any evaluations of whether stress responses are good 
or bad, or controllable or uncontrollable.
Negative prior mindsets
At baseline, participants in all experiments except study 2 completed 
standard measures of negative event-focused mindsets (fixed mindset 
of intelligence; that is, “Your intelligence is something about you that 

Article
you can't change very much”)4 and response-focused mindsets (the 
stress-is-debilitating mindset21; that is, “The overall effect of stress on 
my life is negative”) (for both, 1 = strongly disagree, 6 = strongly agree). 
The items for each construct were combined into indices by taking 
their unweighted averages. Measures of internal consistency were all 
in the acceptable range (between 0.70 and 0.85). Means and standard 
deviations for each of the six studies are presented in Supplementary 
Table 6. In the primary Bayesian analyses for studies 3, 5, and 6, the 
two measures and their product were entered into the covariate and 
moderator function, and the machine-learning algorithm decided how 
best to use the mindset measures to optimize prediction or moderation. 
In the preliminary correlational analyses (Extended Data Table 1), we 
analysed the multiplicative term of the two, for simplicity.
Analysis strategy
For all experimental analyses, we used intention-to-treat analyses, 
which means that data were analysed for all individuals who were ran-
domized to condition and who provided outcome data, regardless of 
their fidelity to the intervention protocol. If participants were missing 
data on covariates, those data were imputed. This analysis is more 
conservative than analyses that drop participants with low fidelity, 
but it also better reflects real-world effect sizes.
Our research advanced a fully Bayesian regression approach called 
Bayesian causal forests and its extension targeted smooth Bayesian 
causal forests (BCF and tsBCF)6,52,53 to calculate treatment effects and 
understand moderators of the treatment effects. A previous version of 
the BCF algorithm has won several open competitions for yielding honest 
and informative answers to questions about the complex, but systematic,  
ways in which a treatment’s effects are—or are not—heterogeneous,  
and it is designed to be quite conservative6. We used the existing 
single-level BCF method for studies 1, 2, and 6. The model is specified 
in equation (1):
y
α
β x
τ w z
=
+ (
) + (
)
+ ϵ
(1)
ij
i
ij
ij
i
ij
In studies 3 and 4, we updated the BCF method to apply to time-series 
data. See equation (2):
y
α
β x t
τ w
t z
=
+
(
,
) + (
,
)
+ ϵ
(2)
ij
j
j
ij
ij
ij
j
ij
In equations (1) and (2), yij is the outcome for adolescent i at time j, 
αj is the random intercept for each individual, xj is the vector of covari-
ates that predict the outcome and could control for chance imbalances 
in random assignment, wij is the vector of potential treatment effect 
moderators, t is time (the tij term is omitted in all studies except stud-
ies 3 and 4), zj is the dichotomous treatment effect indicator for each 
individual, and ϵij is the error term. (Study 4 involved additional updates 
to allow for multi-arm comparisons that accommodate the four-cell 
design; see the Supplementary Information).
What makes BCF unique, and well-suited for this application, is that both 
β(.) and τ(.) are non-linear functions that take a 'sum-of-trees' representa-
tion, and which are estimated using standard BART machine-learning 
tools6,54,55. This frees researchers from making arbitrary decisions about 
which covariates to include, what their functional form should be and 
how or whether covariates should interact. Notably, BCF uses conserva-
tive prior distributions, especially for the moderator function, to shrink 
towards homogeneity and to simpler functions, avoiding over-fitting. The 
data are used once—to move from the prior to the posterior distribution—
and all analyses then summarize draws from the posterior.
The BCF approach contrasts with the classical method, which involves 
re-fitting the model many times to estimate simple effects or to conduct 
robustness analyses with different specifications. The BCF approach, 
therefore, reduces researcher degrees of freedom, mitigating the risk of 
false discoveries and other spurious findings. In this research we focused 
on estimation of treatment effects (that is, how large the effect is) and not 
null hypothesis testing (that is, whether it is 'significant' or not) because 
of well-known problems with the all-or-nothing thinking inherent in the 
null hypothesis significance test56. Following convention57, we reported 
the ATEs and the CATEs with the associated 10th and 90th percentiles 
from the posterior distributions (see the Figures for the 2.5th and 97.5th 
percentiles). When the pre-analysis plan called for it (in study 4), we 
report the exact posterior probabilities of a difference in effects.
The covariates included in each study are listed in Supplementary 
Table 5. The core covariates and moderators were: the prior mindset 
measures (fixed mindset and stress-is-debilitating mindsets), sex and 
perceived social stress, as pre-registered (https://osf.io/tgysd). When 
available, other covariates were added as well: age, race or ethnicity, 
self-esteem, test anxiety, social class and personality. Justifications for 
each covariate appear in Supplementary Table 5.
Effect size calculations
Unless otherwise noted, effects are standardized by the pooled s.d.
Manipulation checks (all studies)
The intervention reduced negative mindset beliefs relative to controls 
(four items, including “Stress stops me from learning and growing” 
and “The effects of stress are bad and I should avoid them”; 1 = strongly 
disagree, 6 = strongly agree). BCF analyses revealed lower levels of nega-
tive mindsets in the synergistic mindsets intervention condition at 
post-test compared to the neutral control condition, signifying a suc-
cessful manipulation check: study 1: ATE = −0.28 s.d. [10th percentile: 
−0.43, 90th percentile: −0.16]; study 2: −0.49 s.d. [−0.73, −0.24]; study 3: 
−0.50 s.d. [−0.89, −0.14]; study 4: −0.54 s.d. [−0.75, −0.33]; study 5: −0.26 
s.d. [−0.61, 0.03]; study 6: −0.56 s.d. [−0.71, −0.40]. The two field experi-
ments with high schoolers (studies 1 and 5) had smaller manipulation 
check effects that were more imprecise than the others (studies 2, 3, 4 
and 6). This was expected because the former studies were conducted 
in naturalistic school settings that tend to produce noisier data.
Study 1
Sample size determination. Sample size was planned to have suf-
ficient power to detect a treatment effect in a field experiment of 
0.10 s.d. or greater, with 0.10 s.d. being the minimum effect size that 
we would interpret as meaningful for a study focused on immediate 
post-test self-reports. We worked with our data collection partner, 
the Character Lab Research Network (CLRN) (https://characterlab.
org/research-network/), to recruit as close to 3,000 participants as 
possible in a single semester. The final sample size was determined 
by the logistical constraints of data collection during the COVID-19 
pandemic and by CLRN’s data availability.
Participants. Participants were from a large, heterogeneous sample 
of adolescents who were evenly distributed across grades 8 to 12 in 35 
public schools in the United States (13 years old: 16%; 14 years old: 20%; 
15 years old: 20%; 16 years old: 21%; 17 years old: 18%; 18 years old: 5%). 
The schools were sampled from a stratum of large, diverse, suburban 
and urban public schools in the southeast United States. Forty-nine per 
cent of adolescents identified as male, 49% as female and 2% as gender 
non-binary. Participants were racially and ethnically diverse (partici-
pants could indicate multiple racial or ethnic identities so numbers 
exceed 100%): Black: 20%; Latinx: 39%; white: 68%; Asian: 7%. Participants 
were also socioeconomically diverse: 40% received free or reduced-price 
lunch, an indicator of low family income. Therefore, study 1 provided a 
test of the hypothesis that the intervention could be widely disseminated 
and effectively change beliefs and appraisals in a large and diverse sam-
ple of adolescents. Even so, the sample was not strictly representative 
because random sampling was not used to recruit the CLRN sample.
Procedure. Participants were recruited by CLRN (https://characterlab.
org/research-network/), which administers roughly 45-min online survey 

experiments three times per year to a large panel of adolescents in the 6th 
to the 12th grade. Researchers program their studies using the Qualtrics 
platform and students self-administer the materials at an appointed time. 
Data collection continued during the modified instructional settings of 
autumn 2020. We note that all measures had to be short so as to keep the 
respondent burden low and fit within the required time limit for CLRN 
studies. Thus, the trade-off in study 1, when achieving scale and reaching 
a large adolescent population during the COVID-19 pandemic, was esti-
mating potentially weaker effect sizes owing to greater statistical noise.
Measures. At the beginning of the survey, participants indicated their 
most stressful class (for example, mathematics, science, English or 
language arts). Then, after the intervention (or control) experience 
they were asked to imagine that “later today or tomorrow your teacher 
[in your most stressful class] asked you to do a very hard and stressful 
assignment. Imagine this is the kind of assignment that will take a lot of 
time to finish but you only have two days to turn it in. Also pretend that 
you will soon have to present your work in front of the other students in 
your class.” Participants then reported their event-focused appraisals 
on three items (for example, “How likely would you be to think that the 
very hard assignment is a negative threat to you?”; 5 = not at all likely to 
think this, 1 = extremely likely to think this). Next, participants reported 
their response-focused appraisals (“Do you think your body's stress 
responses (your heart, your sweat, your brain) would help you do well 
on the assignment, hurt your performance on the assignment, or not 
have any effect on your performance either way?”; 5 = definitely hurt 
my performance, 1 = definitely help my performance). The items were 
aggregated by taking their unweighted averages.
The end of the study also included an additional behavioural inten-
tion measure: a choice between an 'easy review' extra credit assignment 
and a 'hard challenge' assignment58,59. The intervention increased the 
rate of choosing the challenging assignment by 0.11 s.d. [0.028, 0.200]. 
We expected the treatment to increase engagement with stressors 
because it leads to the appraisal that they are opportunities for learn-
ing and growth.
Study 2
Sample size determination. All students in an introductory social 
science course in autumn 2019 were invited to complete the interven-
tion or control materials in return for a small amount of course credit. 
Sample size was set by the response rate.
Participants. Participants were predominately first-year college stu-
dents attending a selective public university in the United States that 
drew from a wide range of socioeconomic status groups: 17 years old: 
3%; 18 years old: 49%; 19 years old: 29%; 20 years old: 11%: 21 or older: 
8%. Sixty-four per cent identified as female and the rest as male; 39% 
had mothers who did not have a four-year college degree or higher 
(an indicator of lower socioeconomic status), and 59% identified as 
lower class, lower middle class or middle class (versus upper middle 
or upper class).
Procedure. This experiment was conducted in a social science course 
in which students completed timed, challenging quizzes at the begin-
ning of each class meeting, twice per week. In the second week of the 
semester, soon before the first graded quiz, students were invited to 
complete the intervention (or control) materials on their own time us-
ing their own computer in return for course credit, and 83% of invited 
students did so. The effects of the intervention were assessed through 
students’ appraisals of the first graded quiz of the semester one to three 
days later. The appraisal items were necessarily short because they 
were embedded at the end of the assignment and students completed 
them during class before the lecture. The appraisal items were then 
administered a second time after another quiz, which occurred three 
to four weeks after intervention.
Measures. Participants rated their agreement or disagreement with the 
statements “I felt like my body’s stress responses hurt my performance 
on today’s benchmark” (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree) and  
“I felt like my body’s stress responses helped my performance on today’s 
benchmark” (5 = strongly disagree, 1 = =strongly agree). The two rat-
ings were averaged to provide an appraisal index, with higher values 
corresponding to more negative appraisals60.
Study 3
Sample size determination. An a priori power analysis was used to 
determine sample size. Previous stress research that assessed cardio-
vascular responses in laboratory-based stress induction paradigms 
produced medium to large effect sizes (for example, range: d = 0.59 
to d = 1.44. Based on a standard medium effect size, at the low end of 
this range (d = 0.50), with a two-tailed hypothesis, G*Power indicated 
that 64 participants per condition (that is, 128 total participants) 
would be necessary to achieve a target power level of 0.80 to test 
for basic effects of the treatment using frequentist methods. In 
anticipation of potential data loss, we determined a priori that we 
would oversample by 20%. Data collection was terminated the week 
after more than 150 participants had been enrolled in the study and 
provided valid data.
Participants. Participants were prescreened and excluded for physician- 
diagnosed hypertension, a cardiac pacemaker, body mass index 
(BMI) > 30 and medications with cardiac side effects. A total of 166 stu-
dents were recruited from a university social science subject pool (120 
females, 46 males; 76 white/Caucasian, 12 Black/African-American, 17 
Latinx, 65 Asian/Asian-American, 2 Pacific Islander, 4 mixed ethnicity, 
7 other; mean age = 19.81, s.d. = 1.16, range = 18–26; 32% reported that 
their mothers did not have a college degree). After data collection, 
two participants were excluded owing to experimenter errors. In 
addition, impedance cardiography data for four participants could 
not be analysed owing to technical issues (prevalence of noise and 
artefacts in the signals). Decisions about the inclusion of participants 
were made blind to condition assignment and to levels of the out-
come. Participants were compensated US$20 or 2 h of course credit 
for their participation.
Procedure. After intake questions, application of sensors and acclima-
tion to the laboratory environment, participants rested for a 5-min 
baseline cardiovascular recording that occurred approximately 25 min 
after arrival at the laboratory. They were then randomly assigned to 
an intervention condition by the computer software in real time and 
completed either intervention or control materials, which took approxi-
mately 20 min in this sample. Participants then completed the TSST28. 
The TSST asks participants to give an impromptu speech about their 
personal strengths and weaknesses in front of two evaluators. Evalu-
ators are presented as members of the research team who are experts 
in nonverbal communication and will be monitoring and assessing 
the participant’s speech quality, ability to clearly communicate ideas 
and nonverbal signalling. Throughout the speech (and mathematics) 
epochs of the TSST, evaluators provide negative nonverbal feedback 
(for example, furrowing brow, sighing, crossing arms and so on) and 
no positive feedback, either nonverbal or verbal28. At the conclusion 
of speeches, and without prior warning, participants are asked to do 
mental mathematics (counting backwards from 996 in increments of 7)  
as quickly as possible in front of the same unsupportive evaluators. 
Incorrect answers were identified by evaluators, and participants were 
instructed to begin back at the start. This stress induction procedure 
is widely used to induce the experience of negative, threat-type stress 
responses29,31. After completion of the TSST task, participants rested 
quietly for a three-minute recovery recording. Before leaving the labo-
ratory, all participants were debriefed and comforted.

Article
Physiological measures. The following measures were collected dur-
ing baseline and throughout the TSST: ECG, ICG and blood pressure. 
ECG and ICG signals were sampled at 1,000 Hz, and integrated with a 
Biopac MP150 system. ECG sensors were affixed in a Lead II configu-
ration. Biopac NICOO100C cardiac impedance hardware with band 
sensors (mylar tapes wrapped around participants’ necks and torsos) 
were used to measure impedance magnitude (Z0) and its derivative  
(dZ/dt). Blood pressure readings were obtained using Colin7000 sys-
tems. Cuffs were placed on participants' non-dominant arm to measure 
pressure from the brachial artery. Blood pressure recordings were taken 
at two-minute intervals during baseline, throughout the stress task and 
during recovery. Blood pressure recordings were initiated from a separate 
control room. ECG and ICG signals were scored offline by trained person-
nel. First, one-minute ensemble averages were analysed using MindWare 
software IMP v.3.0.21. Stroke volume was calculated using the Kubicek 
method61. B- and X-points in the dZ/dt wave, as well as Q- and R-points in 
the ECG wave, were automatically detected using the maximum slope 
change method. Then, trained coders blind to condition examined all 
placements and corrected erroneous placements when necessary.
Analyses targeted three physiological measures: PEP, stroke volume  
and TPR. This suite is commonly used to analyse threat- versus challenge- 
type stress responses (for a review, see ref. 62). TPR is the clearest indicator  
of threat-type responses and was therefore the focal outcome measure 
in this research. TPR assesses vascular resistance, and when threat-
ened, resistance increases from baseline26. TPR was calculated using 
the following validated formula: (MAP/CO) × 80 (in which MAP is mean 
arterial pressure and  CO refers to cardiac output; ref. 63). PEP is a measure 
of sympathetic arousal and indexes the contractile force of the heart. 
Shorter PEP intervals indicate greater contractile force and sympa-
thetic activation. Both challenge- and threat-type stress responses are 
accompanied by decreases in PEP from rest; in some studies, a stronger 
challenge response has corresponded to an greater decrease in PEP 
relative to a threat response, signifying greater engagement with the task. 
Threat versus challenge states differ in PEP values, however, in recovery 
to baseline, with challenge states corresponding to quicker recovery. 
Stroke volume is the amount of blood ejected from the heart on each 
beat (on average per minute). Increases in stroke volume index greater 
beat-to-beat cardiac efficiency and more blood being pumped through 
the cardiovascular system, and are often observed in challenge states, as 
the body spreads more oxygenated blood to the periphery29. Decreases 
in stroke volume, on the other hand, are more frequently observed in 
threat states (even though threat can also elicit little or no change in 
stroke volume64). Cardiac output, which is stroke volume multiplied 
by heart rate, is frequently used to assess threat- and challenge-type 
stress responses as well. As in a past paper29 we focused on stroke volume 
rather than cardiac output because the effects of the treatment on PEP 
(and thus heart rate, a part of the cardiac output formula) could distort 
effects on cardiac output. For all three measures (TPR, stroke volume 
and PEP) we computed and analysed reactivity scores by subtracting 
each person’s average levels from the five minutes of the baseline epoch, 
which occurred before random assignment. Thus, all TPR, PEP and stroke 
volume results in the paper account for any potential baseline differences 
that existed before random assignment.
Study 4
Sample size determination. Study 3 showed an ATE for the synergistic 
mindsets intervention of approximately 0.70 s.d. for TPR reactivity dur-
ing the first minute of the speech epoch. Assuming an approximately 
25% reduction in effect size for a replication study, then to have an 80% 
likelihood of reliably detecting an ATE of 0.50 s.d. with a one-tailed  
hypothesis test (because this is a replication study), we calculated that 
we would need approximately 50 participants per condition. Our stop-
ping rule was to collect data from 200 participants who completed one 
of the conditions and provided valid TPR data for analysis.
Participants. Participants were from the same university pool as study 
3 and were recruited using the same protocols and exclusion criteria.  
A total of 200 students provided valid TPR data (163 females, 37 males; 
79 white/Caucasian, 22 Black/African-American, 14 Latinx, 79 Asian/
Asian-American, 6 other; Mage = 20.11, s.d. = 1.77, range = 18–32; 32% 
reported their mothers did not have a college degree).
Procedure. Study 4 followed the same procedure as study 3 except for 
three changes. First, we removed the mathematics epoch to streamline 
the study for the focal epochs only, so that we could collect data as 
quickly as possible before a COVID-19 outbreak could shut down data 
collection. Second, the Qualtrics survey randomized participants to 
one of four conditions; two were new conditions, and two were the same 
synergistic mindsets and neutral control conditions that appeared in 
the other studies (the materials for the two new conditions are posted 
on the OSF; see the Supplementary Information). Third, we assessed 
threat and challenge appraisals and well-being at the end of the study.
The first new control condition was a growth-mindset-only condi-
tion. This used materials from a previously published growth mindset 
intervention experiment that was successful at improving the grades 
of lower-achieving adolescents65. The intervention involved reading 
a scientific article about the brain’s potential to grow and learn and 
answering open-ended questions that encourage students to internal-
ize the information, as described in previous reviews of the literature66. 
It did not discuss stress or encourage stress reappraisals. Replicating 
previous studies, the growth-mindset-only condition reduced reports 
of fixed mindset by 0.46 s.d. [−0.64, −0.28], which is within the expected 
range on the basis of a previous national experiment evaluating a 
growth mindset intervention (which was 0.33 s.d. (ref. 4)). This condi-
tion did not reduce reports of stress-is-debilitating mindsets relative 
to the neutral control condition; ATE = 0.08 SD [−0.25, 0.41]. Thus, the 
growth-mindset-only condition faithfully manipulated growth mindset 
but not stress mindset, as intended.
The second new control condition was a stress-mindset-only condi-
tion. This used materials from a previously published stress mindset 
intervention experiment that was successful at changing stress mindsets 
and showed mixed effects on stress coping in a longitudinal study67. This 
intervention involved watching videos that explained the concept of 
stress-is-enhancing mindsets, invited participants to practice reapprais-
ing stress and guided them through a vivid imagery reflection exercise 
to make the stress-is-enhancing mindset message vivid and relatable. 
As expected, this established stress-mindset-only intervention reduced 
stress-is-debilitating mindsets by −0.33 s.d. on average [−0.095, −0.56] 
relative to the neutral control condition, but did not reduce (and perhaps 
even increased) fixed mindsets; ATE = 0.19 [0.01, 0.40].
Measures. The measures for TPR, stroke volume and PEP reactivity 
were identical to study 3. Two new indices were added for exploratory 
analyses.
The first exploratory measure assessed self-reports of threat-type 
(versus challenge-type) appraisals. These are global appraisals of 
whether people feel like the demands of a stressful situation exceed 
the resources available to them to cope with the situation (see Fig. 1a). 
The composite consisted of the unweighted average of items used in 
previous TSST studies29 (all items appear in materials posted on the 
OSF; see the Supplementary Information for links). Several questions 
measured the perceived demand of the speech task ("The task was 
very demanding"; "The task was very stressful") and several assessed 
perceived resources ("I felt that I had the abilities to perform well on 
the task"; "I believe I performed well on the task"); these were combined 
into an index corresponding to threat versus challenge appraisals by 
computing the ratio of perceived demand to perceived resources, fol-
lowing previous research. Next, one question assessed perceived threat 
("I felt threatened by the task") and one question assessed perceived 

challenge ("I felt that the task challenged me in a positive way"); these 
too were combined by dividing threat by challenge. Finally, the two 
ratio scores were combined by taking their unweighted average.
The second additional measure involved items taken from an estab-
lished measure of well-being: reports of whether people felt that their 
psychological needs were currently being met68,69. Measures assessing 
threats to psychological needs ("I felt disconnected; rejected; insecure") 
were reverse-scored and averaged with items assessing satisfaction of 
psychological needs ("I felt good about myself; liked; powerful"; and 
"My self-esteem was high") to create an index of positive well-being. 
Notably, feeling bad about oneself, and reporting low self-esteem, is 
central to the network of depression symptoms35. Therefore, this meas-
ure of well-being assesses the presence or lack of immediate post-task 
internalizing symptoms, and conceptually replicated the results of the 
field experiment in study 5.
Pre-registered analysis plan. The pre-registration called for a focus 
on TPR reactivity during the most stressful speech epoch. In addition 
to this primary outcome, we used the pre-registered modelling method 
to replicate study 3’s finding with regard to the effects of the synergistic 
mindsets treatment on stroke volume (also during the speech epoch) 
and PEP (during the recovery period). As in study 3, we would have 
focused on cardiac output rather than stroke volume, but because we 
again found differences in PEP (a measure of SNS activation), we used 
the less-contaminated stroke volume measure. Finally, we used the 
pre-registered BCF method, and same covariates and moderators, 
to analyse two exploratory outcomes that were not mentioned in the 
analysis plan: threat appraisals and well-being.
Study 5
Sample size determination. We aimed for a minimum of 100 partici-
pants and 1,000 daily diary responses in this field experiment evaluat-
ing the synergistic mindsets treatment. We sought to recruit as many 
as possible before the end of October in the autumn of 2019, because 
the study was focused on normative stressors at the start of a new 
school year, and because daily diary data collection could not happen 
during or after the Thanksgiving break in the United States (which is 
in late November). The number of students recruited each week was 
constrained by the research team’s capacity to support twice-daily 
diary surveys and thrice-daily saliva samples in a school environment.  
The ultimate sample size was determined by the total number of stu-
dents who could be recruited from the school in the autumn semester 
of 2019, given these constraints.
Participants. Participants were adolescents from economically disad-
vantaged families (99%); 78% were Black/African-American, 5% were 
white or Asian, and the remaining students were Hispanic/Latino; 36% 
were in 9th grade; 34% were in 10th grade; 18% were in 11th grade; and 
12% were in 12th grade. Students attended a high-quality urban charter 
school that showed a high graduation rate (98%) relative to the urban 
city school district (68%). The teachers at the school were well-trained 
and motivated, having earned a national distinction for this charter 
school. This was a meaningful school for a first evaluation study because 
the synergistic mindsets intervention was not expected to overcome 
an absence of objective opportunities to learn, but rather to inspire 
students to take advantage of opportunities for upward mobility.
Procedure. Participants were assigned to one of three data collection  
cohorts on the basis of their academic schedules and available research 
staff. Cohorts 1, 2 and 3 completed daily diary measures across three 
consecutive weeks during the autumn term. The intervention was 
administered on a Thursday, and then students began their weekly daily 
diary data collection 1–3 weeks later (M = 14 days). Intervention materials 
(see experiment 1) were completed on a tablet computer with headphones 
in a quiet room at the school. Randomization to conditions occurred at 
this time. All data collection was supervised by trained research staff who 
assisted participants and answered any questions, while being blind to con-
dition assignment and specific hypotheses. Before intervention or control 
materials, participants completed baseline measures of mindsets (stress 
mindsets and growth mindsets) along with demographic information.
The week of daily diary data collection began on a Monday and stu-
dents were surveyed twice each day for five consecutive days through to 
Friday. Students provided their first self-report at lunch and the second at 
the conclusion of the school day but before leaving the school’s campus. 
Saliva samples were collected three times per day by adding the morning, 
before the first class period of the day. Lunchtime samples were collected 
before students ate. Thus, we targeted 10 total reports for each student 
and 15 total saliva samples. In addition to occasional non-response, there 
were two exceptions to these targeted numbers. One cohort had four 
days of data collection owing to a school-wide event on a Friday, and the 
first cohort had up to three preliminary days of self-report (not saliva) 
data collection while the research team was refining procedures. Rather 
than exclude these additional self-report records, they were included, 
although the results were the same when excluding them.
The daily diary measures were designed to be brief (around five min-
utes) and were completed on paper. In the mornings only, students com-
pleted brief writing prompts that asked them to reflect on the themes 
from their respective treatment or control groups. The purpose of the 
reflections was to collect qualitative data to use in future research and 
development about how students were using the treatment messages 
in their daily lives. Students provided their saliva samples either before 
completing the reflections or simultaneously with them; as noted, 
at lunch and in the afternoon, students completed their daily stress 
diaries. Note that although there was a possibility that the morning 
reflections influenced students’ self-reports later in the day, they could 
not have influenced the saliva samples, because, as noted, salivary 
samples were collected before or simultaneously with the reflections, 
and salivary cortisol levels reflect stress responses 30–45 min earlier.
To report daily stressful events, students first checked boxes indicat-
ing which of several categories of stressors they experienced that day 
(for example, friends/social, academics, romantic relationships, daily 
hassles and so on), then how intense the stressors, combined, were 
overall (“How negative would you say these experiences were?”; 1 = not 
negative at all, 5 = extremely negative). Following published standard 
operating procedures for the diary studies in this laboratory29, days on 
which no social-evaluative stressors were listed were coded as a 1 for 
stressor intensity (the lowest value), to avoid dropping data from those 
who did not experience a social-evaluative stressor.
Students were compensated US$10 for completing intervention 
materials, and US$5 for each daily diary entry. Thus, the maximum 
compensation per participant was US$60. After the conclusion of data 
collection, students and instructors were debriefed. At the end of the 
school year, students randomly assigned to the control condition were 
provided with the mindset intervention.
Daily negative self-regard. On each daily survey, students reported 
daily negative self-regard, an internalizing symptom, operationalized 
as overall positive or negative feelings about themselves (“Overall, how 
good or bad did you feel about yourself today?”; 1 = extremely good, 
7 = extremely bad). This was a single-item measure owing to the limited 
respondent time.
Cortisol. Acute cortisol responses follow a specific time course (peak 
levels occur around 30 min after stress onset). However, the diary 
survey stressors were not calibrated to identify the timing of specific 
events, so the two sources of information could not be yoked. Indeed, 
as noted in the main text, there was no association between the inten-
sity of stressors reported and cortisol in the control condition (unlike 
self-regard and stressor intensity). In addition, levels of cortisol have 
a diurnal cycle (peak levels at wakening, rapid declines within the first 

Article
waking hours and nadir at the end of the day). Waking levels and diurnal 
slopes can map onto well-being, stress coping and health70. Because 
all sampling was conducted during the school day, waking levels and 
diurnal cortisol slopes could not be accurately and precisely measured. 
The lack of time-course specificity and diurnal cycle data means that 
our reported effect sizes for global cortisol levels are likely to be con-
servative because noise in the data attenuates effect sizes.
Academic achievement. The research team obtained students’ tran-
scripts from schools after credits were recorded in the spring of 2020. 
Credit attainment (that is, whether students passed the course) in core 
classes (mathematics, science, social studies and English or language 
arts) were coded. An 'on-track' index71 was computed for each student 
(1 = students passed all four of their core classes; 0 = they did not). In ad-
dition, following a previous growth mindset intervention study4, a STEM 
course on-track indicator was computed (1 = passed mathematics and 
science; 0 = they did not) as was a non-STEM course on-track indicator 
(1 = passed social studies and English or language arts; 0 = they did not).
Study 6
Sample size determination. We recruited all students possible from an 
entire social science class in the spring of 2020, which, we would later 
learn, was a unique cohort for examining stress during the COVID-19 
lockdowns. A minimum of 278 students would be needed to have a 
greater than 80% chance of detecting a directional effect on anxiety of 
0.3 s.d. with a conventional linear model analysis, and more students 
than this participated.
Participants, procedure and measures. Data were collected during 
the spring semester of 2020. Participants were from the same university 
as study 2 and the same intervention procedures were followed. (Owing 
to a difference in data collection procedures relative to study 2, quiz 
appraisal data could not be collected in study 5). The intervention was 
delivered at the end of January 2020. In March 2020, students were 
sent home owing to COVID-19 quarantines. In mid-April 2020, students 
completed the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7)38 as a part of a 
class activity focused on psychopathology. The GAD-7 asks “How often 
have you been bothered by the following over the past 2 weeks?” and 
offers several symptoms, including “Feeling nervous, anxious, or on 
edge,” “Not being able to stop or control worrying,” and “Feeling afraid 
as if something awful might happen.” Each symptom is rated on a scale 
from 0 ("Not at all") to 3 ("Nearly every day"). The seven items were 
summed, producing an overall score ranging from 0 to 21, with higher 
values corresponding to higher levels of general anxiety symptoms.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability
Data are available on the OSF (https://osf.io/3zmqc/).
Code availability
Syntax files and the multibart package v.0.3, which was used for all 
Bayesian analyses, are available on the OSF (https://osf.io/3zmqc/).
 
48.	 Molden, D. C. & Dweck, C. S. Finding ‘meaning’ in psychology: a lay theories approach to 
self-regulation, social perception, and social development. Am. Psychol. 61, 192–203 
(2006).
49.	 Aronson, J. M., Fried, C. B. & Good, C. Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African 
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38, 
113–125 (2002).
50.	 Jamieson, J. P., Crum, A., Goyer, J. P., Marotta, M. E. & Akinola, M. Optimizing stress 
responses with reappraisal and mindset interventions: an integrated model. Anxiety 
Stress Coping 31, 245–261 (2018).
51.	
Aronson, E. The power of self-persuasion. Am. Psychol. 54, 875–884 (1999).
52.	 Starling, J. E. et al. Targeted smooth Bayesian causal forests: an analysis of 
heterogeneous treatment effects for simultaneous versus interval medical abortion 
regimens over gestation. Ann. Appl. Stat. 15, 1194–1219 (2021).
53.	 Starling, J. E., Murray, J. S., Carvalho, C. M., Bukowski, R. K. & Scott, J. G. BART with targeted 
smoothing: an analysis of patient-specific stillbirth risk. Ann. Appl. Stat. 14, 28–50 (2020).
54.	 Chipman, H. A., George, E. I. & McCulloch, R. E. BART: Bayesian additive regression trees. 
Ann. Appl. Stat. 4, 266–298 (2010).
55.	 Hill, J., Linero, A. & Murray, J. Bayesian additive regression trees: a review and look 
forward. Annu. Rev. Stat. Appl. 7, 251–278 (2020).
56.	 McShane, B. B., Tackett, J. L., Böckenholt, U. & Gelman, A. Large-scale replication projects 
in contemporary psychological research. Am. Stat. 73, 99–105 (2019).
57.	
Gelman, A., Lee, D. & Guo, J. Stan: a probabilistic programming language for Bayesian 
inference and optimization. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 40, 530–543 (2015).
58.	 Yeager, D. S. et al. Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: the case 
of the growth mindset during the transition to high school. J. Educ. Psychol. 108, 374–391 
(2016).
59.	 Rege, M. et al. How can we inspire nations of learners? An investigation of growth mindset 
and challenge-seeking in two countries. Am. Psychol. 76, 755–767 (2021).
60.	 Jamieson, J. P. et al. Reappraising stress arousal improves affective, neuroendocrine, and 
academic performance outcomes in community college classrooms. J. Exp. Psychol. 
Gen. 151, 197–212 (2022).
61.	
Sherwood, A., Royal, S. A., Hutcheson, J. S. & Turner, J. R. Comparison of impedance 
cardiographic measurements using band and spot electrodes. Psychophysiology 29, 
734–741 (1992).
62.	 Mendes, W. B. & Park, J. in Advances in Motivation Science Vol. 1 (ed. Elliot, A.) 233–270 
(Elsevier, 2014).
63.	 Sherwood, A. et al. Methodological guidelines for impedance cardiography. 
Psychophysiology 27, 1–23 (1990).
64.	 Jamieson, J. P., Nock, M. K. & Mendes, W. B. Mind over matter: reappraising arousal 
improves cardiovascular and cognitive responses to stress. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 141,  
417–422 (2012).
65.	 Paunesku, D. et al. Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for academic 
underachievement. Psychol. Sci. 26, 784–793 (2015).
66.	 Dweck, C. S. & Yeager, D. S. Mindsets: a view from two eras. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 13, 
481–496 (2019).
67.	
Keech, J. J., Hagger, M. S. & Hamilton, K. Changing stress mindsets with a novel imagery 
intervention: a randomized controlled trial. Emotion 21, 123–136 (2021).
68.	 Williams, K. D. in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology Vol. 41 (ed. Zanna, M. P.) 
275–314 (Academic Press, 2009).
69.	 Jamieson, J. P., Harkins, S. G. & Williams, K. D. Need threat can motivate performance after 
ostracism. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 36, 690–702 (2010).
70.	 Adam, E. K. et al. Diurnal cortisol slopes and mental and physical health outcomes:  
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 83, 25–41 (2017).
71.	
Allensworth, E. M. & Easton, J. Q. The On-Track Indicator as a Predictor of High School 
Graduation. https://consortium.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/2018-10/p78.pdf (2005).
72.	 Seo, E. et al. Trait attributions and threat appraisals explain why an entity theory of 
personality predicts greater internalizing symptoms during adolescence. Dev. 
Psychopathol. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579420001832 (2021).
Acknowledgements This research was supported by funding provided to the University of 
Texas at Austin by the National Institutes of Health under award number R01HD084772-01,  
and grant P2CHD042849, and by the National Science Foundation under grant numbers 
1761179 and 2046896. Funding was also provided to the University of Rochester by Google 
Empathy Lab. We acknowledge the following individuals for contributing to the research:  
A. Audette, A. Rank, F. Medrano, H. Y. Lee, J. O’Brien, E. Seo, S. Gosling, J. Pennebaker,  
C. Kirshbaum, C. S. Dweck and T. Manchester. We thank S. Talamus, A. Duckworth and the 
CLRN for supporting data collection for study 1.
Author contributions D.S.Y., C.J.B. and J.P.J. jointly conceived of the studies and led their 
design. D.S.Y., C.J.B., D.K.C. and M.J. developed the intervention materials. J.P.J. and H.G. led 
the collection of data for studies 3, 4 and 5. M.J. and H.G. processed and merged those data. 
D.S.Y., J.J.G., C.J.B., D.K.C. and J.P.J. developed the conceptual framework. D.S.Y. and J.J.G. wrote 
the first draft of the paper. C.J.B. and J.P.J. authored sections of the paper and provided critical 
edits and revisions to the rest. P.S. and J.S.M. developed the BCF method used here, conducted 
analyses for studies 3–6, authored descriptions of the statistical methodology and, with D.S.Y., 
developed figures and data visualizations for those studies. D.S.Y. analysed the data for studies 
1 and 2 using methods developed by P.S. and J.S.M.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests for this study. D.S.Y. has 
disseminated growth mindset research to public audiences and has complied with 
institutional financial disclosure requirements; no financial conflicts of interest have been 
identified. D.K.C. is employed by Google, which owns technology products designed to 
support well-being, but does not currently make or sell any product based on the research 
presented here. None of the study funders accessed the raw data, nor did they influence the 
data collection, analysis or reporting.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04907-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to David S. Yeager, 
Christopher J. Bryan, Jared S. Murray, Pedro H. F. Santos or Jeremy P. Jamieson.
Peer review information Nature thanks Sarah-Jayne Blakemore and the other, anonymous, 
reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are 
available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Extended Data Fig. 1 | In study 3, prior mindsets moderated the treatment 
effect on TPR during stressful TSST epochs. In (A), the expected value of TPR 
reactivity for each epoch and for each prior mindset group, by condition,  
in (B), an additive summary of the posterior distribution of treatment effects, 
by negative prior mindset levels, in (C) the conditional average treatment 
effects (CATEs) for each prior mindset subgroup for each epoch, and in (D) and 
the interaction between treatment and prior mindsets on TPR responses 
across TSST epochs. Note: TPR = total peripheral resistance (in dyne-sec x cm5).  
Dots correspond to the expected values (a), CATEs (b), and average of the 
posterior distribution of a difference in CATEs (C) estimated with the Bayesian 
algorithm. Thick lines represent the 10th to 90th %iles of the posterior 
distribution; grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th %iles. ATE = average 
treatment effect. In (B), the red line corresponds to the expected partial 
treatment effect, which corresponds to the offset from the average treatment 
effect (ATE) at each level of the moderator, holding other potential moderators 
constant; the dark band is the 10th to 90th percentile of the posterior 
distribution and the light band is the 2.5th to 97.5th %iles. The prior mindset 
subgroups used to display treatment effects in (A), (C) and (D) were identified 
by implementing a hands-off Bayesian decision-making algorithm that 
maximized the differences among the mindset groups in terms of the outcome, 
without using information on the magnitudes of the treatment effects (see SI 
online). Control n = 86, Treatment n = 74.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | In study 3, the synergistic mindsets intervention 
improved cardiovascular responses to the TSST. Effects of the intervention 
on stroke volume (SV)—the amount of blood ejected from the heart during each 
beat, in ml—were tested because challenge (relative to threat) responses 
increase SV to facilitate actively addressing stressors25,26,29. Thus, we 
anticipated those experiencing challenge-type stress during the stressful  
TSST epochs should exhibit relatively higher stroke volumes as their bodies 
distribute oxygenated blood to optimize performance, whereas threatened 
individuals were expected to have lower stroke volumes during stressful 
epochs of the TSST as their bodies seek to concentrate blood in the core.  
SV values reported here are reactivity scores, which means that the average of 
the 5 min during the baseline epoch were subtracted from each. In (A) the 
darkest lines correspond to the expected value of the outcome, estimated in 
the Bayesian model. Dots correspond to the ATEs (B), expected values (C), 
CATEs (D), and average of the posterior distribution of a difference in CATEs (F) 
estimated with the Bayesian algorithm. ATE = average treatment effect.  
In (E), the red line corresponds to the expected partial treatment effect, which 
corresponds to the offset from the average treatment effect (ATE) at each level 
of the moderator, holding other potential moderators constant. In all panels, 
thick bands represent the 10th to 90th %iles of the posterior distribution;  
the lightest/grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th %iles. In (B), ATE for 
Prep = 2.5 ml [1.5, 3.6], Speech = 4.0 ml [3.1, 5.0], Math = 2.9 [1.9, 4.0], 
Recovery = 0.9 [−.1, 2.0]. In (C), (D) and (F), the prior mindset subgroups used to 
display the different treatment effects were generated by implementing a 
hands-off Bayesian decision-making algorithm that maximized the differences 
among the mindset groups in terms of the outcome, without using information 
on the magnitudes of the treatment effects. Control n = 86, Treatment n = 74.

Extended Data Fig. 3 | In study 3, the effect of the synergistic mindsets 
intervention on PEP reactivity in milliseconds across TSST epochs. 
Pre-ejection period (PEP)—which assesses the contractile force of the heart by 
measuring the time from onset of ventricular depolarization to aortic valve 
opening—was examined to test for effects of the intervention on sympathetic 
nervous system (SNS) arousal. Challenge responses evoke more rapid onset of 
SNS arousal during a stressor and more rapid recovery to homeostasis after 
stress offset. Threat-type responses are associated with sustained vigilance for 
sources of harm and prolonged stress responses, thus threat is associated with 
slower recovery to baseline after stress offset17,64. Whereas all participants 
should show PEP decreases (leading to a more rapid heart rate) relative to 
baseline during the stressful epochs29,64 (see Fig. 1), condition differences are 
expected to emerge during the recovery period, because controls should be 
slower to return to homeostasis relative to treated individuals. In (A) the 
darkest lines correspond to the expected value of the outcome, estimated in 
the Bayesian model. In (B), dots correspond to the ATEs. ATE = average 
treatment effect. In both panels, thick bands represent the 10th to 90th %iles of 
the posterior distribution; the lightest/grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th 
%iles. In (B), a positive treatment effect of 2.13 ms [0.8, 3.4] was found during 
the recovery epoch, as expected29. PEP values reported here are reactivity 
scores, which means that the average of the 5 min during the baseline epoch 
were subtracted from each. Control n = 86, Treatment n = 74.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 4 | In study 5, the synergistic mindsets intervention 
reduced daily negative self-regard relative to controls the most among 
people with negative prior mindsets, on their most highly stressful days. 
Note: n = 119, n ≤ 1,213 observations. In (A), dots correspond to the average 
expected value of the outcome, and in (B) dots correspond to the CATEs, 
estimated by the Bayesian algorithm. CATE = Conditional Average Treatment 
Effect. In both panels, thick bands represent the 10th to 90th %iles of the 
posterior distribution; the lightest/grey lines represent the 2.5th to 97.5th  
%iles. The CATEs are: Low Daily Stress Intensity, Negative Prior Mindsets 
CATE = −.19 [−.48, .12], Positive Prior Mindsets CATE = −.23 [−.48, .022]; High 
Daily Stress Intensity, Negative Prior Mindsets CATE = −.57 [−1.11, −.12], Positive 
Prior Mindsets CATE = −.41 [−.75, −.07]. Hence, the CATE was 40% for negative 
prior mindsets participants on high-stress days relative to positive prior 
mindsets participants. The prior mindset subgroups used to display different 
treatment effects were generated by implementing a hands-off Bayesian 
decision-making algorithm that maximized the differences among the mindset 
groups in terms of the outcome, without using information on the magnitudes 
of the treatment effects. Control n = 58, Treatment n = 61.

Extended Data Fig. 5 | In study 6, an additive summary of the posterior 
distribution of treatment effects shows greater reductions in anxiety in 
response to the treatment among those with negative prior mindsets, and 
this same result is supported when examining the CATEs for positive and 
negative prior mindsets. Note: In (A), the red line corresponds to the expected 
partial treatment effect, which corresponds to the offset from the average 
treatment effect (ATE) at each level of the moderator, holding other potential 
moderators constant, estimated in the Bayesian algorithm. In (B) dots 
correspond to the CATEs, estimated by the Bayesian algorithm. CATE = 
Conditional Average Treatment Effect. In both panels, thick bands represent 
the 10th to 90th %iles of the posterior distribution; the lightest/grey lines 
represent the 2.5th to 97.5th %iles. Control n = 172, Treatment n = 179.

Article
Extended Data Table 1 | Negative prior mindsets predicted outcomes in the control condition in five experiments
Negative prior mindsets are a multiplicative term of event- and response-focused mindset measures assessed before the intervention. In study 1, negative event and response appraisals refer to 
appraisals that the stressor and the response are harmful and uncontrollable. In study 4, threat-type task appraisals refers to the global assessment that task demands during the TSST exceeded 
perceived resources, and well-being refers to reports of self-esteem, feeling liked, powerful and good about oneself, and fewer reports of feeling insecure. Self-report outcomes are prioritized 
here because physiological indicators of challenge or threat stress responses rarely correlate with self-reported measures27.

Extended Data Table 2 | Treatment effect estimation with traditional linear regression analysis and classical null hypothesis 
testing reproduces the primary findings from each of the six studies
p = one-tailed P value, owing to directional hypotheses. No adjustments were made to P values. TPR = total peripheral resistance; SV = stroke volume; PEP = pre-ejection period; pp = percentage 
points. The study 3 and 4 TPR, SV and PEP models, and the study 5 self-regard and cortisol models, were estimated using linear mixed effects modelling; the remaining models were ordinary 
one-level linear regressions. Study 3 included all active epochs, because the epoch of interest was not pre-registered in that study, and study 4 included only the pre-registered speech epoch. 
In study 5, high-stress days refers to days with social-evaluative stressors with an intensity rating from 2 to 4 (on a 0 to 4 point scale). In study 5, the results for cortisol correspond to morning 
cortisol; the ATE for all three times of day (not just morning) was −0.20 SD, t(112) = 2.208, P = 0.0146. In study 6, the negative prior mindsets variable is the multiplicative term of prior stress and 
fixed mindsets.





