nature photonics
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01135-3
Q&A
Metasurfaces get smart
Geoffroy Lerosey, co-founder and 
CEO/CSO of Greenerwave, shares 
how tunable metasurfaces may 
shake up industries from automotive 
to wireless communications.
How did your research on ‘time-reversal’ 
lead you towards start-up companies?
Previously I was working with Mathias Fink 
on the concept of ‘time-reversal’ for focus-
ing waves in complex media. The concept, 
based on the reversibility of the wave equa-
tion, was that if you have an array with a lot 
of time-controlled active sources, no matter 
the complexity of the medium you can focus 
energy at a given point, or two points, three 
points and so on. That means you are able to 
use waves in a smart way for wireless commu-
nications; the idea is that you can multiplex 
space. What we proposed in my PhD around 
2005/2006 was to use time-reversal with a 
large array of sources at radio frequency and 
to be able to maximize the data rate of wireless 
communications; if you do spatial multiplex-
ing then you can use the same bandwidth for 
each user and you multiply the data rate by the 
number of users.
We were working on these topics starting 
from the year 2000 and we even started a 
company called Time Reversal Communica-
tions and I was involved in it, but not in the 
‘good way’ — just working one day a week — it 
was not a success. We learned that when you 
want to bring technology into the wireless sec-
tor you have to think about how costly and 
complex the technology is. The technology 
we were proposing at the time with a lot of 
time-programmable sources is both complex 
and expensive and this is why it gathered little 
interest. We were so into the science we didn’t 
think about simplifying the technology.
Tell me about Greenerwave, and exploiting 
reconfigurable metasurfaces.
We were working in the field of optics, using 
spatial light modulators and learning how to 
propagate light through very ‘nasty’ media. 
We had the idea to try to transpose this type 
of idea to the field of RF. The original idea was, 
if people don’t want to complexify the emit-
ters or receivers in wireless communications 
then what you can do is make the environment 
smart by using smart surfaces that can control 
the propagation of electromagnetic waves. 
We said: “okay, we made a mistake with this 
idea of time-reversal because it was way too 
complex but now if we can make surfaces that 
have reconfigurable electromagnetic proper-
ties, they can be placed on the wall to make 
any environment smart, so you don't suffer 
from the scattering of the waves indoors 
causing you to have a connection here, but 
no connection there. We are going to shape 
the electromagnetic waves in such a way that 
anywhere in your building you are going to 
have excellent wireless communications.” 
The idea was to design surfaces made out of 
identical pixels whose electromagnetic prop-
erties can be modified in real time using very 
simple electronics and that’s how we started 
to design these tunable metasurfaces. We 
filed a patent and did a demonstration of a 
surface just made of conventional printed 
circuit boards with very simple electronics; 
they consume very little energy and they can 
be mass produced. What we show is that when 
you put these surface on the wall, if you have 
a ‘smart’ algorithm with feedback, you can 
multiply by one hundred the energy received 
by a given receiver in the room, whatever the 
complexity of the room. You can shape the 
waves in real-time anywhere by having smart  
environments.
People do acoustic smart, thermal smart, 
and light smart for buildings. We thought 
why can’t we do electromagnetic smart. We 
let someone else run the company but it didn’t 
work out, and there was no market for this 
kind of technology. You ask yourself: “who 
should I talk to?” The person who owns the 
building, makes the building, makes the net-
work, or uses the network and so on … when-
ever you have six people you can talk to to  
sell your product, it means that you don’t have 
a product.
We could have made a product based on 
tunable surfaces like a laptop cover. You 
remember when we were sitting at Berkeley 
at the cafe and you were on the fringe of wifi 
coverage? This cover could have improved 
your connection. But the problem is that to 
do so we needed to have access to deep layers 
of chipsets inside the computer and compa-
nies like Intel and Broadcom don’t share it. 
Long story short, the company almost died in 
2017 and this is when I took leave from CNRS 
[The French National Centre for Scientific 
Research] to start it again.
I thought, what can we do with this kind of 
technology? We had tunable, reconfigurable 
metasurfaces, algorithms and experience with 
controlling waves. We decided to come up 
with two applications. First was RFID, because 
you have the same problems as wireless com-
munications but it’s much simpler; it’s not at 
the scale of a building or a city, it’s at the scale 
of a small machine, a car, and so on. RFID is 
also easy in terms of technique because it’s low 
frequency. The other idea we had was to put 
the surface in the room and make this room 
‘smart’; the idea is that if I scale this to high 
frequency … I make a box with a ‘dumb’ source, 
and put a hole in it and make a leaky cavity. 
With a tunable metasurface inside, the cavity 
acts as an antenna that can be reconfigured  
in real-time. So we started to do these two 
things in 2018.
People use RFID to make inventories, for 
example, of what’s inside their car for delivery, 
or for technology repairers to remember to 
bring required tools; what companies want 
to do is put RFID on all of their objects and 
the car takes the inventory of what’s inside 
the car and says “hey, you forgot your item!”, 
or another use case is for companies like UPS, 
Amazon and so on, who have many packages 
in the car. If you have a lot of tags to read, 
because of the interference of the waves and 
reflections within the closed cavities you can-
not read all of the tags. You could use more 
complex readers and electronics, which is 
 Check for updates
Credit: Greenerwave

nature photonics
Q&A
costly and consumes a lot of energy. What we 
do is use the standard reader but we put tun-
able surfaces in this environment, change the 
boundary conditions in the cavity, and change 
the electromagnetic energy distribution in the 
cavity which in turn increases the RFID inven-
tory reliability, because we can ‘explore’ all of 
the areas of the volume with the EM field. We 
do not complexify the RF emission … instead 
of designing a ‘sophisticated’ phased-array 
for RFID to make sure that you really control 
the EM wave, we used a ‘dumb’ source which is 
energy efficient and cost effective; by includ-
ing our tunable surfaces we do the job of a very 
complex system.
It’s the same for the antennas. We are target-
ing satellite communications, 5G millimetre 
wave antennas and so on; everything above 
let’s say 10 GHz. Consider Starlink, which is 
an optimized phased-array; they have a mil-
lion antennas and each antenna is made of 
a thousand tiny integrated circuits that can 
generate RF waves. It’s a phased array with 
each MMIC [monolithic microwave integrated 
circuit] controlling four antennae and they 
control the RF amplitude, phase, amplification 
and so on, and this chip is 5 mm × 5 mm; they 
have ordered something like a billion chips 
from STMicroelectronics to lower the price 
and a million PCBs [printed circuit boards] 
(which are massive 60-cm PCBs) and by these 
huge volumes they were able to decrease the 
price of this antenna to somewhere around 
US$2,500. There is no question that they 
have done an amazing job but the customer 
pays $500 for the antenna and Starlink loses 
$2,000 per antenna upfront. The power con-
sumption is around 300 W, which is roughly 
equivalent to a microwave oven always turned 
on in defrost mode. Instead, with our tech-
nology we use the same bulk amplifier as 
used in the good old parabolic antenna and 
it’s relatively efficient. Then we connect this 
emitter/receive system to tunable metasur-
faces with the leaky cavity; the leaky cavity 
controlled by these tunable surfaces can do 
the same job as the phased array. The price is 
much lower because we just have the central 
emitter/receiver, so that means one big ampli-
fier and one low-noise amplifier. We just have 
to build a PCB with passive electronics and 
the power consumption is low because we 
simply polarize our switches or diodes. The 
target price that mega-constellations have for 
these types of antennas is of the order of $500 
and we think we can make it, while limiting 
their power consumption to the range of a few  
tens of watts.
The metasurface reconfigurability 
is low power because you bias 
low-current components to change the 
electromagnetic response?
You have a component that acts as a switch. It 
can be a PIN diode, CMOS switch or whatever; 
by polarizing it you change the impedance of 
the electromagnetic passive resonator. We use 
PIN diodes now, but we are going towards sili-
con in the future and we have ideas how you 
can reduce the price of these components for 
high frequency. We’ve been thinking about 
replacing the PIN diodes for a while and now we 
are working with a large foundry and they are 
going to produce a custom component for us.
The beam forming at the moment consumes 
10–15 W because we have PIN diodes but if 
we move to silicon it’s going to be a lot less 
because it’s microamps per switch. The central 
bulk amplifier can be GaN with efficiency of 
30–40%, which is much higher than any inte-
grated circuit you have on the market, which 
are on the order of 1% efficiency. This fits with 
rational behind the company in that we are 
‘green’ in terms of waves. We are doing smart 
beamforming in ‘satcom’ now but we will push 
millimetre waves in 5G, and we also work on 
radar applications.
What products are you making?
We are working with a big automotive company 
and will have some vehicles on the road next year 
that are equipped with our RFID technology. In 
early 2024 we should have a satellite commu-
nications antenna on the market. A radar that 
we are developing with Plastic Omnium, a big 
French automotive supplier, is planned to be 
in cars in 2026; it takes time because there is a 
lot of automotive certification.
What those in wireless communications call 
reconfigurable intelligent surfaces, which are 
tunable metasurfaces, are really everywhere 
in that field now. The millimetre wave applica-
tions really make sense; you can’t send waves 
everywhere like in wifi. You really need to do 
point-to-point communications and whenever 
you have a wall or obstacle you either need to use 
a new base station or remove the object. If you 
don’t want to do that you can use smart tunable 
surfaces and use them to extend your coverage. 
That’s what we are working on with Japanese 
companies AGC and NTT Docomo. I think this is 
going to be an application of the initial technol-
ogy but products will come after 2026.
Are there any hurdles to overcome?
People are talking a lot about THz [~sub- 
millimetre wavelength] for wireless 
communications but I don’t really believe in 
it. It’s not easy to align mm-waves because the 
beam width is small and this is one of the rea-
sons millimetre waves are not ‘flying’ for 5G. 
People who claim they will use THz for wireless 
communications probably have never tried to 
align a millimetre wave system before.
On the other hand I’m quite interested in 
Metalenz out of Harvard. It’s not a secret that 
STMicroelectronics is doing fabrication for 
them. They opened the road. When people 
said ten years ago that metalenses will never go 
in a smart phone, they were wrong. So I think 
the times are quite exciting for metamaterials.
Why move away from academia?
In physics, if you don’t start companies, the 
ideas that you develop are going to die. Now 
a lot of academic researchers see that if you 
don’t start a company yourself, nobody is going 
to use your technology. It used to work back 
in the days of Bell Laboratories and so on but 
it doesn’t work anymore; there is not enough 
transfer between academia and big companies. 
Start-ups are a way to make this transfer.
I believe that the goals of public and private 
researchers have diverged over the years. The 
goals were aligned in the ‘laser days’. Now the 
goal of most people doing academia that we 
see is to make ‘nice papers’ and you don’t make 
a product out of ‘nice papers’. In the end it’s 
hard for big companies to do their job of 
technology sourcing because everything is 
‘dressed up’ like it’s the next big thing.
Do you have any advice for those thinking 
of making a start-up?
You need to be involved. A high-level scientist 
must be fully involved in the company. Some 
researchers are lucky enough to have really 
experienced postdocs who can start the com-
pany, but if you don’t have that, the researcher 
needs to go full time or the company is going 
to die. You cannot rely on external people to 
push your technology; it doesn’t work. I made 
the mistake twice and I know it doesn’t work.
The second thing is to be very careful when 
you hire people. Hiring is the most compli-
cated thing in a start-up. If you don’t select 
people very cautiously, or do cross checking 
of the CVs, especially for the ‘C level’ posi-
tions, it’s a big mistake. Be involved, make 
sure your hiring is done with the highest level 
of verification.
Interviewed by David Pile
Published online: xx xx xxxx

