994
news & views
OPTICAL NANOSTRUCTURES
Metasurfaces provide the extra bling
Structuring surfaces coated with nanoparticles in the subwavelength range allows almost complete control over the 
optical appearance of an object.
Frank Scheffold
T
he visual appearance of flat surfaces 
and curved objects is paramount in 
life and technology. It determines 
perceived attractiveness and allows for 
signalling in nature, beautifully illustrated 
by colourful birds, insects and flowers. 
Since time immemorial, people have been 
fascinated by shiny metallic jewellery, gilded 
clothing, tableware, weapons and goblets. 
Gemstones draw part of their appeal from 
a combination of reflectivity and colour 
effects. More recently, effect coatings for  
cars have gained in popularity. Attributes 
such as glossy, matte or diffuse often 
describe the visual appearance, thus 
encompassing more than simply colour, 
colour purity and brightness.
Recent progress in materials science 
has led to many new structurally coloured 
materials. These are materials where 
colour emerges from nanostructured 
scattering interference instead of selective 
absorption provided by common dyes. 
Structural colours are non-fading and can 
be a sustainable alternative to traditional 
colouring methods. Researchers have 
designed dye-free pigments1 and explored 
coloured living bacteria2 and adaptive 
chameleon-inspired structural colour3, often 
mimicking colour formation in nature. 
However, those earlier studies primarily 
focused on colour and neglected other 
critical aspects of visual appearances,  
such as glossy reflectivity or a diffuse 
scattering background4. Now, writing in 
Nature Materials, Vynck et al. report  
how they have engineered surfaces on  
the subwavelength scale to control the  
entire visual appearance of an object  
almost at will5. The authors employ the 
concept of metasurfaces, which are artificial 
optical materials obtained by patterning 
a surface on subwavelength scales using 
metallic and dielectric nanostructures.
Vynck et al. use the bidirectional 
reflectance distribution function (BRDF) 
to characterize the visual appearance of 
a surface6. Computer graphics gaming 
applications also rely heavily on the BRDF 
as well as other domains such as the remote 
sensing or photometry of celestial objects7. 
The spectrally resolved BRDF measures 
the ratio of reflected radiant flux in a 
given direction to incident radiant flux in 
another direction. In contrast to simple 
wavelength scans of reflectivity, which are 
sufficient to determine colour, the BRDF 
comprehensively quantifies phenomena 
such as diffuse and specular reflections. 
It enables a prediction of the colour and 
appearance of an object in different and 
varying environments.
Equipped with this powerful tool, 
Vynck et al. can design and optimize the 
visual appearance of metasurfaces using 
a computer. To this end, they employed 
a combination of subwavelength surface 
patterning with resonant nanoparticles and 
thin-layered substrates in their simulation. 
The interplay between diffuse and specular 
reflectance is vital for setting the visual 
appearance — interferences and scattering 
can tailor the relative contribution.
The modelled metasurfaces consist of 
a monolayer of dielectric nanoparticles, 
either metallic silver (Ag) or high-index 
dielectric silicon (Si). The nanoparticles 
have diameters between 100 nm and 
200 nm to match the resonant scattering 
conditions for visible light. In addition, 
spatial structuring of nanoparticles over 
the surface provides additional control 
over the visual appearance. To this end, 
structural correlations affect the collective 
optical response of nanoparticle assemblies 
in two and three dimensions. As shown 
previously, liquid-like disordered structures 
and hyperuniformity can inhibit diffuse 
scattering or promote backscattering 
depending on the degree of correlations  
and the characteristic length scale of 
short-range order8–10. The degree of 
structural correlations can easily be set 
and used to dial in and out certain spectral 
features while retaining the same material 
composition. By controlling the spatial 
correlations of the nanoparticles, the  
authors can manage, quasi-independently, 
the colour of the specular and diffuse 
components of reflectance, leading to 
stunning visual effects (Fig. 1b). Beyond 
purely planar structures, adding high-index 
layered substrates with a substantial specular 
reflectivity can boost the interaction of light 
with resonant nanoparticles. Here, photons, 
similar to a ball between a bumper and 
the wall of a pinball machine, bounce back 
and forth between the substrate and the 
nanoparticle monolayer, thereby enhancing 
the interaction between both.
Impressive visual appearances emerge 
from this interplay between specular 
reflections and diffuse scattering. This 
effect becomes evident when looking at 
a spherical metasurface visualizing the 
appearance of the surface at many scattering 
angles (Fig. 1). Vynck et al. conclude their 
study with an experimental demonstration 
of their concepts. They patterned a 
centimetre-scale silica (SiO2) substrate with 
silicon nanodiscs using standard silicon 
lithography technology. The nanodiscs act 
p = 0.5
p = 0.1
a
b
Increasing structural correlations
Increasing layer thickness
h = 0 nm
h = 600 nm
Fig. 1 | Rendered images of a macroscopic 
spherical probe covered by metasurfaces.  
a, Silver nanoparticles (radii of 90 nm, density 
ρ ≃ 4 μm−2) distributed randomly on a SiO2/Si 
substrate. Without and with an additional thin 
SiO2 layer of thickness (h) of 600 nm. b, Spherical 
probe for a metasurface composed of the identical 
silver particles now at a density of ρ = 5 μm−2  
on a glass substrate for different degrees of  
structural correlation (p). Figure reproduced with 
permission from ref. 5, Springer Nature Ltd.
Nature Materials | VOL 21 | September 2022 | 993–1002 | www.nature.com/naturematerials

995
news & views
as scattering particles. Their experimental 
findings demonstrate the ‘diffuse-halo’ effect 
predicted by the numerical calculations  
(Fig. 1b). Strong structural correlation  
(p = 0.5) of nanodiscs suppresses diffuse 
light intensity near the specular reflection, 
which is surrounded by sharp angular lobes 
of diffuse intensity with a colour gradient.
The work of Vynck et al. realizes a whole 
range of essential tasks. First, it establishes 
a platform for multiscale modelling of the 
optical properties of complex surfaces. In 
addition, it shows how colour and coherent 
and diffuse reflection can be controlled with 
a minimal set of independent variables using 
a reasonably simple design. Moreover, they 
show how in-plane structural correlations 
in a multilayer geometry can be exploited 
to control the perpendicular reflection. 
Large-scale applications of surfaces of this 
kind based on the lithography process 
used here are still unrealistic. However, 
nanoparticle self-assembly, combined  
with roll-to-roll deposition, could open  
up possibilities for such applications in  
the near future1.
❐
Frank Scheffold 
  ✉
Physics Department, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, 
Switzerland.  
✉e-mail: Frank.Scheffold@unifr.ch
Published online: 24 August 2022 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01341-y
References
	1.	 Droguet, B. E. et al. Nat. Mater. 21, 352–358 (2022).
	2.	 Johansen, V. E. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 2652–2657  
(2018).
	3.	 Wang, Y. et al. Matter 1, 626–638 (2019).
	4.	 Jacucci, G., Vignolini, S. & Schertel, L. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
117, 23345–23349 (2020).
	5.	 Vynck, K. et al. Nat. Mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-
01255-9 (2022).
	6.	 McCluney, W. R. Introduction to Radiometry and Photometry 
(Artech House, 2014).
	7.	 Butler, C. J. & Elliott, I. Stellar Photometry: Current Techniques 
and Future Developments: IAU Colloquium 136 (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 1993).
	8.	 Rojas-Ochoa, L. F. et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 073903 (2004).
	9.	 Leseur, O., Pierrat, R. & Carminati, R. Optica 3, 763–767  
(2016).
	10.	Torquato, S. Phys. Rep. 745, 1–95 (1998).
Competing interests
The author declares no competing interests.
Nature Materials | VOL 21 | September 2022 | 993–1002 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
CELL MIGRATION
In search of a softer environment
By maximizing cell–substrate force transmission, cancer cells can migrate towards either stiffer or softer substrate 
regions.
Amy E. M. Beedle and Pere Roca-Cusachs
C
ells continuously migrate through 
organisms, driving tissue-remodelling 
processes that are central in processes 
such as morphogenesis, wound healing  
and cancer progression, among others.  
This migration has traditionally been 
understood to occur in response to  
gradients in chemical factors (chemotaxis), 
but we now know that cells also move 
in response to mechanical gradients. 
Specifically, cells in many contexts  
in vitro1 and in vivo2 migrate from soft 
to stiff areas of tissues in the process of 
durotaxis. Writing in Nature Materials, 
Isomursu and colleagues3 now report 
that cells can also migrate towards softer 
tissues. Even more importantly, they 
demonstrate that this occurs because cells 
migrate towards a specific range of substrate 
stiffness, and identify the regulatory 
mechanism involved.
Although durotaxis was discovered later 
than chemotaxis, it is in fact an intuitive 
phenomenon. It can be understood only 
by considering that cells attach to their 
underlying substrate and exert forces on it 
via actomyosin contractility. As a simple 
analogy, consider a person on a skateboard 
with open arms and each hand holding 
a spring attached to a wall. If one spring 
is stiffer than the other and the person 
brings their arms together (contracts), 
the stiff spring will deform less and the 
person will move towards it (Fig. 1a). 
This type of mechanism has been shown 
to drive collective durotaxis4. However, 
if mechanical guidance of migration is 
functionally relevant, this calls for more 
refined mechanisms able to tune how and 
when migration is triggered. If cells simply 
always moved towards stiffer tissues, then 
our brains would be depleted of cells and 
our neurons would all pile up around the 
much stiffer bones in the skull. Luckily, this 
is not the case. Thus, how is mechanically 
guided migration regulated and fine-tuned? 
To address this question, Isomursu and 
colleagues consider that cells do not merely 
attach on two ends (similar to the springs 
of the skateboarder), but in fact adhere to 
their substrate all along the cell–substrate 
interface. Contractile forces exerted by 
Rigidity
Soft
Stiff
a
b
Force
Force
Migration
High force
Low force
Migration
Fast actin flow
Actin
protrusion
Slow actin flow
Fig. 1 | Mechanisms of durotaxis. a, If cells only apply contractile forces at the cell periphery, force 
balance implies that substrate deformation is higher on soft (rather than stiff) substrates. This shifts the 
cell centre of mass towards the stiff substrate. b, If force can be balanced throughout the cell–substrate 
interface, then force balance can be different on different sides of the same cell. High forces will slow 
actin retrograde flows, thereby promoting actin protrusion. Thus, cell migration will be biased towards 
regions exerting high forces, and not necessarily towards stiffer substrates.

