1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Python‑assisted biological 
knowledge acquisition method 
to trigger design inspiration
Z. M. Zha1, H. Zhang1* & G. A. Aggidis2
Design inspiration comes from the continuous stimulation of external information and the continuous 
accumulation of knowledge. In order to obtain an ideal design inspiration from nature, researchers 
have proposed a large number of biological information retrieval and knowledge acquisition methods. 
But how to purposefully acquire valuable biological knowledge in order to effectively stimulate 
design inspiration and produce the novel and feasible designs idea is still an urgent problem to be 
solved. This paper proposes a method for acquiring valuable biological knowledge to efficiently 
stimulate inspiration and quickly conceive solutions in engineering design. First, keywords, such as 
the functional requirements and key components of design objects, are selected as the engineering 
terminologies. Next, biological keywords related to the engineering terminologies are searched from 
the biological dictionary and biology websites. Then in order to retrieve enough biological knowledge, 
these biological keywords are expanded manually and automatically respectively based on Thesaurus 
Webpage and WordNet database, and expanded keywords are filtered according to repeated words 
and different forms of the same words. Finally, in the biological knowledge base, biological keywords 
that had been filtered are used to obtain biological knowledge with Python web crawler programming. 
Through an example of application for ship equipment, the effectiveness of the method is verified.
Most creative work requires inspiration to stimulate imagination to solve difficult problems. Inspiration is a 
kind of non-logical thinking, which not only comes from the stimulation of external conditions, but also comes 
from the accumulation of ­knowledge1. Knowledge has many forms, such as design knowledge and biological 
knowledge. Biological knowledge contains more rare and delicate structures, so it can trigger more inspiration. 
Most of the existing biological knowledge and information carriers are websites, texts, and biological dictionar-
ies. Many researchers acquire some knowledge, such as biological principles, shapes, functions, and their own 
unique attributes, to stimulate design innovation from these ­carriers2. Some biological mechanisms are directly 
imitated, while others tend to inspire the ideas of ­design3. Therefore, acquiring a wealth of biological knowledge 
is very important for stimulating design inspiration.
Biological knowledge can be obtained from different information carriers, such as books, papers, databases, 
corpora, biological websites, etc.4–10. For different carriers, the methods of obtaining them are different. For 
example, Shu et al.11,12 used a vocabulary language framework to systematically map engineering terms to biologi-
cally meaningful keywords, and then used automated search tools to obtain biological knowledge from various 
biological resources such as books and papers in natural language. Nagel et al.13 used the Engineering Biology 
(E2B) vocabulary to link biological functions and processes with engineering terms, combined with concept 
generation software models (MEMIC), and obtained biological knowledge by searching biological knowledge 
bases and engineering knowledge bases. Most of these methods are suitable for designers with a certain biologi-
cal background or require biologists and engineers to collaborate to complete knowledge transfer and exchange. 
Therefore, for designers who lack biological background, the acquisition and application of biological knowledge 
are still the difficult ­problem14. In order to obtain biological knowledge that is more direct and more in line with 
engineering design goals, this article proposes a method of acquiring biological knowledge for engineers without 
biological background, which can help them quickly acquire a large amount of valuable biological knowledge.
This paper first extracts engineering keywords according to the purpose functions, means functions and 
key components of design objects. Next, biological information related to engineering keywords is searched in 
biological databases such as biological dictionaries and biological web pages, and the biological keywords are 
extracted from them. Then, these biological words are expanded in two ways. One way is to extract the synonym 
OPEN
1Ocean Engineering Equipment College, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan 316022, Zhejiang, People’s Republic 
of China. 2Engineering Department, Lancaster University Renewable Energy Group and Fluid Machinery Group, 
Lancaster LA14YW, UK. *email: Zhanghui@zjou.edu.cn

2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
set of biological words in Thesaurus. Another way is using Python programming to automatically extract the 
hypernym, hyponyms, and the synonym set of biological words from the WordNet database. After filtering the 
expanded biological words, some valuable biological keywords are obtained. Finally, based on the obtained 
words, biological knowledge that can inspire design inspiration is acquired in AskNature with the help of Python 
programming, and the design inspiration triggered by biological characteristics and phenomenon information 
is used to solve engineering design problems.
The following section “Acquisition of biological knowledge” introduces the current acquisition methods and 
applications of biological knowledge. Section “Python-assisted method for acquiring biological knowledge” 
introduces the detailed process from engineering terms to biological knowledge. Section “An example of appli-
cation” provides case studies. Section “Discussion” discusses the expansion methods under different biological 
backgrounds and comparative experiments, and Section "Conclusions" provides the conclusions.
Acquisition of biological knowledge
In the process of using biological knowledge to inspire design inspiration and solving problems, an important 
work is to acquire biological knowledge. Many researchers have conducted extensive and in-depth research on 
this aspect. The research includes not only the methods of obtaining biological knowledge, but also the applica-
tions of biological knowledge.
Methods of obtaining biological knowledge. 
Valuable biological knowledge is very helpful to stimu-
late design inspiration. In order to obtain biological knowledge effectively and efficiently, researchers have done 
a large number of works on the acquisition methods of biological knowledge. Related researches mainly include 
the following aspects:
•	 Selection of search terms In order to meet the needs of designers, researchers use engineering terms related 
to product features as search terms. Some researchers chose a single type of engineering term as a search 
term, such as ­function15, function-flow16 or ­shape17 to search for biological solutions. Some researchers chose 
multiple types of engineering terms as search terms, such as function and ­effect18, function, attribute, and 
­environment19,20 to obtain more biological solution. The more types of search terms, the richer the biological 
information obtained, but how to accurately identify the features of the product and effectively use other 
features of the product are issues that need to be considered.
•	 Expansion of search terms In order to obtain more search terms for retrieving biological information, 
researchers have developed a number of dictionaries and thesaurus. For example, the engineering-to-biology 
­thesaurus21, Functional ­Basis22 were used to convert engineering terms into biological terms to overcome 
obstacles caused by different terminologies in different fields. ­Nagel23 have solved the problems of cross-
domain design by establishing an engineering-biological vocabulary, but the construction of this kind of 
database requires too much time. There are also many researchers using WordNet to expand search ­terms12,15. 
WordNet includes many uncommon words. So, a lot of useless words will be gotten after the expansion. The 
number of search terms expanded is related to the quantity and quality of the words in these dictionaries or 
databases.
•	 Obtaining of search terms Many researchers are exploring the application of artificial intelligence technology 
in obtaining search terms.
	
  To obtain the valuable search terms, Chen et al.15 proposed an algorithm to automatically push biological 
information search keywords. This method enables designers to obtain the required biological information 
without biological knowledge reserves. However, the size of the biological corpus will affect the credibility 
of the pushed keywords. ­Li24 used mining technology to extract keywords from Autohome. The method of 
word segmentation will affect the calculation results and calculation efficiency.
	
  To obtain the rich and relevant search terms, ­Xu25 proposed an algorithm for extracting keywords from 
webpages based on word span. This algorithm can obtain a wealth of search terms, but its accuracy is related 
to generation method of high frequency words. ­Liu26 proposed a supervised keyword extraction algorithm, 
which can recognize keywords in the test documents, but the accuracy of recognition will be affected by the 
amount of labeled training data. ­Liu27 proposed a method to obtain semantic keywords based on the ontol-
ogy. The method can improve relevance, but the construction of the ontology is more troublesome.
•	 Retrieval of biological information In order to discover biological inspiration, some retrieval systems have 
been developed, such as ­Webcrawler28, citation cataloguing ­system29, ­BIOscrabble19,20. In addition, Kim 
et al.30 developed a causality-based overall representation framework of biological systems, an ontology-based 
"fully connected" knowledge base and retrieval system as a knowledge-based recommendation system that 
supports bionic design. Willocx et al.31 used three different methods to find biological inspiration and found 
that processing retrieved biological articles is still a difficult and time-consuming task. Therefore, biological 
information retrieval system still needs to be improved to be more friendly to engineers without biological 
background.
Application of biological knowledge. 
Biological knowledge is one of the sources of inspiration for inno-
vation. Some novel designs can be conceived with the help of biological knowledge of shape, function, structure, 
texture, color, and ­strategy3. The methods of applying biological knowledge have been proposed.
•	 Design process

3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	
  Van et al.32 mainly described the design process based on a top-down approach. He used biological phe-
nomena and data for the development and application of products, machine tools, processes and manufac-
turing systems.
	
  Goel et al.33 analyzed 74 bio-inspired design cases in the library and compared the problem-driven bio-
design process with the solution-based design process. It can be discovered that the solution-based process 
is easier to lead to a multifunctional design than a problem-driven process.
	
  Lenau et al.34 reviewed the characterization and application of design paradigms. According to dominant 
opportunities, challenges, and knowledge characteristics, different design paradigms can be used to realize 
the biologically inspired design process.
	
  Peters35 proposed two spiral models of the bionic design process. That is from biology to design and from 
problems to biology. The top-down bionic design process can effectively find solutions that are conducive 
to product innovation and design. Extraction and expression of morphological features are targeted more, 
which can better grasp the development direction of innovative ­design36–38. The bottom-up bionic design 
process of product shape is more aimed at the extraction and expression of the intrinsic characteristics of 
biological shape, which is good for grasping the direction of innovative design and quickly find the solution 
of product innovation. Its direction is more diversified and open, and product design schemes are also more 
­diversified39.
•	 Design method
	
  TAN et al.40 revealed that the biological knowledge applied to the engineering innovation has evolved from 
imitating simple biological characteristics to building new products, design processes and new manufacturing 
systems.
	
  Bogatyrev41 constructed a knowledge base of biological effects based on TRIZ theory to assist the bionic 
design process. TRIZ can be used to solve the contradictions and problems encountered in the bionic design 
process. It is the key to realizing multi-dimensional (shape, function, etc.) product bionic design.
	
  Helms42 used analogies to develop solutions for engineering problems. Three frequently used arguments 
are: (a) The mature performance of biological systems; (b) The potential of sustainable products and (c) 
the potential for finding ready-made solutions. Nature is a largely undeveloped field, so it is still very likely 
to stimulate the potential for more sustainable and innovative products. At the same time, the biological 
knowledge can be used to inspire breakthrough innovative ­ideas43, which can be further developed into new 
patents.
	
  Through the above analysis of the current research works, it can be found that the limitations of existing 
methods are as follows: (a) How to realize the conversion of engineering words to valuable biological words; 
(b) How to expand the search for biological knowledge; (c) How to improve the efficiency of acquiring bio-
logical knowledge; and (d) How to transfer the acquired biological knowledge into design and creation. In 
response to these problems, this paper proposes a Python-based method for acquiring biological knowledge 
and applies it to the design of a novel bionic winch. Through the design of this winch, the limitations of the 
prior method are improved. Table 1 shows some biological information retrieval methods that have been 
developed and researched.
Python‑assisted method for acquiring biological knowledge
Python is an explanatory, interactive and object-oriented cross-platform language with simple syntax and easy 
reading and writing. It supports both process-oriented programming and object-oriented programming. It has 
been ported to many platforms and databases. In recent years, with the rise of big data and artificial intelligence 
technology, Python has been widely used in the fields of web application development, automatic operation and 
maintenance, web crawling, data analysis, scientific computing, and artificial intelligence. The specific steps of 
Python-based knowledge acquisition are as following.
Extracting engineering keywords. 
When determining the design object and understanding the require-
ments or purpose of the design, engineering keywords can be extracted first based on the type of knowledge in 
the ­product48, so that these words are closer to engineering design needs. But keywords have different forms, 
such as nouns and verbs, which make them have different meanings in a paragraph or text. For example, when 
“remove” is used as a verb, it means to remove, but when used as a noun, it means distance. Therefore, when 
keywords are selected, it is necessary to determine the specific meaning and design characteristics and then it 
can be extracted as an engineering keyword.
Obtaining biological keywords. 
After determining the engineering keywords, in order to obtain poten-
tial keywords related to biology, it is necessary to search and obtain biological keywords from the biological 
dictionary or related biological fields. Because biological keywords are directly extracted from biological infor-
mation, they have a close relationship with biological information. At the same time, these keywords can also 
increase the understanding of biological information in the later stage, such as capturing pictures and texts about 
biological knowledge in AskNature.
Expanding biological keywords. 
After collecting biological keywords, due to the expanded vocabulary 
are not comprehensive in the WordNet database, therefore, this paper combines WordNet database and The-
saurus Webpage to expand biological keywords. First, the Thesaurus Webpage is used to expand the synonyms 
of biological keywords. Then the WordNet database is imported from the NLTK.Corpus database and Python 
programming is used to automatically query the synonym set, hypernym, and hyponym set of the same part of 
speech in the vocabulary of the biological keywords. WordNet is like an English dictionary corpus, and it is in 

4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the corpora folder under the NLTK data folder. NLTK is easily integrated into the Python environment, so it is 
easier to use WordNet under the Python environment. At the same time, WordNet is the synset, so it can bring 
great help when doing cross-language work, but it does not completely belong to any specific field.
Filtering biological keywords. 
The expanded keywords that obviously not related to biological informa-
tion need to be removed to save time of crawling biological information. After deleting irrelevant keywords, the 
filtered keywords are valuable biological keywords.
Acquiring biological knowledge. 
AskNature is a natural science website. When inputting in relevant 
keywords, we can retrieve the corresponding biological information and knowledge. Using the python crawler 
can obtain biological phenomena and biological articles with the filtered biological keywords. Thus, biological 
knowledge obtained will directly affect the thinking of engineering designers and be used to stimulate their 
design inspiration. The flowchart is shown in Fig. 1.
An example of application
The figures and plots in this section were drawn by authors using AutoCAD 2017, PowerPoint (version 16.26), 
or Excel (version 16.26) software.
Winch is widely used in various fields, especially ships. Marine winches can be divided into electric winches, 
hydraulic winches and many other. Among them, the electric winch is usually installed on the main deck at the 
bow and stern of the ship. It is mainly used for anchoring or retraction of the ship. It is the self-protection and 
towing device. The marine electric winch is mainly composed of planetary reducer, winch head, main shaft, drive 
motor and other parts. When working, the power of the motor is transmitted to the rotation of the drum. The 
Table 1.   A comparison of methods of acquiring biological knowledge.
Information carrier
Author
Method
Purpose
Advantage
Disadvantage
Text
AskNature
Wang pan et al.44
Proposed web-based 
automatic information 
acquisition.
To achieve the combina-
tion of portable data and 
portable code by combining 
XML and Java.
Combining programming 
methods to obtain infor-
mation can automatically 
save time.
The unified description of 
biological information in 
xml limits the inspiration 
for design.
Liu Wei et al.45
Used multi-biological 
effects to obtain the rel-
evance between biological 
knowledge and products
To use the feature clustering 
principle and the analogy 
principle to transform the 
target product and multi-
biological effects
It is very innovative to 
stimulate design inspira-
tion through the influence 
of nature on living things
The correlation between 
this kind of biological 
knowledge and products is 
difficult to discover
Relevant corpus text
Mark et al.46
Put forward the method 
of describing biological 
phenomena to develop 
concepts and solve a simple 
problem
The research provided an 
outline of a strategy that 
will be applied in the fields 
of biology and engineering
The biological strategies 
extracted have provided 
diverse solutions and 
inspirations for solving 
problems.
Inability to transfer infor-
mation from biology to 
engineering
LIFE corpus text
Nagel and ­Stone47
Through an algorithm, uti-
lized the functional basis, 
Design Repository, MEMIC 
(Morphological evaluation 
machine and interactive 
conceptualizer), organized 
search tool and engineering 
to biology thesaurus to 
create, filter and inspire 
concept variants
To discover biological 
inspiration and circumvent 
the problem of knowledge 
needs in different fields in 
the early stages of design,
The computational 
approach could be used to 
assist engineering students 
with discovering the 
connections between the 
biology and engineer-
ing domains and find 
innovative solutions to the 
problem
There are no hyperlinks 
to add detailed biological 
information and images 
to be integrated into the 
results, and the process 
takes a long time
Database
The engineering-to-biology 
thesaurus
Nagel23
The engineering-to-biology 
thesaurus has the potential 
to aid engineering design-
ers with the comprehension 
of biological contexts by 
substituting Functional 
Basis terms for commonly 
used biological words
The three key goals of this 
thesaurus are (1) to lessen 
the burden when working 
with knowledge from 
the biological domain by 
providing a link between 
engineering and biological 
terminologies; (2) to assist 
designers by establishing 
connections between the 
two domains; and (3) to 
facilitate bioinspired design
The engineering-to-biology 
thesaurus increases the 
interaction between the 
users and the knowledge 
resource and fosters one to 
make associations between 
the engineering and biolog-
ical lexicons and enhances 
the designer’s ability to use 
biological information
Search only in text writ-
ten in natural language 
format, and cannot be used 
to search in web-based 
repositories
WordNet database
Chen et al.15
An algorithm that inte-
grates semantic similarity 
calculation, data normaliza-
tion and corpus technology 
is proposed
To calculate the compound 
association strength of 
functional combination 
words and realize an 
automatic push of bio-
logical information search 
keywords
The designer obtains the 
required biological infor-
mation without the biologi-
cal knowledge reserve.
The similarity calculation 
of this algorithm is closely 
related to WordNet. But 
WordNet is a vocabulary 
database which will expand 
the scope of retrieval
Chiu et al.12
Proposed the natural 
language processing and 
computational linguistics 
for potential semantic 
retrieval of keywords and 
related collocation words
Identifying words that 
frequently collocated with 
keywords and the relation-
ship between words
Reduce the time to find rel-
evant biological phenom-
ena in natural language
It takes a lot of time to 
identify the statistics of fre-
quently collocation words

5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
rotation of the drum drives the rotation of the driving shaft. The planetary gear reduces the speed of the motor 
while increasing the output torque to drive the winch to work. The traditional marine winch is shown in Fig. 2.
However, the traditional winch has problems including the following: When the winch stops, the winch will 
lag behind due to water surface fluctuations. The winch drum will slip when rotating. In addition, the drum will 
be exposed to external pressure for a long time, which will cause it to wear too much. It also needs to strengthen 
its pressure resistance, and so on. The following takes a marine winch as an example to introduce the specific 
implementation steps of the new method proposed in this paper.
Extracting engineering keywords. 
This paper aims to improve the above-mentioned marine winches 
and makes it achieve anti-skid, reduce weight, increase strength and save energy. According to the targets that 
Figure 1.   Flow chart of the method of acquiring biological knowledge.

6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the electric winch needs to achieve, this article extracts the key components and design purposes of the marine 
electric winch as engineering keywords, such as lose weight, lightweight design, increase the intensity, non-slip, 
save electricity, reel, etc. The words usually have polysemy and polymorphism phenomena. So, the meaning of 
keywords proposed from the design object should be determined.
Obtaining biological keywords. 
In order to obtain a large amount of biological knowledge and real-
ize knowledge transfer and biological analogy, this paper discovers potential biological keywords based on the 
obtained engineering keywords. The biological keywords related to biological language can be found from the 
dictionary module in the Biology-online.org ­Webpage49, Henderson’s Dictionary of ­Biology50, and the biology 
subject in the module dict.cnki.net51.
The above collected potential keywords are shown in Fig. 3. They are obtained by three different methods 
and are related to some organisms.
Expanding biological keywords. 
To acquire more biological information, the biological keywords need 
to be expanded by hypernym, a hyponym, and synonyms. In many cases, different words with the same mean-
ing may obtain different information in a biological context. This expansion can supplement the more biologi-
cal knowledge and information from different angles. At the same time, the expansion of the upper and lower 
words is also a supplement to the biological knowledge. Therefore, based on the obtained biological keywords, an 
extended supplement is made in the Python and Thesaurus Webpages respectively. For example, some biological 
keywords, such as fiber, strength, and shell, are used to expand on the Thesaurus webpage first, and the synonym 
search results of keyword ‘shell’ are shown in Fig. 4.
Then based on the WordNet database, the biological keywords are segmented and expanded for synonyms, 
hypernyms, and hyponyms by Python programming. For example, the word ‘reduction’ is expanded on Table 2.
In Fig. 5, the two expansion methods are compared based on the number of expanded four biological ter-
minologies. It is found that the words based on WordNet expansion do not necessarily exist in the web page. 
Therefore, after the expansion of biological terms in two ways, the number of words used to retrieve biological 
information will increase significantly. At the same time, the number of retrieved biometric information will 
increase.
Filtering biological keywords. 
There are too many words obtained through web search and Python pro-
gramming. In order to obtain more valuable biological information in a short time, it is necessary to filter the 
expanded biological keywords. The basis of filtering is: (a) The repeated words obtained by two ways; (b) Differ-
ent forms of the same word in two ways. The filtered biological keywords are shown on Table 3.
Figure 2.   Marine electric mooring winch. 1—Base, 2—Output shaft, 3—Bearing, 4—Rotation shaft, 5—Cable 
drum shell, 6—Cable drum, 7—Linkage shaft, 8—Cable drum support.

7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Acquiring biological knowledge. 
Collection of biological information based on AskNature.  The 20th 
century is the era of big data. Getting valuable information quickly and accurately on the Internet need to make 
full use of the advantages of computer programming languages. The fact is that people need to spend a lot of 
time in the design process to obtain the information. This paper uses the computer language Python to crawl 
biological information for saving a lot of time in the design process. Python can be used to filter the biological 
knowledge and information in biological databases. Of course, other computer languages can also handle it, but 
python is more powerful and rich in information processing. In this paper, biological information retrieved in 
AskNature mainly exists in the form of pictures and texts. The pictures include some biological shapes that can 
inspire design inspiration. The texts include some biological information that can inspire design inspiration, 
such as principles and structures. But usually a search term can retrieve many information links that may con-
Figure 3.   Obtained biological keywords.
Figure 4.   Expanded biological keywords retrieved by the Thesaurus ­webpage52.

8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
tain biological information used to inspire the design. We need to click on these links one by one to find useful 
information. But through the Python crawler, we can get all the pictures and texts information retrieved by a 
search term at one time, thus saving our time. The process of crawling web page information based on Python 
is shown in Fig. 6.
Next, the filtered biological keyword ‘fiber’ is taken as an example and the biological information is obtained 
on the AskNature page based on Python programming. The flowchart is shown in Fig. 7.
Acquisition of biological knowledge.  Biological knowledge retrieved by keywords can not only stimulate the 
engineering designer, but also integrate the useful information in the biological field into the engineering design 
to achieve innovative design results. Based on the expanded biological keywords, searching on AskNature is first 
step in this paper, and then a Python program is used to crawl the relevant biological knowledge text, biological 
phenomenon and biological information, etc. The important features of biological objects are extracted and clas-
sified based on the function, the structure and shape features to aid the innovation of the winch. The acquired 
biological knowledge is shown on Table 4. Table 4 does not show all the biological information collected. Some 
conceives of using biological inspiration to design winch are also displayed on Table 4. Figure 8 shows some 
biological entities listed on Table 4.
Table 2.   The expansion of synonyms, hypernyms and hyponyms based on WordNet.
The query for the set of synonyms of the same part of speech of ‘reduction’ is coded as:
from nltk.corpus import wordnet as wn
sets = wn.synsets(’reduction’, pos = wn.NOUN)
print(sets)
The result of the operation:[Synset(’decrease.n.04’)]
The query for the set of hypernyms of ‘reduction’ is coded as:
from nltk.corpus import wordnet as wn
reduction = wn.synset(’reduction.n.01’)
hypernym_sets = reduction.hypernyms()
print(hypernym_sets)
root_hypernym = reduction.root_hypernyms()
print(root_hypernym)
The result of the operation:[Synset(’change_of_magnitude.n.01’)][Synset(’entity.n.01’)]
The query for the set of hyponyms of ‘reduction’ is coded as:
from nltk.corpus import wordnet as wn
reduction = wn.synset(’reduction.n.01’)
hyponym_sets = reduction.hyponyms()
print(hyponym_sets)
The result of the operation:
[Synset(’amortization.n.01’), Synset(’contraction.n.04’), Synset(’cut.n.19’), Synset(’cutback.n.01’), Synset(’de-escalation.n.01’),
Synset(’declassification.n.01’), Synset(’deflation.n.03’), Synset(’depletion.n.01’), Synset(’depreciation.n.01’), Synset(’devaluation.n.02’),
Synset(’devitalization.n.01’), Synset(’discount.n.01’), Synset(’easing.n.02’), Synset(’extenuation.n.02’), Synset(’lowering.n.01’),
Synset(’minimization.n.01’), Synset(’moderation.n.04’), Synset(’reverse_split.n.01’), Synset(’rollback.n.02’), Synset(’shortening.n.02’),
Synset(’shrinking.n.02’), Synset(’subtraction.n.02’), Synset(’tax_credit.n.01’), Synset(’tax_shelter.n.01’), Synset(’weakening.n.02’)]
Figure 5.   The number of words expanded by the two ways.
Table 3.   Biological keywords are filtered by instance abbreviations.
Reduction
Contraction, rebate, decrease, discount, abatement, lowering, depreciation, depletion, easing, degradation, shortening, defla-
tion, reverse

9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 6.   Flow chart of obtaining biological information based on Python.
Figure 7.   Process of capturing information in ­AskNature54.

10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Triggering design inspiration.  In life, biomimetic products are very common. Information and knowledge 
about biological appearance and other features can trigger designers to create novel designs. This kind of cross-
domain information and knowledge is to a large extent the source of inspiration for future innovative design. 
This paper uses the analogy to transfer biological knowledge to engineering knowledge for solving the deficien-
cies of the existing marine winches. The novel marine winch designed is shown in Fig. 9, and the idea has been 
applied for an invention patent.
Table 4.   Biological knowledge triggering design inspiration.
Classification
Article name
Acquired biological ­knowledge54
Design inspiration
Function
Fiber arrangement is highly efficient
Most of the strength of bamboo comes from vascular 
bundles wrapped in cellulose. The bundles serve dual 
functions as transport vessels and reinforcement 
for the stem. Trees and other woody plants are solid 
cylinders with the strong vascular bundles evenly 
arranged throughout. Bamboo, however, forms hol-
low tubes. The outside edge is where the stresses are 
the strongest and so the optimizes material used by 
placing the toughest materials where they are most 
needed
This arrangement and distribution of bamboo 
inspired an idea whether a hollow structure can also 
be used in the winch drum, and then the hardest 
materials are gathered on the inner and outer walls 
of the tube, which can reduce weight and increase 
strength
Structural composition provides strength in chang-
ing conditions
In the root tip or stem tip of a plant, the cell wall may 
be thinner in the immature stage, but when it grows 
to the mature stage, the cell wall becomes thicker, 
and lignin is incorporated into the structure. The 
cell itself has a strengthening effect on the overall 
strength of the plant. Parenchyma cells act like a 
pressurized container when fully hydrated. Mature 
cells, especially cells with thick cell walls, have their 
own strength even without water
The expansion and contraction caused by the 
complete hydration of the thin-walled wall is like 
a telescopic airbag. Is it possible to use such a 
telescopic airbag on the inner wall of the reel so that 
the contact area between the airbag and the rope is 
increased after the airbag is under pressure, thereby 
increasing the friction and achieving a non-slip 
effect?
Shape
Proteins reduce surface tension
Most mushrooms have an appendage on the surface, 
which is uneven
Is it possible to design a bionic covering layer with a 
spherical crown on the surface of the winch drum, 
so that the winch drum can prevent the rope from 
slipping during work?
Scale shape enables limbless movement
Studies on a variety of different snake species have 
demonstrated that the friction generated by sliding 
depends on the direction of travel. Belly scales have 
small “micropatterns” that create arrays of v-shaped 
feathered trailing edges. The tips of these V-shapes 
point towards the tail of the snake and, in some 
species, they are raised at the tip. In this way, as the 
snake slides, the surface moves easily up and over the 
raised tips, but in reverse direction they act like the 
pawl of a ratchet, snagging the surface and resisting 
movement in the opposite direction. And snakes 
control movement by increasing friction on the 
surface of the skin and muscles
These V-shaped patterns on the surface of the snake 
can achieve the effect of preventing inversion. Can 
the ratchet pawl in this idea be used in the winch to 
prevent the movement of the cable when the winch 
rotates counterclockwise and cause damage to the 
people on the ship. In addition, the scales on the 
snake body are increased by Is it possible to apply 
this method of increasing friction to the outer sur-
face of the drum to achieve a non-slip effect?
Structure
Honeycomb structure is space-efficient and strong
The honeycomb is composed of regular hexagonal 
beeswax cells, and the span is filled by adjusting the 
arrangement. The reason for the high compressive 
strength of the structure is that there are six short 
walls around each "tube"
Can the inner wall of the honeycomb hexagonal 
nesting structure be used in the first-round tube of 
the winch drum to enhance the ability of the drum 
to resist external pressure during work and reduce 
deformation?
Layers create multihued appearance
The shell on the back of the beetle are curved 
structures, and both the shell and the beetle are hard 
material
Can the curved structure of the shell be applied to 
the pressure plate and the winch head in the winch 
to improve the pressure resistance and increase the 
service life of the winch head?
Figure 8.   Biological entities retrieved by biological keywords. (a) ­Snake55; (b) ­Bamboo53; (c) ­Mushroom56; (d) 
Honey ­comb57; (e) ­Beetle58; (f) Root of a ­plant59. (All pictures are loyalty free).

11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The rubber bump in Fig. 9 is a biomimetic coating based on a layer of cover on the surface of a biological 
mushroom. The purpose is to prevent the wire rope from slipping. The ratchet and pawl mechanism in Fig. 10 
is inspired by the micro-patterns on the abdomen of the snake. It can prevent the shaft from turning upside 
down. The surface of the snake can easily move up and over the protruding tip during the sliding process. In 
turn, they hook the surface like the pawls of a ratchet and prevent movement in the opposite direction. The 
retractable airbag in Fig. 11 is designed based on the hydration of the plant cell wall. The purpose is to increase 
the contact area between the steel wire rope and the first-round tube when the telescopic airbag is compressed 
and deformed, thereby increasing the friction. The curved pressure plate in Fig. 12 is designed according to the 
shape and structure of the shell and the back of the beetle. The purpose is to increase the force area and improve 
the pressure resistance. The outward round tube uses a hollow tube and the inner wall reinforcement plate is 
designed based on bamboo. Most of the strength comes from the arrangement and structure of vascular bundles 
wrapped in cellulose fibers.
The above solutions are conceived based on the acquired biological knowledge. The specific details are shown 
in Table 5:
Figure 9.   Structure diagram of electric ­winch60. 1—Side plate; 3—First round tube; 4—Drive motor; 5—Second 
round tube; 6—Controller; 7—Battery; 8—Fixing plate; 9—Curved pressure plate; 32—Rubber, bumps; 33—
Telescopic airbag; 41—Rotary shaft; 42—Base; 422—Connecting rod; 91—Screw; 921—Sealing plate.
Figure 10.   A-A section ­view60. 5—Second round tube; 41—Rotary shaft; 42—Base; 51—perforation; 52—
Slider; 53—Second nut; 54—Compression spring; 55—pawl; 411—ratchet; 421—Support leg; 422—Connecting 
rod; 521—Limit plate; 522—External thread; 551—Pressure Sensor.

12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 11.   B-B section ­view60. 1—Side plate; 2—side panel; 3—First round tube; 8—Fixing plate; 9—Curved 
pressure plate; 21—Pressure generating sheet; 31—Groove; 32—Rubber bumps; 81—Through hole; 92—Vertical 
pole; 311—Electromagnet; 331—Magnetorheological fluid; 921—Sealing plate.
Figure 12.   C-C section ­view60. 1—Side plate; 2—Side panel; 3—First round tube; 4—Drive motor; 5—Second 
round tube; 8—Fixing plate; 9—Curved pressure plate; 33—Rubber bumps; 41—Rotary shaft; 42—Base; 
81—Through hole; 82-Threaded hole; 91—Screw; 92—Vertical pole; 311—Electromagnet; 411—ratchet; 421—
Support leg; 422—Connecting rod; 921—Sealing plate.

13
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Discussion
Biology dictionary. 
The primary problem of stimulating design inspiration with the help of acquired bio-
logical knowledge is how to determine keywords. The different keywords can retrieve different biological infor-
mation. This paper uses three biological backgrounds, namely Biology-online.org, Henderson’s dictionary of 
Biology, and dict.cnki.net, to obtain biological keywords. After using, the advantages and disadvantages of three 
ways are found as following:
(a)	
The keywords extracted from the dictionary module of Biology-online.org need to be analyzed to obtain 
more intuitive biological keywords in the retrieved articles. Therefore, extracting keywords in the article 
will increase the time consumption.
(b)	 Henderson’s dictionary of Biology text dictionary can quickly locate the searched word, but this biological 
dictionary is a knowledge explanation of the searched word. Therefore, the efficiency is not high.
(c)	
Dict.cnki.net contains information in various fields. Users only need to select biology after retrieving 
content related to biology only, and the biological information retrieved is only a biological text related to 
the search term information. Therefore, it greatly helps users save time, and the extracted keywords will 
be more accurate and closely related to biological themes.
Comparison of biological keyword expansion methods. 
In order to obtain more comprehensive 
biological knowledge from AskNature, this article uses two methods to expand biological search terms. The 
biological terms are expanded in Thesaurus and in Python based on the WordNet database. Through practice, 
the advantages and disadvantages of the two methods are found as follows:
(a)	
The advantage of the expansion in Python based on WordNet database is that not only it can crawl syno-
nyms, but also crawl the hypernym and hyponym with the same part of speech as the search term. The 
whole the process is automated. The disadvantage is that fewer words are obtained and the process is more 
complicated.
(b)	 The advantages of synonym retrieval from biological keywords in Thesaurus are that the process is easier 
and can obtain more words. Some words crawled by Python will also be included.
Using both expansion methods at the same time will complement each other. Keywords obtained by the two 
expansion methods are shown on Table 6.
The method proposed in this paper has similarities and differences with the method provided by ­Lenau61. The 
similarity is that we have supplemented and refined the keywords. Lenau generated synonyms for the keywords 
in the list based on the thesaurus function in the online Google Docs of Encyclopedia Britannica. This article 
uses Python programming to automatically obtain synonyms based on the WordNet database. The difference is 
that Lenau expanded keywords for the first time in AskNature to obtain more possible keywords and generate 
more words at the same time in the continuous progress of the search stage. This article uses keywords based on 
different biological backgrounds, such as biology and biological dictionaries, to expand the purposeful keywords 
that are closer to biology. Finally, we can get biological knowledge in AskNature based on these keywords. In 
contrast, the advantages of the method proposed in this article are to simplify the biological keywords, expand 
the keywords after narrowing the scope of keywords, and finally obtain the required biological knowledge and 
Table 5.   Design choices and details.
Selected organism or part
Detail
Bamboo
The shape of bamboo is cylindrical and similar to that of the reel in the winch. The arrangement of 
bamboo fiber bundles is a ring-shaped mesh hollow structure, which can be realized on the inner 
and outer walls of the reel. The hollow structure of the first-round tube can reduce the overall 
weight of the winch and is convenient for handling. The inner and outer wall structures can 
improve the structural strength and avoid deformation under compression
Rhizomes and pointed stems of plants
The hydration of rhizomes and tip stems can cause cell walls to expand and contract, similar to 
retractable air sacs. This kind of bionic airbag structure is added into the groove, the steel wire 
rope is in contact with the first round tube, the airbag is deformed under pressure, the contact 
area between the first round tube and the steel wire rope is increased, and the friction force can be 
increased
Mushroom
There are many covering layers on the mushroom surface, and the covering layer is designed on 
the first-round tube with rubber bumps to prevent the wire rope from slipping
Snake’s abdomen scales
Abdomen scales are like an inverted V structure. This inverted V structure is designed on the 
rotating shaft with a ratchet and pawl. When the drive motor suddenly loses power, the weight 
loses the pulling force and falls, and the rotating shaft is impacted in one direction. At this time, 
the pawl restricts the ratchet from turning Rotate to avoid accidental falling of heavy objects
Honeycomb structure
The hexagonal structure of the honeycomb is designed in a bionic design on the inner wall rein-
forcing plate of the reel to improve the strength of the first-round tube
The shell on the back of the Beetle
The shell of the beetle is mostly arc-shaped. The arc-shaped structure is used as the arc-shaped 
pressure plate of the winch. When the winch drags the heavy object, the steel wire rope releases 
the specified length, and the arc-shaped pressure plate is moved down and pressed by the lifting 
structure. The steel wire rope of the first-round tube avoids the relative sliding of the steel wire 
rope and improves the working stability of the winch

14
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
information in AskNature automatically. Therefore, this method can not only shorten the acquisition time, but 
also ensure the relevance of biological and engineering keywords under the condition of expanding biological 
knowledge.
In addition, the method proposed in this paper has similarities and differences with the method provided by 
­Kaiser19,20. The similarity is that we all use the function of the product as engineering keywords and WordNet 
to expand search space. The difference is that the papers of Kaiser mainly include three steps, namely, selecting 
engineering terminology, obtaining search terms, and acquiring biological knowledge. But this paper includes 
five steps, namely, selecting engineering terminology, obtaining biological keywords, expanding biological key-
words, filtering biological keywords and acquiring biological knowledge.
There are some differences in these steps.
(1)	
Selecting engineering terminology ­Kaiser19,20 chose function, property and environment of the product as 
the engineering terminology. This paper selects the product’s purpose function, means function, and key 
components as engineering terminology according to the type of knowledge in the ­product48. The purpose 
functions are related to the performance of the product, such as the cost, volume, requirement, etc. For 
example, ‘reducing vibration’. The means functions involve the methods and means to improve the technical, 
economic, or social aspects of a product, such as ‘isolate’. It means to reduce vibration by isolating objects. 
In addition, the function, shape, behavior and other features are hidden in the names of some parts, such 
as ‘elastic ring’ and ‘clamping devices’. Among them, the name of the parts is easily overlooked. Choosing 
these engineering terminologies can more accurately reflect the needs of engineers.
(2)	
Obtaining search terms ­Kaiser19,20 obtained the search terms with the help of WordNet. This paper uses some 
database, namely dic.cnki.net, Biology-online.org Webpage and Biology-online.org dictionary module to 
obtain biological keywords.
(3)	
Expanding biological keywords There is no such step in the ­Kaiser19,20. This paper uses two ways to expand 
biological keywords. One way is to use Thesaurus Webpages to expand biological keywords, and the other 
way is to use WordNet to expand biological keywords with the help of python programming. So, the more 
biological keywords can be obtained, and the same keywords obtained through these ways can be prefer-
entially used for retrieval.
(4)	
Filtering biological keywords There is no such step in the ­Kaiser19,20. This paper uses two methods to filter 
biological keywords. One method is to filter out some redundant words. The second method is to filter out 
different forms of the same word. These processes can be easily completed through programming. Filtering 
out some words can reduce the number of useless biological keywords, thereby reducing retrieval time.
(5)	
Acquiring biological information ­Kaiser19,20 acquired biological knowledge from the PubMed. This paper 
acquires the biological knowledge from AskNature with the help of Python crawling programming.
The proposed method uses different and easily overlooked but important engineering terminologies, expands 
and filters biological terminologies in multiple ways, thereby it can expand the search space of terminologies, 
increase the possibility of obtaining more valuable biological terminologies, and acquire more biological knowl-
edge quickly by using Python crawling technology.
Comparative experiment. 
Comparison with ­Chen15, the same point is that this paper and ­Chen15 are 
both based on WordNet database to obtain synonyms to retrieve biological information and provide auxiliary 
innovative design ideas for engineering design. The differences between the two methods is that in the process 
of obtaining biological terminology. In this paper, based on the feature of engineering design products, some 
engineering words, such as function, purpose, shape and other engineering words, are selected. Some database, 
namely dic.cnki.net, Biology-online.org Webpage and Biology-online.org dictionary module are used to obtain 
biological terminologies. Chen decomposes engineering requirements and structure FCW, calculates FCW’s ECI 
(Engineering Correlation Intension), BCI (Biological Correlation Intension), and CCI (Composite Correlation 
Intension) values, and then pushes keywords through ranking. The potential words can be found and com-
mended based on the calculated value.
In order to observe the effect of using the presented method to acquire biological knowledge, we use the 
phrase ‘transfer electric energy’ in ­Chen15 to compare the amount of biological information obtained with this 
method and the method in ­Chen15.
Table 6.   Expansion method comparison.
Input word
Retrieve Webpages for expanded words (Thesaurus Webpage)
Python automatically obtains expanded words (WordNet database)
Shell
Carapace, frame, integument, pod, skeleton, case, chassis, crust, frame, hull, husk, 
nut, pericarp, plastorn, scale, shard, shuck, skin
Carapace, palte, ammunition, shotgun-shell, shrapnel
Reduction
Contraction, rebate, debasement, cut, cutback, devaluation, discount, abatement, 
attrition, cortailment, minimization, diminution, degradation, decrement, shrink-
age, subjection, subtraction, subdual, markdown
Decrease, change-of-magnitude, amortization, contraction, depreciation, lower-
ing, shortening, shrinking, weakening, subtraction, depletion, easing, discount, 
cutback, conquest, declassification, rollback, reverse, de-escalation, deflation, 
extenuation, discount
Fiber
Grain, thread, tissue, cilia, cord, fibril, filament, grit, hair, shred, staple, string, 
strip, tendril, tooth, vein, warp, web, woof, footlet
Material, roughage, character, Bassine, bristle, coir, string, raveling, oakum

15
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
According to the proposed method, the phrase is split and expanded by two ways. The expanded biological 
terminologies is shown in Table 7.
When two ways are used to expand biological terminology, the expanded words generated by one way may 
also exist in the expanded words generated by the other way, and these repeated words will be preferentially used 
for retrieval. Table 8 is the comparison of the number of search terms and the number of retrieved biological 
information between ­Chen15 and the proposed method. (ST: Search Term, NPBI: Number of pieces of biological 
information retrieved)
It can be found from Table 8 and Figs. 13 and 14 that different biological terms can be obtained by the pro-
posed method and ­Chen15, and thus different biological information can be obtained. Although the number 
of search terms used by the two methods is similar, the biological information retrieved is quite different. This 
difference is mainly due to the two ways of expanding biological keyword used in this article and obtaining 
biological keywords from multiple databases.
Conclusions
In the design process, if there is no stimulation from external information, the designer’s development and inno-
vation ideas will be increasingly limited to traditional thinking. Biological knowledge is an important source to 
stimulate design inspiration. But without biological knowledge, it is difficult for people in different fields to obtain 
the biological information required. Therefore, acquiring biological knowledge is a key step in the innovation 
process. The method proposed in this paper can not only stimulate designers’ inspiration, but additionally has 
lower requirements for designers’ interdisciplinary knowledge than other automatic acquisition methods such 
as algorithms and natural language analysis. At the same time, in the process of acquiring biological knowledge, 
Python language is used to expand keywords and capture biological information, which expands the space for 
acquiring biological knowledge and shortening the time of biological information retrieval.
Using Python language to expand biological keywords through biological dictionaries and biological data-
bases can greatly increase the number of keywords, but at the same time, the expanded biological keywords will 
Table 7.   Biological terminologies expanded by the two ways in the proposed method.
Keywords after splitting
The number of search terms after 
expanding
Based on Thesaurus
Based on WordNet
Transfer
18
12
Electricity
4
11
Energy
54
13
Table 8.   The number of pieces of biological information retrieved by the two methods.
ST
NPBI
Chen15
Transfer electron
40
Transfer charge
28
Transfer potential
16
Shift electron
1
Shift potential
3
Pump electron
12
Transfer field
9
Displace electron
9
Shift field
2
Migrate charge
13
This Paper
Transfer efficiency
1
Transfer electron
11
Transfer intensity
1
Conduction power
36
Substitution power
35
Conduction energy
2
Movement energy
3
Movement power
75
Transport electronics
19
Change electron
23
Delivery charge
35

16
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
have more word polymorphisms and word repetitions, etc., manual filtering will take a lot of time. Therefore, 
the next step of this work is to solve the problem of automatic selection of expanded words. In addition, there 
are different types of biological websites on the Internet. How to use multiple biological websites to obtain com-
plementary biological knowledge for analogy stimulation and obtain new the inspirational design is also a very 
interesting and worthy research question.
Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
Received: 24 July 2021; Accepted: 29 April 2022
Figure 13.   The number of biological information retrieved by ­Chen15.
Figure 14.   The number of biological information retrieved by the proposed method.

17
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
References
	 1.	 Victoria, C. O. et al. The scientific study of inspiration in the creative process: Challenges and opportunities. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 
8, 436. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fnhum.​2014.​00436 (2014).
	 2.	 Cohen, Y. H. & Reich, Y. Biomimetic Design Method for Innovation and Sustainability Theories, Knowledge Bases and Conceptual 
Frameworks that Support the Analysis of Observations (Springer, 2017).
	 3.	 Luo, S. J. et al. Research status and progress of product shape bionic design. Chin. J. Mech. Eng. 54(21), 152–169 (2018).
	 4.	 Goel, A. K., Rugaber, S. & Vattam, S. Structure, behavior, and function of complex systems: The structure, behavior, and function 
modeling language. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf. 23, 23–35 (2009).
	 5.	 Yen, J., Helms, M., Goel, A., Tovey, C. & Weissburg, M. Adaptive evolution of teaching practices in biologically inspired design. 
In Biologically Inspired Design 153–199 (Springer, 2014).
	 6.	 Nagel, J. K. & Stone, R. B. A computational approach to biologically inspired design. Artif. Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf. 26(02), 
161–176. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0890​06041​20000​54 (2012).
	 7.	 Shu, L. H. et al. Biologically Inspired Design (Cambridge University Press, 2010).
	 8.	 Bruck, H. A. et al. Training mechanical engineering students to utilize biological inspiration during product development. Bioinspir. 
Biomim. 2(4), S198. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​1748-​3182/2/​4/​S08 (2007).
	 9.	 Jacobs, S. R., Nichol, E. C. & Helms, M. E. Where are we now and where are we going? The BioM innovation database. J. Mech. 
Des. 136(11), 111101. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/1.​40281​71 (2014).
	10.	 Zhang, H. & Aggidis, G. A. Nature rules hidden in the biomimetic wave energy converters. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 97, 28–37. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​rser.​2018.​08.​018 (2018).
	11.	 Shu, L. H. A natural-language approach to biomimetic design. Artif. Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf. 24(4), 507–519. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1017/​S0890​06041​00003​63 (2010).
	12.	 Chiu, I. & Shu, L. H. Natural language analysis for biomimetic design. ASME 2004 International Design Engineering Technical 
Conferences & Computers & Information in Engineering Conference. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/​DETC2​004-​57250 (2004).
	13.	 Nagel, J., Stone, R. B. & Mcadams, D. A. An engineering-to-biology thesaurus for engineering design. Proceedings of the ASME 
2010 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC/CIE 
2010, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/​DETC2​010-​28233 (2010).
	14.	 Farzaneh, H. H. & Lindemann, U. A Practical Guide to Bio-inspired Design (Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 2019).
	15.	 Chen, C. et al. A method to automatically push keywords for biological information searching in bio-inspired design. Proc. Inst. 
Mech. Eng. C https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​09544​06220​932595 (2020).
	16.	 Stone, R. B. & Wood, K. L. Development of a functional basis for design. J. Mech. Des. 122(December), 359–370 (2000).
	17.	 Ke, J., Wallace, J. S., Chiu, I. & Shu, L. H. Supporting Biomimetic Design by Embedding Metadata in Natural-Language Corpora. 
Proceedings of the ASME 2010 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineer-
ing Conference IDETC/CIE 2010, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 1–8. https://​shulab.​mie.​utoro​nto.​ca/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​pubs/​Confe​
rence/​2010_​KeEtAl_​DTM_​Biomi​metic​MetaD​ata.​pdf (2010).
	18.	 Cheong, H. & Shu, L. H. Automatic Extraction of Causally Related Functions from Natural-Language Text for Biomimetic Design. 
Proceedings of the ASME 2012 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineer-
ing Conference IDETC/CIE 2012, Chicago, IL, USA 1–20. https://​shulab.​mie.​utoro​nto.​ca/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​pubs/​Cheong_​etal_​
DTM_​12.​pdf (2012).
	19.	 Kaiser, M. K., Hashemi, F. H. & Lindemann, U. BIOscrabble: Extraction of Biological Analogies out of Large Text Sources. In IC3K 
2013: 5th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management—SCITE-
PRESS Digital Library, Vilamoura, Algarve, Portugal 10–20. https://​media​tum.​ub.​tum.​de/​doc/​11887​07/​11887​07.​pdf (2013).
	20.	 Kaiser, M. K., Farzaneh, H. & Hand Lindemann, U. An approach to support searching for biomimetic solutions. International 
design. In Proceedings of the International Design Conference—DESIGN 2012, Dubrovnik, Croatia 969–978. https://​media​tum.​ub.​
tum.​de/​doc/​11671​62/​11671​62.​pdf (2012).
	21.	 Nagel, J. K. S. & Stone, R. B. A Systematic Approach to Biologically-Inspired Engineering Design. Proceedings of the ASME 2011 
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC/CIE 2011 
1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/​DETC2​011-​47398 (2011).
	22.	 Stroble, J. K., Stone, R. B., McAdams, D. A. & Watkins, S. E. An Engineering-to-Biology Thesaurus to Promote Better Collaboration, 
Creativity and Discovery. Proceedings of the 19th CIRP Design Conference—Competitive Design 30–31. https://​dspace.​lib.​cranf​ield.​
ac.​uk/​bitst​ream/​handle/​1826/​3719/​An_​Engin​eering-​to-​Biolo​gy_​Thesa​urus_​To_​Promo​te_​Better_​Colla​borat​ion_​Creat​ivity_​and_​
Disco​very-​2009.​pdf;​seque​nce=4.
	23.	 Nagel, J. A. Thesaurus for Bioinspired Engineering Design (Springer, 2014).
	24.	 Li, Y., Wen, R. & Yang, L. C. Research on the relationship between internet search index and automobile sales-keyword acquisition 
based on text mining. Mod. Inf. 36(8), 131–136. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3969/j.​issn.​1008-​0821.​2016.​08.​026 (2016).
	25.	 Xu, G. Research on Web Keyword Extraction Method Based on Word Span (Xiangtan University, 2017).
	26.	 Liu, H. T. et al. Keyword extraction for general gap sequence pattern mining. Chin. J. Electron. 47(5), 1121–1128 (2019).
	27.	 Liu, L. & Zhang, B. Research on the acquisition method of ontology feature index based on semantic keywords. Comput. Technol. 
Dev. 18(12), 140–143. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3969/j.​issn.​1673-​629X.​2008.​12.​042 (2008).
	28.	 Vandevenne, D., Caicedo, J., Verhaegen, P. A., Dewulf, S. & Duflou, J. R. Webcrawling for a biological strategy corpus to support 
biologically-inspired design. In CIRP Design 83–92 (Springer-Verlag, 2012).
	29.	 Vattam, S. S. & Goel, A. K. Foraging for Inspiration: Understanding and Supporting the Online Information Seeking Practices 
of Biologically Inspired Designers. In Proceedings of the ASME 2011 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & 
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC/CIE 2011 177–186. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/​DETC2​011-​48238.
	30.	 Kim, S. J. & Lee, J. H. A study on metadata structure and recommenders of biological systems to support bio-inspired design. Eng. 
Appl. Artif. Intell. 57, 16–37. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​engap​pai.​2016.​10.​003 (2017).
	31.	 Willocx, M., Ayali, A. & Duflou, J. R. Where and how to find bio-inspiration?. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 31(9), 61–67. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cirpj.​2020.​09.​013 (2020).
	32.	 Vhf, A. et al. Bio-based design methodologies for products, processes, machine tools and production systems—ScienceDirect. 
CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 32, 46–60. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cirpj.​2020.​11.​008 (2021).
	33.	 Goel, A. K. & Hancock, W. Multifunctional and domain independent? A meta-analysis of case studies of biologically inspired 
design. Des. Sci. 7, e24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​dsj.​2021.​23 (2021).
	34.	 Lenau, T. A., Metze, A. L. & Hesselberg, T. Paradigms for biologically inspired design. Bioinspir. Biomim. Bioreplication https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1117/​12.​22965​60 (2018).
	35.	 Peters, T. Nature as measure the biomimicry guild. Architect. Des. 81, 44–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ad.​1318 (2011).
	36.	 Gao, L. Product Bionic Design Based on Emotional Experience (Tianjin University of Science and Technology, 2014).
	37.	 Yang, H. Research on the Ecological Bionic Design of Large Public Buildings (Henan University, 2016).
	38.	 Feng, H. T. Research on the Bionic Design of Electric Bicycle Body Model (Jilin University, 2016).
	39.	 Jia, H. L. et al. Design of bionic saw blade for corn stalk cutting. J. Bionic Eng. 10(4), 497–505. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S1672-​
6529(13)​60242-5 (2013).

18
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:7864  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11833-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	40.	 Tan, R. et al. Creative design inspired by biological knowledge: Technologies and methods. Front. Mech. Eng. 014(001), 1–14. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11465-​018-​0511-0 (2019).
	41.	 Bogatyrev, N. & Bogatyreva, O. BioTRIZ: A Win-Win Methodology for Eco-innovation, Eco-Innovation and the Development of 
Business Models (Springer International Publishing, 2014).
	42.	 Helms, M., Vattam, S. S. & Goel, A. K. Biologically inspired design: Process and products. Des. Stud. 30(5), 606–622. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​destud.​2009.​04.​003 (2009).
	43.	 Forbes, P. The Gecko’s Foot: Bio-inspiration, Engineering New Materials from Nature (W. Norton & Company, 2005).
	44.	 Bonser, R. H. C. Patented biologically-inspired technological innovations: A twenty-year view. J. Bionic Eng. 3(1), 39–41. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S1672-​6529(06)​60005-X (2006).
	45.	 Liu, W. et al. Research on the realization method of multi-biological effect technology. Chin. J. Mech. Eng. 52(9), 129–140. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3901/​JME.​2016.​09.​129 (2016).
	46.	 Mark, T. W. & Shu, L. H. Using descriptions of biological phenomena for idea generation. Res. Eng. Des. 19(1), 21–28. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s00163-​007-​0041-y (2008).
	47.	 Nagel, J. & Stone, R. B. A computational concept generation technique for biologically-inspired, engineering design. Des. Comput. 
Cogn. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​94-​007-​0510-4_​38 (2011).
	48.	 Zhang, H., Qiu, Q. Y., Feng, P. E. & Wang, Z. X. An automated method for acquiring design knowledge from product patents. J. 
Harbin Eng. Univ. 30(7), 785–791. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3969/j.​issn.​1006-​7043.​2009.​07.​012 (2009).
	49.	 http://​www.​biolo​gyonl​ine.​com.
	50.	 Lawrence, E. Henderson’s Dictionary of Biology (Pearson, 2016).
	51.	 http://​www.​dict.​cnki.​net.
	52.	 https://​www.​thesa​urus.​com/​browse/​shell.
	53.	 Unsplash. Bamboo. https://​unspl​ash.​com/​photos/​OoULo​8WHNtY (accessed on 8 April 2022).
	54.	 http://​www.​askna​ture.​org.
	55.	 Unsplash. Snake. https://​unspl​ash.​com/​photos/​HaGwC​k2AD84 (accessed on 8 April 2022).
	56.	 Wikimedia Commons. Mushroom. https://​commo​ns.​wikim​edia.​org/​wiki/​File:​Gypsy_​Mushr​oom_​(50377​82405).​jpg (accessed on 
8 April 2022).
	57.	 Unsplash. Honey Comb. https://​unspl​ash.​com/​photos/​00Tro​AQH0sE. (accessed on 8 April 2022).
	58.	 Unsplash. Beetle. https://​unspl​ash.​com/​photos/​OkuDW​YDh5yE (accessed on 8 April 2022).
	59.	 Unsplash. Root of a Plant. https://​unspl​ash.​com/​photos/​QRnBV​nQR1SQ (accessed on 8 April 2022).
	60.	 Zha, Z. M. & Zhang, H. An electric winch with improved structure. 202021771340.2020-08-24.
	61.	 Lenau, T. A. et al. Engineering Design of an Adaptive Leg Prosthesis Using Biological Principles. International Design Conference-
design. 2010. http://​polyn​et.​dk/​lenau/​lenau​DESIG​N2010.​pdf
Author contributions
Z.M.Z. and H.Z. wrote the main manuscript. H.Z. and G.A.A.: Revised the paper, Owner’s manuscript.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.Z.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2022

