ARTICLE
Chimpanzees produce diverse vocal sequences
with ordered and recombinatorial properties
Cédric Girard-Buttoz
1,2,3,5✉, Emiliano Zaccarella
4,5, Tatiana Bortolato1,2,3, Angela D. Friederici
4,
Roman M. Wittig
1,2,3 & Catherine Crockford1,2,3✉
The origins of human language remains a major question in evolutionary science. Unique to
human language is the capacity to ﬂexibly recombine a limited sound set into words and
hierarchical sequences, generating endlessly new sentences. In contrast, sequence produc-
tion of other animals appears limited, stunting meaning generation potential. However,
studies have rarely quantiﬁed ﬂexibility and structure of vocal sequence production across
the whole repertoire. Here, we used such an approach to examine the structure of vocal
sequences in chimpanzees, known to combine calls used singly into longer sequences.
Focusing on the structure of vocal sequences, we analysed 4826 recordings of 46 wild adult
chimpanzees from Taï National Park. Chimpanzees produced 390 unique vocal sequences.
Most vocal units emitted singly were also emitted in two-unit sequences (bigrams), which in
turn were embedded into three-unit sequences (trigrams). Bigrams showed positional and
transitional regularities within trigrams with certain bigrams predictably occurring in either
head or tail positions in trigrams, and predictably co-occurring with speciﬁc other units. From
a purely structural perspective, the capacity to organize single units into structured
sequences offers a versatile system potentially suitable for expansive meaning generation.
Further research must show to what extent these structural sequences signal predictable
meanings.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
OPEN
1 Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod, CNRS, 67 Boulevard Pinel, 69675 BRON Lyon, France. 2 Taï Chimpanzee Project, Centre Suisse de
Recherche Scientiﬁque, Abidjan, Ivory Coast. 3 Department of Human Behaviour, Ecology and Culture, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
04103 Leipzig, Germany. 4 Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. 5These authors
contributed equally: Cédric Girard-Buttoz, Emiliano Zaccarella. ✉email: cbuttoz@isc.cnrs.fr; crockford@isc.cnrs.fr
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
1
1234567890():,;

A
major conundrum in evolutionary science has been
reconstructing the evolution of language1–5. Given that
language does not fossilize, a key line of research has been
comparative, contrasting the communication systems of non-
human animals (hereafter: animals) with that of humans. Unique
to human language is its capacity to combine a limited sound set
into words, and to combine words into rule-based hierarchically
structured phrases, allowing the generation of endlessly new
sentences and thereby new meanings. Animals, including non-
human primates (hereafter: primates), typically use limited sound
sets (e.g., primates6, bats7, and birds8), overlapping in size with
human sound sets9. Thus, it is unlikely that, for animals, the size
of the sound set is the factor limiting meaning generation. Rather,
the animal capacity to generate communicative sequences is
considered highly constrained, both in terms of structural sys-
tematicity and meaning generation5. In human language, words
together with syntactic hierarchical structures permit ﬂexible
meaning construction. Such hierarchical structures have not been
demonstrated in other animal communication systems although
some animal calls show a limited capacity to encode meaning,
and meaning can shift when single calls are emitted in short
sequences10.
Comparative studies with human and non-human primates
have examined their capacities to process sequences both in
perception and production. In terms of sequence perception,
auditory
discrimination
tasks
using
familiarization-
discrimination paradigms on artiﬁcially generated rule-based
sequences have shown that some primates (cotton-top tamarins11
and macaques12) appear to be sensitive to local sequence viola-
tions generated by artiﬁcial grammars although they fail to detect
violations based on phrase structure relationships. This suggests
that primates might possess some organizational principles
applying over pattern regularities between neighboring units.
Crucially, such positional principles appear to go beyond simple
adjacency rules and include the capacity to detect sequence vio-
lations
across
non-adjacent
relationships
between
distinct
sounds13,14. Importantly, these tasks encode patterning but not
meaning, as sounds are selected to be neutral and devoid of
context. The observed behavioral ability could be based on a
neuroanatomical structure which links the auditory cortex to the
frontal cortex in non-human primates similar to humans15. This
pathway has been discussed to support auditory-to-motor map-
ping in humans allowing vocal imitation of auditory input16 and
may at least serve a function of auditory pattern recognition in
non-human primates.
With respect to production, there are no examples demon-
strating that animals generate hierarchically structured vocal
sequences with changes in meaning5,17–20 where a sequence is
broadly deﬁned as the production of two or more different types
of single vocal units within a short time of each other21.
Due to methodological challenges21, however, it cannot be
ruled out that such examples exist in animals, nor likewise that
intermediary examples of vocal sequence complexity exist.
Establishing either structural ﬂexibility or meaning content of
even a single short vocal sequence is highly time-consuming.
Therefore, animal studies have necessarily focused on a few vocal
sequences per vocal repertoire but rarely offer quantitative
assessment of sequence production across the whole vocal
repertoire. Drawing deﬁnitive conclusions about the extent of
animal capacities to generate sequences may thus be premature.
While both structure and meaning are crucial requirements for
ﬂexible meaning generation, a way to establish a link between the
production of vocal sequences and sequence perception ﬁndings
discussed above, is to assess whether vocal sequences in pro-
duction follow structural rules, similar to rule-based sequence
perception. Such structure of vocal sequences would facilitate the
encoding of meaning, should meaning content be evident in the
vocalizations. For example, if a repertoire has few vocal sequen-
ces, it cannot offer extensive meaning potential. Conversely,
repertoires with many vocal sequences offer at least a greater
potential for meaning generation. For instance, work on forest
monkeys shows that the production of vocal sequences can be a
source of new meaning generation whereby a sequence combin-
ing two alarm calls produce a new meaning related to travel22.
This example illustrates that by combining meaning-bearing units
(such as call types) into a sequence new meaning can be gener-
ated. However, this capacity seems limited to the combination of
calls produced in alarm contexts in this species. Animal songs
(e.g., whales23 and song birds24) can contain hierarchical struc-
turing of vocal sequences but without meaning content and so
will not be discussed here. Hence, we postulate that the structure
of a system that can encode ﬂexible meaning should minimally,
but not exclusively, require the following three structural capa-
cities (summarized in Table 1):
1. Flexibility: are most sounds or calls in the vocal repertoire
combined with most of the others (hereafter: single units)?
Can single units, A, B, C, D, E… be combined as AB, AC,
AD, AE, BC, BD, BE, CD, CE…?. If only few single units
from the vocal repertoire occur in sequences (only AB, AD
are options out of A, B, C, D, and E units), it is a limited
system.
2. Ordering: Do single units within sequences follow ordering
rules? i.e., both AB and BA can occur; however, if different
ordering of the same single units should encode different
information (such as coordination versus alarm), we would
expect production biases at the structural level. Speciﬁcally,
we expect that certain single units are more likely to be
combined than others, and that they might occur in certain
positions in the sequence depending on the units with
which they are combined. If so then sequence production
cannot
be
explained
by
random
juxtaposition
of
single units.
3. Recombination: independently emitted short sequences are
combined into longer sequences. Such recombination has
the potential to increase meaning generation, overcoming
limitations of a small vocal repertoire: e.g., independently
produced bigrams (i.e., two independently used single units
combined into a two-unit sequence) which can in turn be
emitted in trigrams (sequences of three single units), and
trigrams which can be found in longer sequences (e.g., AB
can also occur as ABC, or separately emitted bigrams
ABCD can occur as ABCD). Such recombination, might
suggest some rudimentary capacity to treat independently
emitted bigrams as units for more complex sequences. A
vocal system that can ﬂexibly combine all single units with
Table 1 Three structural capacities that can expand the potential to encode ﬂexible meaning generation.
Criterion
Example
1. Flexibility: most single units in a repertoire combine with most other single units into sequences
A, B, C, … →[AB], [BC], [BA], [CB], …
2. Ordering: ordered positioning of single units occur in sequences
[AB], [AC], [AD], [EF], [EG],…
3. Recombination: short independently emitted sequences recombined into longer sequences
[[AB]C], [C[AB]], [[AB][CD]], …
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
2
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

other single units but without the evident potential for
some
form
of
recombination,
only
provides
limited
meaning-generation potential.
Using a comparative perspective, we examine these three
lower-level but universal capacities in human speech. These
capacities loosely reﬂect a system that develops in early childhood
as a pathway to hierarchical syntax: corpora studies show how
words, initially produced in isolation, are ﬂexibly assembled into
two-word phrases, linearly ordered in the language of use, and
then recombined into longer sequences25,26.
Whether such structural capacities are evident in natural ani-
mal vocal production has not been comprehensively established:
sequences reported so far in nonsinging species show limitations
with respect to the three structural capacities laid out above.
For the ﬁrst capacity, ﬂexible combining of single units into
sequences, across species vocal sequences occurring in long-
distance and alarm calls use a minority of call types from the
vocal repertoire, such that most call types are only ever emitted
singly (e.g., chacma baboons27, geladas28, indris29, Japanese tits30;
but see Dahlin and Wright31). In alarm contexts, a few single
units can be combined, changing the information about the
predator type, urgency, or combining mobbing recruitment and
warning calls into a sequence (e.g., several forest monkeys22,32;
and Japanese tits30). However, the single units which are com-
bined only represent a small portion of the total single-unit vocal
repertoire of the species (but see Ouattarra et al.33 for a possible
exception). Furthermore, sequences emitted in an alarm context
tend to occur as bigrams, where two independent calls are
combined, and not in longer sequences (10,34,35, but see
refs. 30,33).
For the second capacity, ordered production of single units
within sequences, there are a few examples of ordering of single
units produced in bigrams or longer sequences (e.g., Japanese
tits36) which also demonstrate that changing unit order alters the
information conveyed to conspeciﬁcs30. Longer sequences have
shown variation in unit order for example only at the population
level, indicating population differences (e.g., rock hyraxes37;
birds31; and gibbons38).
For the third capacity, recombination of short independently
emitted sequences, there are only a few reports of embedding of
certain sequences within longer sequences. For instance, Japanese
tits combine a common sequence ABC with a fourth element D to
produce a sequence ABCD30 and forest monkeys combine the
sequence B_K with a third element H to form the longer sequence
B_K_H33. However, reports of such phenomenon are rare and
once again limited so far to a few single units per vocal repertoire.
In sum, we ﬁnd only few reported examples for each of the
three capacities laid out above, and no species other than humans,
demonstrates all three structural capacities. This could result
from researchers rarely evaluating the occurrence or ﬂexibility of
structured sequences across the whole vocal repertoire of non-
singing species. Hence it is quite possible that such a system that
encodes the three structural capacities laid out above exists out-
side of humans.
Here, we examined vocal sequence production in the chim-
panzee, a species known to produce vocal sequences across the
whole vocal repertoire39, but as yet lacking quantitative analyses
of these sequences. We do not assess meaning in this study, but it
is important to note that chimpanzee single-unit use can show
high context-speciﬁcity across a relatively broad range of contexts
compared to other species, including alarm, hunting, feeding and
greeting40 for a review see Crockford41. Chimpanzees also use
single units within numerous vocal sequences, not only in their
loud calls—pant hoot42,43—but in sequences occurring in con-
texts such as feeding, nesting, fusion, greeting, and travel39,40,44.
The acoustic structure of calls emitted within a vocal sequence
show acoustic ﬁdelity to the calls emitted singularly44. However, a
quantitative approach to examining vocal sequence patterning
has not been conducted. These characteristics combined make
this a suitable vocal system to examine the structure of vocal
sequences
in
relation
to
the
three
structural
capacities
detailed above.
We aimed to quantify the structural properties of chimpanzee
vocal sequences, assessing the potential for ﬂexible meaning
generation in chimpanzees. Thus, we tested the extent to which
chimpanzees: (1) ﬂexibly combine single-use calls into sequences,
(2) produce ordered positioning of single units within sequences,
and (3) recombine independently emitted sequences into longer
sequences.
To reach this goal, we ﬁrst extracted the use of single units as
well as all the vocal sequences with two or more single units,
using a full-vocal repertoire analysis. We tested each capacity as
follows: (1) Flexibility: we ﬁrst focused on bigrams (i.e., two-unit
sequences). We constructed “networks” of bigrams to examine
how extensively single units are combined with other single units
across the vocal repertoire. (2) Ordering: we then assessed which
bigrams were produced above-chance level (more frequently than
by random juxtaposition of single units) and, focusing on these
sequences, established whether single units were found con-
sistently at speciﬁc positions (i.e., at the start or end of the
sequence: positional bias), and were predictably preceded or
followed by other speciﬁc single units (transitional bias). (3)
Recombination: we focused on sequences with three single units
(trigrams) and assessed which trigrams were produced above-
chance level. We then established if frequently used bigrams were
also reused within trigrams. If this occurred, we were also
interested in whether the recombination of bigrams with a third
single unit into trigrams followed some positional and transi-
tional bias. We focused on sequences with two (bigrams) and
three (trigrams) single units because they represent about 80% of
the vocal sequences recorded in this study.
We used 900.8 h of data from 46 wild mature chimpanzees
from Taï National Park, Ivory Coast, fully habituated to human
observers, from three communities. We followed a systemic
whole-repertoire approach where vocalizations were continuously
recorded during focal animal sampling27–29.
Results
For this study, we used a call classiﬁcation procedure, training
listeners to classify calls according to sound and spectrographic
information, resulting in high interrater reliability scores between
coders. This method has proven to be the most accurate at
classifying calls, especially in a noisy forest environment, as
compared to semiautomatic classiﬁcation of manually extracted
metrics or fully automatic call classiﬁcation algorithms21. To limit
classiﬁcation problems arising from the highly acoustically graded
chimpanzee repertoire, we chose to classify broad call categories
that show consensus across studies and chimpanzee populations
(reviewed in Crockford41; Table 2, Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2)
and the acoustic properties of which discriminate in cluster and
discriminant function analyses45. Call types, such as grunt, hoo,
bark, and scream, can be emitted singly (unpanted), or inter-
dispersed with voiced inhalations (panted), producing a string of
repetitions of alternations of pant + another vocalization (Sup-
plementary Figs. 2 and 3). The use of unpanted or panted forms
can result in contextual shifts. Single grunts, for example, are
predominantly emitted at food, whereas panted grunts are pre-
dominantly emitted as a submissive greeting vocalization41,42.
Single hoos are emitted to threats46,47, but panted hoos are used
in inter-party communication48. Unpanted and panted calls are
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
3

frequently combined into longer sequences39. Given these char-
acteristics of panted calls, whilst panted calls may be sequences in
their own right, for the purpose of this study we deﬁned panted
and unpanted form of calls as separate single units. Our rationale
for treating panted calls as separate call types rather than as a
sequence of e.g., grunt and pant, was motivated by previous
studies demonstrating that pant-grunt and pant hoot are clearly
stand-alone call types42,48 (reviewed in Crockford41). For con-
sistency in the treatment of panted call types, we include panted
barks and panted screams as stand-alone call types. Please note
that panted screams and panted barks are also reported across
chimpanzee populations41.
In the chimpanzee repertoire, variants of the same call, such as
a hoo, are emitted in different contexts, such that the acoustic
variants are context-speciﬁc, and elicit different behavioral
responses during playback experiments from receivers49. How-
ever, it may be that hoos share a common function, such as to
coordinate activities like resting and traveling41,50. Likewise,
although screams are emitted in a range of contexts e.g., when
being aggressed or during travel in pant-hoots, and some can be
discriminated acoustically from others51, they likely share an
overarching function to recruit others41,50. Hence, for simplicity,
in this study, we do not distinguish between different call variants
but use a simpliﬁed classiﬁcation whereby all hoos are classiﬁed as
“hoo”, all screams as “scream”, and so on. This approach will, if
anything, under-represent variation in vocal sequence use.
Capacity 1: the ﬂexible combination of single units within
sequences. To address capacity 1, the extent to which single-use
calls are combined into sequences, we describe the portion of
single units used in sequences and the length and diversity of
sequences in the chimpanzee vocal repertoire. Chimpanzees
produce 12 different types of single units (i.e., different call types,
see Table 2 for the abbreviation of the name of these different call
types as used in “"Results”). We analyzed 4826 utterances from 46
mature chimpanzees (Fig. 1), including adult and subadult males
and females, older than ten years of age. In total, 3232 (67.2%) of
these utterances contained only one single unit or repetitions of a
single unit, e.g., only hoos or screams. Of these, 485, c.a. 10%,
occurred in panted form e.g., panted hoos or panted screams
(Fig. 1 and Supplementary Data 1). In total, 1584 (32.8%)
utterances were sequences including 817 (16.9%) bigrams (i.e.,
sequences comprised of two units, where each unit also occurs
singly, such as hoo + grunt), 458 (9.5%) trigrams (i.e., sequences
comprised of three single units, where each unit also occurs singly
such as hoo + panted hoos + panted scream) and 170 (3.5%), 90
(1.9%), 29 (0.6%), 12 (0.2%), 4 (0.1%), 2 (0.04%), and 2 (0.04%)
sequences comprised of four, ﬁve, six, seven eight, nine and ten
units respectively, where each unit also occurs singly (Fig. 1 and
Supplementary Data 1). The length of a sequence was determined
based on the succession of two or more single units which were
each different from the preceding unit. However, the same single
unit could be repeated in the sequence when separated by at least
another single-unit type (e.g., we coded A_B_C_C as a trigram
but A_C_B_C as a four-unit sequence). The rationale here is that
the latter may also increase the potential for meaning generation.
Using this criterion, we recorded 390 unique sequences. Please
note that some studies also calculate sequence diversity such that
each single unit only occurs once in the sequence. Using this
alternative approach we found 282 unique sequences. For the rest
of the result section, however, we report on sequences with
Table 2 Discrimination of chimpanzee call types.
Call (unit) type
Abbreviation
Fundamental frequency (f0)
Shape of f0
Noisiness
Single/
panted
Occurrence in the
repertoire
Grunt
GR
70–700 Hz
Variable
Noisy
Single
2087 (27.1%)
Panted grunt
PG
100–200 Hz
Variable
Noisy
Panted
853 (11.1%)
Hoo
HO
200–700 Hz
Flat
Highly tonal
Single
1561 (20.3%)
Panted hoo
PH
–
Flat
Highly tonal
Panted
1015 (13.2%)
Bark
BK
600–2000 Hz
Dome
Variable
Single
337 (4.4%)
Panted bark
PB
600–2000 Hz
Dome
Variable
Panted
549 (7.1 %)
Pant
PN
100–200 Hz (if visible)
Flat (if visible)
Noisy
Panted
402 (5.2%)
Scream
SC
800–2000 Hz
Flat midsection
Variable
Single
312 (4.1%)
Panted scream
PS
800–2000 Hz
Flat midsection
Variable
Panted
317 (4.1%)
Non-vocal sounds (lip
smack, raspberry)
NV
–
–
Noisy
Single
184 (2.39%)
Whimper
WH
350–1300 Hz
Flat
Highly tonal
Single
78 (1.0%)
Panted roar
PR
200–300 Hz, with bands
below F0 (<100 Hz)
Flat
Noisy
Panted
1 (0.01%)
Fig. 1 Frequency distribution of vocal sequences length. The length refers
to the number of different single units. The number of single units in the
utterance is indicated on the x axis. The y axis depicts the number of
recordings (log-transformed for ease of visualization). All utterances with
one to seven single units (in dark blue) are produced by both sexes while
utterances with eight or more single units (in light blue) are only produced
by females. The number on top of each bar in blue indicates the number of
individuals producing utterances of this particular length. The red box
indicates the data used in the bigram analysis (Figs. 2 and 3) and the
orange box indicates the data used in the trigram analysis (Fig. 4).
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
4
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

repeated single units in the sequence but not after itself (as
described above). From an average of 13.2 focal hours per indi-
vidual, all individuals produced trigrams. Two-thirds of the
chimpanzees (32/46: 69.6%) produced sequences with ﬁve single
units. In this sample, only females produced sequences with
8–10 single units. Examples of sequences produced by chim-
panzees are provided in Supplementary Fig. 4.
Across our entire dataset, we found that all the 12 different
types of single unit were used in sequences. PR only occurred
once in this sample but within a sequence. From the 11 other
single units, with the exception of non-vocal sounds (NV) which
were combined with only four other single units, each of the 10
remaining single units were combined with 9 or 10 other different
single units into sequences (e.g., across all sequences comprising
GR, GR was combined into at least one sequence with BK and
into at least one sequence, not necessarily the same one, with HO
etc…). Four single units (GR, PB, PH, and PN, i.e., 33% of the
single units) were combined with all other single units but PR
across all sequences. Altogether this demonstrates tremendous
ﬂexibility in single unit combinatoriality.
When focusing on sequences with two single units (bigrams:
N = 817), we found that chimpanzees produced 58 unique
bigrams (Supplementary Data 1). We represent all the bigrams
in the dataset as a combinatorial network and show the
corresponding combinatorial strength per unit (number of in/
out connections) in Fig. 2b, c (see also Supplementary Fig. 5).
Network metrics, and in particular betweenness centrality,
revealed that PH is the single unit that is the most frequently
combined with all other single units in the dataset (PHBetweenness
Centrality (BC) = 12.45). This suggests that PH might be a key single
unit in the two-unit network and that it can be emitted ﬂexibly in
sequences with all other single units (HOBC = 4.566, SCBC =
4.116, GRBC = 3.816, BKBC = 3.5, PBBC = 2.533, PGBC = 1.115,
WHBC = 1.033, PSBC = 0.666, PNBC = 0.2).
Capacity
2:
ordered
production
of
single
units
within
sequences. To address capacity 2, we focused on the 58 unique
bigrams in the dataset and assessed (1) Positional bias: are the
single units produced by chimpanzees biased towards the start or
end position within a bigram? (2) Speciﬁc ordering frequency: do
the bigrams show ﬁxed order frequencies that go beyond random
juxtaposition of single units? (3) Transitional bias: do relation-
ships between these units exist when forming bigrams (i.e., the
Fig. 2 Bigram ﬂexibility and ordering (N = 817 bigrams and 58 unique bigrams). a Frequency distribution for two-unit vocal sequences (bigrams) with
units occurring in ﬁrst position listed along the y axis and units occurring in second position listed along the x axis. Color gradients (white-to-dark-green)
represent the relative occurrence of each bigram within the two-units’ set. In each cell, the absolute frequency count for each bigram is conversely
reported. b The bigram combinatorial network with the ten single units depicted as circled nodes and color gradients (hot-to-cold) representing the number
of times a certain unit is found in the bigram set. Note that the single units (NV) and (PR) that never occurred in bigrams are not shown here. This network
was also used for the calculation of the Betweenness Centrality among the units. The size of the directional edges (arrows) expresses the number of times
the speciﬁc bigram is found in the sample (thick-to-thin). c The number of different single units with which each single unit forms a bigram in the sample as
ﬁrst unit (left) or second unit in the bigram (right).
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
5

single unit υ always follows the single unit ω, or the single unit υ
always precedes the single unit ω)?
Positional bias. The number of occurrences of every single unit
in the ﬁrst and second positions within each of the bigrams
can be found in Fig. 2a (see also Supplementary Table 1). We
used Bayesian binomial tests (see “Methods” and Table 3) over
the number of occurrences of each unit in either the ﬁrst or
second position within a bigram. We found strong evidence
for positional bias for nine out of the ten single units occur-
ring in sequences. The single units HO, GR, and PH most
reliably occurred in the ﬁrst position in bigrams (Fig. 3a
and Table 3). Conversely, PG, PB, PS, SC, BK, and PN showed
an opposite bias toward the second position (Table 3). We
found no bias for WH, which however only occurred 13 times
in total.
Ordering frequency. We used a classic randomization procedure
based on 1000 randomizations and we found that out of the 58
unique bigrams produced by the chimpanzees, 14 bigrams were
produced above-chance level (i.e., more often than by random
juxtaposition of single units from the repertoire, Fig. 3b). Out of
the 14 above-chance bigrams, 7 were produced by at least 10
individuals (GR_PG, GR_PN, HO_PG, HO_PH, PH_PB, PH_PS,
and PN_PG).
Transitional bias. We evaluated two different kinds of transitional
relationships between the two single units forming the bigram,
thus mimicking information-theoretic concepts used for quanti-
fying processing efforts in the psycholinguistic literature52–54.
Here, we focused on bigrams that occurred above-chance level
and were produced by at least ten individuals. First, we tested
how likely it was to ﬁnd a unit ω in the second position, com-
pared to all other possible follow-on units, given a unit υ in ﬁrst
position. We called this transitional possibility a forward rela-
tionship. Second, we tested how likely it was to ﬁnd a unit υ in
ﬁrst position, compared to all the possible preceding units, given a
unit ω in the second position. We called this alternative transi-
tional possibility a backward relationship. None of the seven
bigrams found above chance showed any forward relationship
between the two single units within the sequence. Indeed, there
was no unit in the ﬁrst position that preferentially occurred with a
certain unit in the second position (Fig. 3c and Supplementary
Table 1). Thus, the ﬁrst single unit in a bigram set no constraint
on the following single unit. The second position did however
appear to be bound to certain units in ﬁrst position. We indeed
found four bigrams with a strong backward bias—PH-PS, HO-
PH, PH–PB, and GR-PN—suggesting that a certain second unit
predominantly occurred when it was preceded by another speciﬁc
unit (Fig. 3d and Table 3). For example, PS was in second posi-
tion 67 times in a bigram and out of these 67 times it was pre-
ceded by a PH 60 times (89.5%) and only 7 times by other
single units.
Capacity 3: recombination of independently emitted bigrams
into trigrams. To address capacity (3), the extent to which
recombination of independently emitted sequences occurs, we
analyzed the structure of trigrams to explore how chimpanzees
combine independently emitted bigrams with a third unit to
produce trigrams. Of the 58 unique bigrams, 49 were also emitted
with a third unit attached, as trigrams. The chimpanzees pro-
duced 458 trigrams, of which 104 were unique (Supplementary
Data 1). We ﬁrst assessed which trigrams were produced above-
chance levels and which bigrams would appear above chance
within trigrams. We thus ﬁrst asked: (1) Speciﬁc ordering fre-
quency: (a) do trigrams show nonrandom patterning beyond
simple juxtaposition of single units? (b) Is there nonrandom
positioning of bigrams within trigrams? (2) Positional bias: are
bigrams biased toward a certain speciﬁc position within trigrams
(head position—i.e., ﬁrst and second position bias with a third
unit taking the ﬁnal position; tail position—i.e., second and third
position bias with a third unit taking the head position)? (3)
Transitional bias: do relationships between bigrams and speciﬁc
third single units exist within trigrams (i.e., υω follows ε, or υω
precedes ε)?
Ordering frequency. As for the analysis of bigrams above, we used
classic randomization procedures and found that 49 unique tri-
grams were produced above-chance level (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Out of these 49 above-chance trigrams, eight were produced by at
least ten individuals (GR_PG_GR, GR_PG_PN, HO_PH_HO,
HO_PH_PB,
HO_PH_PS,
PH_PB_PH,
PH_PB_PS,
and
PH_PS_PB, Fig. 2b). Interestingly, four of the seven bigrams that
were produced above-chance level and by at least 10 chimpanzees
(GR_PG, HO_PH, PH_PB, PH_PS) are also found as part of
these eight trigrams. When speciﬁcally considering all the
bigrams occurring within trigrams, we identiﬁed 64 unique
bigrams. Using the same randomization procedure as for the
bigrams in sequences with two single units we found that 21 out
of the 64 unique bigrams in trigrams were produced above the
chance level (Fig. 4). Out of these 21 above-chance bigrams, 13
Table 3 Bayesian binomial test for positional, forward, and
backward bias in two-unit sequences (bigrams).
Unit/
bigram
log(BF10)
Posterior θ
95% CI
Positional
bias, bigrams
HO + ♢
68.52
0.83
0.78–0.87
GR + ♢
18.72
0.68
0.62–0.73
PH + ♢
2.44
0.58
0.53–0.64
♢+ PG
34.03
0.75
0.70–0.80
♢+ PB
32.48
0.88
0.81–0.93
♢+ PS
18.37
0.82
0.74–0.90
♢+ SC
6.02
0.73
0.61–0.83
♢+ BK
5.77
0.72
0.61–0.82
♢+ PN
3.97
0.66
0.56–0.74
♢+ WH
−0.88
0.60
0.50–0.79
Forward bias,
bigrams
HO→PH*
−1.31
0.46
0.40–0.50
PH→PS*
10.20
0.32
0.26–0.39
PH→PB*
6.81
0.35
0.28–0.42
GR→PN*
33.78
0.22
0.17–0.28
GR→PG*
−1.60
0.46
0.40–0.50
HO→PG*
33
0.24
0.19–0.30
PN→PG
−0.81
0.59
0.50–0.72
Backward
bias, bigrams
HO ←PH
35.76
0.85
0.79–0.90
PH ←PS
22.33
0.89
0.80–0.95
PH ←PB
7.19
0.71
0.61–0.80
GR ←PN
3.20
0.67
0.56–0.77
GR ←PG
−2.18
0.53
0.50–0.59
HO ←PG*
15.50
0.29
0.24–0.36
PN ←PG*
69.22
0.10
0.07–0.15
Results from the Bayesian binomial test evaluating positional, forward, and backward bias in
two-unit sequences (bigrams). For each analysis, we conducted Bayesian binomial tests on
JASP101 with default effect size priors and ﬂat Beta (1,1) to quantify the relative likelihood for a
potential positional or relationship bias within the sequence (see “Methods”). The number of
successes over all trials for each unit was deﬁned according to the number of occurrences found
in the most frequent position (ﬁrst or second position) for the positional analysis. The number of
successes over all trials for each sequence was deﬁned according to the number of times that υ
was followed by ω (or that ω was preceded by υ), compared to the number of times that υ was
followed by any other unit (or that ω was preceded by any other unit) for the two relationship
analyses. Results are reported for the Bayesian factor log(BF10), testing the hypothesis that the
proportion of occurrences is higher than (unless speciﬁed) the default test value set at 0.5
(50%). Effect size estimates are reported as median posterior population (θ) with Credible
Intervals (CI) set at 95%102. *Testing the null hypothesis that the proportion of occurrences in
the most frequent position is lower than the default test value set at 0.5. ♢= irrespective of
unit type.
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
6
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

were produced by at least 10 individuals (GR_PG, HO_PH,
PH_PB, PG_GR, PH_PS, PG_PB, PB_PH, PG_PN, PB_PS,
PS_SC, SC_PS, PB_BK, and PS_PB). A comparison of the fre-
quency distribution of bigrams in two-unit sequences with the
frequency distribution of bigrams within trigrams reveals similar
frequencies for the most frequent bigrams (Supplementary Fig. 7).
Positional bias. We used Bayesian binomial tests (see “Methods”
and Table 4) to assess whether any of the four bigrams found
above chance and emitted by at least 10 individuals at both two-
and at three-unit level sequences (GR_PG, HO_PH, PH_PB, and
PH_PS) showed bias to occur at head or tail position in the
trigrams. We found that HO_PH, GR_PG, and PH_PB showed a
strong positional bias towards the head position, while no effect
was found for PH_PS (Fig. 4 and Table 4 and Supplementary
Table 2).
Transitional bias. We tested for possible relationships between
bigrams and single units in trigrams (i.e., [υω]ε or ε[υω]). First,
we asked in one case how likely is it to ﬁnd ε, compared to all
possible following units (forward relationship), given υω in head
position. Second, we asked how likely it is to ﬁnd ε, compared to
all the other possible preceding units (backward relationship),
given υω tail position. Transitional relationships between bigrams
and single units revealed one strong forward relationship between
GR_PG and the following GR unit (Fig. 4 and Table 4), while the
two-unit PH_PS was predominantly preceded by the HO unit
(Figs. 4 and 5, Table 4, and Supplementary Tables 3 and 4).
Literature review on sequence production in non-human pri-
mates. We conducted a literature search on vocal sequences
production in non-human primates (see details in the method
section). We found reports of vocal sequence production in 31
non-human primate species and in all the four major taxa (i.e.,
apes and old-world monkeys (catarrhini): agile gibbons, Hylo-
bates
agilis55,
chimpanzees
(our
study),
bonobos,
Pan
paniscus56,57,
gorillas,
Gorilla
gorilla58,
orang-utans,
Pongo
pygmaeus59,60, blue monkeys, Cercopithecus mitis61, Campbell’s
monkeys, C. campbelli62, chacma baboon, Papio ursinus27, DeB-
razza’s monkeys, C. neglectus62, Diana monkeys, C. diana63,
geladas, Theropitecus gelada64, olive baboons, P. anubis27, putty-
nosed monkeys, C. nictitans22,65, red-capped mangabeys, Cerco-
cebus torquatus62, sooty mangabeys, Cercocebus torquatus atys66,
Thomas langurs, Presbytis thomasi67, white-handed gibbons, H.
lar; new-world monkeys (platyrrhini): golden lion tamarins,
Leonthopitecus
rosalia68,
common
marmosets,
Callithrix
jacchus69, Goeldi’s marmosets, Callimico goeldii70, pygmy mar-
mosets,
Cebuella
pygmaea71,
silvery
marmosets,
Mico
argentatus72; and prosimians (haplorrhini): Philippine tarsiers,
Fig. 3 Positional bias, speciﬁc ordering frequency, and transitional bias for two-unit sequences (bigrams). a Likelihood for a certain unit υ to occur in
ﬁrst position (yellow) or in second position (orange) in two-unit utterances, expressed as median posterior distribution (θ). Bars stand for Credible
Intervals (CI) at 95%. ♢= irrespective of unit type (see Table 3). b Frequency of production of the bigrams that were produced above chance (i.e., >95%
more likely than by random juxtaposition of single units). The height of each bar corresponds to the number of times each utterance was recorded. The
color gradient in the bars depicts the number of times each utterance was observed divided by the number of times each utterance was present on average
in each randomization (averaged over 1000 randomizations). The color ranges from the lowest ratio in white (i.e., the utterance was present in the
observed data two times more than in the randomization) to the highest ratio in red (i.e., the utterance was present in the observed data 12 times more
than in the randomized data). The number on top of each bar in blue indicates the number of individuals that produced each utterance. c Likelihood for a
certain unit ðυÞ in ﬁrst position to be in a forward relationship (green) with a certain unit ω
ð Þ in second position (see Table 3). d Likelihood for a certain unit
ω
ð Þ in second position to be in a feedback relationship (blue) with a certain unit ðυÞ in ﬁrst position, in two-unit utterances (see Table 3).
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
7

Tarsius syrichta73, common brown lemurs, Eulemur fulvus74,
indris, Indri indri29, giant mouse lemurs, Mirza mirza75, red-
bellied
lemurs,
Eulemur
ribriventer74,
crowned
lemurs,
E.
coronatus74, mangoose lemur, E. mangoz76, Sahamalaza sportive
lemur, Lepilemur sahamalensis77). At least one species of each of
these taxa produced sequences comprising at least three different
vocal units. In nonsinging species (i.e., species combining
potentially meaning-bearing call types into vocal sequences) we
could only ﬁnd reports of a large diversity of different sequences
(i.e., >10) in great ape species.
Discussion
Compared to human language, the ﬂexible use of vocal sequences
in other species has been reported to be limited, although com-
prehensive quantitative analyses across whole animal vocal
repertoires are rare. Here, we conducted a full quantitative ana-
lysis across the entire vocal repertoire to assess the usage of three
structural capacities that should promote a ﬂexible but ordered
system, which would in principle provide a structural foundation
for a versatile meaning generation.
First, we show that chimpanzees have a highly ﬂexible vocal
sequencing system, to an extent not yet reported for primate, as
shown by our literature search (Fig. 6, see below). Taї chim-
panzees produced 390 unique sequences comprising two or more
single units (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Data 1). More than one-
third of their vocal output includes at least two units, with 15% of
vocal sequences containing three to ten units. Note these numbers
are likely an underestimation of the vocal sequence potential of
chimpanzees since the number of new sequences found had not
reached asymptote after nearly 5000 recordings (Supplementary
Fig. 8).
According to capacity (1), chimpanzees show a high degree of
ﬂexibility in vocal sequence output. 11 of the 12 vocalizations in
the vocal repertoire were produced as single units and emitted in
numerous different sequences with 4–9 other single units
(Fig. 2b).
According to capacity (2), we found that the order in which
single units were combined was ﬂexible so that 52.6% of all
bigrams were produced as AB and BA, at least once (Fig. 2b). In
our dataset, we found 58 bigrams, 40 of which were 20 different
pairs of single units produced with every single unit either as the
Fig. 4 Speciﬁc ordering frequency, positional bias, and relationship bias for trigrams. a Bigrams in trigrams that were produced above chance (i.e., >95%
more likely than by random juxtaposition of single units). The height of each bar corresponds to the number of times each utterance was recorded. The
color gradient in the bars depicts the number of times each utterance was observed divided by the number of times each utterance was present on average
in each randomization (averaged over 1000 randomizations). The color ranges from the lowest ratio in white (i.e., the utterance was present in the
observed data two times more than in the randomization) to the highest ratio in red (i.e., the utterance was present in the observed data 13 times more
than in the randomized data). The number on top of each bar in blue indicates the number of individuals that produced each utterance. b Likelihood for a
certain bigram υω to occur in head position (yellow) or in tail position (red) in trigrams, expressed as median posterior distribution (θ). Bars stand for
Credible Intervals (CI) at 95%. ♢= irrespective of unit type (see Table 4). c Likelihood for a certain bigrams ðυωÞ to be in a forward relationship (green)
with a certain ðεÞ single unit following it (see Table 4). d Likelihood for a certain bigram ðυωÞ to be in a backward relationship (blue) with a certain ðεÞ single
unit following it (see Table 4). *The bigram PB_PR appeared in the dataset only 1 time and it appeared 250 times less in the randomizations as compared to
the observed frequency (i.e., it appeared only 22 times in 1000 randomization so at an average frequency of 0.022), and not 3 times as indicated by the red
color. We used a gradient of color from 1 to 3 to visualize the variation in the other bigrams bearing in mind that the ratio observed/randomized of the last
bigram (PB_PR) is much higher than indicated in the ﬁgure.
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
8
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

ﬁrst or second element in the bigrams (e.g., a combination of A
and B either as AB or BA) and 18 were bigrams which appeared
only in a certain order (e.g., EF was produced but FE was never
recorded). Yet single units followed some ordering properties
when combined within sequences since we found evidence of
positional and transitional bias using very conservative measures.
At the two-unit level, we found a strong positional bias for almost
every single unit, such that particular single units were pre-
ferentially emitted in the ﬁrst and other particular units were
emitted in the second position within bigrams (e.g., when com-
bined with any other single unit, HO most predominantly occurs
in ﬁrst position, whereas PB predominantly occurs in last
position). Second, there were several bigrams which were pro-
duced above-chance level (i.e., more than by random juxtaposi-
tion of single units). Third, we found a strong transitional bias
within the above-chance bigrams, such that the single unit in
second position was predominantly emitted with a speciﬁc single
unit in ﬁrst position (e.g., PH was preceded predominantly by
HO). Worth noting, the fact that most bigrams can be produced
with either unit emitted ﬁrst, and that bigrams can also be pre-
ceded or followed by other units (Fig. 5 and Supplementary
Fig. 5) suggests that the order in which the units are produced are
not due to speciﬁc musculoskeletal constraints on the chimpanzee
vocal articulatory system78. For example, several bigrams found
in trigrams can be preceded or followed by four to eight different
single units within the trigram (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4
and Fig. 5). Likewise, within bigrams, although we found ordering
effects, we found occurrences of most bigrams being emitted with
either element ﬁrst (Fig. 2a, b).
To address capacity (3), recombination, we conducted the same
analyses at the three-unit level (trigrams). This showed that close
to half of the unique trigrams (47%, 49 out of 104) were produced
above-chance level. We found that bigrams showed the same
order preference whether emitted as a bigram or within a trigram
(e.g., HO_PH occurs as a bigram but can also occur with an
added third unit in a trigram: HO_PH_PB or HO-PH_PS). We
also found strong positional bias, such that certain bigrams pre-
dictably occurred in either head or tail positions within trigrams
(e.g., third units added to GR_PG typically occur after and not
before the bigram is emitted: GR_PG_X). Finally, we found a
strong transitional bias of bigrams within trigrams, such that
some bigrams in the head/tail position were emitted with the
highest likelihood with a certain speciﬁc unit in tail/head position
(e.g., the bigram GR_PG is more likely to be followed by GR than
by any other single unit while the bigram PH_PB is more likely to
be preceded by HO than by any other single unit). Our results
also indicate that some bigrams are reused as ready-combined
calls into trigrams. This might offer intriguing evidence for a
potential pairing prerequisite during vocal communication in
animals30,79. If these single units carry meaning, it may be that
chimpanzees form combined meanings from two single units,
which can, in turn, be recombined with a third unit to eventually
output a third combined meaning. However, without looking into
Table 4 Bayesian binomial test for positional, forward, and
backward bias in three-unit sequences (trigrams).
Bigrams/
trigrams
log(BF+0)
Posterior
θ
95% CI
Positional
bias,
bigrams in
trigrams
[HO + PH] + ♢
61.23
0.99
0.96–1
[GR + PG] + ♢
47.32
0.92
0.87–0.96
[PH + PB] + ♢
6.70
0.71
0.61–0.80
♢+ [PH + PS]
−1.55
0.55
0.50–0.64
Forward
bias,
bigrams in
trigrams
[GR + PG] →GR
5.93
0.68
0.59–0.77
[HO_PH] →PS*
0.32
0.40
0.31–0.49
[PH_PB] →PH*
1.43
0.36
0.25–0.47
[PH_PS] →PB*
1.06
0.34
0.20–0.47
Backward
bias,
bigrams in
trigrams
HO ←[PH_PS]
18.04
0.93
0.83–0.98
HO ←[PH_PB]
3.88
0.78
0.61–0.91
HO ←[GR_PG]*
−0.27
0.34
0.13–0.49
Results from the Bayesian binomial test evaluating positional, forward, and backward bias of
bigrams in trigrams. The same parameters as described in Table 2 were used (see “Methods”).
The number of successes over all trials for each bigram was deﬁned according to the number of
occurrences found in the most frequent position (head vs. tail) in the trigrams for the positional
analysis (positional bias). The number of successes over all trials for each utterance was thus
deﬁned according to the number of times that υω was followed by ε (or that υω was preceded by
ε), compared to the number of times that υω was followed by any other units (or that υω was
preceded by any other unit) for the relationship analyses (forward and backward bias). Results
are reported for the Bayesian factor log(BF10), testing the hypothesis that the proportion of
occurrences is higher than (unless speciﬁed) the default test value set at 0.5 (50%). Effect size
estimates are reported as median posterior population (θ) with Credible Intervals (CI) set at
95%102. *Testing the null hypothesis that the proportion of occurrences in the most frequent
position is lower than the default test value set at 0.5. ♢= irrespective of unit type.
Fig. 5 Frequency distribution for bigrams within trigrams. a Bigrams occurring in head position ðυωÞ along the x axis and subsequent units ðεÞ along the y
axis. Color gradients (white-to-green) represent the relative occurrence of each bigram within the trigram’ set. In each cell, the absolute frequency count
for each three-unit sequence is also reported. b Frequency distribution for trigrams with bigrams occurring in tail position ðυωÞ along the x axis and
preceding units ðεÞ along the y axis. Color gradients (white-to-blue) represent the relative occurrence of each bigram within the trigram’ set. In each cell,
the absolute frequency count for each trigrams is also reported.
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
9

contextual information, which goes beyond the scope of the
present study, our analysis cannot exclude that the pairing effects
in the three-unit vocal sequence result from simple transitional
relationships between adjacent elements. In this respect, trigrams
containing bigrams produced above chance, like HO←[PH–PS] or
HO←[PH–PB], might be rather analyzed as HO←PH←PS or
HO←PH←PB, where single units in position two and three are
strongly dependent on the single unit occurring in the preceding
position. This would suggest that linear order in chimpanzees
would sufﬁce to create longer sequences, notwithstanding tran-
sitional relationships between the internal elements.
Overall, the data suggest that chimpanzees might possess some
fundamental combinatorial principles which can be used to
establish sequential relationships across multiple sound units. The
positional information in bigrams is relevant to the sequential
ordering of the uttered message and most importantly, the ﬁrst
position seems to be ﬁlled with compulsory information when a
certain unit needs to be introduced in the second position. This
seems to be especially relevant for units like PS or PB, which
occur less frequently in isolation and which are often preceded by
the speciﬁc unit PH in bigrams.
The fact that chimpanzees have access to local ordering pat-
terns and precedence relationships during spontaneous vocal
production supports previous data coming from auditory sound
discrimination paradigms in other primates, which showed sen-
sitivity to ordering violations between adjacent sound units in
artiﬁcial strings generated by simple ﬁnite-state grammars of the
(AB)2
type11,14,80–82.
Beyond
adjacency
relationships,
chimpanzees and other primates have been shown to generalize
over dependency rules between non-adjacent elements in both
sound and visual discrimination tasks13,83–85. This suggests some
ordering capacity that would go beyond simply adding two single
units together in a sequence. In this study, we found that in
trigrams, chimpanzees might also rely on positional information,
where some over-represented bigrams within trigrams are con-
sistently produced at the beginning of the sequence (ﬁrst position,
e.g., HO_PH + X, GR_PG + X, PH_PB + X). Similarly, a few
over-represented bigrams—which occur above chance at both
two-unit and three-unit level—appear to co-occur together with a
third single unit, which generally linearly precedes them, when
occurring in three-unit sequences (e.g., GR_PG + GR, HO +
PH_PS, HO + PH_PB).
Beyond bigrams and trigrams, we also found 60 different
sequences longer than three units, together representing 15.8% of
all utterances emitted. There were not sufﬁcient numbers of each
to examine them in detail. Thus, the sizable sample of close to
5000 vocal utterances would likely need at least tripling to
examine patterns in longer vocal sequences. With our large
dataset, we can nevertheless be conﬁdent that the estimation of
the frequency of production of sequences of different lengths is
likely representative of the true vocal output even if sequence
diversity beyond bigram or trigram is likely underrepresented.
One interpretation of why sequences longer than three units are
rarely produced might be that longer sequences are not impor-
tant. Alternatively, one can argue that frequency does not
necessarily equate to signiﬁcance, as rare but crucial parts of vocal
Fig. 6 A literature review comparing vocal sequencing across primates. The barplot on the left indicates the maximum length of sequences reported in
each species (i.e., the number of unique single units emitted in a single sequence) (a). The barplot on the right indicates the number of different sequences
reported to comprise at least two different single units (b). We counted sequences in which different single units occurred at least once. If the same single
unit was repeated later in the sequence this was not counted as a new sequence. Species showing no number of different sequences may reﬂect lack of
published information. The color of the bars in both plots indicate the taxa of the species. Apes (including great and lesser apes), old-world monkeys, new-
world monkeys, and prosimians are depicted in dark blue, light blue, orange, and red respectively. The singing species are indicated by the purple text.
Singing species are species such as Indris or gibbons which emit different single units in song. These units are not necessarily emitted singularly nor in
other parts of the vocal repertoire. Superscript numbers refer to the relevant citations listed below.
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
10
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

repertoires are well documented. Alarm calls in social species, for
example, are likely underrepresented in overall vocal emission
compared to social spacing calls, such as contact calls62.
Of note, two-unit and longer sequences emitted by both sexes
occur throughout the chimpanzee vocal repertoire. They are not
limited, for example, to loud calls, nor more speciﬁcally to the
well-described four-unit pant-hoot sequence (Supplementary
Fig. 4a–c, see supplementary discussion). Our approach thereby
proves valuable in not only identifying the commonly described
pant-hoot sequence but also sequences containing other units
that follow nonrandom ordering patterns.
Although the current dataset is not small, determining the
importance of these vocal sequences in chimpanzees’ commu-
nicative needs will require even larger datasets. An important
next step is to assess whether the production of a large diversity
of sequences with ordering properties actually promotes ver-
satile meaning generation. To this end, contexts of vocal pro-
duction require detailed analysis. While some chimpanzee
single units have demonstrated context-speciﬁcity in previous
studies (e.g., Crockford41), the context-speciﬁcity of sequences
remains largely uninvestigated (but see Leroux et al.44). In
particular, whether the juxtaposition of single units into
sequences leads to some meaning shifts is a promising area for
future research. In fact, we identiﬁed several bigrams con-
stitutive of the trigrams that were also produced as bigrams
alone (i.e., without a third element, i.e., BK_SC, GR_PG,
HO_PH, PH_PB, PH_PS, PS_SC, and WH_PH) whereas other
bigrams within trigrams were never produced as bigram alone
(i.e., PB_BK, PB_PR, PB_PS, PG_PB, PS_PB and SC_PS, Sup-
plementary Fig. 10). Contextual information will therefore help
understanding the kind of combinatorial system beyond the
generative capacity in chimpanzees (e.g., Rizzi86): speciﬁcally,
whether chimpanzees treat frequent bigrams as stored chunks
to be reused in trigrams as a whole, or alternatively whether the
transitional relationships between adjacent calls reﬂect simple
adjunction or some more complex combinatorial mechanism
beyond single combinations. Thus, a future goal is to determine
whether the ﬂexibility we have identiﬁed across the chimpanzee
vocal repertoire relates to ﬂexibility in the information con-
veyed. This will require analyses testing, ﬁrst, for potential
contextual and/or meaning shifts between single units emitted
alone, and the same unit emitted paired with another single
unit in a bigram. A second aim is to test whether the bigram
produced alone undergoes a meaning shift when combined with
third or fourth single units.
To assess the likelihood that other primate species may also
have ﬂexible vocal sequence capacities, we conducted a literature
search. We found substantial evidence of vocal sequence pro-
duction across all four primate clades, in both singing and non-
singing species (Fig. 6). For singing species, as in other taxa with
monogamous breeding systems such as birds, monogamous pri-
mates demonstrate co-evolution of singing and duetting, likely
due to sexual selection pressures. Across primate clades, singing
usually occurs in territorial or courtship contexts87,88, with vocal
sequences containing 3–13 unit types (ref.
55 and Fig. 6).
Addressing capacity (1), ﬂexibility, units used in ‘song’ are rarely
reported to be used singly, or in other parts of the vocal
repertoire28,29. Addressing capacity (2), ordering, as in other
singing taxa, such as birds and whales89, it is thought that pattern
variation of single units in the sequence primarily functions to
identify individuals or groups and likely conveys little other socio-
ecological contextual information29,64,90.
For nonsinging primates (Fig. 6), vocal sequences production
is observed across all four primate orders, suggesting it is a
relatively common primate trait. However, sequences are
usually short (2–5 single units) and mainly restricted to alarm
calls (usually bigrams) or long-distance calls. Exceptions are
olive colobus, marmosets, bonobos, and gorillas, interestingly
all forest-dwelling species, where vocal sequences have been
described
in
both
intra-group
and
inter-group
contexts57,58,69,91. This literature review demonstrates some
use of vocal sequences across many primate species. Note that
quantitative whole-repertoire analyses have rarely been con-
ducted and may reveal broader use of structural complexity
within species than we are currently aware of.
Nevertheless, as yet, only human and chimpanzee vocal sys-
tems seem to encompass all three of our structural capacities.
This has implications for the meaning-generation potential of a
species. Consider a vocal system with a vocal repertoire of six
vocalizations and only one bigram. This gives the potential to
encode seven different meanings (such as the chacma baboon27).
The chimpanzee vocal system, consisting of 12 call types used
ﬂexibly as single units, or within bigrams, trigrams or longer
sequences, offers the potential to encode hundreds of different
meanings. Whilst this possibility is substantially less than the
inﬁnite number of different meanings that can be generated by
human language, it nonetheless offers a structure that goes
beyond that traditionally considered likely in primate systems.
The versatile patterning of chimpanzee vocal sequences presents a
valuable opportunity to examine whether detected patterns also
relate to predictable meaning shifts. Further research challenges
include comparing the contexts of production of single units
(such as a bark), the single unit emitted paired with another single
unit (bark + panted hoo), or a bigram emitted before or after a
third single unit (hoo + [bark + panted hoo]; or [bark + panted
hoo] + grunt).
Compared to compositionality in vocal sequences produced by
animals, human language compositionality is based on hier-
archical structure rather than linear order, where the structure is
determined by the word categories being combined (e.g., nouns,
verbs, prepositions forming noun phrases, verb phrases, or pre-
positional phrases, respectively). Whilst linear order can change
meaning, and open up the potential for meaning generation in
limited systems, a ubiquitous phenomenon in human language is
indeed the fact that the same linear order may convey different
meanings, depending on relevant kinds of the underlying struc-
ture. For example, the expression the man drew a boy with a
pencil can either mean that a man used a pencil to draw a boy, or
that he drew a boy who’s holding a pencil. This is often taken as
evidence that linear ordering alone is insufﬁcient to capture
language18,92,93.
An inﬂuential hypothesis in linguistic theory states that the
computational system holding hierarchical representations in
human language—i.e., Merge—might be based on a very parsi-
monious computation, which builds together phrases and sen-
tences from individual word categories and which is assumed/
proposed to be neutrally hardwired in the human brain94–96.
Some studies have raised the prospect of using Merge as way to
describe animal vocal constructions at a higher degree of
formalization10,79. In contrast to language, however, animal
communication seems to lack any categorical dimension on the
units of analysis as a hierarchical prerequisite (such as noun or
verb equivalent)93, although actual empirical tests of this have
rarely be attempted. While cross-species comparability in the
chimpanzee multiunit vocal sequences is premature, the posi-
tional bias, the transitional relationships, and the potential for
recombination within a pairing system, such as emitting inde-
pendently produced bigrams also within trigrams, points to the
chimpanzee vocal sequences as a valuable system for analysis.
Future studies must determine whether combining single units
into bigrams and bigrams into longer sequences creates pre-
dictable contextual or meaning shifts.
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
11

Conclusions. Here, we reveal a highly versatile vocal system in a
non-human animal, the chimpanzee, demonstrating ﬂexible
combination and recombination of single units across the vocal
repertoire. Most calls in the vocal repertoire could be combined
with most other calls so that single-use vocalizations were also
emitted within bigrams, and independently produced bigrams
were added to third units to produce trigrams. Although single
units could occur in ﬁrst or last positions, there were strong
positional and transitional biases, consistent with clear ordering
patterns. Previous studies report a highly limited capacity for
animal vocal repertoires to produce ﬂexible vocal sequences that
can support numerous differentiated meanings. Our results
examining chimpanzee vocal sequence structure suggest that
these conclusions may be premature. Further research must show,
however, to what extent these structural sequences signal pre-
dictable meanings.
Methods
Study site and subjects. We conducted the study within the Taï Chimpanzee
Project97 on wild western chimpanzees at the Taï National Park, Cȏte d’Ivoire
(5°45′N, 7°07′W). TB collected data on all adult and subadult chimpanzees from
three communities (East, North, and South) between two study periods: January-
February 2019 and December 2019 to March 2020. We deﬁned as adult all
chimpanzees ≥15 years of age and subadults as chimpanzees between 10 and 15
years of age. Adult and subadult chimpanzees are referred in our study as mature
individuals. For this study TB collected data on 46 mature chimpanzees, 5 males
and 10 females in East group, 4 males and 8 females in the North group, and 5
males and 14 females in the South group.
Data collection. TB followed the chimpanzees from dawn to dusk during c.a. 12 h
per day. TB recorded vocalizations during half-day focal animal sampling98
switching the focal animal around 12:30 pm, resulting in c.a. 6 h of continuous
sampling per focal. Using a 2 s pre-record option, she audio recorded each voca-
lization from the focal chimpanzee as well as any vocalization produced by indi-
viduals visible around the focal animal for whom the identity of the caller could be
identiﬁed with certainty ad libitum98. TB recorded the vocalizations using a
Sennheiser ME67 directional microphone (digitized at a 48 kHz sampling rate and
24-bit sampling depth) connected to a Tascam DR-40X digital recorder. TB
focalled mature chimpanzees for 513 h and collected ad libitum data for an
additional 387.8 h. This resulted in mean ± SE 13.2 ± 0.9 SE hours of focal sampling
on 39 mature focal individuals. In addition, vocal production from seven extra
mature individuals was recorded ad libitum. Per individual, TB collected an overall
mean ± SE of 34.4 ± 3.5 vocal utterances during focal hours and 85.89 ± 7.02 vocal
utterances ad libitum. Per hour of focal data, TB obtained 3.9 ± 0.3 vocal utter-
ances, from which 2.1 ± 0.2 where single units and 0.9 ± 0.1 were sequences (i.e., at
least two different single units produced one after the other with less than 1-s pause
between them). Of the single units, 1.8 ± 0.2 were non-panted single calls (HO; GR;
BK; SC; WH; NV) and 0.4 ± 0.1 were panted single calls (PH; PG; PB; PS; PR).
Construction of vocal repertoire. The chimpanzee vocal repertoire consists of
several call types. Most of these call types are emitted either singly or in a “panted”
form whereby a voiced inhalation is inserted between each call (Supplementary
Fig. 2a, b). Thus hoos can be emitted as single hoos, as repetitions of single hoos
with 100–500 ms between each hoo, or as sequences of panted hoos, with c.a.
100 ms between each hoo and pant. Whilst each call type can be emitted singly,
panted versions are only emitted as repetitions. Given that inserting pants between
single calls often changes the context in which calls are emitted, we attribute panted
versions as being different units. Thus, we divide the repertoire into call types and
their panted versions resulting in seven single forms and ﬁve panted forms, here
termed “single units” (see details in Table 1 and Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). Each
of these 12 single units can be combined, where different combinations result in
different sequences. We deﬁned a single unit as a unit type emitted alone or
repeated within 2-s intervals. We deﬁned a sequence as different types of single
units emitted with less than 1 s interval (e.g., hoos followed by panted hoos and
panted barks (Supplementary Fig. 3B); or panted hoos followed by panted barks,
panted grunts and grunts (Supplementary Fig. 3C) emitted within 1 s). Different
variants of the same call type (e.g., “rest” or “alert” hoos in Crockford et al.46) are
not differentiated here but are considered as the same unit type.
Assigning units to recorded vocal sequences. Recordings are examined using
PRAAT version 6.1.31 spectrograms which show the frequency distribution across
the call99. An inherent problem in acoustic recordings in tropical forests is the
dense background noise, making automated processes for extracting acoustic
measurements problematic, especially for quieter calls such as hoos and grunts.
However, different call types can be distinguished using spectrograms, which reveal
both temporal and spectral properties43,100. Call types can be differentiated due to
their distinctive acoustic features (Table 1, see SI for spectrograms and sound ﬁles
of each call type, and gradations of these call types). For the analysis, we considered
only calls of high quality, with the lowest frequency band visible, recorded from the
beginning to the end, and with the signaller ID deﬁned.
The chimpanzee vocal repertoire is a graded system (Supplementary Fig. 9),
such that most call types grade into other call types. Call types that were thus
difﬁcult to categorize were sent to a blind coder and an expert in chimpanzee vocal
repertoire (CC). If there was no agreement between at least two coders, the call was
categorized as unclear. We did not include in the analysis utterances containing
unclear calls. Utterances in which the start or end could not be coded due to
overlap or recording omission were also not included. TB coded all the data. In
total, 6% of the data (301 calls across all call types) was subjected to inter-ratter
reliability with a blind coder. At the end of the training, TB and the blind coder
reached a 94.6% of agreement on the call classiﬁcation. In total, 4826 utterances
were used for this study out of 5517 utterances recorded, comprising 401
differently constructed utterances which included one to ten different single units
(see details in Supplementary Data 1). Our goal was to test if the three capacities
laid out in the introduction apply to chimpanzees.
Statistics and reproducibility. Capacity 1—Flexible combination of single units
within sequences: To test capacity 1, we extracted each vocal sequence from our
dataset and quantiﬁed the diversity of these sequences, their length and which
single units were used into sequences.
Capacity 2—Ordered production of single units within sequences: To test
capacity 2, we assessed whether the sequences formed by two (bigrams) and three
(trigrams) single units in our study were just a random juxtaposition of single units,
or if they conversely resulted from some ordering rules/ nonrandom order among
the individual calls. Sequences formed by three single units constituted the
maximum vocal sequence length that was reached across all individuals (Fig. 1).
Thus, the sample sizes of sequences longer than three units were overall too small
to run meaningful statistical analysis on each respective length (i.e., four and then
ﬁve and then six, etc.).
We asked three questions concerning the patterning organization of single units
emitted in sequences of two single units (hereafter bigrams). (1) Positional bias: are
the single units produced by chimpanzees biased towards a certain speciﬁc position
within a bigram? (2) Speciﬁc ordering frequency: do the bigrams show ﬁxed order
frequencies that go beyond random juxtaposition of single units? (3) Transitional
bias: do relationships between these units exist (i.e., υ follows ω, or υ precedes ω)
when forming bigrams?
Positional bias. A unit υ occurring more often in position 1 than in position 2 (or
vice versa), would be classiﬁed as having a potential positional bias towards
position 1 (or vice versa). For each unit, we then conducted a Bayesian binomial
test on JASP101 with default effect size priors and ﬂat Beta (1,1) to quantify the
relative likelihood for a potential positional bias within the sequence. We deﬁned
the number of successes over all trials for each unit according to the number of
occurrences found in the most frequent position. Results are reported for the
Bayesian factor BF10 testing the hypothesis that the proportion of occurrences in
the most frequent position is higher than the default test value set at 0.5 (50%).
Effect size estimates are reported as median posterior population (θ) with cred-
ibility intervals (CI) set at 95%102.
Ordering frequency. We used randomization routines to assess which bigrams were
produced more than by chance. We ﬁrst established the frequency of production of
every single unit produced singly and in sequences (see Table 1). This constituted
the frequency pool of observed frequency of call production. In this study, we
recorded 817 bigrams (Fig. 1). We therefore sampled randomly from this dis-
tribution (i.e., the frequency pool) 817 pairs of single calls, with both calls being
different to create 817 random bigrams. We then compared the distribution of the
random bigrams to that of the observed bigrams (the bigrams that have been
recorded), and identiﬁed which bigrams had an observed frequency above the
random frequency. We repeated this process 1000 times to establish whether each
bigram occurred more than by chance (i.e., more than by random juxtaposition of
single units). Bigrams were considered to occur more than by chance if the
observed frequency was above the randomized frequency in at least 950 rando-
mizations (i.e., 95% of the randomizations).
Transitional bias. We took, for consistency, only the bigrams that were produced
above-chance levels. We tested two different transitional relationships between the
two single units υ and ω within the bigrams. First, we asked: given υ, how likely is it
to ﬁnd ω, compared to all other possible following units? For convenience, we
called this transitional possibility a forward relationship. Second, we asked: given ω,
how likely is it to ﬁnd υ, compared to all possible preceding units? We called this
alternative transitional possibility a backward relationship. We quantiﬁed the
likelihood for a potential relationship bias between any two units using Bayesian
binomial tests with the same parameters and results report as described in (1)
above. The number of successes over all trials for each sequence was deﬁned
according to the number of times that υ was followed by ω (or that ω was preceded
by υ), compared to the number of times that υ was followed by any other unit (or
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
12
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

that ω was preceded by any other unit). Since the test value for this Bayesian
analysis was kept constant at 0.5, we measured how far above this level a certain
call would either precede or follow another call, using a very conservative ratio of
combinatorial patterning of 1:1 as a starting point. We acknowledge that each call
in the repertoire could have been preceded or followed by more than two calls, so
the ratio of each call to precede or follow another call is 1/total number of calls. We
however reasoned that using a very conservative test value at 0.5 would have been
more informative for two interdependent reasons: we would have been more
conﬁdent to detect true transitional relationships in the chimpanzee’s vocal system
—which might have been masked with lower test values in a very ﬂexible reper-
toire; we aimed at detecting a small set of highly consistent transitions as a starting
point for future investigations—rather than offering a full-ﬂedged description of
the overall transitional patterns in the repertoire, which would require a larger
sample. We thus investigated whether certain calls ω exist, which would either
precede or follow υ at least 50% of the time, compared to all the other calls pooled
together.
As a further test of capacity 2 beyond bigrams, and a test of capacity 3, we also
assessed which three-unit sequences (trigrams) were produced above chance using
a similar randomization procedure as for bigrams (see below). We analyzed which
bigrams were reused into trigrams and if this occurred more than by chance as a
test of capacity 3 (see below). Finally, to test capacity 2 further we also assessed if
these bigrams were biased towards a certain position in the trigrams and if
transitional bias existed between bigrams and single units within trigrams. For
convenience, we detail all these analysis under the header criteria 3 below.
Capacity 3—Recombination of independently emitted sequences: To assess the
recombination of independently emitted sequences we focused on how
chimpanzees combine simple bigrams with a third unit to produce trigrams. We
assessed which bigrams would appear more than by chance within trigrams. We
ﬁrst asked: (1) Speciﬁc ordering frequency: (a) Are the trigrams produced beyond
simple random juxtaposition of single units? (b) Were some bigrams occurring
within trigrams beyond simple random juxtaposition of single units? (2) Positional
bias: are these bigrams biased towards a certain speciﬁc position (head position, tail
position) within bigger trigrams? (3) Transitional bias: do relationships between
these bigrams and single calls exist (i.e., υω follows δ, or υω precedes δ) when
forming trigrams?
Ordering frequency. We repeated the same randomization process as described for
bigrams above but for the trigrams. We extracted randomly 458 trigrams (i.e., the
number of trigrams recorded for this study, Fig. 1) and compared this distribution
to the distribution of observed trigrams. As for bigrams, we repeated this procedure
1000 times and the trigrams were considered to occur above-chance level if their
observed frequency was above the randomized frequency in 950 randomizations.
As for (1b) we extracted from each trigram the two possible bigrams within these
sequences. For instance, a trigram HO_PH_PG would produce the two following
bigrams: HO_PH, PH_PG (see Table 1 for the abbreviation of call names). We then
assessed which of these bigrams in trigrams were produced more than by chance
using the same approach as for the bigrams produced in sequences with only two
single units. For this analysis, we sampled 916 bigrams 1000 times.
Positional bias. We restricted our examination to those bigrams which occurred
above-chance levels in (1b) above. We counted the positional occurrence—head
position, i.e., ﬁrst and second position; tail position, i.e., second and third position
—of each bigrams within each of the trigrams (N = 406). Each bigrams in a
sequence was assigned either to head or tail position bias, according to its position
of predominant occurrence. Thus, a trigram υωε that contains a bigram υω
occurring more often in the head position than in the tail position, would be
classiﬁed as having a potential positional bias towards the head position. For each
sequence, we quantiﬁed the likelihood for a potential positional bias using Bayesian
binomial tests with the same parameters and results report as described in capacity
2 above. The number of successes over all trials for each sequence was deﬁned
according to the number of bigrams found in the most frequent position.
Transitional bias. We again asked in one case if given υω, how likely it is to ﬁnd ε,
compared to all possible following units (forward relationship). In the other case,
we asked: given υω, how likely is it to ﬁnd ε, compared to all possible preceding
units (backward relationship)? The potential relationship bias was assessed using
frequentist and Bayesian binomial tests with the same parameters and results
report as described in capacity 2 above. The number of successes over all trials for
each utterance was thus deﬁned according to the number of times that υω was
followed by ε (or that υω was preceded by ε), compared to the number of times that
υω was followed by any other units (or that υω was preceded by any other unit). To
assess the bias, only the trigrams for which ε followed υω (or ε preceded υω) with a
frequency higher than the sum of all other units following υω (or preceding υω)
were included in the analysis.
We conducted all the randomization in R version 3.4.4103 and the Bayesian
analyses in JASP version 0.13.1101.
Literature review on sequence production in non-human primates. Using
Google Scholar, we searched peer-reviewed publications for information on vocal
sequence production across primate taxa. We searched for each primate species
combining its scientiﬁc name and its vernacular name with the following keywords:
vocal repertoire, vocal production, call, call combination, call sequence, vocal
sequence, phonology, syntax, long call, vocal complexity. We identiﬁed vocal
sequences either from the text or from accompanying spectrograms. We deter-
mined (1) whether sequences were reported for a given species, (2) if so what was
the longest reported sequence and 3) what was the number of different sequences
reported. The results of this search are depicted in Fig. 6 for species in which we
could ﬁnd any description for at least one sequence containing at least two different
call types or notes (for singing species). We cannot exclude that we missed some
publications that reported sequences in species not listed in Fig. 6. We also cannot
exclude that the species indicated in Fig. 6 may emit longer vocal sequences or have
a larger variety of sequences than is currently reported in the literature. For several
species, it is not clear if the vocal units emitted in the sequences are also produced
singularly or if they are only produced as part of a sequence. We did not consider
repeats of the same vocal unit (e.g., A_A_A) as a sequence. For the sake of com-
parison with other species in which the methods differ slightly from our current
approach, we recalculated for Fig. 6 the length and diversity of sequences excluding
counts of repetitions of the same vocal unit at any time point within a sequence
(e.g., we treated A_B_D as the same sequence as A_B_A_D). In this review, we
differentiated singing from nonsinging species, as in singing species descriptions of
vocal sequences tend to be limited to song contexts only, which are typically related
only to sexual attraction or territorial contexts and may reveal little about the vocal
sequence usage more generally.
Ethic statement. Our study was purely observational and non-invasive.
Observers followed the strict hygiene protocol of Taï Chimpanzee Project,
which was adopted by IUCN as the best practice guideline for wild ape
studies104 3.44. Observers quarantined for 5 days before following the chim-
panzees. During follows, observers disinfected their hands and boots and
changed clothes before leaving and entering camps. In the forest, observers
wore face masks and keep a minimum distance of eight meters between
themselves and the chimpanzees, to avoid disease transmission from humans
to chimpanzees, and to avoid disturbing the natural behavior of the observed
individuals. The research presented here was approved by the ‘Ethikrat’ of the
Max Planck Society on 04.08.2014.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The source data generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author on reasonable request. The data used to generate the ﬁgures in
this manuscript are provided in Supplementary Data 2.
Code availability
No custom computer code or algorithm was generated to analyze the data in this article.
The R and JASP codes for the analysis are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.
Received: 30 July 2021; Accepted: 10 April 2022;
References
1.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N. & Fitch, W. T. The faculty of language: what is it,
who has it, and how did it evolve? Science 298, 1569–1579 (2002).
2.
Fitch, W. T., Hauser, M. D. & Chomsky, N. The evolution of the language
faculty: Clariﬁcations and implications. Cognition 97, 179–210 (2005).
3.
Bolhuis, J. J., Tattersall, I., Chomsky, N. & Berwick, R. C. How could language
have evolved? PLoS Biol. 12, e1001934 (2014).
4.
Chomsky, N. The language capacity: architecture and evolution. Psychon. Bull.
Rev. 24, 200–203 (2017).
5.
Townsend, S. W., Engesser, S., Stoll, S., Zuberbühler, K. & Bickel, B.
Compositionality in animals and humans. PLoS Biol. 16, 1–7 (2018).
6.
McComb, K. & Semple, S. Coevolution of vocal communication and sociality
in primates. Biol. Lett. 1, 381–385 (2005).
7.
Wilkinson, G. S. Social and vocal complexity in bats. In Animal social
complexity: Intelligence, culture, and individualized societies (eds de Waal, F. B.
M. & Tyack, P. L.), 322–341 (Harvard University Press, 2003).
8.
Leighton, G. M. & Birmingham, T. Multiple factors affect the evolution of
repertoire size across birds. Behav. Ecol. 32, 380–385 (2020).
9.
Moran, S., McCloy, D. & Wright, R. Revisiting population size vs. phoneme
inventory size. Language 88, 877–893 (2012).
10. Engesser, S. & Townsend, S. W. Combinatoriality in the vocal systems of
nonhuman animals. WIREs Cogn. Sci. 10, e1493 (2019).
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
13

11. Fitch, W. T. & Hauser, M. D. Computational constraints on syntactic
processing in a nonhuman primate. Science 303, 377–380 (2004).
12. Wilson, B. et al. Auditory sequence processing reveals evolutionarily
conserved regions of frontal cortex in macaques and humans. Nat. Commun.
6, 8901 (2015).
13. Milne, A. E. et al. Evolutionary origins of non-adjacent sequence processing in
primate brain potentials. Sci. Rep. 6, 36259 (2016).
14. Watson, S. K. et al. Nonadjacent dependency processing in monkeys, apes,
and humans. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb0725 (2020).
15. Balezeau, F. et al. Primate auditory prototype in the evolution of the arcuate
fasciculus. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 611–614 (2020).
16. Hickok, G. & Poeppel, D. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 393–402 (2007).
17. Berwick, R. C., Friederici, A. D., Chomsky, N. & Bolhuis, J. J. Evolution, brain,
and the nature of language. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 89–98 (2013).
18. Everaert, M. B. H., Huybregts, M. A. C., Chomsky, N., Berwick, R. C. &
Bolhuis, J. J. Structures, not strings: linguistics as part of the cognitive sciences.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 729–743 (2015).
19. Berwick, R. C. & Chomsky, N. Why Only Us: Language and Evolution (MIT
Press, 2016).
20. Friederici, A. D., Chomsky, N., Berwick, R. C., Moro, A. & Bolhuis, J. J.
Language, mind and brain. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 713–722 (2017).
21. Kershenbaum, A. et al. Acoustic sequences in non-human animals: a tutorial
review and prospectus. Biol. Rev. 91, 13–52 (2016).
22. Arnold, K. & Zuberbühler, K. Meaningful call combinations in a non-human
primate. Curr. Biol. 18, R202–R203 (2008).
23. Suzuki, R., Buck, J. R. & Tyack, P. L. Information entropy of humpback whale
songs. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 119, 1849–1866 (2006).
24. Sainburg, T., Theilman, B., Thielk, M. & Gentner, T. Q. Parallels in the
sequential organization of birdsong and human speech. Nat. Commun. 10,
3636 (2019).
25. Yang, C. Ontogeny and phylogeny of language. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,
6324–6327 (2013).
26. Yang, C., Crain, S., Berwick, R. C., Chomsky, N. & Bolhuis, J. J. The growth of
language: universal grammar, experience, and principles of computation.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 81, 103–119 (2017).
27. Hammerschmidt, K. & Fischer, J. Baboon vocal repertoires and the evolution
of primate vocal diversity. J. Hum. Evol. 126, 1–13 (2019).
28. Gustison, M. L., Semple, S., Ferrer-i-Cancho, R. & Bergman, T. J. Gelada vocal
sequences follow Menzerath’s linguistic law. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
E2750–E2758 (2016).
29. Torti, V., Gamba, M., Rabemananjara, Z. H. & Giacoma, C. The songs of the
indris (Mammalia: Primates: Indridae): contextual variation in the long-
distance calls of a lemur. Ital. J. Zool. 80, 596–607 (2013).
30. Suzuki, T. N., Wheatcroft, D. & Griesser, M. Experimental evidence for
compositional syntax in bird calls. Nat. Commun. 7, 10986 (2016).
31. Dahlin, C. & Wright, T. Pair duets in the yellow-naped amazon (Amazona
auropalliata): phonology and syntax. Behaviour 144, 207–228 (2007).
32. Ouattara, K., Lemasson, A. & Zuberbühler, K. Campbell’s monkeys use
afﬁxation to alter call meaning. PLoS ONE 4, e7808 (2009).
33. Ouattara, K., Lemasson, A. & Zuberbühler, K. Campbell’s monkeys
concatenate vocalizations into context-speciﬁc call sequences. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 106, 22026–22031 (2009).
34. Miyagawa, S. & Clarke, E. Systems underlying human and old world monkey
communication: one, two, or inﬁnite. Front. Psychol. 10, 1911 (2019).
35. Zuberbühler, K. Syntax and compositionality in animal communication.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190062 (2020).
36. Suzuki, T. N. Communication about predator type by a bird using discrete,
graded and combinatorial variation in alarm calls. Anim. Behav. 87, 59–65
(2014).
37. Kershenbaum, A., Ilany, A., Blaustein, L. & Geffen, E. Syntactic structure and
geographical dialects in the songs of male rock hyraxes. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol.
Sci. 279, 2974–2981 (2012).
38. Clarke, E., Reichard, U. H. & Zuberbühler, K. The syntax and meaning of wild
gibbon songs. PLOS ONE 1, e73 (2006).
39. Crockford, C. & Boesch, C. Call combinations in wild chimpanzees. Behaviour
142, 397–421 (2005).
40. Fedurek, P. et al. The function of chimpanzee greeting calls is modulated by
their acoustic variation. Anim. Behav. 174, 279–289 (2021).
41. Crockford, C. Why does the chimpanzee vocal repertoire remain poorly
understood? - and what can be done about It. in The Chimpanzees of the Taï
Forest: 40 Years of Research (eds Boesch, Christophe, R. M. et al.) 394–409
(Cambridge University Press, 2019).
42. Goodall, J. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior (Harvard
University Press, 1986).
43. Mitani, J. C., Hasegawa, T., Gros‐Louis, J., Marler, P. & Byrne, R. Dialects in
wild chimpanzees? Am. J. Primatol. 27, 233–243 (1992).
44. Leroux, M. et al. Chimpanzees combine pant hoots with food calls into larger
structures. Anim. Behav. 179, 41–50 (2021).
45. Grawunder, S. et al. Chimpanzee vowel-like sounds and voice quality suggest
formant space expansion through the hominoid lineage. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
B Biol. Sci. 377, 20200455 (2022).
46. Crockford, C., Wittig, R. M. & Zuberbühler, K. Vocalizing in chimpanzees is
inﬂuenced by social-cognitive processes. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701742 (2017).
47. Girard-Buttoz, C. et al. Information transfer efﬁciency differs in wild
chimpanzees and bonobos, but not social cognition. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
287, 20200523 (2020).
48. Notman, H. & Rendall, D. Contextual variation in chimpanzee pant hoots and
its implications for referential communication. Anim. Behav. 70, 177–190
(2005).
49. Crockford, C., Wittig, R. M. & Zuberbühler, K. An intentional vocalization
draws others’ attention: a playback experiment with wild chimpanzees. Anim.
Cogn. 18, 581–591 (2014).
50. Schamberg, I., Wittig, R. M. & Crockford, C. Call type signals caller goal: a
new take on ultimate and proximate inﬂuences in vocal production. Biol. Rev.
93, 2071–2082 (2018).
51. Slocombe, K. E. & Zuberbühler, K. Chimpanzees modify recruitment screams
as a function of audience composition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104,
17228–17233 (2007).
52. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J.
27, 379–423 (1948).
53. Hale, J. A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. In Second
meeting of the north american chapter of the association for computational
linguistics (2001).
54. Levy, R. Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition 106,
1126–1177 (2008).
55. Marler, P. & Mitani, J. C. A phonological analysis of male gibbon singing
behavior. Behaviour 109, 20–45 (1989).
56. Bermejo, M. & Omedes, A. Preliminary vocal repertoire and vocal
communication of wild bonobos (Pan paniscus) at Lilungu (Democratic
Republic of Congo). Folia Primatol. 70, 328–357 (1999).
57. Clay, Z. & Zuberbuehler, K. Bonobos extract meaning from call sequences.
PLoS ONE 6, e18786 (2011).
58. Hedwig, D., Hammerschmidt, K., Mundry, R., Robbins, M. M. & Boesch, C.
Acoustic structure and variation in mountain and western gorilla close calls: a
syntactic approach. Behaviour 151, 1091–1120 (2014).
59. Spillmann, B. et al. Acoustic properties of long calls given by ﬂanged male
orang-utans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii) reﬂect both individual identity and
context. Ethology 116, 385–395 (2010).
60. Lameira, A. R. et al. Predator guild does not inﬂuence orangutan alarm call
rates and combinations. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 67, 519–528 (2013).
61. Fuller, J. L. The vocal repertoire of adult male blue monkeys (Cercopithecus
mitis stulmanni): A quantitative analysis of acoustic structure. Am. J. Primatol.
76, 203–216 (2014).
62. Bouchet, H., Blois-Heulin, C. & Lemasson, A. Social complexity parallels vocal
complexity: a comparison of three non-human primate species. Front. Psychol.
4, 390 (2013).
63. Coye, C., Zuberbühler, K. & Lemasson, A. Morphologically structured
vocalizations in female Diana monkeys. Anim. Behav. 115, 97–105 (2016).
64. Gustison, M. L., le Roux, A. & Bergman, T. J. Derived vocalizations of geladas
(Theropithecus gelada) and the evolution of vocal complexity in primates.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 367, 1847–1859 (2012).
65. Arnold, K. & Zuberbühler, K. Call combinations in monkeys: compositional
or idiomatic expressions? Brain Lang. 120, 303–309 (2012).
66. Range, F. & Fischer, J. Vocal repertoire of sooty mangabeys (Cercocebus
torquatus atys) in the Taï National Park. Ethology 110, 301–321 (2004).
67. Wich, S. A., Koski, S., Vries, Hde & Schaik, C. Pvan Individual and contextual
variation in thomas langur male loud calls. Ethology 109, 1–13 (2003).
68. Halloy, M. & Kleiman, D. G. Acoustic structure of long calls in free-ranging
groups of golden lion tarnarins, Leontopithecus rosalia. Am. J. Primatol. 32,
303–310 (1994).
69. Bezerra, B. & Souto, A. Structure and usage of the vocal repertoire of Callithrix
jacchus. Int. J. Primatol. 29, 671–701 (2008).
70. Masataka, N. A ﬁeld study on the vocalizations of Goeldi’s monkeys
(Callimico goeldii). Primates 23, 206–219 (1982).
71. Pola, Y. V. & Snowdon, C. T. The vocalizations of pygmy marmosets
(Cebuella pygmaea). Anim. Behav. 23, 826–842 (1975).
72. Epple, G. Comparative studies on vocalizations in marmoset monkeys. Folia
Primatol. 8, 1–40 (1968).
73. Řeháková-Petrů, M., Policht, R. & Peške, L. Acoustic repertoire of the
Philippine Tarsier (Tarsius syrichta fraterculus) and individual variation of
long-distance calls. Int. J. Zool. 2012, e602401 (2012).
74. Macedonia, J. M. & Stanger, K. F. Phylogeny of the lemuridae revisited:
evidence from communication signals. Folia Primatol. 63, 1–43 (1994).
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
14
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio

75. Hending, D., Seiler, M. & Stanger-Hall, K. F. The vocal repertoire of the
northern giant mouse lemur (Mirza zaza) in captivity. Int. J. Primatol. 41,
732–763 (2020).
76. Nadhurou, B., Gamba, M., Andriaholinirina, N. V., Ouledi, A. & Giacoma, C.
The vocal communication of the mongoose lemur (Eulemur mongoz):
phonation mechanisms, acoustic features and quantitative analysis. Ethol.
Ecol. Evol. 28, 241–260 (2016).
77. Mandl, I., Schwitzer, C. & Holderied, M. Sahamalaza sportive lemur, lepilemur
sahamalaza, vocal communication: call use, context and gradation. Folia
Primatol. 90, 336–360 (2019).
78. Diogo, R., Potau, J. M. & Pastor, J. F. Photographic and Descriptive
Musculoskeletal Atlas of Chimpanzees: With Notes on the Attachments,
Variations, Innervation, Function and Synonymy and Weight of the Muscles
(CRC Press, 2019).
79. Suzuki, T. N. & Zuberbühler, K. Animal syntax. Curr. Biol. 29, R669–R671
(2019).
80. Hauser, M. D. & Glynn, D. Can free-ranging rhesus monkeys (Macaca
mulatta) extract artiﬁcially created rules comprised of natural vocalizations? J.
Comp. Psychol. 123, 161–167 (2009).
81. Wilson, B. et al. Auditory artiﬁcial grammar learning in Macaque and
Marmoset Monkeys. J. Neurosci. 33, 18825–18835 (2013).
82. Wilson, B., Smith, K. & Petkov, C. I. Mixed-complexity artiﬁcial grammar
learning in humans and macaque monkeys: evaluating learning strategies. Eur.
J. Neurosci. 41, 568–578 (2015).
83. Newport, E. L., Hauser, M. D., Spaepen, G. & Aslin, R. N. Learning at a
distance II. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies in a non-human
primate. Cogn. Psychol. 49, 85–117 (2004).
84. Ravignani, A., Sonnweber, R.-S., Stobbe, N. & Fitch, W. T. Action at a
distance: dependency sensitivity in a New World primate. Biol. Lett. 9,
20130852 (2013).
85. Sonnweber, R., Ravignani, A. & Fitch, W. T. Non-adjacent visual dependency
learning in chimpanzees. Anim. Cogn. 3, 733–745 (2015).
86. Rizzi, L. Monkey morpho-syntax and merge-based systems. Theor. Linguist
42, 139–145 (2016).
87. Terleph, T. A., Malaivijitnond, S. & Reichard, U. H. Lar gibbon (Hylobates lar)
great call reveals individual caller identity. Am. J. Primatol. 77, 811–821
(2015).
88. Ham, S., Hedwig, D., Lappan, S. & Choe, J. C. Song functions in nonduetting
gibbons: evidence from playback experiments on Javan Gibbons (Hylobates
moloch). Int. J. Primatol. 37, 225–240 (2016).
89. Payne, K. The progressively changing songs of humpback whales: a window
on the creative process in a wild animal. in The Origins of Music. 135–150
(2000).
90. Oyakawa, C., Koda, H. & Sugiura, H. Acoustic features contributing to the
individuality of wild agile gibbon (Hylobates agilis agilis) songs. Am. J.
Primatol. 69, 777–790 (2007).
91. Bene, J.-C. K., Ouattara, K., Bitty, E. A. & Kone, I. Combination calls in olive
colobus monkeys (Procolobus Verus) in Tai National Park. Cote D’ivoire. J.
Asian Sci. Res. 2, 466–477 (2012).
92. Fujita, K. On the parallel evolution of syntax and lexicon: a Merge-only view.
J. Neurolinguist. 43, 178–192 (2017).
93. Goucha, T., Zaccarella, E. & Friederici, A. D. A revival of Homo loquens as a
builder of labeled structures: neurocognitive considerations. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 81, 213–224 (2017).
94. Ding, N., Melloni, L., Zhang, H., Tian, X. & Poeppel, D. Cortical tracking of
hierarchical linguistic structures in connected speech. Nat. Neurosci. 19,
158–164 (2016).
95. Nelson, M. J. et al. Neurophysiological dynamics of phrase-structure building
during sentence processing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3669–E3678
(2017).
96. Zaccarella, E. & Friederici, A. D. The neurobiological nature of syntactic
hierarchies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 81, 205–212 (2017).
97. Wittig, R. M. Tai chimpanzees. in Encyclopedia of Animal Cognition and
Behavior (eds Vonk, J. & Shackelford, T. K.) (Springer International
Publishing, 2018).
98. Altmann, J. Observational study of behavior: sampling methods. Behaviour
49, 227–266 (1974).
99. Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. Praat: doing phonetics by computer (Version 5.1.
05)[Computer program]. http://www.praat.org/ (2009).
100. Crockford, C. & Boesch, C. Context-speciﬁc calls in wild chimpanzees, Pan
troglodytes verus: analysis of barks. Anim. Behav. 66, 115–125 (2003).
101. JASP Team (2022). JASP (Version 0.16.2)[Computer software] https://jasp-
stats.org/faq/how-do-i-cite-jasp.
102. Keysers, C., Gazzola, V. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Using Bayes factor hypothesis
testing in neuroscience to establish evidence of absence. Nat. Neurosci. 23,
788–799 (2020).
103. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2018).
104. Gilardi, K. V. et al. Best practice guidelines for health monitoring and disease
control in great ape populations. Occas. Pap. IUCN Species Surviv. Comm. 56
(2015).
Acknowledgements
We thank the Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche Scientiﬁque and
the Ministère de Eaux et Fôrets in Côte d’Ivoire, and the Ofﬁce Ivoirien des Parcs et
Réserves for permitting the study. We are grateful to the Centre Suisse de Recherches
Scientiﬁques en Côte d’Ivoire for their logistical support, and to Kayla Kolff and the staff
members of the Taï Chimpanzee Project for their support and assistance in collecting the
data, and to Christophe Boesch for tremendous work in establishing and nurturing the
Taï Chimpanzee Project for 30 years. This study was funded by the Max Planck Society
and the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program awarded to C.C. (grant agreement no. 679787). Core
funding for the Taï Chimpanzee Project was provided by the Swiss National Foundation
(1979–1997) and Max Planck Society (since 1997). We thank Julia Fischer, Cat Hobaiter
and Adriano Lameira for comments extremely helpful in shaping this manuscript.
Author contributions
A.D.F., C.C., C.G.B., E.Z., and R.M.W. designed the study; T.B. collected the data; C.G.B.
and E.Z. conducted the statistical analyses; C.C., C.G.B., and E.Z. wrote the ﬁrst draft of
the manuscript with substantial input from all co-authors.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Cédric Girard-Buttoz
or Catherine Crockford.
Peer review information Communications Biology thanks Yohei Oseki, Toshitaka Suzuki
and the other, anonymous, reviewer for their contribution to the peer review of this
work. Primary Handling Editors: Karli Montague-Cardoso and Caitlin Karniski. Peer
reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:410 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio
15

