
“Free will is an illusion so convincing that people simply refuse to believe
that we don’t have it. In Free Will, Sam Harris combines neuroscience and
psychology to lay this illusion to rest at last. Like all of Harris’s books, this
one will not only unsettle you but make you think deeply. Read it: you have
no choice.”
—JERRY A. COYNE, Professor of Ecology and Evolution, University
of Chicago, and author of Why Evolution Is True
 
A BELIEF IN FREE WILL touches nearly everything that human beings
value. It is difficult to think about law, politics, religion, public policy,
intimate relationships, morality—as well as feelings of remorse or personal
achievement—without first imagining that every person is the true source of
his or her thoughts and actions. And yet the facts tell us that free will is an
illusion.
In this enlightening book, Sam Harris argues that this truth about the
human mind does not undermine morality or diminish the importance of
social and political freedom, but it can and should change the way we think
about some of the most important questions in life.
 

“In this elegant and provocative book, Sam Harris demonstrates—with
great intellectual ferocity and panache—that free will is an inherently
flawed and incoherent concept, even in subjective terms. If he is right, the
book will radically change the way we view ourselves as human beings.”
—V. S. RAMACHANDRAN, Director of the Center for Brain and
Cognition, UCSD, and author of The Tell-Tale Brain
 
“Brilliant and witty—and never less than incisive—Free Will shows that
Sam Harris can say more in 13,000 words than most people do in 100,000.”
—OLIVER SACKS
 
“Many say that believing that there is no free will is impossible—or, if
possible, will cause nihilism and despair. In this feisty and personal essay,
Harris offers himself as an example of a heart made less self-absorbed, and
more morally sensitive and creative, because this particular wicked witch is
dead.”
—OWEN FLANAGAN, Professor of Philosophy, Duke University, and
author of The Really Hard Problem
 
“If you believe in free will, or know someone who does, here is the perfect
antidote. In this smart, engaging, and extremely readable little book, Sam
Harris argues that free will doesn’t exist, that we’re better off knowing that
it doesn’t exist, and that—once we think about it in the right way—we can
appreciate from our own experience that it doesn’t exist. This is a delightful
discussion by one of the sharpest scholars around.”
—PAUL BLOOM, Professor of Psychology, Yale University, and author of
How Pleasure Works
 
 

© PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNIFER ROPER
SAM HARRIS is the author of the bestselling books The End of Faith,
Letter to a Christian Nation, The Moral Landscape, and Lying. The End of
Faith won the 2005 PEN Award for Nonfiction. His writing has been
published in over fifteen languages. Dr. Harris and his work have been
discussed in The New York Times, Scientific American, Nature, Rolling Stone,
Newsweek, Time, and many other publications. His writing has appeared in
The New York Times, Los Angeles Times, The Times (London), The Boston
Globe, The Atlantic, Newsweek, Annals of Neurology, and elsewhere. Dr.
Harris is cofounder and CEO of Project Reason, a nonprofit foundation
devoted to spreading scientific knowledge and secular values in society. He
received a degree in philosophy from Stanford University and a PhD in
neuroscience from UCLA. Please visit his website at www.samharris.org.
MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT
SimonandSchuster.com
• THE SOURCE FOR READING GROUPS •
JACKET DESIGN BY DAVID DRUMMOND
COPYRIGHT © 2012 SIMON & SCHUSTER
 

 

Also by Sam Harris
 
The End of Faith
Letter to a Christian Nation
The Moral Landscape
Lying
 


FREE PRESS
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2012 by Sam Harris
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address Free
Press Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New
York, NY 10020.
First Free Press trade paperback edition March 2012
FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live
event. For more information or to book an event contact the Simon &
Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Harris, Sam,
Free will / Sam Harris.—1st Free Press trade pbk. ed.
p. cm.
1. Free will and determinism. I. Title.
BJ1461.H2785 2012
123'.5—dc23                   2011052177
ISBN 978-1-4516-8340-0
ISBN 978-1-4516-8347-9 (eBook)

For Hitch
 

Thank you for purchasing this Free Press eBook.
 
Sign up for our newsletter and receive special offers, access to bonus content, and info on the latest
new releases and other great eBooks from Free Press and Simon & Schuster.
 
 
 
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com
 

Contents
 
The Unconscious Origins of the Will
Changing the Subject
Cause and Effect
Choices, Efforts, Intentions
Might the Truth Be Bad for Us?
Moral Responsibility
Politics
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
About the Author

FREE WILL
 

 
The question of free will touches nearly everything we care about. Morality, law,
politics, religion, public policy, intimate relationships, feelings of guilt and
personal accomplishment—most of what is distinctly human about our lives
seems to depend upon our viewing one another as autonomous persons, capable
of free choice. If the scientific community were to declare free will an illusion, it
would precipitate a culture war far more belligerent than the one that has been
waged on the subject of evolution. Without free will, sinners and criminals
would be nothing more than poorly calibrated clockwork, and any conception of
justice that emphasized punishing them (rather than deterring, rehabilitating, or
merely containing them) would appear utterly incongruous. And those of us who
work hard and follow the rules would not “deserve” our success in any deep
sense. It is not an accident that most people find these conclusions abhorrent.
The stakes are high.
In the early morning of July 23, 2007, Steven Hayes and Joshua
Komisarjevsky, two career criminals, arrived at the home of Dr. William and
Jennifer Petit in Cheshire, a quiet town in central Connecticut. They found Dr.
Petit asleep on a sofa in the sunroom. According to his taped confession,
Komisarjevsky stood over the sleeping man for some minutes, hesitating, before
striking him in the head with a baseball bat. He claimed that his victim’s screams
then triggered something within him, and he bludgeoned Petit with all his
strength until he fell silent.
The two then bound Petit’s hands and feet and went upstairs to search the rest
of the house. They discovered Jennifer Petit and her daughters—Hayley, 17, and
Michaela, 11—still asleep. They woke all three and immediately tied them to
their beds.
At 7:00 a.m., Hayes went to a gas station and bought four gallons of gasoline.
At 9:30, he drove Jennifer Petit to her bank to withdraw $15,000 in cash. The
conversation between Jennifer and the bank teller suggests that she was unaware
of her husband’s injuries and believed that her captors would release her family
unharmed.
While Hayes and the girls’ mother were away, Komisarjevsky amused himself
by taking naked photos of Michaela with his cell phone and masturbating on her.
When Hayes returned with Jennifer, the two men divided up the money and
briefly considered what they should do. They decided that Hayes should take

Jennifer into the living room and rape her—which he did. He then strangled her,
to the apparent surprise of his partner.
At this point, the two men noticed that William Petit had slipped his bonds
and escaped. They began to panic. They quickly doused the house with gasoline
and set it on fire. When asked by the police why he hadn’t untied the two girls
from their beds before lighting the blaze, Komisarjevsky said, “It just didn’t
cross my mind.” The girls died of smoke inhalation. William Petit was the only
survivor of the attack.
Upon hearing about crimes of this kind, most of us naturally feel that men like
Hayes and Komisarjevsky should be held morally responsible for their actions.
Had we been close to the Petit family, many of us would feel entirely justified in
killing these monsters with our own hands. Do we care that Hayes has since
shown signs of remorse and has attempted suicide? Not really. What about the
fact that Komisarjevsky was repeatedly raped as a child? According to his
journals, for as long as he can remember, he has known that he was “different”
from other people, psychologically damaged, and capable of great coldness. He
also claims to have been stunned by his own behavior in the Petit home: He was
a career burglar, not a murderer, and he had not consciously intended to kill
anyone. Such details might begin to give us pause.
As we will see, whether criminals like Hayes and Komisarjevsky can be
trusted to honestly report their feelings and intentions is not the point: Whatever
their conscious motives, these men cannot know why they are as they are. Nor
can we account for why we are not like them. As sickening as I find their
behavior, I have to admit that if I were to trade places with one of these men,
atom for atom, I would be him: There is no extra part of me that could decide to
see the world differently or to resist the impulse to victimize other people. Even
if you believe that every human being harbors an immortal soul, the problem of
responsibility remains: I cannot take credit for the fact that I do not have the soul
of a psychopath. If I had truly been in Komisarjevsky’s shoes on July 23, 2007—
that is, if I had his genes and life experience and an identical brain (or soul) in an
identical state—I would have acted exactly as he did. There is simply no
intellectually respectable position from which to deny this. The role of luck,
therefore, appears decisive.
Of course, if we learned that both these men had been suffering from brain
tumors that explained their violent behavior, our moral intuitions would shift
dramatically. But a neurological disorder appears to be just a special case of
physical events giving rise to thoughts and actions. Understanding the
neurophysiology of the brain, therefore, would seem to be as exculpatory as
finding a tumor in it. How can we make sense of our lives, and hold people

accountable for their choices, given the unconscious origins of our conscious
minds?
Free will is an illusion. Our wills are simply not of our own making. Thoughts
and intentions emerge from background causes of which we are unaware and
over which we exert no conscious control. We do not have the freedom we think
we have.
Free will is actually more than an illusion (or less), in that it cannot be made
conceptually coherent. Either our wills are determined by prior causes and we
are not responsible for them, or they are the product of chance and we are not
responsible for them. If a man’s choice to shoot the president is determined by a
certain pattern of neural activity, which is in turn the product of prior causes—
perhaps an unfortunate coincidence of bad genes, an unhappy childhood, lost
sleep, and cosmic-ray bombardment—what can it possibly mean to say that his
will is “free”? No one has ever described a way in which mental and physical
processes could arise that would attest to the existence of such freedom. Most
illusions are made of sterner stuff than this.
The popular conception of free will seems to rest on two assumptions: (1) that
each of us could have behaved differently than we did in the past, and (2) that we
are the conscious source of most of our thoughts and actions in the present. As
we are about to see, however, both of these assumptions are false.
But the deeper truth is that free will doesn’t even correspond to any subjective
fact about us—and introspection soon proves as hostile to the idea as the laws of
physics are. Seeming acts of volition merely arise spontaneously (whether
caused, uncaused, or probabilistically inclined, it makes no difference) and
cannot be traced to a point of origin in our conscious minds. A moment or two of
serious self-scrutiny, and you might observe that you no more decide the next
thought you think than the next thought I write.

The Unconscious Origins of the Will
We are conscious of only a tiny fraction of the information that our brains
process in each moment.1 Although we continually notice changes in our
experience—in thought, mood, perception, behavior, etc.—we are utterly
unaware of the neurophysiological events that produce them. In fact, we can be
very poor witnesses to experience itself. By merely glancing at your face or
listening to your tone of voice, others are often more aware of your state of mind
and motivations than you are.
I generally start each day with a cup of coffee or tea—sometimes two. This
morning, it was coffee (two). Why not tea? I am in no position to know. I wanted
coffee more than I wanted tea today, and I was free to have what I wanted. Did I
consciously choose coffee over tea? No. The choice was made for me by events
in my brain that I, as the conscious witness of my thoughts and actions, could
not inspect or influence. Could I have “changed my mind” and switched to tea
before the coffee drinker in me could get his bearings? Yes, but this impulse
would also have been the product of unconscious causes. Why didn’t it arise this
morning? Why might it arise in the future? I cannot know. The intention to do
one thing and not another does not originate in consciousness—rather, it appears
in consciousness, as does any thought or impulse that might oppose it.
The physiologist Benjamin Libet famously used EEG to show that activity in
the brain’s motor cortex can be detected some 300 milliseconds before a person
feels that he has decided to move.2 Another lab extended this work using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): Subjects were asked to press
one of two buttons while watching a “clock” composed of a random sequence of
letters appearing on a screen. They reported which letter was visible at the
moment they decided to press one button or the other. The experimenters found
two brain regions that contained information about which button subjects would
press a full 7 to 10 seconds before the decision was consciously made.3 More
recently, direct recordings from the cortex showed that the activity of merely 256
neurons was sufficient to predict with 80 percent accuracy a person’s decision to
move 700 milliseconds before he became aware of it.4
These findings are difficult to reconcile with the sense that we are the
conscious authors of our actions. One fact now seems indisputable: Some
moments before you are aware of what you will do next—a time in which you

subjectively appear to have complete freedom to behave however you please—
your brain has already determined what you will do. You then become conscious
of this “decision” and believe that you are in the process of making it.
The distinction between “higher” and “lower” systems in the brain offers no
relief: I, as the conscious witness of my experience, no more initiate events in
my prefrontal cortex than I cause my heart to beat. There will always be some
delay between the first neurophysiological events that kindle my next conscious
thought and the thought itself. And even if there weren’t—even if all mental
states were truly coincident with their underlying brain states—I cannot decide
what I will next think or intend until a thought or intention arises. What will my
next mental state be? I do not know—it just happens. Where is the freedom in
that?
Imagine a perfect neuroimaging device that would allow us to detect and
interpret the subtlest changes in brain function. You might spend an hour
thinking and acting freely in the lab, only to discover that the scientists scanning
your brain had been able to produce a complete record of what you would think
and do some moments in advance of each event. For instance, exactly 10
minutes and 10 seconds into the experiment, you decided to pick up a magazine
from a nearby table and begin reading, but the scanner log shows this mental
state arising at 10 minutes and 6 seconds—and the experimenters even knew
which magazine you would choose. You read for a while and then got bored and
stopped; the experimenters knew you would stop a second before you did and
could tell which sentence would be the last you read.
And so it would go with everything else: You tried to recall the name of the
lead experimenter, but you forgot it; a minute later you remembered it as “Brent”
when it was actually “Brett.” Next, you decided to go shopping for new shoes
after you left the lab—but on second thought, you realized that your son would
be getting out of school early that day, so you wouldn’t have enough time to go
shopping after all. Imagine what it would be like to see the time log of these
mental events, alongside video of your associated behavior, demonstrating that
the experimenters knew what you would think and do just before you did. You
would, of course, continue to feel free in every present moment, but the fact that
someone else could report what you were about to think and do would expose
this feeling for what it is: an illusion. If the laws of nature do not strike most of
us as incompatible with free will, that is because we have not imagined how
human behavior would appear if all cause-and-effect relationships were
understood.

It is important to recognize that the case I am building against free will does not
depend upon philosophical materialism (the assumption that reality is, at bottom,
purely physical). There is no question that (most, if not all) mental events are the
product of physical events. The brain is a physical system, entirely beholden to
the laws of nature—and there is every reason to believe that changes in its
functional state and material structure entirely dictate our thoughts and actions.
But even if the human mind were made of soul-stuff, nothing about my
argument would change. The unconscious operations of a soul would grant you
no more freedom than the unconscious physiology of your brain does.
If you don’t know what your soul is going to do next, you are not in control.
This is obviously true in all cases where a person wishes he could feel or behave
differently than he does: Think of the millions of committed Christians whose
souls happen to be gay, prone to obesity, or bored by prayer. However, free will
is no more evident when a person does exactly what, in retrospect, he wishes he
had done. The soul that allows you to stay on your diet is just as mysterious as
the one that tempts you to eat cherry pie for breakfast.
There is a distinction between voluntary and involuntary actions, of course,
but it does nothing to support the common idea of free will (nor does it depend
upon it). A voluntary action is accompanied by the felt intention to carry it out,
whereas an involuntary action isn’t. Needless to say, this difference is reflected
at the level of the brain. And what a person consciously intends to do says a lot
about him. It makes sense to treat a man who enjoys murdering children
differently from one who accidentally hit and killed a child with his car—
because the conscious intentions of the former give us a lot of information about
how he is likely to behave in the future. But where intentions themselves come
from, and what determines their character in every instance, remains perfectly
mysterious in subjective terms. Our sense of free will results from a failure to
appreciate this: We do not know what we intend to do until the intention itself
arises. To understand this is to realize that we are not the authors of our thoughts
and actions in the way that people generally suppose.
Of course, this insight does not make social and political freedom any less
important. The freedom to do what one intends, and not to do otherwise, is no
less valuable than it ever was. Having a gun to your head is still a problem worth
rectifying, wherever intentions come from. But the idea that we, as conscious
beings, are deeply responsible for the character of our mental lives and
subsequent behavior is simply impossible to map onto reality.
Consider what it would take to actually have free will. You would need to be
aware of all the factors that determine your thoughts and actions, and you would
need to have complete control over those factors. But there is a paradox here that

vitiates the very notion of freedom—for what would influence the influences?
More influences? None of these adventitious mental states are the real you. You
are not controlling the storm, and you are not lost in it. You are the storm.

Changing the Subject
It is safe to say that no one was ever moved to entertain the existence of free will
because it holds great promise as an abstract idea. The endurance of this notion
is attributable to the fact that most of us feel that we freely author our own
thoughts and actions (however difficult it may be to make sense of this in logical
or scientific terms). Thus the idea of free will emerges from a felt experience. It
is, however, very easy to lose sight of this psychological truth once we begin
talking philosophy.
In the philosophical literature, one finds three main approaches to the
problem: determinism, libertarianism, and compatibilism. Both determinism and
libertarianism hold that if our behavior is fully determined by background
causes, free will is an illusion. (For this reason they are both referred to as
“incompatibilist” views.) Determinists believe that we live in such a world,
while libertarians (no relation to the political philosophy that goes by this name)
imagine that human agency must magically rise above the plane of physical
causation. Libertarians sometimes invoke a metaphysical entity, such as a soul,
as the vehicle for our freely acting wills. Compatibilists, however, claim that
determinists and libertarians are both confused and that free will is compatible
with the truth of determinism.
Today, the only philosophically respectable way to endorse free will is to be a
compatibilist—because we know that determinism, in every sense relevant to
human behavior, is true. Unconscious neural events determine our thoughts and
actions—and are themselves determined by prior causes of which we are
subjectively unaware. However, the “free will” that compatibilists defend is not
the free will that most people feel they have.
Compatibilists generally claim that a person is free as long as he is free from
any outer or inner compulsions that would prevent him from acting on his actual
desires and intentions. If you want a second scoop of ice cream and no one is
forcing you to eat it, then eating a second scoop is fully demonstrative of your
freedom of will. The truth, however, is that people claim greater autonomy than
this. Our moral intuitions and sense of personal agency are anchored to a felt
sense that we are the conscious source of our thoughts and actions. When
deciding whom to marry or which book to read, we do not feel compelled by
prior events over which we have no control. The freedom that we presume for
ourselves and readily attribute to others is felt to slip the influence of impersonal

background causes. And the moment we see that such causes are fully effective
—as any detailed account of the neurophysiology of human thought and
behavior would reveal—we can no longer locate a plausible hook upon which to
hang our conventional notions of personal responsibility.5
What does it mean to say that rapists and murderers commit their crimes of
their own free will? If this statement means anything, it must be that they could
have behaved differently—not on the basis of random influences over which
they have no control, but because they, as conscious agents, were free to think
and act in other ways. To say that they were free not to rape and murder is to say
that they could have resisted the impulse to do so (or could have avoided feeling
such an impulse altogether)—with the universe, including their brains, in
precisely the same state it was in at the moment they committed their crimes.
Assuming that violent criminals have such freedom, we reflexively blame them
for their actions. But without it, the place for our blame suddenly vanishes, and
even the most terrifying sociopaths begin to seem like victims themselves. The
moment we catch sight of the stream of causes that precede their conscious
decisions, reaching back into childhood and beyond, their culpability begins to
disappear.
Compatibilists have produced a vast literature in an effort to finesse this
problem.6 More than in any other area of academic philosophy, the result
resembles theology. (I suspect this is not an accident. The effort has been
primarily one of not allowing the laws of nature to strip us of a cherished
illusion.) According to compatibilists, if a man wants to commit murder, and
does so because of this desire, his actions attest to his freedom of will. From
both a moral and a scientific perspective, this seems deliberately obtuse. People
have many competing desires—and some desires appear pathological (that is,
undesirable) even to those in their grip. Most people are ruled by many mutually
incompatible goals and aspirations: You want to finish your work, but you are
also inclined to stop working so that you can play with your kids. You aspire to
quit smoking, but you also crave another cigarette. You are struggling to save
money, but you are also tempted to buy a new computer. Where is the freedom
when one of these opposing desires inexplicably triumphs over its rival?
The problem for compatibilism runs deeper, however—for where is the
freedom in wanting what one wants without any internal conflict whatsoever?
Where is the freedom in being perfectly satisfied with your thoughts, intentions,
and subsequent actions when they are the product of prior events that you had
absolutely no hand in creating?
For instance, I just drank a glass of water and feel absolutely at peace with the

decision to do so. I was thirsty, and drinking water is fully congruent with my
vision of who I want to be when in need of a drink. Had I reached for a beer this
early in the day, I might have felt guilty; but drinking a glass of water at any
hour is blameless, and I am quite satisfied with myself. Where is the freedom in
this? It may be true that if I had wanted to do otherwise, I would have, but I am
nevertheless compelled to do what I effectively want. And I cannot determine
my wants, or decide which will be effective, in advance. My mental life is
simply given to me by the cosmos. Why didn’t I decide to drink a glass of juice?
The thought never occurred to me. Am I free to do that which does not occur to
me to do? Of course not.
And there is no way I can influence my desires—for what tools of influence
would I use? Other desires? To say that I would have done otherwise had I
wanted to is simply to say that I would have lived in a different universe had I
been in a different universe. Compatibilism amounts to nothing more than an
assertion of the following creed: A puppet is free as long as he loves his strings.
Compatibilists like my friend Daniel Dennett7 insist that even if our thoughts
and actions are the product of unconscious causes, they are still our thoughts and
actions. Anything that our brains do or decide, whether consciously or not, is
something that we have done or decided. The fact that we cannot always be
subjectively aware of the causes of our actions does not negate free will—
because our unconscious neurophysiology is just as much “us” as our conscious
thoughts are. Consider the following, from Tom Clark of the Center for
Naturalism:
 
Harris is of course right that we don’t have conscious access to the
neurophysiological processes that underlie our choices. But, as Dennett
often points out, these processes are as much our own, just as much part of
who we are as persons, just as much us, as our conscious awareness. We
shouldn’t alienate ourselves from our own neurophysiology and suppose
that the conscious self, what Harris thinks of as constituting the real self
(and as many others do, too, perhaps), is being pushed around at the mercy
of our neurons. Rather, as identifiable individuals we consist (among other
things) of neural processes, some of which support consciousness, some of
which don’t. So it isn’t an illusion, as Harris says, that we are authors of our
thoughts and actions; we are not mere witnesses to what causation cooks
up. We as physically instantiated persons really do deliberate and choose
and act, even if consciousness isn’t ultimately in charge. So the feeling of
authorship and control is veridical.

Moreover, the neural processes that (some-how—the hard problem of
consciousness) support consciousness are essential to choosing, since the
evidence strongly suggests they are associated with flexible action and
information integration in service to behavior control. But it’s doubtful that
consciousness (phenomenal experience) per se adds anything to those
neural processes in controlling action.
It’s true that human persons don’t have contra-causal free will. We are
not self-caused little gods. But we are just as real as the genetic and
environmental processes which created us and the situations in which we
make choices. The deliberative machinery supporting effective action is just
as real and causally effective as any other process in nature. So we don’t
have to talk as if we are real agents in order to concoct a motivationally
useful illusion of agency, which is what Harris seems to recommend we do
near the end of his remarks on free will. Agenthood survives determinism,
no problem.8
 
This perfectly articulates the difference between Dennett’s view and my own
(Dennett agrees9). As I have said, I think compatibilists like Dennett change the
subject: They trade a psychological fact—the subjective experience of being a
conscious agent—for a conceptual understanding of ourselves as persons. This is
a bait and switch. The psychological truth is that people feel identical to a certain
channel of information in their conscious minds. Dennett is simply asserting that
we are more than this—we are coterminous with everything that goes on inside
our bodies, whether we are conscious of it or not. This is like saying we are
made of stardust—which we are. But we don’t feel like stardust. And the
knowledge that we are stardust is not driving our moral intuitions or our system
of criminal justice.10
At this moment, you are making countless unconscious “decisions” with
organs other than your brain—but these are not events for which you feel
responsible. Are you producing red blood cells and digestive enzymes at this
moment? Your body is doing these things, of course, but if it “decided” to do
otherwise, you would be the victim of these changes, rather than their cause. To
say that you are responsible for everything that goes on inside your skin because
it’s all “you” is to make a claim that bears absolutely no relationship to the
feelings of agency and moral responsibility that have made the idea of free will
an enduring problem for philosophy.
There are more bacteria in your body than there are human cells. In fact, 90
percent of the cells in your body are microbes like E. coli (and 99 percent of the

functional genes in your body belong to them). Many of these organisms
perform necessary functions—they are “you” in some wider sense. Do you feel
identical to them? If they misbehave, are you morally responsible?
People feel (or presume) an authorship of their thoughts and actions that is
illusory. If we were to detect their conscious choices on a brain scanner seconds
before they were aware of them, they would be rightly astonished—because this
would directly challenge their status as conscious agents in control of their inner
lives. We know that we could perform such an experiment, at least in principle,
and if we tuned the machine correctly, subjects would feel that we were reading
their minds (or controlling them).11
We know, in fact, that we sometimes feel responsible for events over which
we have no causal influence. Given the right experimental manipulations, people
can be led to believe that they consciously intended an action when they neither
chose it nor had control over their movements. In one experiment, subjects were
asked to select pictures on a screen using a computer’s cursor. They tended to
believe that they had intentionally guided the cursor to a specific image even
when it was under the full control of another person, as long as they heard the
name of the image just before the cursor stopped.12 People who are susceptible
to hypnosis can be given elaborate suggestions to perform odd tasks, and when
asked why they have done these things, many will confabulate—giving reasons
for their behavior that have nothing to do with its actual cause. There is no
question that our attribution of agency can be gravely in error. I am arguing that
it always is.
Imagine that a person claims to have no need to eat food of any kind—rather,
he can live on light. From time to time, an Indian yogi will make such a boast,
much to the merriment of skeptics. Needless to say, there is no reason to take
such claims seriously, no matter how thin the yogi. However, a compatibilist like
Dennett could come to the charlatan’s defense: The man does live on light—we
all do—because when you trace the origin of any food, you arrive at something
that depends on photosynthesis. By eating beef, we consume the grass the cow
ate, and the grass ate sunlight. So the yogi is no liar after all. But that’s not the
ability the yogi was advertising, and his actual claim remains dishonest (or
delusional). This is the trouble with compatibilism. It solves the problem of “free
will” by ignoring it.
How can we be “free” as conscious agents if everything that we consciously
intend is caused by events in our brain that we do not intend and of which we are
entirely unaware? We can’t. To say that “my brain” decided to think or act in a
particular way, whether consciously or not, and that this is the basis for my

freedom, is to ignore the very source of our belief in free will: the feeling of
conscious agency. People feel that they are the authors of their thoughts and
actions, and this is the only reason why there seems to be a problem of free will
worth talking about.

Cause and Effect
In physical terms, we know that every human action can be reduced to a series of
impersonal events: Genes are transcribed, neurotransmitters bind to their
receptors, muscle fibers contract, and John Doe pulls the trigger on his gun. But
for our commonsense notions of human agency and morality to hold, it seems
that our actions cannot be merely lawful products of our biology, our
conditioning, or anything else that might lead others to predict them.
Consequently, some scientists and philosophers hope that chance or quantum
uncertainty can make room for free will.
For instance, the biologist Martin Heisenberg has observed that certain
processes in the brain, such as the opening and closing of ion channels and the
release of synaptic vesicles, occur at random, and cannot therefore be
determined by environmental stimuli. Thus, much of our behavior can be
considered truly “self-generated”—and therein, he imagines, lies a basis for
human freedom. But how do events of this kind justify the feeling of free will?
“Self-generated” in this sense means only that certain events originate in the
brain.
If my decision to have a second cup of coffee this morning was due to a
random release of neurotransmitters, how could the indeterminacy of the
initiating event count as the free exercise of my will? Chance occurrences are by
definition ones for which I can claim no responsibility. And if certain of my
behaviors are truly the result of chance, they should be surprising even to me.
How would neurological ambushes of this kind make me free?
Imagine what your life would be like if all your actions, intentions, beliefs,
and desires were randomly “self-generated” in this way. You would scarcely
seem to have a mind at all. You would live as one blown about by an internal
wind. Actions, intentions, beliefs, and desires can exist only in a system that is
significantly constrained by patterns of behavior and the laws of stimulus-
response. The possibility of reasoning with other human beings—or, indeed, of
finding their behaviors and utterances comprehensible at all—depends on the
assumption that their thoughts and actions will obediently ride the rails of a
shared reality. This is true as well when attempting to understand one’s own
behavior. In the limit, Heisenberg’s “self-generated” mental events would
preclude the existence of any mind at all.
The indeterminacy specific to quantum mechanics offers no foothold: If my

brain is a quantum computer, the brain of a fly is likely to be a quantum
computer, too. Do flies enjoy free will? Quantum effects are unlikely to be
biologically salient in any case. They play a role in evolution because cosmic
rays and other high-energy particles cause point mutations in DNA (and the
behavior of such particles passing through the nucleus of a cell is governed by
the laws of quantum mechanics). Evolution, therefore, seems unpredictable in
principle.13 But few neuroscientists view the brain as a quantum computer. And
even if it were, quantum indeterminacy does nothing to make the concept of free
will scientifically intelligible. In the face of any real independence from prior
events, every thought and action would seem to merit the statement “I don’t
know what came over me.”
If determinism is true, the future is set—and this includes all our future states
of mind and our subsequent behavior. And to the extent that the law of cause and
effect is subject to indeterminism—quantum or otherwise—we can take no
credit for what happens. There is no combination of these truths that seems
compatible with the popular notion of free will.

Choices, Efforts, Intentions
When we consider human behavior, the difference between premeditated,
voluntary action and mere accident seems immensely consequential. As we will
see, this distinction can be preserved—and with it, our most important moral and
legal concerns—while banishing the idea of free will once and for all.
Certain states of consciousness seem to arise automatically, beyond the sphere
of our intentions. Others seem self-generated, deliberative, and subject to our
will. When I hear the sound of a leaf blower outside my window, it merely
impinges upon my consciousness: I haven’t brought it into being, and I cannot
stop it at will. I can try to put the sound out of my mind by focusing on
something else—my writing, for instance—and this act of directing attention
feels different from merely hearing a sound. I am doing it. Within certain limits,
I seem to choose what I pay attention to. The sound of the leaf blower intrudes,
but I can seize the spotlight of my attention in the next moment and aim it
elsewhere. This difference between nonvolitional and volitional states of mind is
reflected at the level of the brain—for they are governed by different systems.
And the difference between them must, in part, produce the felt sense that there
is a conscious self endowed with freedom of will.
As we have begun to see, however, this feeling of freedom arises from our
moment-to-moment ignorance of the prior causes of our thoughts and actions.
The phrase “free will” describes what it feels like to identify with certain mental
states as they arise in consciousness. Thoughts like “What should I get my
daughter for her birthday? I know—I’ll take her to a pet store and have her pick
out some tropical fish” convey the apparent reality of choices, freely made. But
from a deeper perspective (speaking both objectively and subjectively), thoughts
simply arise unauthored and yet author our actions.
This is not to say that conscious awareness and deliberative thinking serve no
purpose. Indeed, much of our behavior depends on them. I might unconsciously
shift in my seat, but I cannot unconsciously decide that the pain in my back
warrants a trip to a physical therapist. To do the latter, I must become aware of
the pain and be consciously motivated to do something about it. Perhaps it would
be possible to build an insentient robot capable of these states—but in our case,
certain behaviors seem to require the presence of conscious thought. And we
know that the brain systems that allow us to reflect upon our experience are
different from those involved when we automatically react to stimuli. So

consciousness, in this sense, is not inconsequential.14 And yet the entire process
of becoming aware of the pain in my back, thinking about it, and seeking a
remedy for it results from processes of which I am completely unaware. Did I,
the conscious person, create my pain? No. It simply appeared. Did I create the
thoughts about it that led me to consider physical therapy? No. They, too, simply
appeared. This process of conscious deliberation, while different from
unconscious reflex, offers no foundation for freedom of will.
As Dan Dennett and many others have pointed out, people generally confuse
determinism with fatalism. This gives rise to questions like “If everything is
determined, why should I do anything? Why not just sit back and see what
happens?” This is pure confusion. To sit back and see what happens is itself a
choice that will produce its own consequences. It is also extremely difficult to
do: Just try staying in bed all day waiting for something to happen; you will find
yourself assailed by the impulse to get up and do something, which will require
increasingly heroic efforts to resist.
And the fact that our choices depend on prior causes does not mean that they
don’t matter. If I had not decided to write this book, it wouldn’t have written
itself. My choice to write it was unquestionably the primary cause of its coming
into being. Decisions, intentions, efforts, goals, willpower, etc., are causal states
of the brain, leading to specific behaviors, and behaviors lead to outcomes in the
world. Human choice, therefore, is as important as fanciers of free will believe.
But the next choice you make will come out of the darkness of prior causes that
you, the conscious witness of your experience, did not bring into being.
Therefore, while it is true to say that a person would have done otherwise if he
had chosen to do otherwise, this does not deliver the kind of free will that most
people seem to cherish—because a person’s “choices” merely appear in his mind
as though sprung from the void. From the perspective of your conscious
awareness, you are no more responsible for the next thing you think (and
therefore do) than you are for the fact that you were born into this world.
Let’s say your life has gone off track. You used to be very motivated, inspired by
your opportunities, and physically fit, but now you are lazy, easily discouraged,
and overweight. How did you get this way? You might be able to tell a story
about how your life unraveled, but you cannot truly account for why you let it
happen. And now you want to escape this downward trend and change yourself
through an act of will.
You begin reading self-help books. You change your diet and join a gym. You
decide to go back to school. But after six months of effort, you are no closer to
living the life you want than you were before. The books failed to make an

impact on you; your diet and fitness regime proved impossible to maintain; and
you got bored with school and quit. Why did you encounter so many obstacles in
yourself? You have no idea. You tried to change your habits, but your habits
appear to be stronger than you are. Most of us know what it is like to fail in this
way—and these experiences are not even slightly suggestive of freedom of will.
But you woke up this morning feeling even greater resolve. Enough is
enough! Now you have a will of steel. Before stepping out of bed you had a
brilliant idea for a website—and the discovery that the domain name was
available for only 10 dollars has filled you with confidence. You are now an
entrepreneur! You share the idea with several smart people, and they think it is
guaranteed to make you rich.
The wind is at your back, your sails are full, and you are tacking furiously. As
it turns out, a friend of yours is also a close friend of Tim Ferriss, the famous
lifestyle coach and fitness guru. Ferriss offers to consult with you about your
approach to diet and exercise. You find this meeting extremely helpful—and
afterward you discover a reservoir of discipline in yourself that you didn’t know
was there. Over the next four months you swap 20 pounds of fat for 20 pounds
of muscle. You weigh the same, but you are fully transformed. Your friends can’t
believe what you have accomplished. Even your enemies begin to ask you for
advice.
You feel entirely different about your life, and the role that discipline, choice,
and effort have played in your resurrection cannot be denied. But how can you
account for your ability to make these efforts today and not a year ago? Where
did this idea for a website come from? It just appeared in your mind. Did you, as
the conscious agent you feel yourself to be, create it? (If so, why not just create
the next one right now?) How can you explain the effect that Tim Ferriss’s
advice had on you? How can you explain your ability to respond to it?
If you pay attention to your inner life, you will see that the emergence of
choices, efforts, and intentions is a fundamentally mysterious process. Yes, you
can decide to go on a diet—and we know a lot about the variables that will
enable you to stick to it—but you cannot know why you were finally able to
adhere to this discipline when all your previous attempts failed. You might have
a story to tell about why things were different this time around, but it would be
nothing more than a post hoc description of events that you did not control. Yes,
you can do what you want—but you cannot account for the fact that your wants
are effective in one case and not in another (and you certainly can’t choose your
wants in advance). You wanted to lose weight for years. Then you really wanted
to. What’s the difference? Whatever it is, it’s not a difference that you brought
into being.

You are not in control of your mind—because you, as a conscious agent, are
only part of your mind, living at the mercy of other parts.15 You can do what you
decide to do—but you cannot decide what you will decide to do. Of course, you
can create a framework in which certain decisions are more likely than others—
you can, for instance, purge your house of all sweets, making it very unlikely
that you will eat dessert later in the evening—but you cannot know why you
were able to submit to such a framework today when you weren’t yesterday.
So it’s not that willpower isn’t important or that it is destined to be
undermined by biology. Willpower is itself a biological phenomenon. You can
change your life, and yourself, through effort and discipline—but you have
whatever capacity for effort and discipline you have in this moment, and not a
scintilla more (or less). You are either lucky in this department or you aren’t—
and you cannot make your own luck.
Many people believe that human freedom consists in our ability to do what, upon
reflection, we believe we should do—which often means overcoming our short-
term desires and following our long-term goals or better judgment. This is
certainly an ability that people possess, to a greater or lesser degree, and which
other animals appear to lack, but it is nevertheless a capacity of our minds that
has unconscious roots.
You have not built your mind. And in moments in which you seem to build it
—when you make an effort to change yourself, to acquire knowledge, or to
perfect a skill—the only tools at your disposal are those that you have inherited
from moments past.
Choices, efforts, intentions, and reasoning influence our behavior—but they
are themselves part of a chain of causes that precede conscious awareness and
over which we exert no ultimate control. My choices matter—and there are paths
toward making wiser ones—but I cannot choose what I choose. And if it ever
appears that I do—for instance, after going back and forth between two options
—I do not choose to choose what I choose. There is a regress here that always
ends in darkness. I must take a first step, or a last one, for reasons that are bound
to remain inscrutable.16
Many people believe that this problem of regress is a false one. Certain
compatibilists insist that freedom of will is synonymous with the idea that one
could have thought or acted differently. However, to say that I could have done
otherwise is merely to think the thought “I could have done otherwise” after
doing whatever I in fact did. This is an empty affirmation.17 It confuses hope for
the future with an honest account of the past. What I will do next, and why,
remains, at bottom, a mystery—one that is fully determined by the prior state of

the universe and the laws of nature (including the contributions of chance). To
declare my “freedom” is tantamount to saying, “I don’t know why I did it, but
it’s the sort of thing I tend to do, and I don’t mind doing it.”
One of the most refreshing ideas to come out of existentialism (perhaps the only
one) is that we are free to interpret and reinterpret the meaning of our lives. You
can consider your first marriage, which ended in divorce, to be a “failure,” or
you can view it as a circumstance that caused you to grow in ways that were
crucial to your future happiness. Does this freedom of interpretation require free
will? No. It simply suggests that different ways of thinking have different
consequences. Some thoughts are depressing and disempowering; others inspire
us. We can pursue any line of thought we want—but our choice is the product of
prior events that we did not bring into being.
Take a moment to think about the context in which your next decision will
occur: You did not pick your parents or the time and place of your birth. You
didn’t choose your gender or most of your life experiences. You had no control
whatsoever over your genome or the development of your brain. And now your
brain is making choices on the basis of preferences and beliefs that have been
hammered into it over a lifetime—by your genes, your physical development
since the moment you were conceived, and the interactions you have had with
other people, events, and ideas. Where is the freedom in this? Yes, you are free
to do what you want even now. But where did your desires come from?
Writing for The New York Times, the philosopher Eddy Nahmias criticized
arguments of the sort I have presented here:
 
Many philosophers, including me, understand free will as a set of
capacities for imagining future courses of action, deliberating about one’s
reasons for choosing them, planning one’s actions in light of this
deliberation and controlling actions in the face of competing desires. We act
of our own free will to the extent that we have the opportunity to exercise
these capacities, without unreasonable external or internal pressure. We are
responsible for our actions roughly to the extent that we possess these
capacities and we have opportunities to exercise them.18
 
There is no question that human beings can imagine and plan for the future,
weigh competing desires, etc.—and that losing these capacities would greatly
diminish us. External and internal pressures of various kinds can be present or
absent while a person imagines, plans, and acts—and such pressures determine

our sense of whether he is morally responsible for his behavior. However, these
phenomena have nothing to do with free will.
For instance, in my teens and early twenties I was a devoted student of the
martial arts. I practiced incessantly and taught classes in college. Recently, I
began training again, after a hiatus of more than 20 years. Both the cessation and
the renewal of my interest in martial arts seem to be pure expressions of the
freedom that Nahmias attributes to me. I have been under no “unreasonable
external or internal pressure.” I have done exactly what I wanted to do. I wanted
to stop training, and I stopped. I wanted to start again, and now I train several
times a week. All this has been associated with conscious thought and acts of
apparent self-control.
However, when I look for the psychological cause of my behavior, I find it
utterly mysterious. Why did I stop training 20 years ago? Well, certain things
just became more important to me. But why did they become more important to
me—and why precisely then and to that degree? And why did my interest in
martial arts suddenly reemerge after decades of hibernation? I can consciously
weigh the effects of certain influences—for instance, I recently read Rory
Miller’s excellent book Meditations on Violence. But why did I read this book? I
have no idea. And why did I find it compelling? And why was it sufficient to
provoke action on my part (if, indeed, it was the proximate cause of my
behavior)? And why so much action? I’m now practicing two martial arts and
also training with Miller and other self-defense experts. What in hell is going on
here? Of course, I could tell a story about why I’m doing what I’m doing—
which would amount to my telling you why I think such training is a good idea,
why I enjoy it, etc.—but the actual explanation for my behavior is hidden from
me. And it is perfectly obvious that I, as the conscious witness of my experience,
am not the deep cause of it.
After reading the previous paragraph, some of you will think, “That Miller
book sounds interesting!” and you will buy it. Some will think no such thing. Of
those who buy the book, some will find it extremely useful. Others might put it
down without seeing the point. Others will place it on the shelf and forget to read
it. Where is the freedom in any of this? You, as the conscious agent who reads
these words, are in no position to determine which of these bins you might fall
into. And if you decide to switch bins—“I wasn’t going to buy the book, but now
I will, just to spite you!”—you cannot account for that decision either. You will
do whatever it is you do, and it is meaningless to assert that you could have done
otherwise.

Might the Truth Be Bad for Us?
Many people worry that free will is a necessary illusion—and that without it we
will fail to live creative and fulfilling lives. This concern isn’t entirely
unjustified. One study found that having subjects read an argument against the
existence of free will made them more likely to cheat on a subsequent exam.19
Another found such subjects to be less helpful and more aggressive.20 It is surely
conceivable that knowing (or emphasizing) certain truths about the human mind
could have unfortunate psychological and/or cultural consequences. However,
I’m not especially worried about degrading the morality of my readers by
publishing this book.
Speaking from personal experience, I think that losing the sense of free will
has only improved my ethics—by increasing my feelings of compassion and
forgiveness, and diminishing my sense of entitlement to the fruits of my own
good luck. Is such a state of mind always desirable? Probably not. If I were
teaching a self-defense class for women, I would consider it quite
counterproductive to emphasize that all human behavior, including a woman’s
response to physical attack, is determined by a prior state of the universe, and
that all rapists are, at bottom, unlucky—being themselves victims of prior causes
that they did not create. There are scientific, ethical, and practical truths
appropriate to every occasion—and an injunction like “Just gouge the bastard’s
eyes” surely has its place. There is no contradiction here. Our interests in life are
not always served by viewing people and things as collections of atoms—but
this doesn’t negate the truth or utility of physics.
Losing a belief in free will has not made me fatalistic—in fact, it has
increased my feelings of freedom. My hopes, fears, and neuroses seem less
personal and indelible. There is no telling how much I might change in the
future. Just as one wouldn’t draw a lasting conclusion about oneself on the basis
of a brief experience of indigestion, one needn’t do so on the basis of how one
has thought or behaved for vast stretches of time in the past. A creative change
of inputs to the system—learning new skills, forming new relationships,
adopting new habits of attention—may radically transform one’s life.
Becoming sensitive to the background causes of one’s thoughts and feelings
can—paradoxically—allow for greater creative control over one’s life. It is one
thing to bicker with your wife because you are in a bad mood; it is another to
realize that your mood and behavior have been caused by low blood sugar. This

understanding reveals you to be a biochemical puppet, of course, but it also
allows you to grab hold of one of your strings: A bite of food may be all that
your personality requires. Getting behind our conscious thoughts and feelings
can allow us to steer a more intelligent course through our lives (while knowing,
of course, that we are ultimately being steered).

Moral Responsibility
The belief in free will has given us both the religious conception of “sin” and our
commitment to retributive justice. The U.S. Supreme Court has called free will a
“universal and persistent” foundation for our system of law, distinct from “a
deterministic view of human conduct that is inconsistent with the underlying
precepts of our criminal justice system” (United States v. Grayson, 1978). Any
intellectual developments that threatened free will would seem to put the ethics
of punishing people for their bad behavior in question.
The great worry, of course, is that an honest discussion of the underlying
causes of human behavior appears to leave no room for moral responsibility. If
we view people as neuronal weather patterns, how can we coherently speak
about right and wrong or good and evil? These notions seem to depend upon
people being able to freely choose how to think and act. And if we remain
committed to seeing people as people, we must find some notion of personal
responsibility that fits the facts.
Happily, we can. What does it mean to take responsibility for an action?
Yesterday I went to the market; I was fully clothed, did not steal anything, and
did not buy anchovies. To say that I was responsible for my behavior is simply to
say that what I did was sufficiently in keeping with my thoughts, intentions,
beliefs, and desires to be considered an extension of them. If I had found myself
standing in the market naked, intent upon stealing as many tins of anchovies as I
could carry, my behavior would be totally out of character; I would feel that I
was not in my right mind, or that I was otherwise not responsible for my actions.
Judgments of responsibility depend upon the overall complexion of one’s mind,
not on the metaphysics of mental cause and effect.
Consider the following examples of human violence:
 
1. A four-year-old boy was playing with his father’s gun and killed a young
woman. The gun had been kept loaded and unsecured in a dresser drawer.
2. A 12-year-old boy who had been the victim of continual physical and
emotional abuse took his father’s gun and intentionally shot and killed a young
woman because she was teasing him.

3. A 25-year-old man who had been the victim of continual abuse as a child
intentionally shot and killed his girlfriend because she left him for another
man.
4. A 25-year-old man who had been raised by wonderful parents and never
abused intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met “just for
the fun of it.”
5. A 25-year-old man who had been raised by wonderful parents and never
abused intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met “just for
the fun of it.” An MRI of the man’s brain revealed a tumor the size of a golf
ball in his medial prefrontal cortex (a region responsible for the control of
emotion and behavioral impulses).
 
In each case a young woman died, and in each case her death was the result of
events arising in the brain of another human being. But the degree of moral
outrage we feel depends on the background conditions described in each case.
We suspect that a four-year-old child cannot truly kill someone on purpose and
that the intentions of a 12-year-old do not run as deep as those of an adult. In
cases 1 and 2, we know that the brain of the killer has not fully matured and that
not all the responsibilities of personhood have yet been conferred. The history of
abuse and the precipitating circumstance in case 3 seem to mitigate the man’s
guilt: This was a crime of passion committed by a person who had himself
suffered at the hands of others. In 4 there has been no abuse, and the motive
brands the perpetrator a psychopath. Case 5 involves the same psychopathic
behavior and motive, but a brain tumor somehow changes the moral calculus
entirely: Given its location, it seems to divest the killer of all responsibility for
his crime. And it works this miracle even if the man’s subjective experience was
identical to that of the psychopath in case 4—for the moment we understand that
his feelings had a physical cause, a brain tumor, we cannot help seeing him as a
victim of his own biology.
How can we make sense of these gradations of moral responsibility when
brains and their background influences are in every case, and to exactly the same
degree, the real cause of a woman’s death?
We need not have any illusions that a causal agent lives within the human
mind to recognize that certain people are dangerous. What we condemn most in
another person is the conscious intention to do harm. Degrees of guilt can still be
judged by reference to the facts of a case: the personality of the accused, his
prior offenses, his patterns of association with others, his use of intoxicants, his

confessed motives with regard to the victim, etc. If a person’s actions seem to
have been entirely out of character, this might influence our view of the risk he
now poses to others. If the accused appears unrepentant and eager to kill again,
we need entertain no notions of free will to consider him a danger to society.
Why is the conscious decision to do another person harm particularly
blameworthy? Because what we do subsequent to conscious planning tends to
most fully reflect the global properties of our minds—our beliefs, desires, goals,
prejudices, etc. If, after weeks of deliberation, library research, and debate with
your friends, you still decide to kill the king—well, then killing the king reflects
the sort of person you really are. The point is not that you are the ultimate and
independent cause of your actions; the point is that, for whatever reason, you
have the mind of a regicide.
Certain criminals must be incarcerated to prevent them from harming other
people. The moral justification for this is entirely straightforward: Everyone else
will be better off this way. Dispensing with the illusion of free will allows us to
focus on the things that matter—assessing risk, protecting innocent people,
deterring crime, etc. However, certain moral intuitions begin to relax the moment
we take a wider picture of causality into account. Once we recognize that even
the most terrifying predators are, in a very real sense, unlucky to be who they
are, the logic of hating (as opposed to fearing) them begins to unravel. Once
again, even if you believe that every human being harbors an immortal soul, the
picture does not change: Anyone born with the soul of a psychopath has been
profoundly unlucky.
Why does the brain tumor in case 5 change our view of the situation so
dramatically? One reason is that its influence has been visited upon a person
who (we must assume) would not otherwise behave in this way. Both the tumor
and its effects seem adventitious, and this makes the perpetrator appear to be
purely a victim of biology. Of course, if we couldn’t cure his condition, we
would still need to lock him up to prevent him from committing further crimes,
but we would not hate him or condemn him as evil. Here is one front on which I
believe our moral intuitions must change: The more we understand the human
mind in causal terms, the harder it becomes to draw a distinction between cases
like 4 and 5.
The men and women on death row have some combination of bad genes, bad
parents, bad environments, and bad ideas (and the innocent, of course, have
supremely bad luck). Which of these quantities, exactly, were they responsible
for? No human being is responsible for his genes or his upbringing, yet we have
every reason to believe that these factors determine his character. Our system of
justice should reflect an understanding that any of us could have been dealt a

very different hand in life. In fact, it seems immoral not to recognize just how
much luck is involved in morality itself.
To see how fully our moral intuitions must shift, consider what would happen
if we discovered a cure for human evil. Imagine that every relevant change in the
human brain could now be made cheaply, painlessly, and safely. In fact, the cure
could be put directly into the food supply, like vitamin D. Evil would become
nothing more than a nutritional deficiency.
If we imagine that a cure for evil exists, we can see that our retributive
impulse is morally flawed. Consider, for instance, the prospect of withholding
the cure for evil from a murderer as part of his punishment. Would this make any
sense at all? What could it possibly mean to say that a person deserves to have
this treatment withheld? What if the treatment was available prior to his crime?
Would he still be responsible for his actions? It seems far more likely that those
who had been aware of his case would be indicted for negligence. Would it make
any sense to deny surgery to the man in case 5 as a punishment if we knew that
the brain tumor was the actual cause of his violence? Of course not. The
implications of this seem inescapable: The urge for retribution depends upon our
not seeing the underlying causes of human behavior.
Despite our attachment to the notion of free will, most of us know that
disorders of the brain can trump the best intentions of the mind. This shift in
understanding represents progress toward a deeper, more consistent, and more
compassionate view of our common humanity—and we should note that this is
progress away from religious metaphysics. Few concepts have offered greater
scope for human cruelty than the idea of an immortal soul that stands
independent of all material influences, ranging from genes to economic systems.
Within a religious framework, a belief in free will supports the notion of sin—
which seems to justify not only harsh punishment in this life but eternal
punishment in the next. And yet, ironically, one of the fears attending our
progress in science is that a more complete understanding of ourselves will
dehumanize us.
Viewing human beings as natural phenomena need not damage our system of
criminal justice. If we could incarcerate earthquakes and hurricanes for their
crimes, we would build prisons for them as well. We fight emerging epidemics—
and even the occasional wild animal—without attributing free will to them.
Clearly, we can respond intelligently to the threat posed by dangerous people
without lying to ourselves about the ultimate origins of human behavior. We will
still need a criminal justice system that attempts to accurately assess guilt and
innocence along with the future risks that the guilty pose to society. But the logic
of punishing people will come undone—unless we find that punishment is an

essential component of deterrence or rehabilitation.
It must be admitted, however, that the issue of retribution is a tricky one. In a
fascinating article in The New Yorker,21 Jared Diamond writes of the high price
we sometimes pay when our desire for vengeance goes unfulfilled. He compares
the experiences of two people: his friend Daniel, a New Guinea highlander who
avenged the death of a paternal uncle; and his late father-in-law, who had the
opportunity to kill the man who murdered his entire family during the Holocaust
but opted instead to turn him over to the police. (After spending only a year in
jail, the killer was released.) The consequences of taking revenge in the first case
and for-going it in the second could not have been starker. While there is much
to be said against the vendetta culture of the New Guinea highlands, Daniel’s
revenge brought him exquisite relief. Whereas Diamond’s father-in-law spent the
last 60 years of his life “tormented by regret and guilt.” Clearly, vengeance
answers to a powerful psychological need in many of us.
We are deeply disposed to perceive people as the authors of their actions, to
hold them responsible for the wrongs they do us, and to feel that these
transgressions must be punished. Often, the only punishment that seems
appropriate is for the perpetrator of a crime to suffer or forfeit his life. It remains
to be seen how a scientifically informed system of justice might steward these
impulses. Clearly, a full account of the causes of human behavior should
attenuate our natural response to injustice, at least to some degree. I doubt, for
instance, that Diamond’s father-in-law would have suffered the same anguish if
his family had been trampled by an elephant or laid low by cholera. Similarly,
we can assume that his regret would have been significantly eased if he had
learned that his family’s killer had lived a flawlessly moral life until a virus
began ravaging his medial pre-frontal cortex.
However, it may be that a sham form of retribution would still be moral—
even necessary—if it led people to behave better than they otherwise would.
Whether it is useful to emphasize the punishment of certain criminals—rather
than their containment or rehabilitation—is a question for social and
psychological science. But it seems clear that a desire for retribution, arising
from the idea that each person is the free author of his thoughts and actions, rests
on a cognitive and emotional illusion—and perpetuates a moral one.
One way of viewing the connection between free will and moral responsibility
is to note that we generally attribute these qualities to people only with respect to
actions that punishment might deter.22 I cannot hold you responsible for
behaviors that you could not possibly control. If we made sneezing illegal, for
instance, some number of people would break the law no matter how grave the

consequences. A behavior like kidnapping, however, seems to require conscious
deliberation and sustained effort at every turn—hence it should admit of
deterrence. If the threat of punishment could cause you to stop doing what you
are doing, your behavior falls squarely within conventional notions of free will
and moral responsibility.
It may be true that strict punishment—rather than mere containment or
rehabilitation—is necessary to prevent certain crimes. But punishing people
purely for pragmatic reasons would be very different from the approach that we
currently take. Of course, if punishing bacteria and viruses would prevent the
emergence of pandemic diseases, we would mete out justice to them as well.
A wide variety of human behaviors can be modified by punishments and
incentives—and attributing responsibility to people in these contexts is quite
natural. It may even be unavoidable as a matter of convention. As the
psychologist Daniel Wegner points out, the idea of free will can be a tool for
understanding human behavior. To say that someone freely chose to squander his
life’s savings at the poker table is to say that he had every opportunity to do
otherwise and that nothing about what he did was inadvertent. He played poker
not by accident or while in the grip of delusion but because he wanted to,
intended to, and decided to, moment after moment. For most purposes, it makes
sense to ignore the deep causes of desires and intentions—genes, synaptic
potentials, etc.—and focus instead on the conventional outlines of the person.
We do this when thinking about our own choices and behaviors—because it’s the
easiest way to organize our thoughts and actions. Why did I order beer instead of
wine? Because I prefer beer. Why do I prefer it? I don’t know, but I generally
have no need to ask. Knowing that I like beer more than wine is all I need to
know to function in a restaurant. Whatever the reason, I prefer one taste to the
other. Is there freedom in this? None whatsoever. Would I magically reclaim my
freedom if I decided to spite my preference and order wine instead? No, because
the roots of this intention would be as obscure as the preference itself.

Politics
For better or worse, dispelling the illusion of free will has political implications
—because liberals and conservatives are not equally in thrall to it. Liberals tend
to understand that a person can be lucky or unlucky in all matters relevant to his
success. Conservatives, however, often make a religious fetish of individualism.
Many seem to have absolutely no awareness of how fortunate one must be to
succeed at anything in life, no matter how hard one works. One must be lucky to
be able to work. One must be lucky to be intelligent, physically healthy, and not
bankrupted in middle age by the illness of a spouse.
Consider the biography of any “self-made” man, and you will find that his
success was entirely dependent on background conditions that he did not make
and of which he was merely the beneficiary. There is not a person on earth who
chose his genome, or the country of his birth, or the political and economic
conditions that prevailed at moments crucial to his progress. And yet, living in
America, one gets the distinct sense that if certain conservatives were asked why
they weren’t born with club feet or orphaned before the age of five, they would
not hesitate to take credit for these accomplishments.
Even if you have struggled to make the most of what nature gave you, you
must still admit that your ability and inclination to struggle is part of your
inheritance. How much credit does a person deserve for not being lazy? None at
all. Laziness, like diligence, is a neurological condition. Of course, conservatives
are right to think that we must encourage people to work to the best of their
abilities and discourage free riders wherever we can. And it is wise to hold
people responsible for their actions when doing so influences their behavior and
brings benefit to society. But this does not mean that we must be taken in by the
illusion of free will. We need only acknowledge that efforts matter and that
people can change. We do not change ourselves, precisely—because we have
only ourselves with which to do the changing—but we continually influence,
and are influenced by, the world around us and the world within us. It may seem
paradoxical to hold people responsible for what happens in their corner of the
universe, but once we break the spell of free will, we can do this precisely to the
degree that it is useful. Where people can change, we can demand that they do
so. Where change is impossible, or unresponsive to demands, we can chart some
other course. In improving ourselves and society, we are working directly with
the forces of nature, for there is nothing but nature itself to work with.

Conclusion
It is generally argued that our experience of free will presents a compelling
mystery: On the one hand, we can’t make sense of it in scientific terms; on the
other, we feel that we are the authors of our own thoughts and actions. However,
I think that this mystery is itself a symptom of our confusion. It is not that free
will is simply an illusion—our experience is not merely delivering a distorted
view of reality. Rather, we are mistaken about our experience. Not only are we
not as free as we think we are—we do not feel as free as we think we do. Our
sense of our own freedom results from our not paying close attention to what it
is like to be us. The moment we pay attention, it is possible to see that free will
is nowhere to be found, and our experience is perfectly compatible with this
truth. Thoughts and intentions simply arise in the mind. What else could they
do? The truth about us is stranger than many suppose: The illusion of free will is
itself an illusion.
The problem is not merely that free will makes no sense objectively (i.e.,
when our thoughts and actions are viewed from a third-person point of view); it
makes no sense subjectively either. It is quite possible to notice this through
introspection. In fact, I will now perform an experiment in free will for all to see:
I will write anything I want for the rest of this book. Whatever I write will, of
course, be something I choose to write. No one is compelling me to do this. No
one has assigned me a topic or demanded that I use certain words. I can be
ungrammatical if I pleased. And if I want to put a rabbit in this sentence, I am
free to do so.
But paying attention to my stream of consciousness reveals that this notion of
freedom does not reach very deep. Where did this rabbit come from? Why didn’t
I put an elephant in that sentence? I do not know. I am free to change “rabbit” to
“elephant,” of course. But if I did this, how could I explain it? It is impossible
for me to know the cause of either choice. Either is compatible with my being
compelled by the laws of nature or buffeted by the winds of chance; but neither
looks, or feels, like freedom. Rabbit or elephant? Am I free to decide that
“elephant” is the better word when I just do not feel that it is the better word?
Am I free to change my mind? Of course not. It can only change me.
What brings my deliberations on these matters to a close? This book must end
sometime—and now I want to get something to eat. Am I free to resist this
feeling? Well, yes, in the sense that no one is going to force me at gunpoint to eat

—but I am hungry. Can I resist this feeling a moment longer? Yes, of course—
and for an indeterminate number of moments thereafter. But I don’t know why I
make the effort in this instance and not in others. And why do my efforts cease
precisely when they do? Now I feel that it really is time for me to leave. I’m
hungry, yes, but it also seems that I’ve made my point. In fact, I can’t think of
anything else to say on the subject. And where is the freedom in that?

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
I would like to thank my wife and editor, Annaka Harris, for her contributions to
Free Will. As is always the case, her insights and recommendations greatly
improved the book. I don't know how she manages to raise our daughter, work
on her own projects, and still have time to edit my books—but she does. I am
extremely lucky and grateful to have her in my corner.
Jerry Coyne, Galen Strawson, and my mother also read an early draft of the
manuscript and provided very helpful comments.

NOTES
 
1. Recent advances in experimental psychology and neuroimaging have allowed
us to study the boundary between conscious and unconscious mental processes
with increasing precision. We now know that at least two systems in the brain
—often referred to as “dual processes”—govern human cognition, emotion,
and behavior. One is evolutionarily older, unconscious, slow to learn, and
quick to respond; the other evolved more recently and is conscious, quick to
learn, and slow to respond. The phenomenon of priming, in which
subliminally presented stimuli influence a person’s thoughts and emotions,
exposes the first of these systems and reveals the reality of complex mental
processes at work beneath the level of conscious awareness. People can be
primed in a wide variety of ways, and these unconscious influences reliably
alter their goals and subsequent behavior (H. Aarts, R. Custers, & H. Marien,
2008. Preparing and motivating behavior outside of awareness. Science
319[5780]: 1639; R. Custers & H. Aarts, 2010. The unconscious will: How the
pursuit of goals operates outside of conscious awareness. Science 329 [5987]:
47–50).
The experimental technique of “backward masking” has been at the
center of much of this work: If one presents subjects with a brief visual
stimulus (around 30 milliseconds), they can consciously perceive it; but
they can no longer do so if this same stimulus is immediately followed by a
dissimilar pattern (the “mask”). This technique allows for words and
images to be delivered to the mind subliminally. Interestingly, the threshold
for the conscious recognition of emotional words is lower than for neutral
words, which suggests that semantic processing occurs prior to
consciousness (R. Gaillard, A. Del Cul, L. Naccache, F. Vinckier, L. Cohen,
& S. Dehaene, 2006. Nonconscious semantic processing of emotional
words modulates conscious access. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103[19]:
7524–7529).
Recent neuroimaging experiments have offered further evidence: Masked
words engage areas associated with semantic processing (M. T. Diaz & G.
McCarthy, 2007. Unconscious word processing engages a distributed
network of brain regions. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 19[11]: 1768–1775; S.
Dehaene, L. Naccache, L. Cohen, D. Le Bihan, J. F. Mangin, J. B. Poline, et

al., 2001. Cerebral mechanisms of word masking and unconscious
repetition priming. Nat. Neurosci. 4[7]: 752–758; S. Dehaene, L. Naccache,
H. G. Le Clec, E. Koechlin, M. Mueller, G. Dehaene-Lambertz, et al., 1998.
Imaging unconscious semantic priming. Nature 395[6702]: 597–600);
subliminally promised rewards alter activity in the brain’s reward regions
and influence subsequent behavior (M. Pessiglione, L. Schmidt, B.
Draganski, R. Kalisch, H. Lau, R. J. Dolan, et al., 2007. How the brain
translates money into force: A neuroimaging study of subliminal
motivation. Science 316[5826]: 904–906); and masked fearful faces and
emotional words drive activity in the amygdala, the hub of emotional
processing in the limbic system (P. J. Whalen, S. L. Rauch, N. L. Etcoff, S.
C. McInerney, M. B. Lee, & M. A. Jenike, 1998. Masked presentations of
emotional facial expressions modulate amygdala activity without explicit
knowledge. J. Neurosci. 18[1]: 411–418; L. Naccache, R. Gaillard, C.
Adam, D. Hasboun, S. Clemenceau, M. Baulac, et al., 2005. A direct
intracranial record of emotions evoked by subliminal words. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102[21]: 7713–7717).
The subliminal presentation of stimuli poses some conceptual problems,
however. As Daniel Dennett points out, it can be difficult (or impossible) to
distinguish what was experienced and then forgotten from what was never
experienced in the first place—see his insightful discussion of Orwellian vs.
Stalinesque processes in cognition (D. C. Dennett, 1991. Consciousness
explained. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., pp. 116–125). This ambiguity is
largely attributable to the fact that the contents of consciousness must be
integrated over time—around 100 to 200 milliseconds (F. Crick & C. Koch,
2003. A framework for consciousness. Nat. Neurosci. 6[2]: 119–126). This
period of integration allows the sensation of touching an object and the
associated visual perception of doing so, which arrive at the cortex at
different times, to be experienced as though they were simultaneous.
Consciousness, therefore, is dependent upon what is generally known as
“working memory.” Many neuroscientists have made this same point (J. M.
Fuster, 2003. Cortex and mind: Unifying cognition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; P. Thagard & B. Aubie, 2008. Emotional consciousness:
A neural model of how cognitive appraisal and somatic perception interact
to produce qualitative experience. Conscious. Cogn. 17(3): 811–834; B. J.
Baars & S. Franklin, 2003. How conscious experience and working
memory interact. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7(4): 166–172). The principle is
somewhat more loosely captured by Gerald Edelman’s notion of
consciousness as “the remembered present” (G. M. Edelman, 1989. The

remembered present: A biological theory of consciousness. New York:
Basic Books).
2. B. Libet, C. A. Gleason, E. W. Wright, & D. K. Pearl, 1983. Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity (readiness-
potential): The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary act, Brain 106 (Pt
3): 623–642; B. Libet, 1985. Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of
conscious will in voluntary action. Behav. Brain Sci. 8: 529–566. Another lab
has since found that a person’s judgment of when he intended to move can be
shifted in time by giving him delayed sensory feedback of his actual
movements. This suggests that such judgments are retrospective estimates
based on the apparent time of movement and not based on an actual awareness
of the neural activity that causes the movement (W. P. Banks & E. A. Isham,
2009). We infer rather than perceive the moment we decided to act.
(Psychological Science, 20: 17–21).
However, Libet and others have speculated that the concept of free will
might yet be saved: Perhaps the conscious mind is free to “veto,” rather
than initiate, complex action. This suggestion has always seemed absurd on
its face—for surely the neural events that inhibit a planned action arise
unconsciously as well.
3. J. D. Haynes, 2011. Decoding and predicting intentions. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
1224(1): 9–21.
4. I. Fried, R. Mukamel, & G. Kreiman, 2011. Internally generated preactivation
of single neurons in human medial frontal cortex predicts volition. Neuron, 69:
548– 562; P. Haggard, 2011. Decision time for free will. Neuron, 69: 404–406.
5. The neuroscientists Joshua Greene and Jonathan Cohen make a similar point:
Most people’s view of the mind is implicitly dualist and libertarian and
not materialist and compatibilist. . . . That is, it requires the rejection of
determinism and an implicit commitment to some kind of magical mental
causation . . . contrary to legal and philosophical orthodoxy, determinism
really does threaten free will and responsibility as we intuitively understand
them (J. Greene & J. Cohen, 2004. For the law, neuroscience changes
nothing and everything. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 359[1451]:
1775–1785).
6. 
For 
a 
good 
survey 
of 
compatibilist 
thought, 
see
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/compatibilism/. See also G. Watson, ed., 2003.
Free will (second edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
7. D. C. Dennett, 2003. Freedom evolves. New York: Penguin.

8. Tom Clark, personal communication.
9. Daniel Dennett, personal communication.
10. Galen Strawson (personal communication) has pointed out that even if one
agrees with Dennett here, the ordinary notion of moral responsibility is still
deeply problematic for the reasons already given.
11. In his book Consciousness Explained, Daniel Dennett describes an
unpublished experiment in which the neurosurgeon W. Grey Walter directly
connected the motor cortices of his patients to a slide projector. Asked to
advance the slides at their leisure, the subjects were said to have felt that the
projector was reading their minds. Unfortunately, there is some uncertainty as
to whether the experiment was ever performed.
12. D. Wegner, 2002. The illusion of conscious will. Cam-bridge, MA: Bradford
Books/MIT Press.
13. L. Silver, 2006. Challenging nature: The clash of science and spirituality at
the new frontiers of life. New York: Ecco, p. 50.
14. For a recent discussion of the role of consciousness in human psychology,
see R. F. Baumeister, E. J. Masicampo, & K. D. Vohs, 2011. Do conscious
thoughts cause behavior? Annual Review of Psychology, 62: 331–361.
15. Again, as Galen Strawson points out (personal communication), even if we
granted that you are the whole of your mind (conscious and unconscious),
you still cannot ultimately be held responsible for its character.
16. Einstein (following Schopenhauer) once made the same point:
Honestly, I cannot understand what people mean when they talk about
the freedom of the human will. I have a feeling, for instance, that I will
something or other; but what relation this has with freedom I cannot
understand at all. I feel that I will to light my pipe and I do it; but how can I
connect this up with the idea of freedom? What is behind the act of willing
to light the pipe? Another act of willing? Schopenhauer once said: Der
Mensch kann was er will; er kann aber nicht wollen was er will (Man can
do what he will but he cannot will what he wills). (M. Planck, 1932. Where
is science going? New York: W. W. Norton & Company, p. 201.)
17. As Jerry Coyne points out (personal communication), this notion of
counterfactual freedom is also scientifically untestable. What evidence could
possibly be put forward to show that one could have acted differently in the
past?
18. http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/11/13/is-neuroscience-the-death-
of-free-will/.

19. K. D. Vohs & J. W. Schooler, 2008. The value of believing in free will:
Encouraging a belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological
Science, 19(1): 49–54.
20. R. F. Baumeister, E. J. Masicampo, & C. N. DeWall, 2009. Prosocial benefits
of feeling free: Disbelief in free will increases aggression and reduces
helpfulness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35: 260–268.
21. J. Diamond, 2008. Vengeance is ours. The New Yorker, April 21, 2001, pp.
74–87.
22. Steven Pinker, personal communication.

INDEX
 
actions:
     brain and, 69n
     freedom to reinterpret meaning of, 40
     modification of, through punishment or incentives, 59–60
     past, free will and, 6, 39–40, 77n
     as products of impersonal events, 27
     seen as “self-generated,” 27–29
     voluntary vs. involuntary, 12–13, 31–32, 41–42
     see also intentions
agency, sense of:
     experimental manipulation of, 24–25
     free will and, 23–26
attention, directing of, as conscious act, 31–32
backward masking, 70n
bacteria, in human bodies, 23–24
behavior, see actions
brain:
     causal states of, 34
     disorders and tumors of, 50, 51, 53–54, 55–56
     dual systems in, 9, 32, 69n–70n
     medial prefrontal cortex of, 50, 58
     as subject to laws of nature, 11–12
     subliminal presentation of stimuli to, 70n–71n
     see also neurophysiology
brain activity, as preceding consciousness of intent, 8–11
     brain scans, 8–11, 24, 69n–72n
chance, 27–28
     see also luck
change, possibility of, 62–63
child abuse, 3–4, 50, 51
choice:

    as causal brain state, 24
    importance of, 34–35
    as product of prior events, 34, 43–44
    seeming spontaneity of, 6, 37
    stories as explanations of, 35, 37, 43–44
    see also intentions
Clark, Tom, 20–23
cognition, 69n
Cohen, Jonathan, 73n–74n
compassion, 45
compatibilism, 15–26
    free will as defined by, 16–17, 39–40, 74n
    moral responsibility and, 18
consciousness:
     delayed sensory feedback and, 73n
    as dependent on working memory, 72n
    free will and, 6, 26
    intentions as appearing but not originating in, 8
    unconscious origins of, 5, 7–14
Consciousness Explained (Dennett), 74n
conservatives, free will and, 61–62
Coyne, Jerry, 76n
criminals, criminal behavior:
     causes of, 3–5
    as dangers to society, 52–53, 56
    deterrence of, 56, 58–59
    empathy for, 45–46
    free will and, 17–18, 53
    incarceration of, 53, 54, 58
    moral responsibility and, 3, 17–18, 49–52
    punishment of, see retribution
     rehabilitation of, 56, 58
Daniel (New Guinea highlander), 57
deliberative thinking, role of, 32–33
Dennett, Daniel, 20–23, 25, 33, 71n
desires:
     mutually incompatible, 18–19
    pathological, 18
determinism, 15, 74n

    fatalism vs., 33–34
    moral responsibility and, 48–49
    scientific validity of, 16, 29–30
DNA, mutations of, 29
Edelman, Gerald, 72n
EEG (electroencephalogram), 8
Einstein, Albert, 75n–76n
emotion, brain and, 69n
emotional words, subliminal presentation of, 70n–71n
empathy, 45–46
entitlement, sense of, 45
evolution, 29
existentialism, 40
experimental psychology, 69n–72n, 74n–75n
fatalism, 46
    determinism vs., 33–34
Ferriss, Tim, 36, 37
forgiveness, 45
fMRI, see functional magnetic resonance imaging
freedom:
    as ability to act on beliefs, 38–39
    sense of, as enhanced by loss of belief in free will, 46–47
    social and political, 13
free will, as concept:
    as basis of justice system, 1, 23, 48, 54
    compatibilist view of, see compatibilism
    consciousness and, 6, 26
    conservatives and, 61–62
    criminal behavior and, 17–18
    determinist view of, see determinism
    hating and, 53–54
    hypothetical requirements for, 13–14
    as illusion, 5–6, 11, 22, 53
    liberals and, 61
    libertarianism and, 15–16, 74n
    luck vs., 4, 38, 53, 54, 61–62
    past actions and, 6, 39–40, 77n

    rethinking justice system reliance on, 54, 56
    retribution as dependent on sense of, 1
    scientific validity lacking for, 6, 64–65
    sense of agency and, 23–26
    subjective validity lacking for, 6, 65
    success and, 1
free will, sense of:
    chance and, 27–28
    conceptual understanding of self vs., 22–23
    as felt experience, 15, 22–23, 26
    moral responsibility as dependent on, 16–17, 23, 27
    as mystery, 64–65
    as resulting from ignorance of unconscious origins of intentions, 13, 32, 60
    seen as necessary illusion, 45–47
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 8
Greene, Joshua, 73n–74n
hating, free will and, 53–54
Hayes, Steven, 1–4
Heisenberg, Martin, 27
Holocaust, 57
illusion:
    free will as, 5–6, 11, 22
    necessary, sense of free will seen as, 45–47
incarceration, of criminals, 53, 54, 58
intentions:
    as appearing but not originating in consciousness, 8
    brain activity as preceding consciousness of, 8–11
    as causal brain state, 34 to do harm, 52–53
    external and internal restraints on, 41–42
    as product of prior events, 5–6, 19–20, 34, 60
    soul and, 12
    subjective mystery of, 13, 37–38, 39–40
    unconscious origins of, 7–14
    see also actions; choice ion channels, 27
justice system:
    and distinction between voluntary and involuntary actions, 31, 56

    free will as basis of, 1, 23, 48
    rethinking of reliance on free will, 54, 56
    retribution and, 1, 48, 56
Komisarjevsky, Joshua, 1–4
laws of nature, 40
    brain as subject to, 11–12
laziness, 62
liberals, free will and, 61
libertarianism, 15–16, 74n
Libet, Benjamin, 8, 73n
luck:
    free will vs., 4, 38, 53, 54, 61–62
    moral responsibility and, 54
    see also chance
materialism, 11, 74n
meaning, of actions, freedom to reinterpret, 40
medial prefrontal cortex, 50, 58
Meditations on Violence (Miller), 43–44
Miller, Rory, 43–44
moral responsibility, 48–60
    and brain disorders, 50, 51, 53–54, 55–56
    compatibilism and, 18
    of criminals, 3
    degrees of, 49–52
    as dependent on sense of free will, 16–17, 23, 27
    determination of, as dependent on overall complexion of mind, 49
    determinism and, 48–49
    and distinction between voluntary and involuntary actions, 31, 41–42
    and fear of retribution, 58–59
    luck and, 54
murder, 3–4, 12–13, 17, 18, 55, 57
mystery:
    origins of intentions as, 13, 37–38, 39–40
    sense of free will as, 64–65
Nahmias, Eddy, 41–42

neuroimaging, 8–11, 24, 69n–72n
neurophysiology, seen as part of the self, 20–22, 75n
New Guinea, 57
New Yorker, 57
New York Times, 41–42
past actions, free will and, 6, 39–40, 77n
Petit, Hayley, 2–3
Petit, Jennifer, 2–3
Petit, Michaela, 2–3
Petit, William, 2–3
philosophical materialism, 11, 74n
philosophy, free will and, see compatibilism; determinism; libertarianism
politics, 61–63
priming, 69n
psychopaths, 51
punishment, see retribution
quantum indeterminacy, 27, 29–30
rape, 3, 17, 46
rehabilitation, of criminals, 56, 58
religion, 18, 56
retribution:
    as dependent on sense of free will, 1
    as deterrent, 58–59
    human need for, 57–58
    justice system and, 1, 48
    religion and, 56
    as resulting from ignorance of underlying causes of behavior, 55
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 75n–76n
self, seen as comprising both conscious and unconscious processes, 20–22, 75n
sensory feedback, consciousness and, 73n
sin, 48, 56
soul, 56
    intentions and, 12
    libertarianism and, 16
stimuli, subliminal presentation of, 70n–71n

stories, as explanation of choices, 35, 37, 43–44
Strawson, Galen, 74n, 75n
success, free will and, 1
Supreme Court, U.S., 48
synaptic vesicles, 27
theology, 18, 56
unconscious, seen as part of the self, 20–22, 75n
United States v. Grayson, 48
violence, degrees of moral responsibility for, 49–52
volition, see choice
Walter, W. Grey, 74n–75n
Wegner, Daniel, 60
will, see free will; intentions
working memory, consciousness as dependent on, 72n

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
 
Sam Harris is the author of the bestselling books The End of Faith, Letter to a
Christian Nation, The Moral Landscape, and Lying. The End of Faith won the
2005 PEN Award for Non-fiction. His writing has been published in more than
15 languages. Dr. Harris and his work have been discussed in The New York
Times, Scientific American, Nature, Rolling Stone, Newsweek, Time, and many
other publications. His writing has appeared in The New York Times, the Los
Angeles Times, The Times (London), the Boston Globe, The Atlantic, Newsweek,
the Annals of Neurology, and elsewhere. Dr. Harris is a cofounder and the CEO
of Project Reason, a nonprofit foundation devoted to spreading scientific
knowledge and secular values in society. He received a degree in philosophy
from Stanford University and a PhD in neuroscience from UCLA. Please visit
his website at www.samharris.org.

We hope you enjoyed reading this Free Press
eBook.
 
Sign up for our newsletter and receive special offers, access to bonus content, and info on the latest
new releases and other great eBooks from Free Press and Simon & Schuster.
 
 
 
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com
 

