 
Surprise-Based Learning for Developmental Robotics 
Nadeesha Ranasinghe, Wei-Min Shen 
Abstract— Surprise-Based Learning (SBL) is a learning 
algorithm capable of providing a physical robot the ability 
to autonomously learn and plan in an unknown 
environment without any prior knowledge of its actions or 
their impact on the environment. This is achieved by 
creating a model of the environment using prediction 
rules. A prediction rule describes the observations of the 
environment prior to the execution of an action and the 
forecasted or predicted observation of the environment 
after the action. The algorithm learns by investigating 
“surprises”, which are inconsistencies between the 
predictions and observed outcome. SBL has been 
successfully demonstrated on a modular robot learning 
and navigating in a small static environment. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Here we present a scenario of learning as follows. First a 
“baby” robot will be arbitrarily placed in a new, small and 
static environment and it will autonomously perform learning 
and problem solving with a limited number of sensors and 
actions. Then, the number of sensors and actions are varied to 
determine the competence of the learning. Finally the sensors 
and actions will be dynamically “sabotaged” (such as injecting 
noise or turning a sensor upside-down or toggling actions 
such as mapping forward to backward and vice versa) to test if 
the learning can adapt to new situations [1]. This is similar to 
testing a human’s learning ability by having them wear glasses 
that invert their vision. 
In SBL there is a surprise if the latest prediction is 
noticeably different from the latest observation. The algorithm 
must not only detect a surprise, it must also distinguish a 
possible cause for the surprise by investigating the change in 
features. The algorithm follows the framework in Fig. 1. 
 
This framework can be abstractly described as follows: 
After performing an action, the world is sensed via the 
perceptor module which extracts feature information from one 
or more sensors. If the algorithm had made a prediction, the 
surprise analyzer will validate it. If the prediction was 
incorrect, the model modifier will adjust the world model 
accordingly. Based on the updated model the action selector 
will perform the next action so as to repeat the learning cycle. 
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
      
      
Fig. 2:   a) Experimental setup 
                  b) View from robot 
Camera 
SuperBot 
Red Wall 
Power & Video to PC 
White Floor 
 
Videos of results are available via: 
http://www.isi.edu/robots/media-surprise.html 
III. THE SURPRISE-BASED LEARNING ALGORITHM 
In SBL, the world model is represented as a set of rules: 
Rule ≡ Conditions → Action → Predictions      (1) 
Condition ≡ (Feature → Operator → Value)   (2) 
Prediction ≡ (Feature → Operator)       (3) 
 
The SBL algorithm follows a cycle which includes 
prediction, surprise detection and analysis, rule creation, 
selection, validation, maintenance via rule splitting & rule 
refinement, rule abstraction and planning. The details of the 
algorithm can be found in [2]. 
 
Rule Creation: 
 Rule 1   = C1 → Action → P1          (4) 
Rule Splitting with Prediction Modification: 
(C2 being the reason for the surprise, and P2 a second 
prediction which may or may not exist – see subsection E) 
 Rule 1.1 = C1 ∧ C2 → Action → P1 ∨ ¬ P2     (5) 
Rule 1.2 = C1 ∧ ¬ C2 → Action → ¬ P1 ∧ P2    (6) 
After splitting, the 2 rules are marked as “complementary”. 
Rule Refinement, given Rule 1.1 failed: 
(C3 being the reason for surprise) 
 Rule 1.3 = C1 ∧ (C2 ∧ C3) → Action → P1 ∨ ¬ P2   (7) 
Rule 1.4 = C1 ∧ ¬ (C2 ∧ C3) → Action → ¬ P1 ∧ P2  
 (8) 
Rule Refinement, given Rule 1.2 failed: 
(C3 being the reason for surprise) 
 Rule 1.3 = C1 ∧ (¬ C2 ∧ C3) → Action → P1 ∨ ¬ P2  
(9) 
Rule 1.4 = C1 ∧ ¬ (¬ C2 ∧ C3) → Action → ¬ P1 ∧ P2 (10) 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ranasinghe 
N., 
Shen 
W.-M., 
“Surprise-Based 
Learning 
for 
Developmental Robotics”, ECSIS Symposium on Learning and 
Adaptive Behavior in Robotic Systems, LAB-RS 2008, Edinburgh, 
Scotland, August 2008. 
[2] 
Ranasinghe N., Shen W.-M., “The Surprise-Based Learning Algorithm”, 
USC ISI internal publication, April 2008. 
 
input 
output 
actions 
Model Modifier  
prediction 
observation 
Perceptor 
Surprise 
Analyzer 
Predictor 
Model 
Action 
Selector 
 
Physical World 
 
 
Fig. 1: Surprise-based Learning Framework 

