
SCHOPENHAUER: 
A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED

Continuum Guides for the Perplexed
Continuum’s Guides for the Perplexed are clear, concise and accessible intro-
ductions to thinkers, writers and subjects that students and readers can find 
especially challenging. Concentrating specifically on what it is that makes the 
subject difficult to grasp, these books explain and explore key themes and 
ideas, guiding the reader towards a thorough understanding of demanding 
material. 
Guides for the Perplexed available from Continuum:
Adorno: A Guide for the Perplexed, Alex Thomson
Arendt: A Guide for the Perplexed, Karin Fry
Aristotle: A Guide for the Perplexed, John Vella
Augustine: A Guide for the Perplexed, James Wetzel
Bentham: A Guide for the Perplexed, Philip Schofield
Berkley: A Guide for the Perplexed, Talia Bettcher 
Deleuze: A Guide for the Perplexed, Claire Colebrook 
Derrida: A Guide for the Perplexed, Julian Wolfreys
Descartes: A Guide for the Perplexed, Justin Skirry
The Empiricists: A Guide for the Perplexed, Laurence Carlin
Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed, Stephen Earnshaw
Freud: A Guide for the Perplexed, Celine Surprenant
Gadamer: A Guide for the Perplexed, Chris Lawn
Habermas: A Guide for the Perplexed, Lasse Thomassen 
Hegel: A Guide for the Perplexed, David James
Heidegger: A Guide for the Perplexed, David Cerbone 
Hobbes: A Guide for the Perplexed, Stephen J. Finn
Hume: A Guide for the Perplexed, Angela Coventry
Husserl: A Guide for the Perplexed, Matheson Russell
Kant: A Guide for the Perplexed, TK Seung
Kierkegaard: A Guide for the Perplexed, Clare Carlisle
Leibniz: A Guide for the Perplexed, Franklin Perkins
Levinas: A Guide for the Perplexed, B. C. Hutchens 
Locke: A Guide for the Perplexed, Patricia Sheridan 
Merleau-Ponty: A Guide for the Perplexed, Eric Matthews
Nietzsche: A Guide for the Perplexed, R. Kevin Hill
Plato: A Guide for the Perplexed, Gerald A. Press 
Pragmatism: A Guide for the Perplexed, Robert B. Talisse and Scott F. Aikin
Quine: A Guide for the Perplexed, Gary Kemp
Relativism: A Guide for the Perplexed, Timothy Mosteller
Ricoeur: A Guide for the Perplexed, David Pellauer
Rousseau: A Guide for the Perplexed, Matthew Simpson
Sartre: A Guide for the Perplexed, Gary Cox
Socrates: A Guide for the Perplexed, Sara Ahbel-Rappe
Spinoza: A Guide for the Perplexed, Charles Jarrett
The Stoics: A Guide for the Perplexed, M. Andrew Holowchak
Utilitarianism: A Guide for the Perplexed: Krister Bykvist

SCHOPENHAUER: 
A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
R. RAJ SINGH

Continuum International Publishing Group
 
The Tower Building 
80 Maiden Lane
 
11 York Road 
Suite 704
 
London SE1 7NX 
New York, NY 10038
www.continuumbooks.com
© R. Raj Singh, 2010
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval 
system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
 
ISBN: HB: 978-0-8264-9141-1
 
 
PB: 978-0-8264-9142-8
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Singh, R. Raj
Schopenhauer : a guide for the perplexed / R. Raj Singh.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN: 978-0-8264-9141-1
ISBN: 978-0-8264-9142-8
1. Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1788–1860. I. Title. 
B3148.S54 2010
193–dc22
2009044989
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by the MPG Books Group

To my esteemed teacher
John R. A. Mayer

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements 
viii
Abbreviations 
ix
Introduction 
xi
Chapter One: A Contemplative Life  
1
Chapter Two: The World as Representation  
15
Chapter Three: The World as Will  
28
Chapter Four: Suffering and Pointlessness  
39
Chapter Five: Aesthetics and the Arts  
56
Chapter Six: The Enigma of Love  
75
Chapter Seven: A Welcome to Eastern Thought  
86
Chapter Eight:  Ethics and Eternal Justice  
103
Chapter Nine: Death, Philosophy and After-life 
119
Chapter Ten: Denial and Asceticism  
133
Notes 
151
Suggestions for Further Reading 
153
Index 
155

viii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to express my gratitude to Irene Cherrington, Administrative 
Assistant, Department of Philosophy, Brock University, for her sub-
stantive help in the preparation of this manuscript. I also want to 
thank my friend Louis Chenard for help with the proofs. I gratefully 
acknowledge Dover Publications, Inc. for permitting me to quote 
excerpts totalling 2409 words from the Dover edition (1966) of The 
World as Will and Representation, volumes I and II.

ix
ABBREVIATIONS
Schopenhauer’s works (with years of original publication):
BM 
On the Basis of Morality (1840)
FRPSR The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason (1813) 
FW 
On the Freedom of Human Will (1839)
PP 
Parerga and Paralipomena (1851)
PP-I 
Parerga and Paralipomena, vol. I
PP-II 
Parerga and Paralipomena, vol. II
MR 
Manuscript Remains in 4 volumes (1970)
WN 
On the Will in Nature (1854)
WWR 
The World as Will and Representation (1818)
W-I 
The World as Will and Representation, vol. I (1818)
W-II 
The World as Will and Representation, vol. II (1844)

This page intentionally left blank 

xi
INTRODUCTION
Schopenhauer is known for his brilliant writing style as well as for 
being a unique thinker. Generations of general readers and scholars 
have found his ideas stimulating and insightful and have found his 
writings delightfully easy to read in original and in translations. 
Schopenhauer’s attractive writing style is free of the usual conceptual 
web spinnings and hair splitting arguments for which other philoso-
phers, especially European philosophers are notorious. However, the 
readable nature of Schopenhauer’s work does not diminish either his 
original contribution to philosophy, or the need for continuing assess-
ment and interpretations of his philosophical system and of his various 
enigmatic concepts. Just as the work of other great philosophers like 
Plato, Descartes, Hume and Nietzsche is easy to read at first sight, 
but requires a great deal of analysis and interpretation, Schopenhauer’s 
work too can be quite perplexing from a philosophical point of view.
The range of Schopenhauer’s philosophical inquiry includes 
insights from religious thought; Christian ethics and Christian mysti-
cism were his favourite sources. It also includes insights from the 
classical masters facilitated by Schopenhauer’s vast knowledge of 
Greek and Latin sources. He often explores the thought contained in 
literatures of modern European languages and refers to writers like 
Goethe, Baltasar Gracián and Calderón. The fact that Schopenhauer 
treats Western and Eastern philosophies as one body of knowledge, 
and shows a deep appreciation of the thought systems of Hinduism 
and Buddhism, shows a cross-cultural approach in his philosophical 
methodology which was way ahead of his times. The fact that 
Schopenhauer led a fascinating life, which has been the object of 
numerous biographies, combined with the fact that his philosophy is 
so intertwined with the problems of living and being with others, 

INTRODUCTION
xii
makes him and his enigmatic thought ever so challenging for an 
interpreter. Besides all these special features of his philosophy, his 
connections with the work of past philosophers, especially with Plato 
and Kant by whom his system is deeply influenced, need to be 
assessed. The originality of Schopenhauer’s ideas is validated by the 
fact that he had a considerable influence on several European and 
English philosophers and writers such as Nietzsche, Wagner, Tolstoy, 
Turgenev, Freud, Proust, Thomas Hardy, Thomas Mann, Wittgenstein 
and many others. That Schopenhauer was one of the few pessimistic 
thinkers with a heroic resolve to encounter the darker truths of life 
makes his thought not only uniquely fascinating but also a challenge 
for an interpreter.
For all these reasons, a serious reader cannot merely read 
Schopenhauer’s primary works and form a judgement based on first 
impressions. Thus secondary literature has a role to play in offering 
assessments and interpretations of his uniquely built system, which 
rests on a single thought, namely, of the will-to-live which, according 
to him, is the core being of all things including all humanity. Many of 
Schopenhauer’s other concepts that revolve around the focal point of 
the will are equally perplexing for a student interested in his philoso-
phy. The general reader of his primary works without a background 
in the history of philosophy will also be baffled by Schopenhauer’s 
assertions and will be prone to making simplistic judgements espe-
cially about this thinker’s pessimism.
This book aims to offer Schopenhauer without tears to students 
as well as general readers, while offering to an advanced student, in 
many ways an original interpretation of Schopenhauer’s thought 
along with the author’s own critical assessments. Since Schopenhauer 
expressed the gist of his system in his chief work The World as Will 
and Representation, and in all of his subsequent works merely sup-
plemented and explicated the substance of the same world-view, in 
this book we have chosen to focus primarily on WWR and secondarily 
on this thinker’s other important works. All in all, in this Guide for 
the Perplexed an effort has been made to let the primary texts speak 
in their own voice. We have refrained from alluding to and evaluating 
the voluminous secondary literature, except for a few very important 
references in some of the chapters. A unique feature of this book is 
that it will provide a considerable analysis of Schopenhauer’s Eastern 
sources, and will explicate the philosopher’s own interpretations of 
the various standpoints of Vedanta and Buddhism. Unlike any other 

INTRODUCTION
xiii
survey of Schopenhauer’s entire philosophy, this book will outline how 
he fuses some of these Eastern concepts into his own system and stakes 
the claim of being one of the first trans-cultural thinkers in the West. 
But this guide for the perplexed does not highlight Schopenhauer’s 
debt to Eastern thought at the cost of missing out on his connections 
with his own Western philosophical heritage. The influence of Platonic 
and Kantian thought and that of other figures of the history of 
Western philosophy on Schopenhauer’s system is equally exposed.
In the first chapter, the life of Schopenhauer is resketched to pro-
vide important information about his unique, somewhat sad but 
colourful sojourn on this earth. It focuses on his intellectual journey, 
his writings and attempts to resolve several undue harsh critiques 
from Schopenhauer’s other biographers, without ignoring some of 
the obvious character flaws of the great pessimist. Chapter Two 
exposes Schopenhauer’s thesis that the world is primarily composed 
of the representations of the subject and his viewpoints on human 
perception, reason and knowledge. It also provides a summary of his 
very important previous work on the principle of sufficient reason, 
which Schopenhauer prescribes as essential reading for the under-
standing of his system. Chapter Three explores Schopenhauer’s 
emphatic assertion that a dynamic force abides in all existents and 
this should be called the ‘will’. The basic features of this all important 
concept in Schopenhauer’s thought are initially described in WWR, 
but are referred to in all of his other writings. In Chapter Four, the 
aspects of suffering and the vanity of human life as described by this 
pessimistic philosopher are fully examined, and the pre-suppositions 
and important influences of Eastern ideas on this issue are exposed. 
The realistic nature of Schopenhauer’s scathing critiques of human 
selfishness and apathy towards the weal and woe of others is outlined 
here. Chapter Five exposes Schopenhauer’s theories of aesthetics 
and of the various art-forms such as architecture, painting, drama 
and music. His original philosophy of art to which he devotes approx-
imately a quarter of his writings is analysed in this chapter.
Chapter Six explicates Schopenhauer’s philosophical treatment 
of romantic love between the sexes, an issue that seldom received the 
attention of other philosophers. Many nuances of this fascinating 
subject-matter are herein exposed. In Chapter Seven, Schopenhauer’s 
general connection with Eastern thought, especially with Vedanta 
and Buddhism is fully discussed. His interpretation of some Eastern 
concepts is critically evaluated. Many misunderstandings pertaining 

INTRODUCTION
xiv
to his own major concepts such as those of suffering, moral undesir-
ability of the world and eternal justice, caused by misunderstandings 
and non-recognition of his Eastern sources are also exposed. In 
Chapter Eight his reinterpretation of the standard ethical concepts 
from the vantage point of the will is fully explained. Chapter Nine 
exposes Schopenhauer’s standpoints on Death, and its connection 
with philosophy as such, along with his ideas on any possible after-
life for the human entity. His status as a contemplator of death in the 
Socratean tradition is explained along with the fact that the theme of 
death is alive at every juncture of his thought. Chapter Ten discusses 
Schopenhauer’s view that a denial of will is the summit of a higher 
ethical life and a unique possibility of human existence. It is expli-
cated here that according to Schopenhauer, asceticism is invariably 
produced by a life of will’s denial, and salvation must be an ultimate 
issue not just for the religions but also for any authentic philosophy.

1
CHAPTER ONE
A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
It is both fascinating and important to study an account of 
Schopenhauer’s life. The biographies of most Western philosophers 
are given a cursory attention for their work is deemed to have little to 
do with their life-styles and/or the problems of living as such. Martin 
Heidegger fulfilled the requirement of providing a biographical 
sketch at the outset of one of his essays on Aristotle with the follow-
ing cryptic statement: ‘Aristotle was born, he worked and he died.’ 
In case of Schopenhauer, however, his biographies provide impor-
tant clues to his philosophy, and the harsh critiques of his biogra-
phers of his life-style, habits and his pessimistic outlook are indicative 
of the fact that his was a singular and colourful, but much misunder-
stood life. His philosophy is unique in being a study of the everyday 
life of the human entity and aims to delineate the possibilities of 
a life and salvation that is free of religious dogmas and superstition. 
He offers a comprehensive description of the miseries and trepida-
tions of the everyday life of the human animal and suggests a way 
out in the form of a denial of the mundane pursuits and cravings. It 
is interesting therefore to look at the story of his own struggles to 
reconcile his sad, lonely but determined life with his philosophy. As 
one who believed so much in the connection between philosophy and 
living, he did not fail to show a lived philosophy in his own life. That 
his life and philosophy are both blamed too harshly for their pessi-
mism often serves to hide his original insights and his determined, 
dauntless and compassionate life is another matter that we will try to 
outline. Of course, alongside his intellectual and moral merits not 
withstanding, he was not without numerous eccentricities, prejudices 
and egotistical traits. All this makes his life uniquely interesting and 
colourful.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
2
In English language, two classical biographies of Schopenhauer by 
Helen Zimmern (1876) and by W. Wallace (1890) are available which 
are based on original biographies and collections of letters in German 
by W. Gwinner and J. Frauenstädt, two of the closest associates of 
Schopenhauer in the last phase of his life. A more recent intellectual 
biography authored by Rüdiger Safranski (1987) is also available in 
English translation by Edward Osars (1989). Many other biographies 
have been authored in German, English and French. One by A. Hübscher 
(1952) is most noteworthy. While the abovementioned works are all 
well-balanced and comprehensive, there are many others in second-
ary literature, which are unduly harsh in caricaturing Schopenhauer’s 
life by focusing on his abnormalities and his negative and pessimistic 
approaches to human life. Many of his biographers, having scanty 
knowledge of Eastern philosophies, do not seem to sympathize with 
some of Schopenhauer’s concepts inspired by Eastern thought which 
he blends with classical Western, especially Kantian and Platonic 
sources.
PARENTAGE, CHILDHOOD AND SCHOOL YEARS
Arthur Schopenhauer was born on 22 February 1788 in Danzig. 
Both his parents were of Dutch lineage but their ancestors for several 
generations had lived and flourished in the free city of Danzig being 
involved in primarily mercantile activities and secondarily as land-
lords and municipal politicians. The city of Danzig (currently, the 
Polish city of Gdansk) having been a member of the Hanseatic league 
of autonomous German mercantile towns was virtually a state by 
itself, although theoretically a part of the Polish kingdom. When 
Arthur was five years old, the city was annexed by Prussia and the 
family moved to Hamburg, another mercantile city state which was 
bigger, more stable and more autonomous than Danzig. Arthur’s 
father, Heinrich Schopenhauer, was a successful businessman. He had 
travelled to England and France to gain first hand knowledge of the 
world and practical affairs. He was fluent in English and French 
besides his native German and was in the habit of reading foreign 
newspapers especially The Times. His house had a rich library and 
was full of mementos from his travels and tastefully decorated with 
specimens and works of art. It is curious that while he contemplated 
a business vocation for Arthur, he emphasized lived experience in 
foreign lands, especially in England and France as the most important 

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
3
part of his young son’s education. He carefully named his son ‘Arthur’ 
for this name sounds equally native in English, French and German. 
Heinrich Schopenhauer was a short and stocky man of very impres-
sive personality. He was hard of hearing from his early days and was 
prone to fits of depression and excessive anxiety throughout his life. 
In his last years, frequent bouts of rage also tainted his otherwise 
powerful character and record of accomplishments. It is interesting 
that Arthur inherited to a great extent his father’s looks and person-
ality traits, including a keen sense of money management. He was 
able to not only live on the wealth inherited from his father for his 
entire life as an independent scholar but also added on to it by wise 
investments, whereas his mother spent all of her resources and lived 
in straitened circumstances in her last years.
Arthur’s mother, Johanna, also hailed from an influential family 
of Danzig. Married at age 18 to a man 20 years older than she, 
Johanna found new opportunities and leisure for her intellectual 
development. Heinrich’s house was well-endowed for intellectual 
stimulus and her husband encouraged her literary apprenticeships. 
She was a good-looking woman of small and delicate frame with 
blue eyes and brown hair. Her husband could be proud of her culti-
vated intellect and sociable outlook. The couple was very fond of 
travelling and young Arthur always accompanied his parents. Wher-
ever they went in Europe and England they found refined and cele-
brated company. Heinrich’s plan of having his first child born in 
England was thwarted due to his wife’s sudden illness, and upon their 
hasty return home the baby philosopher was born in Danzig. Arthur’s 
first five years were spent in his native city being a darling of his 
youthful mother, who passed most of her time in the country house 
of the Schopenhauers on the outskirts of Danzig. The boy had some 
animals as his playmates and this early contact with animals may be 
responsible for his life-long empathy with non-human creatures.
Heinrich Schopenhauer was anxious about the takeover of his 
native city by the Prussian regime and was firmly resolved to flee 
from Danzig in case his fears materialized. In 1789 he did exactly that 
without caring for the disruption of his business and financial loss. 
The family of three moved to Hamburg, another mercantile Hanseatic 
city, confidently maintaining its free statehood. Arthur’s childhood 
and early youth was spent in this vibrant European centre of trade, 
art and culture. The father’s insistence that his son receives a cosmo-
politan education combined with a first hand study of the world and 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
4
things proved to be an asset for young Schopenhauer as he developed 
a preference for the study of real life and human nature rather than 
opting for abstractions and bookish knowledge. Soon after the birth 
of his only sister, Adele, at age 9 he accompanied his parents on 
a visit to France where his father left him under the guardianship 
of M. Gregoire for the next two years. He was treated very affection-
ately in the Gregoire household where he acquired fluency in the 
French language and became friends with M. Gregoire’s son, 
Anthime, a friendship that would last for many years. Upon his 
return from France, Arthur was enrolled in a high school, where his 
father expected him to acquire education suitable for becoming a 
businessman.
At this time, Schopenhauer had begun to show preference for 
classics and philosophy and entreated his father to let him study these 
human sciences in a Gymnasium to prepare for a university educa-
tion. But his father was not a man to be trifled with. He definitely 
aspired for a merchant’s career for his son. Heinrich came up with an 
ingenious plan to nudge his son on to a business profession. He 
offered young Schopenhauer one of the two options, either to accom-
pany his parents on a long voyage through Europe and England 
including a chance to revisit his friend Anthime in France, or to enter 
a Gymnasium to study philosophy and classics. The option to travel 
stipulated entrance into an apprenticeship with a senior merchant 
to gain experience for a business career. Schopenhauer, being a lad 
of 15 years, could not resist the temptation to travel and revisit his 
friend in France. The two-year-long travel took the Schopenhauer 
family to Holland, England, Scotland, France, Austria, etc. In 
England, Arthur was placed in a boarding house under the charge 
of Rev. Lancaster in the city of Wimbledon for three months, an 
experience that Arthur did not cherish. He despised the English 
boarding school system, religious dogmatism and hypocrisy of the 
higher classes. In his diary, which his mother encouraged him to keep 
for his travel records, young Schopenhauer already showed his ten-
dency to keenly observe the instances of human misery and pitiable 
condition of the disadvantaged classes, the prisoners, the child 
labourers and the poor. Upon his return to Hamburg, Schopenhauer 
became an apprentice clerk in Herr Jenisch’s merchant house in 
accordance with the pact he had made with his father.
Within a few months of joining the merchant house Schopenhauer 
suffered the loss of his father. The calamity was too much for him 

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
5
to bear. Heinrich went through a period of business downturn, had 
grown deaf and had shown signs of anxiety, depression and irritabil-
ity. One day he fell from the balcony of his warehouse into a canal 
and was brought out dead. Whether it was a case of suicide or 
not, posterity will never know. Schopenhauer who respected and 
worshipped his father was heartbroken at this sudden turn of events. 
Although he carried on for two more years as the merchant’s appren-
tice out of regard for the departed soul, his heart was not in the busi-
ness career and he longed to be a scholar of classics and philosophy. 
Finally, at the urgings of his mother, and her friend Farnow, he began 
his studies in earnest at a school in Gotha and took additional tuto-
rials in Greek and Latin. His studies at the Gymnasium at Gotha 
ended abruptly after six months due to a misadventure of caricatur-
ing a schoolmaster which earned him the displeasure of his teachers. 
Arthur then moved to Weimar to continue his studies privately to 
enter a university and to stay with his mother briefly.
Schopenhauer applied himself rigorously to classical learning as 
well as mathematics, history and other subjects to prepare himself 
for entering a university. After annoying his mother, who could no 
longer bear living with him, he stayed in Weimar in his own lodgings 
for about two years. His flair for classical and modern languages and 
for the love of learning was quite evident by now.
SCHOPENHAUER’S UNIVERSITY DAYS
At age 21, Schopenhauer found himself financially well-provided 
thanks to the inheritance left by his father. He could also appreciate 
the wisdom of this parent, for it seemed that Heinrich had foreseen 
that his son having the scholarly inclinations would scarcely be able 
to succeed as a businessman and a man of the world. As is evident 
from a dedication that he composed to pay tribute to his father which 
was meant to be placed at the outset of his collected works, Arthur 
always worshipped the memory of his departed parent and benefac-
tor with gratitude. He had quite the opposite feelings towards his 
surviving parent, whose life-style he did not approve of and consid-
ered her a bad influence on his young sister. He was afraid that his 
mother’s spending habits would soon leave her and young Adele 
penniless. A few years later, while Arthur not only held on but added 
to his inherited funds, the mother lost most of her share due to unwise 
investments and frivolous spending. Schopenhauer’s mistrust and 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
6
dislike of his mother whom he never visited for the last 24 years of 
her life, and his disappointment about the timid nature of his sister, 
seem to be the factors in Schopenhauer’s extreme views about women 
in general as expressed in his notorious essay ‘On Women’ in Parerga 
and Paralipomena, Vol. II. However, that he did not deny full person-
hood to all women and did have high estimation and regard for 
some female deniers of the will-to-live is evident from his tributes to 
Madame de Guyon, ‘that great and beautiful soul, whose remem-
brance always fills me with reverence’ and to the life of Fraulein 
Klettenberg composed by Goethe (W-I, 385).
In 1809, at age 21, Schopenhauer began his studies at the Univer-
sity of Göttingen enrolling himself in the medical faculty, which 
shows his deep interest in physical sciences and biology. In the first 
year he attended lectures on History, Geology, Physics, Botany, etc. 
In the second year, he shifted to the study of philosophy, but contin-
ued to sit in lectures on Astronomy, Ethnology and Physiology. His 
choices indicate his life-long interest in concrete and material reality 
of the phenomena of the world and his attempts to keep his philo-
sophy untrammelled by mere abstractions. Deeply interested in all 
aspects of existence and mundane appearances of things, he may be 
regarded as a precursor of existentialism. Schopenhauer took copi-
ous notes and recorded his impressions of and responses to all the 
lecturers he heard. These manuscript books show us how hard he was 
on the scholars whose viewpoints he disliked or regarded as trivial. 
However, he had high regard for Schulze who advised him to begin 
his philosophical studies with Plato and Kant. While at Göttingen, 
Schopenhauer led the life of a meticulously dressed gentleman, with 
cultivated interests in music, especially flute playing, theatre, muse-
ums and in a careful study of nature. Although he was a reclusive, 
contemplative and highly independent young man, he did have 
friendly relations with some college mates. He was already known for 
his strong opinions and his excessively harsh critiques of professors, 
scholars and writers he did not approve of. In his writing as well he 
was prone to using strong expressions to castigate contemporary 
philosophers and writers whom he disliked, a regrettable habit that 
stayed with him all through life. Although his writing style was sim-
ple and lucid without pedantry and jargon, his contempt for oppos-
ing viewpoints comes through too strongly, turning his critiques into 
unseemly attacks on his intellectual rivals. His later-day attacks on 
Hegel also displayed immoderation and lack of refinement.

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
7
In 1811, Schopenhauer moved to University of Berlin drawn there 
for the prospect of attending Fichte’s lectures. He continued his stud-
ies in natural sciences as well as hearing lectures on botany, anatomy, 
physics, chemistry, etc. He attended the lectures of Schleiermacher, 
Wolf and Fichte, some of the foremost philosophical luminaries 
of the day. His extensive note-books show that he took his studies 
seriously. They also show his excessive self-confidence and pride in 
his own philosophical abilities. He often dismissed the work of his 
teachers through critiques that deployed very strong words with gibes 
such as ‘non-sense’, ‘sophist’, ‘twaddle’, etc. he was disappointed 
with both Fichte and Schleiermacher. He felt that Fichte had departed 
objectionably from Kant’s system and Schleiermacher unduly mixed 
philosophy with religion and theology. Wolf’s lectures on Greek his-
tory and philology particularly attracted Schopenhauer. He greatly 
admired Wolf’s original theories on classical Greek thought and his-
tory which were intellectually stimulating for him.
Schopenhauer did not suffer from the usual fault of national pride. 
He was not overly patriotic like many of his fellow academics. He 
wanted no interruptions to his scholarly quests. When prospect of 
war as the aftermath of Napoleon’s disastrous Russian campaign 
was looming in Berlin, he fled to Rudolfstadt, a quiet little town, to 
work on his dissertation in peace. He submitted his dissertation 
to the University of Jena and received the degree of the Doctor of 
Philosophy in 1813. The work was later published as The Fourfold 
Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, which Schopenhauer 
would always prescribe as an essential reading for the proper under-
standing of his chief work The World as Will and Representation. 
When he told his mother about ‘The Fourfold Root’ she made a joke 
that the book seemed to belong to a pharmacy. He responded that it 
would still be read, when none of her works will be available, indicat-
ing that she would only be remembered as his mother and not due 
to her own works of fiction. Although an arrogant claim, but this 
prophesy by the proud young philosopher has come true. No one 
remembers Johanna Schopenhauer, the authoress. Her works of fic-
tion are long lost having suffered the fate of dated literary exertions 
of minor writers. After the completion of his university studies, 
Schopenhauer had returned to Weimar to board with his mother for 
a few months. The old quarrels often broke out between them as he 
behaved too arrogantly towards a literary friend of hers also lodging 
there and was overly critical of her reckless spending and life-style. 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
8
She expressed her own critical assessment of her son’s difficult 
personality in a letter and suggested to him to move away. Thus 
Schopenhauer left his mother’s house and never to see her again in 
her remaining 24 years. He never again attempted to live with anyone 
for the rest of his own 46 years. There were some fringe benefits of 
this last sojourn with his mother. He was able to have some meetings 
with Goethe, who was on friendly terms with Johanna, whose genius 
he greatly admired. He had opportunities to show his works to Goethe, 
whose compliments boosted his morale. In Weimar this time, Frederick 
Mayer, the well-known Indologist sparked in Schopenhauer an interest 
in Hindu and Buddhist thought, which initiated his life-long involve-
ment with Eastern philosophy.
THE INDEPENDENT SCHOLAR BEGINS HIS VOCATION
After parting with his mother, Schopenhauer looked for a conducive 
place to live and compose the outlines of his philosophical system. 
His choice fell on Dresden, a city with great natural surroundings, 
museums, art galleries and theatre as well as home to some writers 
and scholars. He had received his part of his father’s inheritance 
which promised a comfortable financial situation. Thus the young 
scholar established his residence in Dresden to enjoy his independ-
ence, solitude and reasonable social life and to work on the composi-
tion of his magnum opus.
After completing an essay on the theory of colours in his partner-
ship with Goethe on this subject, Schopenhauer sat down to write his 
chief work The World as Will and Representation which was com-
pleted after four years’ labour in 1818. Not much is known of his life 
in Dresden in these years, the only source of information being his 
intellectual diary. However, this diary is more about his thoughts 
and intellectual development than about his personal life. It is easy to 
surmise that he was having difficulties in having friends and becom-
ing increasingly proud of his intellectual superiority to the common 
mass of humanity he called philistines. Among his acquaintances he 
had a few minor literary figures of the area, but his manner was 
haughty and uncompromising. He was already full of the vanity that 
he was accused of all his life. But perhaps this pride is necessary for one 
whose work will long be rejected by the reading public and scholarly 
peers and who had to carry on his lonely march towards philosophical 
originality and excellence. Perhaps it is not easy to be a philosopher 

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
9
without having some armour of pride as well as a deep love of one’s 
mission in order to survive the indifference or rejection of the so-
called practical-minded folks, the people Schopenhauer often calls 
philistines. How could one have a great mind without knowing it, 
he asks in his diary. Schopenhauer was sure of the greatness of his 
magnum opus and would remain confident about its lasting value for 
centuries to come despite its initial lack of sales and indifferent recep-
tion by the university scholars. This work completed at age 30 by the 
author, was only supplemented and elaborated in his subsequent 
writings. It was never altered, amended or modified. Schopenhauer 
would remain sure of its perfection and excellence as a substantive 
contribution to philosophy requiring no modifications at all.
A SOLITARY PHILOSOPHICAL QUEST
Before his book was even out of the print shop, Schopenhauer trav-
elled to Italy, to have a well-deserved vacation. He was in Venice for 
a few weeks and from there off to Bologna, Florence and Rome. He 
would always visit theatre and opera, a life-long habit with him, 
which he regarded as essential for a creative understanding of life 
and human nature. He was more inclined to have social contact with 
the English fellow travellers, for he spoke English like a native. The 
Germans, some of whom had heard about his conceit, eccentricity 
and tough demeanour would avoid him for the most part. He did not 
think highly of Italians or Catholics and their religious devotions. 
The habit of too much praying was likened by him to begging one’s 
way to heaven rather than earning it through moral deeds alone. In 
May, 1819 he had to return to Germany to safeguard his investments. 
He was able to recover all of his invested funds from a bankrupt 
Danzig firm, whereas his mother had earlier agreed on a settlement, 
which awarded her only 30 percent of her investment. This incident 
shows that Schopenhauer was not lacking in the business acumen 
which his father had bequeathed to him. But since all his energies 
were devoted to philosophy as a higher calling he had no real interest 
in a business career.
On his return home, he inquired about a prospective university 
teaching career from Heidelberg, Göttingen and Berlin. He finally 
chose the University of Berlin where he qualified to be a privat-dozent 
(private lecturer), such lecturership being the first step towards a uni-
versity teaching career in Germany. He was not successful in attracting 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
10
a significant number of students to his lectures, primarily because he 
had purposely scheduled his lectures at exactly the same time as those 
of Hegel. Due to his suspicious and unfriendly nature, he soon was 
on bad terms with his academic colleagues. On his own part, he 
developed a dislike for academic hypocrisy, pedantry and politics. An 
essay in his Parerga and Paralipomena entitled ‘Philosophy in the 
Universities’ gives us a glimpse of Schopenhauer’s bitter experience 
with academia, and his low opinion of professor-philosophers.
All his life Schopenhauer was very sensitive to noise. As he men-
tions in his essay on ‘Din and Noise’ (PP-II, 642–645), noise in his 
environment had been a daily torment to him. Meanwhile in Berlin, 
a seamstress pressed charges against him for pushing her down the 
stairs after he found her in the hallway across from his rooms, chat-
ting with two other women. It was a very unpleasant and costly affair 
for Schopenhauer, who had to pay her an annual compensation 
ordered by a court for the rest of her life. It shows that his intolerance 
of others and quarrelsome nature was getting out of hand during his 
stay in Berlin. He took another extended trip to Italy in 1821 and 
returned to Munich, where he lived in isolation for a year or so. He 
shifted his residence several times from 1819 to 1831 in different 
German cities finally returning to Berlin. This period was full of iso-
lation and professional disappointments. His book had evoked hardly 
any response and his proposals to translate first Hume and then Kant 
were not accepted. In 1931 when cholera broke out in Berlin, true to 
his cautious nature, Schopenhauer immediately fled to Frankfurt. 
Unfortunately, the same pestilence in Berlin claimed Hegel. After a 
brief attempt to live in Mannheim for health reasons, he finally set-
tled down in Frankfurt where he was to remain until his death.
THE SAGE OF FRANKFURT
Schopenhauer seemed to put some of the turmoils and disappoint-
ments of his mid-life behind him having found consolation in his 
own philosophy. To prevent ourselves from being very unhappy we 
should not desire to be very happy. As he says in Parerga and 
Paralipomena:
A happy life is impossible; the best that man can attain is a ‘heroic 
life’, such as lived by one who struggles against overwhelming 
odds in someway and some affair that will benefit the whole of 

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
11
mankind, and who in the end triumphs, although he obtains a 
poor reward or none at all. (PP-II, 322)
Having resolved to live for philosophy rather than by it, he settled 
down to obtain the inner rewards of contemplation. After a lull of 
17 years he produced a new work called the Will in Nature (1836). It 
was followed by an essay ‘On the Freedom of the Will’ which received 
a prize from the Royal Norwegian Academy after a competition. His 
next entry for a similar competition by the Royal Danish Academy was 
rejected which evoked a great deal of bitterness in him. The Academy 
also chided him for using very strong language regarding his fellow 
philosophers especially his unjustified attacks on Hegel and Fichte 
which were unbecoming within a scholarly debate. However, he 
published both these prize and non-prize essays under the title The 
Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics (1841), the preface to which 
expresses the author’s full fury against the Royal Danish Academy. 
Schopenhauer’s excessive pride at the success of his work with the 
Norwegian Academy and undue bitterness at the rejection of his 
essay by the Danish Academy tell us not only about his sensitive 
nature but also about his deep disappointment over the fact that the 
academic community had failed to take adequate notice of his chief 
work The World as Will and Representation (1818). In 1844 the sec-
ond and enlarged edition of his chief work was published in two 
volumes.
Schopenhauer’s daily regimen during the last phase of his life has 
been recorded in all of his biographies. In his own way he applied the 
wisdom of life that he expounds in his later popular works to his own 
living. He lived in very simple rented apartments of no more than 
two rooms. The place was always plainly but elegantly furnished. Of 
course, he possessed a library of a highly selective collection. Only in 
his fifties he acquired furniture of his own. Besides portraits of some 
Western thinkers and writers, especially Kant and Goethe he had a 
gilded bronze statue of the Buddha on a console. On his desk stood 
a bust of Kant. He had no craving for innumerable objects or for a 
typically aristocratic life of luxury. He watched his money but he was 
neither extravagant nor a miser. By the time he died, he had doubled 
his father’s inheritance by prudent investments. He supported some 
of his poor relatives and often contributed to charities. Although he 
was an outspoken critic of human follies, weaknesses and cravings, 
he was utterly compassionate towards the disadvantaged sections 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
12
of society. He was one of the rare Western thinkers who spoke out 
for the importance and the rights of animals. ‘Were there no dogs, 
I wouldn’t want to live’ is a thought-provoking saying of his. He 
always had a dog as his companion since his Göttingen days. A dog 
that he had 1840 onwards was named ‘Atman’ which in Sanskrit 
means the soul or the spirit of all beings. ‘Atman is the Brahman 
(Being)’ is the primary insight of Vedanta philosophy which very 
much influenced Schopenhauer. ‘Atman’ was followed by ‘Butz’ who 
outlived his master, and was provided for in Schopenhauer’s will.
At this stage of his life, Schopenhauer lost all fascination for 
travelling, which he calls needful for the youth but unnecessary for 
the old. He had a very disciplined, organized and moderate life-style 
at the prime of his life. The daily routine resembled that of Kant 
in many ways, except that Schopenhauer was not an early bird. 
Schopenhauer attributes Kant’s eventual senility in his old age to his 
habit of rising too early and working too much on intellectual tasks. 
Schopenhauer emphasizes that more than four hours of intellectual 
exertion is unnatural and excessive. Accordingly, he woke up between 
7 a.m. and 8 a.m., took a sponge bath and had a coffee prepared by 
himself. He had instructed his housekeeper not to disturb him in the 
mornings. He devoted the whole morning to writing or difficult intel-
lectual tasks. He never received any guests in the mornings but later, 
during his years of fame, he admitted some visitors after 11 a.m. 
At 12 noon, he would play his flute for half an hour, and, meticu-
lously dressed, would arrive at the Englischer Hof to dine. Some bio-
graphers have expressed amazement at his large appetite. Besides his 
own explanation that he possessed a head larger than others, we may 
surmise that it was due to his habit of missing breakfast. After dinner 
he returned home, had a coffee and took a nap for an hour or so. 
Around four in the evening he would set out for a walk, rain or shine. 
He usually walked through the countryside, not too far from his 
quarters, Atman always following him. Schopenhauer regarded long 
walks essential for the health of one’s body as well as one’s mind. 
After the conclusion of his walk he would go to a reading room and 
glance over the day’s English and French newspapers. He would 
always give a careful perusal to The Times. There are numerous cita-
tions in his later writings from The Times regarding crime reports, 
executions and mundane occurrences from which he draws profound 
philosophical conclusions. This is one more instance of the closeness 
of his philosophy to the everyday living of human beings. In the late 

A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE
13
evenings, he would often go to the theatre or an opera. Later on when 
he grew deaf he was deprived of this pleasure. After his visit to a 
theatre, he would have a cold supper at the restaurant again. At his 
return home, he would do some light reading followed by a reading 
of a few passages from his anthology of the Upanishads. Then he 
would sleep for nine hours for he believed that his brain required at 
least that much rest.
FAME AT LAST
It was only in the last decade of his life that Schopenhauer’s works 
attracted notice and he enjoyed the warmth of recognition. Some 
readers had begun to admire his writings in the late 1840s. Julius 
Frauenstadt, a scholar and a writer, met Schopenhauer in 1847 and 
became his ardent disciple and friend. Frauenstadt worked tirelessly 
to spread the ideas of his master through his articles in periodicals 
and newspapers, and kept him informed of the citations and mentions 
of his philosophy in the press and in academic circles. The political 
disturbances of 1847 onwards convinced Schopenhauer that demo-
crats represented mob rule and he was definitely against the insur-
gency and in favour of republican forces of law and order. It is for the 
welfare of the widows of the soldiers killed in this revolution that he 
left the bulk of his estate in his will. He worked for over six years on 
his two volumes of miscellaneous writings later published as Parerga 
and Paralipomena (1851). The failure of the 1848 revolution, the 
despondency of the public in its aftermath, the decline of Hegelianism, 
all caused favourable conditions for Schopenhauer’s emergence as a 
popular writer. It was his Parerga and Paralipomena, a work designed 
for popular readership rather than academics that brought him his 
well-deserved recognition. Among his committed admirers and disci-
ples were Lindner, a lawyer from Munich, Adam von Doss, an editor 
of a popular liberal newspaper, Dorguth, an elderly councilor of 
Justice from Magdeburg (who published several tracts in praise 
of the master), and many others from all walks of life. What brought 
him academic notice was an article published in The Westminster 
Review in English, entitled ‘Iconoclasm in German Philosophy’. The 
article was translated into German by the wife of the above-mentioned 
Lindner, the editor of Vossische Zeitung. The article recognized 
Schopenhauer’s original contribution to philosophy in its opposition 
to the dominant transcendentalism in German philosophy and admired 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
14
Schopenhauer’s powerful writing style. Dr W. Gwinner became another 
important disciple of the philosopher in 1854. He would later write 
the first and most authoritative biography of Schopenhauer. In the 
mid-1850s numerous admirers from different cities were regularly 
corresponding with Schopenhauer, and he was receiving a large 
number of visitors. Some would dine at the Englischer Hof, just to 
catch a glimpse of their admired thinker. After the publication of 
Parerga and Paralipomena, he did not wish to author any more origi-
nal works, but worked on supplementing and refining his previous 
writings. The popularity of Parerga and Paralipomena was responsi-
ble for a heightened interest in Schopenhauer’s previous works. A 
third edition of the World as Will and Representation appeared in 
1859, second editions of Will in Nature in 1854, and Two Fundamental 
Problems of Ethics in 1860. These new editions carried honorariums 
and book sales were increasing. He actually made some money as a 
writer. Schopenhauer revelled in his approbation and showed hardly 
any modesty in his reactions. In 1855, the French painter Lunteschüz 
did his portrait. In 1856 he was painted by Goebel. Both these por-
traits were copied in engravings. Lastly, Elizabeth May of Berlin made 
a bust of him, which has been a very well-crafted sculpture. All these 
mementos along with the remainder of his library that survived the 
bombing of World War II are kept in Schopenhauer Archives in Stadt 
und Universitätsbibliothek in Frankfurt. Finally, the German univer-
sities also paid some attention to him. Leipzig offered a prize for the 
best essay on his philosophy.
He was healthy and active to the last. His growing deafness was 
the only sign of age. But one day in April, 1860 he had an attack of 
palpitations and shortness of breath during his usual rapid-paced 
walk. This happened again in September; he fell ill with inflammation 
of lungs but recovered. After a few days he had a fainting spell. Next 
morning, he woke up normally, took his sponge bath and had his 
coffee. The housekeeper came in, opened the window and abstained 
herself as per her usual instructions. A few moments later the physi-
cian came and found him dead on the sofa. Obviously the death was 
quick and painless. As he descended into that dark valley where all 
roads meet, his own words seemed to come true: ‘Dying is the moment 
of that liberation from the one-sidedness of . . . an individuality 
which does not constitute the innermost kernel of our being . . . As a 
rule the death of every good person is peaceful and gentle’ (W-II, 508).

15
CHAPTER TWO
THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
Schopenhauer begins his chief work WWR with a profound statement 
‘This world is my representation’. This assertion acknowledges that 
the stuff that the world is made up of is not all existing and material 
things put together, but it is composed of representations of each 
and every knowing and living being, although only human beings 
receive these representations reflectively. Schopenhauer says that 
man’s recognition of the world as representation is the beginning of 
philosophical thought for an individual. Representation is the trans-
lation of the German term vorstellung the literal meaning of which is 
‘what stands before’. Representations are the meaningful images of 
the worldly phenomena that stand before the mind’s eye. The world 
is nothing but a representation of a representing being, that is, man. 
This connection between the representation and the representing 
being, that is between the object and the subject, is a form more gen-
eral than any other form including those that are modes of the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason such as time, space and causality.
Therefore no other truth is more certain, more independent of all 
the others, and less in need to proof than this, namely that every-
thing that exists for knowledge, and hence the whole of this world, 
is only object in relation to the subject, perception of the perceiver, 
in a word, representation. (W-I, 3)
Thus the subject–object dichotomy or subject–object bifurcation 
of reality that Heidegger attempts to bypass in his way of thinking 
is the most obvious and fundamental truth for Schopenhauer. This 
truth is not new, Schopenhauer points out. It was embedded in 
Cartesian mode of subject-ism and more clearly stated by Berkeley 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
16
who argued that to exist and to perceive or be perceived is one and 
the same thing. This truth was also present in the ancient Vedanta 
philosophy of India which maintained that ‘existence and percepti-
bility are convertible terms’ (W-I, 4).
To consider the world as representation is obviously a one-sided 
view, Schopenhauer warns. The world will also be recognized as ‘will’ 
after an initial but thorough consideration of it as representation. 
Representation as an essential aspect of the world strikes us first as we 
begin to treat the world as a philosophical problem but only a deeper 
reflection reveals that the world is a phenomenon of one’s will. But the 
first thing should come first, and Schopenhauer resolves to focus on 
that aspect of the world which is representation in Book I of WWR.
The subject is that which knows all things but cannot be known. It 
is the essential condition of all appearance, for there can be no object 
without the existence of a subject. In so far as one knows anything, 
one finds oneself as a subject. But the body is the immediate object 
for all human beings. The body being an object among the objects is 
subject to forms of knowledge such as time, space and causality. 
However, the subject that knows is not subordinate to these forms of 
space, time and causality. Thus subject and object are two essential, 
necessary and inseparable halves of the world as representation.
According to Schopenhauer, the separation of these halves is 
inconceivable even in thought and they limit each other. Where the 
object begins the subject ends is problematic and vice versa. The uni-
versal forms of any object, that is, space, time and causality reside 
a priori in our consciousness as Kant explained. Schopenhauer adds 
to the Kantian insight that the principle of sufficient reason is the 
common expression or umbrella term for all these forms of the 
object. Thus every object is subordinate to the principle of sufficient 
reason (see the section on ‘the Principle of Sufficient Reason’ below). 
It is a principle which explains that every object ‘stands in a necessary 
relation’ to other objects. That is, no object is a stand-alone object; 
each object is determined as well as determining with respect to other 
objects. Schopenhauer comes close here to the Buddhist theory of 
co-dependent co-origination (pratitya samutpada) of all entities.
INTUITIVE REPRESENTATION
According to Schopenhauer, abstract representations are constituted of 
concepts. The capacity for these has often been called reason (Vernunft). 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
17
What distinguishes man from the animal is the capacity of having 
abstract representations. It is however the intuitive representation 
that covers the possibility of all experience and the entire visible 
world. Schopenhauer acknowledges the contribution of Kant in so 
far as he showed that the conditions or forms of the visible world, 
namely, time and space, can be separated from their content in 
thought, and also be perceived. This intuition of time and space does 
not come about as a result of experience; rather all experience is 
dependent on it. They are known in an a-priori intuition and serve 
as laws of experience. Schopenhauer adds on to this insight of Kant 
regarding time and space as the universal forms of intuition by main-
taining that the principle of sufficient reason, which determines 
experience in terms of causality and motivation, appears in the forms 
of space and time in a special form, named by Schopenhauer as 
‘ground of being’.
Among the various forms part and parcel of the principle of suf-
ficient reason, that of time is the simplest, and it is time that denotes 
the essence of this principle ‘succession is the whole essence and 
nature of time’ (W-I, 8). Thus Schopenhauer accepts Aristotle’s doc-
trine of time, unlike Heidegger who emphasizes the existential ground 
of time. However, Schopenhauer does regard time and space as intui-
tive forms of human representation. In the principle of sufficient rea-
son, the form of matter or the law of causality governs the contents 
of the forms of time and space. Schopenhauer explains that matter 
really means causality because ‘its being is its acting’. Something that 
acts does so in terms of time and space. The action of the matter 
upon its immediate object, which is also matter, conditions the per-
ception. And thus matter exists only in the perception. Matter is 
nothing but cause and effect; ‘its being is its acting.’ Schopenhauer 
mentions that, in German, substance of a material thing is called 
wirklichkeit (literally, effectiveness), which is a much better term than 
Realität (reality). He remarks in a footnote with the help of a quote 
from Seneca, that ordinary expressions of a language sometimes 
contain a deep philosophical insight into the nature of things. This is 
why Heidegger often resorts to etymological analysis to obtain clues 
for philosophizing about the Being of things. This is one reason that 
Heidegger calls language ‘the house of Being’. Thus the essential con-
nection between matter, whose being is its acting, and the forms of 
time and space is explained by Schopenhauer as follows: ‘Time and 
space . . . each by itself, can be represented in intuition even without 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
18
matter; but matter cannot be so represented without time and space’ 
(W-I, 9).
Since the representation of the object exists only for the subject, 
the same way each special class of representations exist for a com-
mensurately special disposition within the subject. The subjective 
correlative of time and space was named ‘pure sensibility’ by Kant, 
which Schopenhauer accepts with a proviso that sensibility may not 
be the most appropriate term here for it seems to presuppose matter. 
As pointed out above, the subject can have the intuition of time and 
space irrespective of matter. The subjective correlative of matter or 
causality is named as ‘understanding’ by Schopenhauer. Understand-
ing is primarily the understanding of causality. ‘All causality, hence 
all matter, and consequently the whole of reality is only for the under-
standing . . . the ever present manifestation of understanding is per-
ception’ (W-I, 11). What Schopenhauer emphasizes is that perception 
is not merely a by-product of the senses but of the intellect. The 
understanding of cause and effect is a prerequisite upon which 
depend all perception and thus all experience. The knowledge of the 
causal law is never the result of experience. Knowledge of causality 
is independent of all experience and has an a-priori character as 
experience depends on it. This knowledge is already there in all 
perception.
That perception is based on a knowledge of causality should not 
be taken as a reason for assuming a causal relationship between the 
object and the subject. Schopenhauer warns that such erroneous 
assumptions can give rise to foolish controversies that question the 
reality of the external world, as well as those between dogmatic real-
ism and idealism. As explained above, causality precedes perception 
and experience as their pre-condition. Causality is not a by-product 
of experience. The subject and object precede all knowledge and the 
principle of sufficient reason applies only to the object and not to the 
subject. This principle applies solely to the form of the object or to 
the ‘universal mode of all objective existence’. But the subject which 
is the necessary correlative of the object, and pre-supposed by the 
object, remains outside the bounds of the principle of sufficient rea-
son. Schopenhauer responds to the possible controversies on this 
issue as follows:
The whole world of objects is and remains representation and is 
for this reason wholly and forever conditioned by the subject; in 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
19
other words, it has transcendental ideality. But it is not on that 
account falsehood or illusion; it presents itself as a series of repre-
sentations, whose common bond is the principle of sufficient reason. 
(W-I, 15)
For the human subject, the body is its immediate object. The body 
is a representation that is the starting-point in the perception of the 
world or for the subject’s knowledge. The subjective correlative of the 
causality is the understanding, which is affected by the sensations 
and changes in the body, which is why Schopenhauer calls the body 
the ‘immediate object’. But the body is not an ordinary object or 
object in the fullest sense. Schopenhauer explains that there are two 
conditions for the possibility of perception. First, it happens due to 
the proper function of understanding to make sense of the visible 
world based on the law of causality. Secondly, it happens because of 
the sensibility of the animal bodies, that is, due to special nature of 
some certain bodies to function as immediate object of the subject. 
Thus the body does not itself appear as object in the fullest sense, but 
other bodies affecting it or acting on it become direct objects through 
it. But this endowment of understanding is not confined to man 
alone. ‘All animals, even the most imperfect, have understanding, 
for they all know objects, and this knowledge as motive determines 
their movements’ (W-I, 21). What is special about man is that he has 
‘abstract concepts of reason’ in addition to the understanding. The 
concepts of reason work on what is supplied by the understanding; 
they can never bring about understanding which intuitively compre-
hends the forces and laws of nature. Thus Schopenhauer warns that 
it is not proper to downplay the understanding in animals by sub-
suming it under the name of instinct. The instinct is something other 
than understanding and than the faculty of reason.
ABSTRACT REFLECTION OR CONCEPTS OF REASON
In addition to the immediate representation of perception, man has 
reflection or ability to have concepts of reason, whose content is based 
on perceptual knowledge and is related to this perception. In other 
words, reflection or conceptual activity of reason is always a develop-
ment or further sophistication of the perceptual knowledge; it is never 
detached from or something entirely other than the immediate repre-
sentation that one has of the worldly reality. Interestingly, Heidegger 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
20
uses a similar distinction between ‘understanding’ and ‘interpretation’ 
as part of Dasein’s disclosedness or reality. In pure perception every-
thing is clear and virgin, also certain and indisputable. But in abstract 
reflection of the faculty of reason, doubt and error appear invariably. 
Schopenhauer remarks that ‘in the representation of the abstract, 
error can reign for thousands of years, impose its iron yoke on whole 
nations, stifle the noblest impulses of mankind’ (W-I, 35). The peren-
nial concepts and hardened interpretations hold their sway for centu-
ries over different cultures. After all, all these concepts were invented 
by someone’s faculty of reason and subsequently found general 
acceptance within a specific tradition. Heidegger says in the intro-
duction to his Being and Time that it is the business of philosophy 
to re-examine the perennial concepts of a tradition and to let these 
concepts display their birth certificates and calls this inquiry the ‘pos-
itive destruction of the history of ontology’. Schopenhauer here is 
alluding to the same powerful historical spell on a whole tradition. 
He says that ‘reflection’ is an appropriate term for conceptual knowl-
edge that is derived from the knowledge of perception and is truly a 
particular reflection of the perception, which nevertheless has a role 
to play in the development of man’s reality. Schopenhauer points out 
that, due to the possession of this rational faculty, man far surpasses 
animals in wielding his power over nature and the world. But the 
same rational endowment makes man endure much more suffering 
than his ‘irrational brothers’.
Every step of the way in his philosophy, Schopenhauer compares 
and contrasts man with the animal to gain insights about human 
nature. Besides suffering infinitely more than the animal due prima-
rily to his rational faculty, man seldom lives in the present like the 
animal does nor is led merely by the motives at hand. ‘He carries out 
considered plans, or acts in accordance with maxims, without regard 
to his surroundings or to the accidental impressions of the moment. 
The animal feels and perceives; man in addition “thinks” and “knows”; 
both “will”’ (W-I, 37). What distinguishes man from the animal is his 
power of speech which is ‘a necessary instrument of his faculty of 
reason’. Therefore in Greek and in Italian, speech and reason have the 
same word (logos, discourso). The German word for reason Vernunft 
is rooted in vernehmen which means ‘being aware of ideas’.
The concepts are based on representations of perception, but dif-
fer from them in many ways. Therefore we cannot have a perceptive 
or clear-cut knowledge of the nature of concepts, nor can they be 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
21
validated in experience. ‘They can only be conceived not perceived, 
and only the effects that man produces through them are objects of 
experience proper. Such effects are language, deliberate and planned 
action and science, and what results from all these’ (W-I, 39). As 
pointed out above, concepts are rooted in a necessary relation to the 
representations of perception. Therefore, they are, in fact, ‘the repre-
sentations of representation’. Thus concepts are never free of the 
principle of sufficient reason, which applies to them in a special form. 
The whole nature of concepts or abstract reflections abides in the rela-
tions expressed in them by the law of sufficient reason. One abstract 
representation may have its relation to another representation which 
may be its ground. This in turn, may again be an intuitive representa-
tion or a concept. However, the series of grounds of knowledge ulti-
mately must end or find their ground in knowledge of perception.
Schopenhauer points out that every concept due to its character as 
an abstract representation has a range or sphere that it covers, even 
when it is an abstract representation pertaining to a single real object. 
Thus the sphere of a concept has something in common with other 
concepts, or may overlap them. Each concept at the same time has 
what others do not. Imitating the style of Euler, Schopenhauer dem-
onstrates the overlapping and distinctiveness of related concepts in 
figures. For example, the sphere of ‘animal’ contains the sphere of 
‘horse’, of ‘angle’ contains ‘right angle’, obtuse angle’ and ‘acute angle’ 
which are themselves exclusive concepts. Schopenhauer explains that 
when we recognize the relations among concepts, a judgement takes 
place. ‘All combinations of concepts may be referred to these cases, 
and from them can be derived a whole theory of judgements . . . 
From them may also be derived the properties of judgements’ (W-I, 
44). Kant based his categories of understanding on such properties 
of judgements.
Reason works only on what it has received from the represen-
tations of perception. In itself, it has nothing but empty forms. 
Schopenhauer boils down the logical laws of pure rational knowledge 
to just four principles ‘the principle of identity, of contradiction, of 
excluded middle, and of sufficient reason of knowledge’. The rest 
of the logic is not ‘perfectly pure rational knowledge’ since it presup-
poses and builds on the already established relations and combina-
tions of the spheres of concepts (W-I, 50). To know means to have 
within the power of the mind, judgements which have their ground 
of knowledge in something in the world, the judgements which are 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
22
true due to their correspondence to the actual representations of per-
ception. According to Schopenhauer, the abstract knowledge may be 
called rational knowledge (Wissen). This knowledge is conditioned 
by the faculty of reason which only man possesses.
THE PRINCIPLE OF SUFFICIENT REASON
How can we account for a principle that would explain the ground of 
things adequately? There must be a principle that elucidates the nec-
essary relation of every entity or event to every other. Although the 
roots of the quest for a principle of ground can be traced as far back 
as Plato and Aristotle, it was pursued in the thought of several major 
thinkers throughout the history of Western philosophy. In eighteenth 
century it was widely discussed and Leibniz called it a ‘first principle’. 
In our age, Heidegger discusses this issue in his own way, by referring 
to Being as ground in Essence of Reasons (Vom Wesen des Grundes, 
1929). Schopenhauer found this principle crucial for the understand-
ing of his theory of representation. His interest in the principle of 
ground began with his doctoral thesis On the Fourfold Roots of the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason (FRPSR), which he published in 1813, 
five years before the publication of WWR. In his chief work he 
repeatedly mentions that FRPSR must be thoroughly read by all seri-
ous readers before beginning a study of WWR. He keeps referring to 
his first publication as the ‘Introductory Essay’ throughout the first 
book of WWR. He found FRPSR so important for his system on the 
whole, that he published its second expanded edition in 1847.
The principle of sufficient reason, which penetrates several methods 
of knowledge and a-priori principles, can simply be stated as ‘Nothing 
is without a reason for its being.’ This is the version of the principle 
given by Christian Wolff that Schopenhauer considers as the most 
comprehensive. He quotes Aristotle’s observation that ‘all knowledge 
which is intellectual . . . deals with causes and principles’ (Metaph, 
V, 1) to conclude that ‘all things must have their reason’ (FRPSR, 5). 
The principle also means that nothing is self-caused or autonomous. 
All things appear from a network of causation. Everything relates to 
other things and all things due to the fact that each entity has as its 
reason of being, another entity which is its cause and explains it. The 
other entity has yet another as its cause and explanation and so on. 
And this chain of causes goes on forever, ruling out any self-caused 
being. However, the cause is only one of the four ways in which a thing 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
23
relates to its ground. According to Schopenhauer, besides the causal 
necessity, there could be a logical or a mathematical or a moral neces-
sity of the being of a thing or event.
The four roots or the four forms of the principle were never com-
prehensively identified in the history of the quest for grounds of 
being of things in the history of Western philosophy according 
to Schopenhauer. Aristotle’s fourfold division of the causes merely 
dealt with only one of the aspects of the principle, namely the 
causal aspect. The blind adherence of the scholastic philosophers to 
Aristotle’s emphasis on cause as the only necessary aspect of reason 
resulted in a confusion about the principle. The confusions largely 
pertain to the distinction between the causal and the logical grounds 
of things. The same confusion appears in Descartes whose proof of 
the existence of God displays a muddling between cause and the 
ground of knowledge, between the empirical and the epistemological 
(FRPSR, 6–13). According to Schopenhauer, Hegel’s entire philoso-
phy is a ‘monstrous amplification of the ontological proof’ (FRPSR, 
13). Kant’s distinction between the formal (logical) and the material 
(transcendental), which meant that every proposition must have its 
ground and every thing must have its ground, was an important step 
away from confusion, but it still did not capture the full range of the 
forms of this principle under one umbrella. In sum, Schopenhauer 
maintains that none of his predecessors have given a complete and 
comprehensive account of the principle and its application. Some 
have even wasted their energies in seeking a proof or the ground of 
the principle itself.
(1) The Causal Form: Schopenhauer maintains that the two distinct 
applications of the principle of sufficient reason acknowledged by 
Kant and his followers are by no means an exhaustive account of the 
principle. Their recognition that judgements or propositions must 
have a ground, and the changes undergone by objects must have a 
cause, do not capture the fuller range of this principle’s application. 
The reason that three equal sides of a triangle must produce three 
equal angles is neither logical nor causal necessity (FRPSR, 29). The 
reason in this case is instinctively recognized and is mathematical. 
Schopenhauer points out that all representations are objects of the 
subject. But representations have an orderly connection, whose form 
is determinable a priori. Thus nothing is self-standing, or independent 
of other things among the objects.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
24
The principle of sufficient reason explains this connection in its 
formal generality. These inter-connections or inter-relations fall into 
four classes or four forms of necessity: namely causal, logical, math-
ematical and moral. The first class of objects and the form of the 
principle applicable to it have to do with the representations of per-
ception which constitute our experience. This class includes the most 
obvious objects that occupy space and time. The representations of 
perception emerge due to their impact on the sensations in the body 
of the subject, and are perceived through the forms of space and 
time. Space and time, together create persistence and succession 
which constitute reality. If there were no space, there will be no per-
sistence of objects, and if there were no time, there will be no succes-
sion or change. Time and space themselves are not perceivable; the 
subject perceives what fills time and space, that is, matter. Matter 
itself is endless, but the dimensions of time and space help us con-
ceive distinct material objects and changes in them. This combina-
tion of space and time is the primary function of understanding. 
In this kind of objects, the principle of sufficient reason operates as 
the law of causality. It is this law that connects together through the 
process of becoming, all objects of perception. The changing state 
of an object or new objects appear through a causal sequence, the 
preceding state being the cause, and the following being the effect. 
However, ‘it is quite wrong to call the objects themselves as the causes, 
instead of the states . . . because objects not only contain form 
and quality, but matter also, which has neither beginning nor end’ 
(FRPSR, 40). Schopenhauer explains that the chain of causes and 
effects does not impact on matter within which all changes occur.
Understanding creates perceptions of space and time or the objec-
tive world without the participation of reflection or abstract reason-
ing. The sole and proper function of understanding is to apprehend 
causal relations. Schopenhauer maintains that this basic function of 
understanding exists in all animals as well as human beings. Thus 
Kant’s attribution of 12 complicated categories to understanding 
is wrong. The law of causality has a twofold function, according to 
Schopenhauer. It organizes the relation or inter-connection among 
the material objects. At the same time, it enables the subject to bring 
material things into being through a process of the understanding. 
Understanding merely apprehends reality through an immediate causal 
apprehension. Schopenhauer points out that between the volition of 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
25
the mind and action of the body there is no causal relation. Volition 
(will) and action are the same thing within the human subject. It is 
our point of view that treats them differently. This insight will be the 
foundation for Schopenhauer’s all important concept of ‘will’ in his 
later works.
(2) The Logical Form: As Schopenhauer will explain at length in 
WWR, man differs from the animal in possessing something over 
and above mere understanding of causal relations. Man is endowed 
with reason, that is abstract representations or concepts. The animal 
does not possess abstract representations which are different from 
those of perception, and therefore lacks speech. Actions of humans 
are necessarily governed by cause and effect and so are the actions 
of animals. However, in case of man, choice is based on a conflict of 
motives and is produced by his conceptual reasoning. Unlike the ani-
mal, his operation of thought, with the assistance of the faculty of 
speech, produce general conceptions. However, thought is not just 
the outcome of the presence of abstract representations, but it is 
based on a combination and separation of such representations, sub-
ject to logical constraints and judgements.
For such rational judgements of conceptual relations, the principle 
of sufficient reason assumes a new form, which Schopenhauer calls 
the principle of sufficient reason of knowing or the ground of know-
ing (FRPSR, 124). This form of the principle demands that if a 
judgement is to be knowledge, it must have a ground. It is this ground 
or reason that makes this judgement true or false. The judgements of 
inter-connection between concepts may have one of the four grounds: 
(1) another judgement may be its ground, which gives it formal or 
‘logical truth’; Schopenhauer says that the ‘intrinsic truth’ typically 
invoked by the proofs of God’s existence would be an absurdity; (2) 
a conceptual judgement may have its ground in perceptual represen-
tations, which accords it a ‘material truth’; (3) a judgement might be 
based on ‘the conditions of all possible experience’, making it have a 
‘transcendental truth’. An example of transcendental truth is ‘noth-
ing happens without a cause’ or ‘3u7=21’. (4) Finally, a judgement 
may be rooted on the formal conditions of all thinking based in rea-
son, which may give it ‘metalogical truth’. There are only four such 
metalogical judgements, namely (i) a subject is equal to the sum of 
its predicates; (ii) a predicate can’t be both affirmed or denied to 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
26
a subject; (iii) one of the two contradictory predicates must apply to 
every subject; and (iv) truth is the reference of a judgement to some-
thing outside of it (FRPSR, 128).
(3) Mathematical Form: The third class of objects are space and 
time themselves which are objects of pure intuition for the subject. 
Following Kant, Schopenhauer maintains that human subjects are 
able to comprehend space and time as pure non-empirical intuitions. 
This class of representation differs from ordinary perception in which 
space and time show the presence of matter and causality becomes 
objective. In this intuition, the relationship between space and time, 
the fact that one conditions the other, is intelligible to the subject 
in a peculiar way, which has nothing to do with understanding or 
reason. The space–time connection is grasped through an a-priori 
perception. The mode of the principle of sufficient reason operative 
here is the ‘sufficient reason of being’. Schopenhauer subscribes 
to the notion that in space, each position has a reference to another, 
one being the ground of the other. In time, every moment is a succes-
sion of the preceding moment and time has a single dimension of 
sequential movement. Here Schopenhauer adopts the traditional 
Aristotelian notion of ‘time as a series of nows’. Heidegger would 
challenge this notion to assert that both space and time are existen-
tial, rather than autonomous. Here Schopenhauer distinguishes this 
ground of being that produces ‘insight’ from the ground of knowledge 
(reason) that produces merely ‘conviction’. Geometry and arithmetic 
depend on this kind of intuition regarding the divisions of space and 
time. In dealing with axioms in geometry we appeal to the intuition 
of space, whereas in theorems, a reason of knowing is invoked. But 
reason of knowing does not explain why if two angles of a triangle 
are equal, the two opposite sides shall also be equal. Only due to the 
conviction based on the reason of being, it is known to us intuitively. 
But this necessity that does not need demonstration, we fully under-
stand the relation between the angles and the sides of a triangle 
(FRPSR, 161). Here it is not a matter of grasping causality or logical 
justification, but the ground of being of space.
(4) The Moral Form: The fourth class of objects is in fact a single 
object of the subject’s own volition, which is behind all deliberate 
activity of the subject. It becomes an object of knowledge in a pecu-
liar inner way within time alone, and not in space. Human subject is 

THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION
27
aware of himself or herself as a subject that wills. One is aware of 
one’s volition, one’s decisions, and one comprehends why one made 
a certain decision in wanting or doing something. One can identify 
one’s motives as the ground of acting one way or the other. However, 
the subject cannot itself become the object of knowledge. It knows 
itself not as knowing but as a willing being. What introspection 
shows us is never knowing but our willing. Schopenhauer maintains 
that it is impossible to detach the subject that knows from the subject 
that wills; both are part of the sense of ‘I’ that man has. The motive 
is unlike other causes which operate in the external world. The effect 
produced by the motive can be explained indirectly just as we know 
other causes from the outside, but at the same time is known quite 
directly from inside (FRPSR, 171). Thus motivation can be called 
causality viewed from within. In this sphere of human volition, the 
principle of sufficient reason assumes the form of ‘principle of the 
sufficient reason of acting’ or as the law of motivation. It indicates 
that willed acts can be explained in terms of motives.

28
CHAPTER THREE
THE WORLD AS WILL
In the first book of the WWR, Schopenhauer considers the general 
form of representation as well as the part played by concepts in the 
representation of perception. In the second book the question is posed 
regarding the real significance of the representations of perception. 
Why is it that representations do not just slide past us as meaningless 
images but engage us and absorb us completely in their world? 
Why is it that their interplay is not a mere picture show but the very 
ground of our quest for meaning in the world? Schopenhauer sug-
gests that philosophy cannot be satisfied with a mere logical arrange-
ment of representations but it seeks to comprehend the significance 
and nature of the thing-in-itself, as much as it can be known by a 
human mind. ‘We are not satisfied with knowing that we have repre-
sentations, that they are such and such, that they are connected 
according to this or that law . . . We want to know the significance of 
these representations’ (W-I, 98).
WILL AND THE BODY
However, what the world is in addition to being a network of repre-
sentations would never emerge as an issue if the inquirer himself 
were no more than a knowing subject or what Schopenhauer calls 
‘winged cherub without a body’. But man finds himself rooted in a 
world, considers himself an individual and has a body. The world as 
representations appears to him in and through his body, which is the 
starting point of all perceptions. The body is obviously also a repre-
sentation and an object among objects. Its actions and movements 
are observable just as the changes undergone by other objects of 

THE WORLD AS WILL
29
perception. But the meaning of the actions and movements of his 
own body are available to the individual in a manner quite different 
from his perceptions and dealings with other objects of the world. 
The body’s experiences are known directly and internally. The usual 
difference between intention and the act does not apply within the 
body. The changes of the other objects are understood to an extent 
on the basis of causes, stimuli, motives and laws of nature whereas 
actions and manifestations of the body are understood in a more 
direct and comprehensive manner by the individual.
What gives the human subject of knowledge the key to his self-
understanding is named ‘will’ by Schopenhauer. ‘This and this alone 
gives him the key to his own phenomenon, reveals to him the signifi-
cance and shows him the inner mechanism of his being, his actions, 
his movements’ (W-I, 100). The human being exists as an individual 
through his identity with the body. This body is endowed to him in 
two different ways; first, as a representation or as an object among 
objects, and second as something which is known immediately and 
directly, that is, as the will. Every act of the individual’s will is at the 
same time a movement of his body. The act of will and the action of 
the body do not have a causal relation. But they are one and the same 
thing. The action of the body can be called an act of will objectified 
and available to perception. Indeed, the whole body is objectified 
will, or will that has become representation. Willing and acting are 
distinct only in reflection; in fact, they are one. The so-called resolu-
tions of the will (e.g. New Year’s resolutions) are not real acts of the 
will but mere deliberations of reason or mere intentions. They are 
acts of will only when they are actually carried out. Schopenhauer 
mentions that the identity between the body and the will is visible in 
the fact that every strong movement of the will or strong emotion 
agitates the body. It affects the inner works and parts of the body 
directly and can even make it dysfunctional at times.
This does not mean that one knows one’s will as a whole or as a 
unity or completely in its nature. The knowledge of the will is an 
immediate knowledge which cannot be detached from the knowledge 
one has of one’s body. We know our will in individual acts, over time, 
since time is the form in which the body appears. Thus ‘body is the 
condition of the knowledge of my will.’ In other words, the knowl-
edge of the will comes to the individual in a piecemeal fashion 
through the acts of the body, over the passage of time within one’s 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
30
life-span. Thus self-knowledge is rightly said to be an ongoing process. 
This message is contained in Socrates’ dictum ‘know thyself,’ which 
appears in Schopenhauer’s terms as ‘know thy will.’
Comparable to Schopenhauer’s distinction between representa-
tional knowledge and bodily knowledge is Heidegger’s reference to 
existential (existenzial) and ‘existentiell’ (existenziell) understanding. 
‘Existentiell’ understanding is the one that human being has in and 
through existing, is a kind of inner knowledge which is different from 
the understanding of the structural features of existence in general 
of everything. It seems that Schopenhauer’s emphasis on knowledge 
of the will in one’s own person or the knowledge of the will in one’s 
own body as being the backbone of knowledge as such of entities in 
the world is an insight that has influenced subsequent existential phi-
losophy in general and the contemporary appreciation of the role 
of self-understanding within human understanding in general. This 
existentialist approach is different from the one that dismisses all per-
sonal insight as subjective bias in the name of acquiring an objective 
knowledge. Schopenhauer’s approach accords due importance to the 
body and downplays the traditional focus on the mind and its repre-
sentations as the sole grounds of human knowledge.
Whereas the things and affairs of the world appear in the con-
sciousness as representations, the body appears quite differently, that 
is, as will. We have a double knowledge from the body, first about its 
actions and movements due to motives and second, about its suffer-
ing due to external impressions. The immediate information about 
the nature, action and suffering of the body is very different and 
much more comprehensive than information we have about any other 
object. Schopenhauer maintains that it is this special relation to a 
body makes the knowing subject into an ‘individual’. The individual 
is conscious of his body not merely as a representation among all 
representations but also in a different way, as a will.
Are the things of the world to be taken as mere representations or 
mere phantoms or can be assigned the same thinghood or will that 
we are conscious of in ourselves? ‘Our knowledge, bound always to 
individuality . . . necessarily means that everyone can “be” only one 
thing whereas he can “know” everything else, and it is this very limi-
tation that creates the need for philosophy’ (W-I, 104). Being dissatis-
fied with the simplistic notion of theoretical egoism which must 
regard all phenomena outside of one’s own will as phantoms, human 
being, encounter the amazing reality of the thinghood of all things 

THE WORLD AS WILL
31
through philosophy. Aristotle’s insight that philosophy indeed ‘begins 
from wonder’ applies here. It is the limitation of certain knowledge 
to the being of oneself alone, that creates the need for philosophy 
through which we seek to resolve the enigma of the thinghood of all 
things or that of the thing-in-itself which may be present in all things 
in the same way as we know it to be present in us. Schopenhauer 
charts the course of philosophy to resolve the enigma of thinghood 
in the following manner.
The double knowledge which we have of the nature and action 
of our own body, and which is given in two completely different 
ways . . . we shall use . . . as a key to the inner being of every phe-
nomenon in nature. We shall judge all objects which are not our 
own body, and therefore given to our consciousness . . . only as 
representations. . . . If we set aside their existence as the subject’s 
representation, what still remains over must be, according to its 
inner nature, the same as what in ourselves we call ‘will’. (W-I, 105)
Schopenhauer maintains that no other kind of reality is attributable 
to the material world. The only reality other than the representations 
that we find in our consciousness is the will and nothing else.
WILL AS THE BEING OF THINGS
Will is a name given by Schopenhauer to the Being of all existents, 
but especially the being-in-itself of the body. But it also has to do 
with willing of this or that action or taking this or that standpoint by 
the individual. The will shows itself in the voluntary or deliberate 
movements of the body. These movements are the individual acts of 
will that have become visible. The acts of the will and the movements 
of the body occur simultaneously. They are the same, except that the 
acts of the will are invisible and the movements of the body visible. 
Schopenhauer cautions that the true and ultimate ground of the acts 
of the will is not their motives. Motives only determine particular 
acts of will of a particular time, place and circumstances. Motives 
do not determine ‘that’ I will or ‘what’ I will in general; they do not 
proclaim the maxim of the whole of one’s willing. In other words, 
‘the whole inner nature of my willing cannot be explained from the 
motives, but they determine merely its manifestation at a given point 
of time. This will itself . . . lies outside the province of the law of 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
32
motivation’ (W-I, 106). The establishment of one phenomenon by 
another, or a deed by a motive, is a different issue from that of the 
essence-in-itself or ultimate ground of the deed which is the will. The 
will’s appearance cannot take place through something which is not 
its own by-product.
The will’s appearance happens through the body. Therefore the 
body itself must be a phenomenon of the will and must be related to 
an individual’s will as a whole. Schopenhauer, borrowing Kantian 
terms, calls the individual’s will the individual’s ‘intelligible character’ 
and its appearance in time as his ‘empirical character’. Thus my body 
is my will’s visible form. It is nothing but my will itself. While indi-
vidual actions of the body come about through the motives, the 
action in general is an appearance of the will which is itself ground-
less. Schopenhauer seems to be tracing the steps of the appearance 
of a particular action beyond the motives and empirical character to 
the individual’s intelligible character or the individual will, which 
itself is a phenomenon of the will in general, that is groundless. The 
ground of the last step cannot be spelled out. We ultimately arrive 
at a level which can be named but cannot be explained. ‘The inner 
nature of everything that appears in this way remains forever unfatho-
mable, and is presupposed by every etiological explanation; it is merely 
expressed by the name force or law of nature, or when we speak of 
actions, the name character or will’ (W-I, 108). Schopenhauer’s name 
for the ultimate ground or Being is will, which is well chosen by keep-
ing in mind its clearest manifestations as willing and acting within a 
human individual.
All human beings possess a knowledge of the inner nature of their 
own phenomenon which is often identified as a feeling. This knowl-
edge of one’s own inner being that comes to one as representation 
through one’s actions and through one’s body is named as ‘will’ by 
Schopenhauer. This will appears as the most immediate knowledge 
in an individual’s consciousness which has not yet acquired the form 
of representation in which subject and object have assumed distinct 
character. This will does not become known to the individual in its 
wholeness but only in its sporadic particular acts. Schopenhauer sug-
gests that a deeper reflection leads us to recognize the will as the key 
to the knowledge of ‘the innermost being of the whole of nature’. 
In order to resolve the enigma of the being of all existents, we need 
to transfer the comprehensive knowledge, direct and indirect, that 
we have of ourselves to all of the phenomena that unfolds for us 

THE WORLD AS WILL
33
as representation. We then gain the insight that the will abides not 
only in men and animals but in all existing things and the so-called 
forces of nature.
It is only this application of reflection which no longer lets us stop 
at the phenomenon, but leads us on to the thing-in-itself . . . But 
only the will is thing-in-itself; as such it is not ‘representation’ at 
all but toto genere different therefrom. It is that of which all repre-
sentation, all object, is the phenomenon . . . It is the innermost 
essence, the kernel, of every particular thing and also of the whole. 
It appears in every blindly acting force of nature, and also in the 
deliberate conduct of man. (W-I, 110)
Schopenhauer explains his chosen name for the being of all beings. 
Why call it ‘will’ rather than anything else? Since this thing-in-itself is 
never an object but all objects are its phenomena, then perhaps we 
need to borrow its name from an object. But should we do so ran-
domly, and assign it any name whatsoever, or should we look for a 
phenomenon which best manifests it. This must be ‘the most com-
plete’ of all the phenomena of this thing-in-itself. What is ‘the most 
distinct, the most developed, the most directly enlightened’ of all its 
phenomena? ‘This is precisely man’s will’ says Schopenhauer. Thus, 
the name ‘will’ is the most appropriate one for the thing-in-itself of 
which all objects are the phenomena.
WILL AND REASON
Schopenhauer claims that ‘hitherto the identity of the inner essence 
of any striving and operating force in nature with (man’s) will has not 
been recognized’ (W-I, 111). This is what he has essentially done by 
naming ‘the genus after its most important species’. Furthermore, 
what is generally called the will has hitherto been understood as 
something guided by knowledge or faculty of reason. This is a limited 
view of the will as something subordinate to reason, and an errone-
ous one according to Schopenhauer. Since the age of the Greeks, the 
soul has always been identified as primarily the seat of reason and 
the will as something inferior, subordinate and controlled by reason. 
Schopenhauer extends the range of the human willing by identifying 
it with something known to us directly and immediately albeit fuzzily 
in the consciousness. This is the manifestation of the thing-in-itself 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
34
within us which is the ground of all our willing and perceiving of 
representation. It is far superior to knowledge because knowledge 
serves the ends of the will as a matter of course. However, in case of 
human entity alone, knowledge can possibly and in rare cases over-
ride the machinations of the will within. This is called denial of the 
will. However, for the most part, it is not knowledge but the will that 
remains paramount.
The innermost essence of the will in general which is known to 
us directly is to be transferred to the weaker phenomenon of one’s 
willing. This will accord the required extension to the concept of 
the will. Schopenhauer says that those who say that just any name 
will suffice for the thing-in-itself misunderstand his philosophy. If 
just any random word is used for this Being of things, it would mean 
that we are referring to a concept which is merely ‘inferred’ or 
abstracted or indirectly understood. ‘But the word will is . . . by no 
means an unknown quantity, something reached by inferences and 
syllogisms, but something known absolutely and immediately’ (W-I, 
111). Schopenhauer emphasizes that the will as the thing-in-itself is 
not an abstraction but the will–man relation is fundamental and 
essential; a glow of the will is ever present in human consciousness; 
it is known more directly and more immediately than any other 
knowledge. Heidegger expresses the man–Being relation in a similar 
fashion. He says that Dasein (Heidegger’s term for the human entity) 
is a being in whose being, being is an ever present issue. For Dasein, 
Being of beings is not an abstraction, but for Dasein its Being is ‘in 
each case mine’. That means mine-ness and Being as such are inter-
twined. Schopenhauer says that the concept of will, among all other 
concepts, is the one that ‘has its origin not in the phenomenon, not in 
the mere representation of perception, but which comes from within, 
and proceeds from the immediate consciousness of everyone’ (W-I, 
112). If we refer to a concept of force, we are referring to something 
unknown or unknowable. But when we say will, we mention some-
thing infinitely better known within us.
THE WILL AND THE FORCES OF NATURE
Schopenhauer often refers to the simple categories of the entities of 
the world, that is, inorganic and organic nature, and within the organic 
nature, plant life, animals and human life. He calls the grades of will’s 
objectification and links them with Plato’s Ideas. A comprehensive 

THE WORLD AS WILL
35
discussion of the grades of will’s objectification is offered as part of 
Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art and art forms (see Chapter Five). 
But while referring to the will’s objectifications in Book II of WWR, 
he cautions that he has used the term Idea in Platonic sense only, and 
not in the sense of abstract productions of reason as done so ‘wrongly 
and illegitimately’ by Kant (W-I, 129).
At the lowest grade of will’s manifestation, that is, in the domain 
of inorganic matter, a number of universal forces of nature are iden-
tifiable. All matter is subject to forces of gravity or impenetrability. 
These forces govern different categories of matter as ‘rigidity, fluidity, 
elasticity, electricity, magnetism, chemical properties and qualities of 
every kind’ (W-I, 130). Schopenhauer maintains that these natural 
forces are immediate phenomena of the will, the same way as the 
conduct of man is. Just as the ultimate man’s character is ultimately 
groundless, so are these forces. That is, these forces are groundless 
means that they cannot be called the effect or the cause. They are 
original forces not subject to cause and effect themselves; only their 
manifestations or particular phenomena have causes. It is therefore 
wrong to inquire about a cause of gravity or electricity, which are 
themselves original manifestations of the will and therefore ground-
less. The natural forces are independent of the chain of causes and 
effects, which is based on time. Such forces are also timeless. They 
bequeath the cause with efficacy, or provide it with an ultimate 
ground, no matter how many times it happens.
Schopenhauer points out that entities at the higher level of will’s 
objectivity are endowed with individuality. In the case of human 
beings individuality and individual character define a person along 
with their outward forms of a distinct personality and an individual 
physique. No animal shows individuality of the type that man does, 
although in some higher species a trace of it is found. The further 
we descend to lower grades of the will’s objectivity in plant life and in 
inorganic nature, the individual character disappears into the general 
character of the species. This is also visible in the sexual and procrea-
tive nature of human versus animal gradations of the will. Whereas 
animals care very little for sexual selection, in man an instinctive 
sexual selection takes the form of a powerful passion and often 
becomes an all important consideration. Schopenhauer discusses the 
passion of love in more detail in his supplementary Volume II of the 
WWR and other later writings (see Chapter Six). His thesis is that 
all human love between the sexes, the fulfilment of the will’s goal of 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
36
procreation, overwhelms two individuals to a fixation at an instinc-
tive level. At the level of inorganic nature, the individuality of differ-
ent phenomena is not really visible, but all things express the Idea of 
their species.
All the phenomena of inorganic nature are manifestations of uni-
versally applicable natural forces. Time, space, plurality, determina-
tion by cause, do not apply either to the will or to the Ideas or the 
grades of will’s objectification. They belong only to the phenomena. 
Thus forces of nature appear the same way in all their countless 
phenomena. These forces manifesting in terms of causality are also 
called ‘laws of nature’. It is their conformity and subservience to the 
laws of nature that gives the entities in the lower grades of the will’s 
objectification a different character from that of the higher grades. 
The lower entities of nature are predictable, strictly subject to the 
laws of nature, and devoid of individual character in contrast to the 
human beings. Schopenhauer says that he is simply tracing the impli-
cations of Kant’s great insight that space, time and causality do not 
belong to the thing-in-itself. These apply only to the phenomena 
(W-I, 134).
Thus we should realize that explanation from causes can go only 
so far. It must stop at a point; otherwise, we will end up reducing the 
content of all phenomena to their form and nothing more than form. 
Schopenhauer also mentions that to posit the ground of all things in 
the original forces is a mark of a thinker’s indolence. These original 
forces are not the ultimate ground of the phenomena. ‘They don’t 
constitute the total force, any more than a hammer and anvil consti-
tute a blacksmith’ (W-I, 142). To appeal to the objectification of the 
will is not to be a substitute for discovering a physical explanation. 
To appeal to the creative powers of God is also a mark of intellectual 
indolence, wherein one stops short of tracing the ultimate ground of 
the phenomena which appears to us through the principle of suffi-
cient reason. Schopenhauer concludes that ‘Philosophy everywhere 
and in nature also considers the universal alone. Here the original 
forces themselves are its object, and it recognizes in them the differ-
ent grades of the objectification of the will that is the inner nature, 
the in-itself of this world’ (W-I, 141).
Schopenhauer cautions that the presence of the same will in all 
Ideas as original forces does not mean identity of these ideas 
themselves. For example, chemical or electrical attraction cannot be 
reduced to gravitational attraction. One force cannot be posited 

THE WORLD AS WILL
37
higher or more perfect than the others, just as in reference to species, 
we cannot call the more perfect as a variation of the less perfect. The 
distinctness of the individual Ideas as well as the forces of nature has 
to be recognized, even though the will is their mutual ground.
WILL, STRIFE AND KNOWLEDGE
The strife, struggle and contest for supremacy is visible everywhere in 
nature. Schopenhauer attributes it to the will’s essential variance with 
itself. It seems that all grades of will’s objectification strive for and 
contest the same matter, space and time. Matter constantly changes 
form, and organic phenomena seem to snatch the matter from each 
other. Animal kingdom is full of mutual conflict. Animals feed on 
the plant life or prey on other animals. It seems that will-to-live feeds 
on itself; it is its own nourishment. When we arrive at the human 
race, it asserts its supremacy over all of nature and ‘regards nature as 
manufactured for its own use’. But the will’s variance with itself is 
very much present within humanity. We witness among humans 
a terrible conflict and contests for supremacy, and the statement 
homo homini lupus est (man is a wolf for man), the oft-quoted adage 
by Schopenhauer, has some truth in it. We have to recognize that 
‘universal conflict is essential to the phenomena of the will.’
In the forces of nature as well, conflict is a necessary feature. The 
forces of attraction and repulsion as those of gravitation and rigidity 
penetrate the will’s objectivity at its lowest grade. At the lowest grade 
of inorganic nature, the will is a blind impulse or a dull urge, and a 
striving far from possessing any knowledge. It appears this way in all 
the original forces. The aim of physical sciences is to become familiar 
with their laws. Schopenhauer points out that the will objectifies 
itself as an ‘obscure driving force’ devoid of knowledge in the lower 
grades. In plant life, stimulus rather than knowledge is at work. The 
vegetative part of the animal life is also moved by stimuli. The will’s 
objectivity ultimately reaches a higher level where mere stimuli are 
not sufficient for its phenomena to obtain their nourishment in a 
situation of overcrowding, confusion and competition. ‘Thus move-
ment consequent on motives and because of this, knowledge, here 
become necessary . . . for the preservation of the individual and prop-
agation of the species’ (W-I, 150). Schopenhauer maintains that every 
determination of the self-objectifying will is represented by an organ. 
Knowledge is represented by the brain. With the advent of knowledge 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
38
in higher animals, especially in the case of man, world as representa-
tion comes into being with all its forms, subject, object, time, space, 
plurality and causality. Up to now in inorganic and vegetative nature, 
the world was merely will. Now it is also representation. At this 
higher grade of its objectification, with the endowment of knowl-
edge, the will ‘kindles a light for itself’.
‘That complicated, many-sided, flexible being, man, who is extremely 
needy and exposed to innumerable shocks and injuries, had to be 
illuminated by a twofold knowledge in order to be able to exist’ (W-I, 
151). Man is endowed with a power of perception and reason as 
the faculty of forming abstract concepts. This brings into existence 
thoughtfulness, ability to assess future and the past, as well as delib-
eration, carefulness, premeditated action and awareness of the deci-
sions of one’s own will. In contrast to the strict conformity to law, 
and infallibility of inorganic nature, the individual’s own deliberation 
with allied irresolution and uncertainty, confusion and error appear 
as features of human consciousness. Will’s manifestation here is no 
simple process, the interplay of multiple motives, which can be falsely 
interpreted or become delusionary and driven by superstition as 
imaginary motive, all impact on the course of the manifestation of 
man’s will.
Schopenhauer emphasizes that knowledge is always subordinate 
to the will, for it comes into being to serve the special purposes and 
needs of the highest grade of will’s objectification, merely as an expe-
dient to fulfil the aim of the will to preserve and procreate this higher 
species. ‘Therefore, destined originally to serve the will for the achieve-
ment of its aims, knowledge remains almost throughout entirely 
subordinate to its service’ (W-I, 152). However, in rare cases, in some 
thoughtful and determined individuals, who recognize the machina-
tion of the will, knowledge is able to ‘throw off its yoke’ and begin to 
live a life of the denial of the will-to-live. The fuller details of this 
practice will be examined in a subsequent chapter.
‘To think is to confine yourself to a single thought’1 says Heidegger.2 
That single thought for Schopenhauer is the thought regarding the 
will. Hence he strives to fathom the will on every page of his writings. 
He continues to explore the nature, the pervasiveness and enigmatic 
operations of the will within all the themes of his philosophy at every 
juncture of his philosophical journey.

39
CHAPTER FOUR
SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
Human suffering is a constant theme in Schopenhauer’s writings. Its 
origin, forms, nature and omnipresence in existence is a subject that 
his philosophy seeks to elucidate as a genuine philosophical problem. 
It is well known that Schopenhauer is a pessimist. His works show us 
that he is admittedly and proudly so, someone who regards optimism 
as, ‘not merely an absurd but also a really wicked, way of thinking’ 
(W-I, 326). Although Schopenhauer clearly has a dark streak in his 
outlook, it would be simplistic to attribute his pessimism to his per-
sonal propensities, as is often done by many of his biographers. For 
he does offer a cogent set of arguments for pessimism along with 
a substantive critique of scholarly optimistic doctrines as well as of 
a naïve singing of the assumed glories of human life. It is also to be 
noticed that the source of his arguments is not just peculiar philo-
sophical insights but also a deeper moral standpoint on human 
exploitation and cruelty especially that of his times. He shows a deep 
empathy for victimized classes, such as black slaves, child labourers, 
prisoners, and those maimed and killed in wars. Add to that his 
deepest sympathy for the animal kingdom, a study of which he finds 
indispensable for a genuine philosophy of existence. At the same 
time, Schopenhauer frequently refers to the vanity, that is, the futility 
and pointlessness of human existence. Is this just an extreme stand-
point of his pessimistic outlook on reality or does he have genuine 
philosophical insight underneath his radical judgement of the ulti-
mate value of human life as such?
SUFFERING AND THE WILL-TO-LIVE
Endless human desires and striving for their fulfilment, and frequent 
hindrances and failures in the way of this striving, are all traced by 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
40
Schopenhauer as the very nature of the will-to-live. The will which is 
the innermost nature of life, seduces man to affirm it constantly and 
yet is never satisfied.
At all grades of its phenomenon, from lowest to the highest, the 
will disposes entirely with an ultimate aim and object. It always 
strives, because striving is its sole nature, to which no attained 
goal can put an end. Such striving is therefore incapable of final 
satisfaction. (W-I, 308)
According to Schopenhauer, human being is a phenomenon of the 
will, just as other entities are, at all grades of Being, inanimate things, 
plants and animals also are. The will is always goal oriented and has 
aims which it is striving to accomplish incessantly in all levels of its 
phenomenon. Everything is striving to realize its nature. Since will 
brings aims, goals and dynamism to all things, it fills them with end-
less striving. Thus man is a bundle of needs, wants and cravings 
which know no final satisfaction, unless the will at the summit of its 
knowledge of itself, in the human existence alone, resolves to deny 
rather than affirm itself. Striving is the kernel and in-itself of every-
thing that exists which in case of human existence, manifests itself 
most distinctly being endowed with a human consciousness superior 
to that of all other entities. This striving in man is appropriately 
called ‘will’, by Schopenhauer a term indicative of resolve, process, 
goals, ends and endless desires. When the will is hindered through 
obstacles between it and its temporary (immediate) goal, it is called 
‘suffering’. Thus suffering is defined as hindrances placed in the 
advance of the will towards its immediate and presumed aims. The 
attainment of the temporary goal of the will is defined as satisfac-
tion, well-being, and happiness by Schopenhauer. Thus both suffer-
ing and temporary satisfaction do not deliver lasting happiness, since 
each so-called satisfaction is the starting point of a new striving. 
‘Thus that there is no ultimate aim of striving means that there is no 
measure or end of suffering’ (W-I, 309). Thus inevitability of striving 
that is part and parcel of the will means that suffering is inevitable 
and ineradicable as a matter of course. This gives Schopenhauer the 
rationale for his pessimistic judgement of life as such.
Schopenhauer offers a graphic account of suffering in human life 
throughout his early and later writings. Suffering is felt to the highest 
degree in human existence because in human existence, knowledge is 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
41
ever more distinct than in any animal and in its enhanced conscious-
ness, pain also increases. Schopenhauer asserts that the more one 
knows the more one suffers; a genius suffers most of all. Although 
suffering is more feebly expressed in animal world, it offers a mirror 
to the human to witness how ‘all life is suffering’, for life means ‘striv-
ing’ and striving never has a smooth sailing.
Life is also a constant warding-off of death, ‘a prevented dying, 
an ever deferred death’. Knowing that there is death, struggling to 
nourish and preserve the body is another reason for suffering. Thus 
the will is more appropriately named ‘will-to-live’. Willing and striv-
ing are the essence of all living and the basis of willing is need, lack 
and hence pain. In case of the highest grade of will’s objectification, 
the human body appears as an objectified will-to-live, with an iron 
command to nourish it. Thus man is a bundle of needs and wants. 
An additional task in-built in this concretized will-to-live is to propa-
gate the species. As Schopenhauer explains in his essay on sexual 
love, the purposes of the will-to-live are unknowingly carried out by 
those attached in the bond of love and marriage. Furthermore, the 
needs and wants of romantic love have their own aspects of suffering.
Furthermore, when objects and activities of willing are temporar-
ily missing, boredom strikes and existence seems to become a burden. 
‘Hence life swings like a pendulum to and fro between pain and bore-
dom’ (W-I, 312). Ensuring and striving after their own existence is 
what keeps all living things engrossed and in motion at all times. As 
soon as their existence is ensured to human beings or striving after 
existence gets a respite, they are at a loss as to ‘how to kill time’ this 
becomes a big issue. Being free of existential cares at once makes 
humans burdens to themselves. Boredom is not to be taken lightly 
for it imposes a compulsory sociability on people and obliges them 
to seek out one another, even though at bottom due to deep-seated 
egoism, there is no love lost among them. At the same time, human 
life is a continuous surge between willing and attainment. But the 
satisfactions of petty attainments are short-lived and wishes appear 
under new versions and forms. Schopenhauer acknowledges that 
pure knowledge and genuine delight in art transforms us to being 
pure spectators of existence. But since pure intellectual and aesthetic 
pleasure require rare talent, they appear in very few. And these select 
few receive this higher satisfaction at the cost of feeling very lonely 
among beings that are incapable of pure knowledge and aesthetic 
feeling. These moments of pure knowledge and art-experience are 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
42
also like fleeting dreams in an existence that is given over to willing 
and craving for the most part.
It is the accidental nature of the appearance of sufferings that 
accords them their power. Suffering is essential to life and it is really 
its various forms that make their appearances subject to chance. But 
we frequently overlook the basic fact that ‘suffering is essential to 
life, therefore does not flow in upon us from outside, but everyone 
carries around within himself its perennial source’ (W-I, 318). Thus 
all satisfaction or so-called happiness is only negative. Every satisfac-
tion is fulfilment of a wish, and a wish or lack or desire has to be the 
precedent condition of every pleasure. Schopenhauer returns to the 
theme of the positive nature of suffering in all of his early and later 
works. He is quick to point out the moral failings of human egoism 
in his graphic description of human miseries. How the sight or 
description of another’s sufferings brings us a feeling of satisfaction 
is described by Schopenhauer with a quote from Lucretius: ‘Not that 
it pleases us to watch another being tormented, but that it is a joy to 
us to observe evils from which we ourselves are free’ (W-I, 320). An 
evidence of Schopenhauer’s observation can be found in the reac-
tions of the tourists to the plight of the poorer native populations 
around the sun and sand destinations. Many tourists seem to draw a 
perverse feeling of joy at their own superior economic situation and 
can hardly suppress their self-congratulatory satisfaction during their 
bouts of eating and drinking in their all-inclusive resorts.
As if the cares, anxieties and preoccupations of the actual world 
are not enough, human mind has a tendency to create an imaginary 
higher world for itself, a world of demons, gods and saints and a 
thousand superstitions. To these conceived deities must be offered 
‘sacrifices, prayer, temple decorations, vows and their fulfilment, 
pilgrimages, salutations, adornment of images and so on’. Events of 
this life are accepted as the counter-effects of these divine beings. 
Such religious activities fulfil a double need of people for help and 
support as well as for activity and diversion. Schopenhauer points 
out that such spiritual and religious innovation took place more 
significantly among peoples whose lives were made easy by mildness 
of climate and fertility of soil, first among the Hindus, then Greeks 
and Romans and later Italians, Spaniards and others.
Schopenhauer emphasizes that his account of life’s suffering is not 
just an ‘a-posteriori’ accumulation of instances of human miseries 
within history and experience. This could be deemed as a one-sided 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
43
description lacking in universality which is required in a philosophi-
cal analysis. He maintains that his account is a ‘perfectly cold and 
philosophical demonstration of the inevitable suffering at the very 
foundation of the nature of life; for it starts from the universal and 
is conducted a priori’ (W-I, 324). However, an a-posteriori confirma-
tion of this truth is to be found everywhere. What Schopenhauer 
means is that the reality and primacy of human suffering is not 
merely deduced from the various instances of pain and rejection in 
human condition. Rather, suffering lies at the core of life as real and 
inevitable, part and parcel of existence as such. All the instances of 
suffering which seem to be accidental occurrences are rather essential 
and inevitable components of existence, a testimony to the truth of 
suffering residing in the core of life. Of course, there are innumerable 
satisfactions felt at the realizations of the goals of our strivings. But 
these are short-lived and too few compared to the widespread frus-
trations at the thwarting of the will’s endless cravings that prompt 
ceaseless quests. Add to these frustrations of wilful projects of human 
being, the tragic facts of the nature of existence, needs, wants and 
necessities of the basic demands of life, the knowledge that death is 
certain but its timing is uncertain, the pains of human relationships, 
meetings and partings. All in all, the nature of life and its many-
coloured unfoldings contain an ocean of suffering. A significant part 
of it is lawful and inevitable aspect of existence itself, another part is 
bound to subdue us even though there is a portion of it that we can 
possibly encounter and overcome with heroism. Schopenhauer main-
tains that a happy life is impossible; a heroic life of compassion and 
fortitude is an option.
According to Schopenhauer, anyone whose judgement is not para-
lysed by prejudices of assured optimistic doctrines will acknowledge 
that ‘this world of humanity is the kingdom of chance and error’. 
Folly and wickedness are rampant in it. Schopenhauer continues to 
present a graphic account of the darker aspects of human life. In this 
world, everything better and excellent struggles through as an excep-
tional occurrence, and lasting creative works of great minds are those 
that have outlived the malice of their contemporaries. In the sphere 
of thought, art and action, the absurd, the dull and the fraudulent 
are the order of the day, disturbed only by brief interruptions of 
the contributions of the genuine heroes and genius intellects. As far 
as the individuals are concerned, ‘as a rule, every life is a continual 
series of mishaps great and small, concealed as much as possible by 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
44
everyone’ (W-I, 324). Everyone is aware that others will draw a per-
verse satisfaction at the miseries of others from which they are at 
the moment free. How can anyone in one’s right mind call this unjust 
and miserable world ‘the best of all possible worlds’ Schopenhauer 
wonders. If we were to take the most ‘hardened and callous’ optimists 
through hospitals, prisons, torture-chambers, slave-hovels, battle-
fields and other abodes of misery, they would have to give up their 
doctrines of the glories of human existence.
But this hopeless and irreversible condition of man is ‘precisely the 
invincible and indomitable nature of his will, the objectivity of which 
is his person’ (W-I, 325). An external power can never change or sup-
press this will, and no supernatural power can possibly deliver him 
from the sufferings that are the consequence of the life which is a 
phenomenon of the will. Everything depends on the individual left to 
himself; any possible deliverance depends on the will of man himself. 
In vain does he make gods for himself, and seeks from them through 
prayer and flattery what can be brought about only by his own will-
power. As man does have the capacity to deny this will-to-live as 
exemplified by sanyasis (monks), martyrs and saints of all faiths. But 
optimism, at a fundamental level as the basic judgement of the nature 
of life, remains a ‘bitter mockery of the unspeakable sufferings of 
mankind’. Schopenhauer shows the atheistic tenor of his thought 
and offers a scathing critique of ritualistic religion. However, he 
shows a great deal of admiration for saints and ascetics of all major 
religions, for he views them as genuine practitioners of the denial of 
the will, a difficult but nobler way of life.
The acknowledgement of the suffering inherent in human life is the 
starting point of wisdom and higher life according to Schopenhauer. 
He regards this pessimism as realism. To overlook and downplay the 
misery of others is both insensitive and immoral; to deny suffering 
in one’s own life shows shallow thinking. Suffering is very real and 
continuous throughout life’s various phases and at the same time 
delivered to us in totally unpredictable and staggering modes, and 
changing realities are hard to handle. The respites from suffering, 
happy interludes are far too few and short-lived. By no means are 
suffering and happiness equal and opposite. Suffering is fundamen-
tal; the will and its allied cravings ensure inevitable hardship. All hap-
pinesses and satisfactions are temporary breaks from the ongoing 
suffering essential to life. This is certainly a pessimistic and one-sided 
appraisal of life based on an interpretation of the character of the 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
45
will-to-live, both willing and living being ongoing quests and ongoing 
strivings, involving innumerable goals and innumerable frustrations. 
Due to the fact that our bodies and our lives are the abodes and are-
nas of the will-to-live, life and suffering have to be synonymous as two 
sides of the same coin. The evidence for this basic truth can be found 
everywhere in the human condition. Schopenhauer cites instances of 
common woes and miseries, along with the meanness of human ego-
ism, systemic exploitation of the downtrodden and widespread heart-
lessness as sure signs of suffering that is part and parcel of life. Does 
Schopenhauer deliberately and/or compulsively downplay the posi-
tive and the good in human life? He does acknowledge the good but 
only in a heroic encounter with suffering, and in an impassioned con-
templation of the nature of the world by a small number of thinkers, 
artists and geniuses, and most of all in the saintly lives of those who 
say ‘no’ to the will’s commands and cravings. Any other happiness or 
good has to be a temporary delusion according to him. The change, 
the striving and movement within life is taken to be something nega-
tive, a pointless turmoil, the opposite of the calm of salvation. Thus 
the Buddhist dualism between samsara (worldliness) and nirvana 
(salvation) seems to be embedded in Schopenhauer’s insight.
VANITY AND SUFFERING OF LIFE
Schopenhauer’s next writing that explicitly deals with the problem 
of suffering appears in volume 2 of the WWR. This supplementary 
essay added to the second and expanded edition of the WWR has a 
very befitting title, namely, ‘On the Vanity and Suffering of Life’. 
The vanity here is to be understood in the sense of pointlessness or 
futility. Life is both pointless and full of suffering because of its mat-
ter-of-course subservience to the will. According to Schopenhauer, 
love of life or the view of it as a glorious possession is erroneous, for 
life is, for the most part, a delusionary affirmation of will’s endless 
cravings doomed to be thwarted by reality. What Schopenhauer 
wants to emphasize is that sufferings of life are neither accidental nor 
negative but essential and positive. Thus suffering is not a negation 
of matter-of-course happiness, but in fact, happiness is brief inter-
ruption of matter-of-course suffering. Thus life on the whole cannot 
be called good, glorious and by itself meaningful. It is something 
that cannot be regarded in itself a good occurrence. It is something 
whose denial is more important than its affirmation. Thus life as 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
46
such is to be recognized as vain, pointless and futile. It does offer to 
an individual an opportunity for the will’s denial and thus on that 
account human life is superior than that of an animal.
‘Everything in life proclaims that earthly happiness is destined to 
be frustrated, or recognized as an illusion. The grounds of this lie 
deep in the nature of things’ (W-II, 573). Schopenhauer faces the 
root of suffering in ‘the nature of things’, that is, the way will is both 
within and outside of us. It is not just a matter of happiness and 
suffering both being equally present in life, but suffering having 
the upper hand due to the ceaseless strivings and cravings of the 
will necessarily resulting in constant stresses and disappointments. 
Schopenhauer offers his insights into the comedy that life plays with 
us. Although he clearly takes the pessimistic outlook, his observa-
tions surely contain a ring of truth. ‘Life presents itself as a contin-
ued deception . . . If it has promised, it does not keep its word, unless 
to show us how little desirable the desired object was’ (W-II, 573). 
Happiness seems to lie either in the future or in the past. The present 
is like a ‘dark cloud over a sunny plain’ constantly moving and cast-
ing a shadow. The present is sold out to the hopes for the future or to 
the fond memories, biased in favour of assumed happy interludes 
from the past. The vanity of all objects of the will and ceaseless exer-
tion to chase them makes life ‘a business that does not cover its costs’. 
‘We feel pain, but not painlessness; care, but not freedom from care; 
fear, but not safety and security . . . only pain and want can be felt 
positively . . . well being, on the contrary is merely negative’ (W-II, 
575). Schopenhauer points out that humans are scarcely conscious 
of the three greatest blessings of life, namely, health, youth and free-
dom as long as they possess them. We become aware of them when 
we lose them. Pain is felt more intensely than pleasure. Therefore 
pain is positive. Happiness and pleasure pass by relatively unnoticed; 
thus they are a negation of pain. ‘We become conscious of time when 
we are bored, not when we are amused . . . our existence is happiest 
when we perceive it least; from this it follows that it would be better 
not to have it’ (W-II, 575).
Such statements of Schopenhauer regarding existence, that is, ‘it 
would be better not to have it’ have puzzled many scholars and read-
ers of his works. This outlook that nirvana is preferable to the world 
or the voluntary giving up of the life of will’s subservience is prefer-
able to the thoughtless and obsessive involvement with wilful and 
petty goals of life, or simply put, the denial of the will is preferable to 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
47
the affirmation of the will, shows Schopenhauer’s appreciation of 
Buddhism. It would be better not to have life is not said in the sense 
of a recommendation for suicide. It means that life as it delivers itself 
to us, as a thoughtless slavery to the will’s ceaseless cravings, is infe-
rior to the life that denies the will as far as possible. The same insight 
is contained in Socrates’ profound saying: it is not living that counts, 
but living well. It would be better not to have life as it comes; it must 
be encountered with a resounding ‘no’ to its will-to-live.
To debate whether good exceeds evil in the world or vice versa is 
ultimately futile, asserts Schopenhauer. Mere existence of the evil 
is decisive, since evil can never be eliminated or counterbalanced by 
good. The existence of evil is fundamentally unacceptable to the 
human mind; it has always provoked philosophical inquiry and 
poetic lamentations. Schopenhauer sprinkles his essay with numer-
ous quotes from classical and modern writers and poets with respect 
to the unsatisfactoriness of this world. At the same time, he makes 
such radical judgements about the undesirability of existence as such, 
which are very difficult to understand or to swallow by many of his 
critics. For example, he maintains that ‘we have not to be pleased but 
rather sorry about the existence of the world; that its non-existence 
would be preferable to its existence; that it is something which at 
bottom ought not to be’ (W-II, 576). Schopenhauer’s radical stand-
point shows his pessimistic interpretation of the Vedanta (Hindu) 
and Buddhist thought-systems which regard coming into the world 
or more precisely, being caught up in the worldly-cycle (samsara) 
as well as in the illusory worldliness (maya) and cravings (trishna) as 
undesirable for a higher life destined for salvation (moksha or nirvana). 
The impact of these Eastern systems is quite incontrovertible on 
Schopenhauer, even though he claims that he thoroughly studied 
these sources only after the publication of the first edition of WWR, 
and merely found a re-authentication of his ideas in Eastern thought. 
We must keep in mind that Vedanta and Buddhism cannot be called 
pessimistic in themselves because they attach great importance to 
human life being a glorious opportunity to expiate the baggage of 
bad karma and to lead a moral life (dharma) on the way to salvation 
(nirvana). It is quite obvious that whereas Schopenhauer pays highest 
tribute to the Eastern systems by incorporating them into Western 
philosophy in general and his own philosophy in particular, he does 
use or abuse them for authenticating his own ideas. At the same time, 
he finds numerous Western classical and modern sources which seem 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
48
to echo his radically pessimistic outlook. All this is done by creatively 
mingling the ‘nature of the world’, ‘coming into the world’ and ‘lead-
ing an immoderately worldly life’ under the general concept of the 
world, much like what concept of the samsara is supposed to convey 
in Vedantic and Buddhist thought-systems.
Schopenhauer outlines a scathing critique of the conduct of 
human entity towards its own kind. Although it is characteristically 
pessimistic and negative portrayal of human nature, it cannot be 
called untrue. ‘The chief source of the most serious evils affecting 
man is man himself. Man is a wolf for man (homo homini lupus est)’ 
(W-II, 578) Schopenhauer gives the example of the so-called con-
querors and calls them ‘archfiends’. These world conquerors of his-
tory, Hitler is an obvious example, set hundreds of thousand men 
against each other and seemed to have said to them ‘To suffer and die 
is your destiny; now shoot one another with musket and cannon and 
they did do so’ (W-II, 578). Besides condemning the stupidity and 
futility of warfare, Schopenhauer gives the examples of the slavery 
of blacks, and child-labour being practised in his times as instances 
of man’s ‘boundless egoism . . . even wickedness’. At the same time, 
man’s heartlessness towards its own kind at an individual level is 
graphically described by him: ‘In general, the conduct of men toward 
one another is characterized as a rule by injustice, extreme unfair-
ness, hardness and even cruelty; an opposite conduct appears only by 
way of exception. The necessity for state and legislation rests on this 
fact, and not on your shifts and evasions’ (W-II, 578). It is obviously 
an extreme characterization of human nature to say that it is as a rule 
bad and any goodness is just an exception. However, human apathy 
towards others and widespread egoism in inter-personal relations is 
well known to all of us.
Schopenhauer points towards the fact that the origin, nature and 
Being of the world has been a long standing philosophical problem. 
If the Being of the world were not a problem, it would be taken as 
self-evident; its totality will arouse no astonishment, its purpose 
would be clear-cut and inquiry about it would not arise in our minds. 
But it is not so. The world’s Being is an ‘insolvable problem’ or a 
perennial problem within philosophy; even the most perfect philoso-
phy will provide only a partial answer and will necessarily have an 
unexplained element regarding this issue. Schopenhauer believes that 
the will-to-live as thing-in-itself, which is not subject to the principle 
of sufficient reason, is the groundless principle of world’s existence 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
49
and fully in accord with the ultimate inexplicability of the world’s 
Being. It also explains the unsatisfactoriness of the world. For ‘only 
a blind, not a seeing, will could put itself in the position in which we 
find ourselves’ (W-II, 579). This means that we are the victims of our 
own gullible subservience to the cravings aroused by the will-to-live. 
It is like the blind leading the blind. We are the blind worshippers of 
a blind will.
Schopenhauer maintains that we are mistaken in calling human 
existence a gift. It is rather a contracted debt in the form of ‘urgent 
needs, tormenting desires, and endless misery’. The entire lifetime is 
spent in paying off the interest on this debt. The repayment of this 
loan is death, a loan which was contracted at one’s birth in this world. 
The influence of karma theory of Hinduism and Buddhism on this 
interpretation of human existence by Schopenhauer is unmistakable. 
Accordingly, he also affirms: ‘every great pain . . . states what we 
deserve, for it could not come if we did not deserve it’ (W-II, 580).
‘The capacity to feel pain increases with knowledge.’ Thus no 
animal can feel pain as much as man. The degree of pain becomes 
higher in accord with the degree of one’s intelligence. No human can 
feel pain like a genius does. Dostoyevsky, in his autobiographical 
novel The House of the Dead, illustrates Schopenhauer’s point. 
Dostoyevsky’s own pain during his confinement in a Siberian prison 
was much more deeply felt than many of his fellow inmates who with 
a peasant background seemed to be free from intellectual pain 
accompanying the hard labour in that prison camp.
Schopenhauer applauds David Hume’s critiques of religion, and 
particularly those of the optimistic doctrines in his Dialogues 
Concerning Natural Religion. But he takes Leibniz to task for being 
the founder of systematic optimism. In reaction to Leibniz’s asser-
tion that this is the best of all possible worlds, Schopenhauer offers 
his contention that ours is the worst of all possible worlds, because 
anything even slightly worse, could not have actually existed. The 
conditions for a reasonably comfortable living exist so scantily and 
sparingly in this world. ‘Nine-tenths of mankind live in constant 
conflict with want, always balancing themselves with difficulty and 
effort on the brink of destruction’ (W-II, 584).
Schopenhauer calls optimism a false and pernicious doctrine due 
to its misrepresentation of life as a desirable mode of being and hap-
piness as its aim. Such a doctrine encourages one to believe that one 
has a claim to happiness and pleasures. If, as it is usually the case, this 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
50
happiness does not come about, the individual believes that he has 
suffered an injustice. In fact, this line of thinking misses the whole 
point of human existence. ‘It is far more correct to regard work, pri-
vation, misery, and suffering, crowned by death, as the aim and object 
of our life . . . since it is these that lead to the denial of the will-to-live’ 
(W-II, 584). Within parentheses, Schopenhauer attributes this pessi-
mistic view to Brahmanism, Buddhism and genuine Christianity. This 
might be a convenient over-simplification on the part of Schopenhauer. 
These religions obviously do not advocate worldly-mindedness and 
hedonism. But they do not call suffering crowned by death as the aim 
and object of our life. Schopenhauer ends this supplementary essay 
on the vanity and suffering of life with the remark that if he were to 
record the comments of great thinkers of all ages on the issue of suf-
fering, there would be no end to the citations. Thus he supplies only 
a short sampling of such quotes.
MORE ON VANITY
Schopenhauer returns to his favourite theme of the ultimate undesir-
ability of life and that of suffering in chapters 11 and 12 of Parerga 
and Paralipomena, a book for popular readership which brought him 
long-awaited popularity and celebrity status in the twilight of his life. 
In chapter 11, entitled ‘Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the 
Vanity of Existence’, Schopenhauer reflects on the nature of human 
existence on the whole and spells out some dreadful facts about it, 
the facts we all are aware of but often dismiss due to the bitterness of 
their truth. For we wish to cling to some sort of optimism as a con-
venient policy. Thus Schopenhauer enumerates some such funda-
mental features of life which make it on the whole a futile process 
which diminish its overall value. He endeavours to bring home the 
realization that it is important to break out of the love of life and its 
assumed joys, glories and gifts, and to acknowledge its overall worth-
lessness so that a voluntary denial of the will, that penetrates life’s 
‘many coloured puppet-show’, is embraced by an authentic human 
being. Such a one who voluntarily gives up the illusory pleasure of life 
to fully acknowledge the sufferings and injustices all around him, takes 
the rightly moral standpoint and path of true compassion for all liv-
ing and suffering things. But a denier of the will-to-live needs to rec-
ognize the truly negative features of life which is wrongly presented 
to us as a bed of roses by folks with an optimistic bent of mind.

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
51
First of all, there is the finite nature of the individual is in contrast 
to the infinite nature of space and time. This basic finitude of human 
existence, makes the present moment, which itself is in passing, the 
only reality available to us. It gives rise to ‘dependence and relativity 
of all things’. Here Schopenhauer seems to echo the doctrine of 
mutual co-arising (pratitya samutpada) of Buddhism. The finitude 
also means constant becoming without being and at a typically 
human level, ‘constant desire without satisfaction’ as well as the 
vanity of all striving to subserve the will in our matter of course life 
(PP-II, 283).
The brevity and fleeting nature of the passing moments within life 
and of the life itself, makes one indecisive on whether to call the 
enjoyment of the present moment ‘the greatest wisdom’ or ‘the great-
est folly’, for to value and deem the present as real does make sense 
on the one hand. But on the other hand, to value temporary and 
doomed pleasures is like wasting serious efforts on dreams. ‘Every-
one . . . strives for an alleged happiness that is rarely attained, and 
even then only to disappoint him . . . Everyone ultimately reaches 
port with masts and rigging gone’ (PP-II, 284). At the same time, 
happiness or unhappiness of an individual life which will be too soon 
over and finished, may be a moot question. Furthermore, there is 
endless but ultimately meaningless activity within life just to keep 
it going. A lot of turmoil and restlessness is produced by two simple 
urges, hunger and the sexual impulse and also by boredom. These 
can be called the prime movers of ‘the many coloured puppet show’ 
of human world. Thus ‘constant need, ever-recurring want and 
endless trouble’ are the stuff life is made of. In addition, every satis-
faction creates a fresh desire and life’s cravings, eternally insatiable, 
go on forever.
For most people, life remains a task of making a living. As soon as 
the problem of livelihood is solved, warding-off of boredom shows 
itself as another task. It assails every life that has been made secure 
from want. Schopenhauer refers to boredom again and again in his 
writings for he finds it a philosophically significant phenomenon in 
human life. Here in chapter 11 of Parerga and Paralipomena, he cites 
boredom as an evidence for the fundamental undesirableness of exist-
ence as such. This undesirability and worthlessness of existence that 
he keeps referring to has been puzzling for his readers and interpreters 
alike. If existence is worthless there is a good justification to end it. 
Or else Schopenhauer’s thinking is absurdly and rabidly pessimistic. 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
52
If we guard ourselves against such simplistic judgements we will 
notice that Schopenhauer’s real conclusion about the need-laden, 
struggle-filled, hard existence of humans, which offers only a few 
brief respites of painlessness, and these interludes sure to be aban-
doned to boredom, is that it is an existence that is by itself and at 
bottom, not to be valued. It is a statement which is in accord with 
Socrates’ assertion that it is not living but living well that is to be 
valued. It is an attitude which may be pessimistic at first sight but 
upon reflection brings home the insight that being in love with life 
means being loaded with self-love and being obsessed with selfish 
pursuits of bodily comforts. This love of life which is a blind adora-
tion of the will-to-live, stems from the notion that life itself and life 
as such has an ultimate value. What Schopenhauer tries to show is 
that this wishful and sugar-coated assumption does not pass the test 
of experience. The facts of human life in general and an individual’s 
career in particular lead to the assumption that existence as such 
is both pointless, worthless and at bottom, empty. This is also the 
rightly philosophical and moral standpoint, for it alone will produce 
a denial of the will and a life of compassion. It truly recognizes 
sufferings of the others as one’s own, as a worthwhile path. Singing 
glories of life is both a philosophical violation of truth and a moral 
degeneration of the first order. Schopenhauer sums it up very 
expressively:
That human existence must be a kind of error, is sufficiently clear 
from the simple observation that man is a concretion of needs 
and wants. Their satisfaction is hard to attain and yet affords 
him nothing but a painless state in which he is still abandoned to 
boredom. This then, is a positive proof that, in itself, existence 
has no value, for boredom is just that feeling of its emptiness. 
(PP-II, 287)
Thus boredom is a manifestation of the ‘worthlessness and vanity’ 
of existence which dawns upon us whenever there is a respite from 
striving. The same boredom appears in the form of a pomp and 
splendour of the rich. Their luxury and amusements are nothing but 
a pathetic attempt to overcome the essential wretchedness of human 
existence. ‘For after all, what are precious stones, pearls, feathers, red 
velvet, many candles, dancers, putting on and off of masks and so 
on?’ (PP-II, 288)

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
53
MORE ON SUFFERING
After reflecting on the vanity, that is, the futility or pointlessness 
or emptiness of human existence as such at a fundamental level, 
Schopenhauer returns to his favourite theme of the sufferings con-
tained within human existence in chapter 12. It is entitled ‘Additional 
Remarks on the Doctrine of the Suffering of the World’. The issue of 
suffering, on which most other philosophers are either unclear or 
silent, is very much a central doctrine in Schopenhauer’s philosophy. 
Suffering (dukkha) happens to be the starting point or main impetus 
for philosophical inquiry in Buddhism. Although Schopenhauer’s 
reading of Buddhism is characteristically too pessimistic, the impact 
of this Eastern system is quite visible in his works. This chapter 
written for the non-academic as well as the academic, summarizes 
Schopenhauer’s previous writings on suffering and at the same time 
offers some additional remarks, that is, some additional insights from 
our day to day lives, some additional embellishments through his 
powerful writing style.
Schopenhauer begins with the remark that omnipresent suffering 
must have to do with the basic reason of life, since it is absurd to 
assume that infinite pain is just purposeless and accidental. Although 
each fact of misfortune seems to be an exception, according to our 
usual approach to instances of suffering, it must be recognized that 
‘misfortune in general is the rule’. At the same time, Schopenhauer 
emphasizes, as he did in previous writings, the positive nature of 
pain, that is, well-being should be considered as nothing positive but 
merely the absence of pain. For example, in our personal experience 
we do not notice the general health as well-being of our whole body, 
but only ‘where the shoe pinches’. It shows that instances of minor 
pains, annoyances and unwelcome trifles are more deeply felt than 
our overall blessings or sporadic strokes of happiness.
It is absurd, says Schopenhauer, to take evil as negative and then 
to produce theodicies, or philosophical justifications for evil, as 
thinkers like St Augustine and Leibniz have done. The undesirable 
aspects of the nature of the world are very real. Schopenhauer gives 
us a remarkable mixture of realism with pessimism, when he says 
that history depicts the life of nations mostly in terms of wars and 
insurrections, brief periods of peace appearing only here and there. 
Similarly, the life of an individual is a perpetual struggle with want 
and boredom as well as with rivals of all kind. ‘Everywhere he finds 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
54
an opponent, lives in constant conflict, and dies, weapon in hand’ 
(PP-II, 292).
It seems that human life won’t be itself, without the constant 
‘care, anxiety, pain and trouble’. If all desires were fulfilled instantly 
how would people occupy themselves? If in an Utopia, ‘everything 
grew automatically and pigeons flew about already roasted; where 
everyone at once found his sweetheart and had no difficulty keeping 
her; then people would die of boredom or hang themselves’ (PP-II, 
293). The way we are, we don’t seem to deserve any other kind of 
existence. Schopenhauer continues his critique of egoism and selfish 
indulgences of the human entity. In seeking enhanced pleasures, 
humans deliberately increase their basic needs. Hence their use of 
‘delicacies, tobacco, opium, alcoholic liquors, pomp, display’ etc. 
Add to that a source of pleasure peculiar to man, namely, honour 
and shame, that is, his care for other people’s opinion of him. Finally, 
for man the instinct of sexual satisfaction invariably transforms into 
an obstinate selection of a definite individual of the other sex. And 
this is bound to make his or her life even more complicated and full 
of additional challenges. The inner nature of the love between the 
sexes is discussed in a remarkable detail by Schopenhauer in volume 
2 of WWR. Of no less importance is the fact that to the human entity 
alone, its certain but unpredictable death is actually known, and this 
terrible truth is forever looming in its mind.
The pain suffered by man is greatly enhanced in contrast to that 
of animals due to his faculty of reason and reflectiveness. Human 
reasoning and knowledge makes susceptibility to pain attain its 
highest point on the one hand, and may bring the subject to the pos-
sibility of denying the will, on the other. Thus the existence of pain 
in human life is not purposeless. It may serve as a catalyst for the 
higher possibility of one’s comprehension of the pointlessness of the 
worldly cravings produced by the over-active will-to-live, and making 
a resolve to live a life of the denial of that will. Thus according to 
Schopenhauer the suffering in life is real, well-deserved and a catalyst 
towards a higher life of asceticism. The law of karma and the life 
of dharma as the doctrines of Buddhism and Vedanta seem to reflect 
themselves in a peculiarly pessimistic form in Schopenhauer’s thought. 
In fact, Schopenhauer applauds Hinduism and Buddhism for their 
critical stance of the world (samsara), that is, having come into Being 
is a kind of original sin (due to the weight of bad karma). He also 
finds the ancient Greek doctrine of world and gods being the work 

SUFFERING AND POINTLESSNESS
55
of a necessity, and the Zoroastrian account of the conflict between 
Ormuzd and Ahriman, as also quite reasonable. ‘But that a Jehovah 
creates this world of misery and affliction . . . and then applauds 
himself . . . this is something intolerable’ (PP-II, 301). Schopenhauer 
finds Old Testament Christianity as having no convincing doctrine 
of the origin of the world and takes it to task for being the only reli-
gion that has no doctrine of immortality or reincarnation. However, 
he finds the allegory of the fall of man quite conducive to his own 
theory.
Schopenhauer maintains that in genuine Christianity, that is, the 
New Testament version, human existence is quite correctly consid-
ered a ‘the consequence of guilt, a false step’. Accordingly we should 
not regard the sufferings and troubles in this world either unexpected 
or abnormal. We should rather find such things as quite normal for 
‘here everyone is punished for his existence and indeed each in his 
own way’ (PP-II, 303). Such an outlook will enable us to accept ‘the 
wretched and contemptible nature of most men, both morally and 
intellectually’. Schopenhauer shows an elitist attitude in his condem-
nation of the intellectually and morally inferior mankind which 
includes most of humanity except a handful of geniuses and morally 
superior natures. The world is an arena of suffering and unjust 
exploitation of others. ‘This world is just a hell and in it human 
beings are the tortured souls on the one hand, and the devils on the 
other’ (PP-II, 300). This is indeed a bleak and deeply pessimistic view 
of the common conduct of humanity and seems to have a complete 
disregard of the notion that there is something basically good in 
every individual, a soul or a conscience. But Schopenhauer’s extreme 
pronouncements never fail to be thought provoking.

56
CHAPTER FIVE
AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
The reflections on aesthetics and individual fine arts occupy almost 
one-fourth of Schopenhauer’s chief work WWR. In his later works, 
numerous essays are devoted to art and art forms. Human preoccu-
pation with art is deemed to have epistemological and redeeming 
qualities that provide glimpses of the deeper being of things as well 
as perspectives on a salvation from the misery-laden worldliness cre-
ated by the will’s striving. According to Schopenhauer, an authentic 
delving into art enables the human entity to know its world as it is 
through an objective observation and contemplation. An encounter 
with art is also a momentary experience of freedom from the demand-
ing and oppressive will-to-live. Art, therefore, can be an impetus for 
human beings to live a life of voluntary denial of the will-to-live, a 
higher way of life according to Schopenhauer.
Art experience is a momentary suspension of the will which ena-
bles the artist to contemplate Ideas of things in their purity. The rec-
ognition of the will-to-live and its manifold implications, including 
the uniquely human possibility of breaking free from the will’s oppres-
sive regime and stepping on to the road of salvation and voluntary 
denial of the will are shown to have an intimate connection with the 
creation and experience of art in Schopenhauer’s system. Besides 
producing a temporary will-lessness, art experience makes possible a 
contemplative apprehension of Ideas. In his artwork, the artist repro-
duces or ‘repeats’ his original apprehension of Ideas. The Ideas, that 
is, the Platonic Ideas, are the ‘immediate and adequate objectivity of 
the thing-in-itself, or the will’.

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
57
IDEAS AS THE OBJECTS OF ART
The will objectifies itself as Ideas (i.e. Platonic Ideas) and as human 
representation at different grades of its objectification. Schopenhauer 
calls the Idea as the immediate and therefore, ‘most adequate’ objec-
tivity of the thing-in-itself, thus tracing a connection between Platonic 
Idea and Kant’s thing-in-itself. ‘Only . . . the eternal Ideas, the origi-
nal forms of all things, can be described as truly existing, since they 
always are but never become and never pass away’ (W-I, 171). The 
specific things appear in accordance with the principle of sufficient 
reason to the human mind. Particular things are comprehended as 
part of the world as representation in terms of their interconnection 
with each other, and seldom in isolation as individual entities stand-
ing in themselves. The particular thing perceived in terms of the 
principle of sufficient reason is merely an indirect objectification of 
the will. Between this particular thing and thing-in-itself (will) stands 
a more direct objectivity of the will, that is, the Ideas. Being a higher 
objectivity than the merely causal and conceptual objectivity within 
space and time under the principle of sufficient reason the Idea is 
described as the ‘most adequate objectivity’ by Schopenhauer. ‘As a 
rule knowledge remains subordinate to the service of the will . . . in 
fact, it sprang from the will . . . as the head from the trunk. With the 
animals, this subjection . . . can never be eliminated. With human 
beings, such elimination appears only as an exception’ (W-I, 177).
Among human beings, transition from the common knowledge of 
particular things to knowledge of the Ideas happens suddenly in the 
mind of a rare individual, a genius or a great artist endowed with 
such ability. In such a subject, knowledge tears itself apart from the 
service of the will, as he ceases to be a mere individual and becomes 
a pure will-less subject of knowledge. When this power of the mind 
is aroused, the forms of the principle of sufficient reason no longer 
guide the subject whose will is suspended and he ‘no longer considers 
the where, the when, the why and the whether in things, but simply and 
solely, the what’ (W-I, 178). It is as if one loses oneself in the object; 
the difference between the perceiver and the perceived is no longer 
felt and the entire consciousness is pervaded by a single image of 
perception. What is known in this mode is not an entity as such but 
the Idea, the eternal form by a ‘will-less, painless, timeless, subject of 
knowledge’. When the Idea arises, ‘subject and object reciprocally fill 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
58
and penetrate each other completely.’ Schopenhauer follows Plato’s 
theory of Ideas in terms of the relation between things subject to 
change, the phenomena and the eternal forms and deems it essen-
tially alive in Kant’s concept of thing-in-itself. He creatively applies 
this theory in the domain of aesthetics:
Now what kind of knowledge it is that considers what continues 
to exist outside and independently of all relations . . . and is there-
fore known with equal truth for all time, in a word, the Ideas . . . 
It is art, the work of genius. It repeats the eternal ideas appre-
hended through pure contemplation . . . According to the material 
in which it repeats, it is sculpture, painting, poetry or music. 
(W-I, 184)
According to Schopenhauer, human life under the subjection of 
the will is for the most part full of striving and suffering interspersed 
with brief interludes of satisfactions of trivial achievements which 
result in pursuits of newer and newer worldly goals. But art experi-
ence is something that pulls one out of the matter of course oscilla-
tion between suffering and illusory satisfaction. In a contemplation 
of an object (or a specific set of objects) free from its ties with other 
objects, that is, in contemplation if its Idea, a detachment is achieved 
by the artist and passed on to the art connoisseur. Schopenhauer 
maintains that in this mode of detachment, art experience leads 
one to a state of will-lessness or a self-transformation as well as 
endows one with a truly objective knowledge of the Ideas of things. 
One becomes a pure will-less subject of knowledge as one gains a 
truly objective knowledge. These moments of art experience, as long 
as they last, usher one to a state of liberation from the network of 
worldly interconnections of things, a network which is consumed 
with personal agendas, temporary satisfactions leading to newer 
lacks and newer sufferings. In art experience one’s personal stakes 
and agendas to manipulate and use things is temporarily suspended 
and one is able to stare at the thing itself to contemplate its Idea. 
According to Schopenhauer, art experience brings both an extraordi-
nary knowledge and an extraordinary self-transformation. It gives 
us intimations of what a life of the denial of the will and salvation 
referred to in great religions like Christianity, Hinduism and Buddhism 
must be like.

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
59
ART AS THE WORK OF A GENIUS
Schopenhauer maintains that great art is produced by a genius. Great 
art is not produced by merely talented or trained individuals but a 
genius who alone is capable of pure contemplation of Ideas. A genius 
is pre-eminently able to detach himself from his personality and 
personal considerations, and to absorb himself entirely in the object. 
‘The gift of genius is nothing but the most complete objectivity’ (W-I, 
185). Genius is the ability and tendency to remain in a state of per-
ception, to immerse oneself in perception and to remove one’s knowl-
edge from the matter-of-course service to the will. According to 
Schopenhauer, a genius has a superfluity of knowledge in contrast 
to other mortals, an amount of knowledge that far exceeds what is 
normally required for the service of an individual will. The knowl-
edge of the Ideas contemplated by the genius is obtained through an 
especially keen perception. It is not abstract or conceptual knowl-
edge. The perception of a genius is more penetrating in contrast to 
the typical perception of an ordinary man who can ‘direct his atten-
tion to things only in so far as they have some relation to his will . . . 
he does not linger long over the mere perception . . . quickly looks 
merely for the concept under which it is to be brought, just as the lazy 
man looks for a chair, which then no longer interests him’ (W-I, 187). 
On the other hand, the genius is often so absorbed in contemplation 
of life itself and Ideas of things that he is invariably forgetful of his 
self-interest and lacks in practical life skills that the ordinary man of 
the world possesses. The issue of the genius was of great interest to 
Schopenhauer as he paints portraits of the genius in several of his 
works. One of the themes he dwells over is the connection between 
genius and madness.
The genius is one who has the capacity of bypassing in his sight 
worldly inter-connections of things, that is, the mundane knowledge 
according to the principle of sufficient reason, in order to focus on 
the thing as such to discover its Idea. He is able to grasp the real inner 
nature of a thing and how that thing represents its whole species. At 
the same time the genius has the power to be a ‘correlative of the 
Idea’. That is, he becomes a ‘pure subject of knowing’, and ceases to 
be an individual in the mode of contemplation. ‘That which exists in 
the actual individual thing, only imperfectly and weakened by modi-
fications, is enhanced to perfection, to the Idea of it, by the method 
of contemplation used by the genius’ (W-I, 194). This is why the 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
60
perceptions of the genius artists seem extreme and exaggerated to 
ordinary people. ‘Therefore he everywhere sees extremes, and on this 
account his own actions tend to extremes. He does not know how to 
strike the mean’ (W-I, 194).
The ability of being correlative to the Ideas of things must be 
inherent in all, albeit in lesser degree, otherwise they would be inca-
pable of enjoying artworks produced by genius artists. All human 
beings must have a power to recognize Ideas in things and must be 
capable of rising above their personality and personal agendas, to 
enjoy the aesthetic feeling for a few moments. The genius is the one 
who far exceeds ordinary people in dwelling in contemplation and 
appreciating the Ideas. The artist is endowed with the ability of repeat-
ing what he discovers about the being (Ideas) of things, in a voluntary 
and intentionally contrived work. According to Schopenhauer, the 
artwork is this ‘repetition’ through which the artist communicates 
the Idea he has grasped. Thus ‘the Idea comes to us more easily from 
the work of art than from nature and from reality . . . The artist lets 
us peer into the world through his eyes . . . (His) is the gift of genius 
and is inborn; but that he is able to lend us this gift, is acquired and 
is the technical side of art’ (W-I, 195).
ART AND THE GLIMPSES OF WILL-LESSNESS
Normally, human consciousness is pervaded by the will and assailed 
by a throng of desires with allied hopes and fears, and it can never 
have any prolonged peace of happiness. Schopenhauer echoes the 
Buddhist doctrine that craving (trishna) is the root cause of pain 
(dukkha) inherent in human condition. But the moments of aesthetic 
experience offer a temporary respite from the tyranny of ongoing 
willing, craving and neediness. These moments are enjoyed by the 
creative artist as well as the people who authentically experience art-
works. These moments offer aesthetic pleasure as well as an extraor-
dinary objective knowledge of things. It is a glimpse of salvation 
which must be a state of will-lessness.
When, however, an external cause or inward disposition suddenly 
raises us out of the endless stream of willing, and snatches knowl-
edge from the thralldom of will, the attention is now no longer 
directed to the motives of willing, but comprehends things free 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
61
from their relation to the will. Thus it considers things without 
interest, without subjectivity, purely objectively. (W-I, 196)
Being free from willing a state of peace and painlessness arrives. 
The moments in which one enjoys the being or the performance of a 
work of art, the deliverance of knowledge from an oppressive and 
demanding will produces such a joy that one has a magical feeling. 
It is as if one has stepped into another world which is to say that one 
has stepped out of this familiar world. Schopenhauer remarks that 
‘Happiness and unhappiness have vanished; we are no longer the 
individual; that is forgotten; we are only pure subject of knowledge. 
We are only one eye of the world which looks out from all knowing 
creatures, but which in man alone can be wholly free from serving the 
will’ (W-I, 198). It is interesting that in ancient Buddhist sutras, the 
Buddha is often described as ‘the eye of the world’ due to his detached 
and dispassionate analysis of the nature of things spelled out in the 
four noble truths.
According to Schopenhauer, art experience enables us to step out 
of the familiar world of desires and frustrations, projects and prag-
mata and behold the Being (Ideas) of things, and look at our own 
being in the world in the face. Schopenhauer points out that the 
essences of entities, usually hidden underneath the pragmatic net-
work of meanings, reveal themselves in the artwork creatively brought 
to the fore by the genius artist. Art gives mundaneness an extraordi-
nary twist that in its magical moments, the will loosens its grip and 
the world is shaken out of its foundation. The serenity of pure con-
templation opens within the observer of art the power of objective 
knowledge free of personal obsessions. Art experience opens the 
gateway to the reality and value of a will-less life, which in its ideal 
form is called salvation. In his book Art Experience, the contempo-
rary Indian philosopher, Hiriyanna, in his exposition of Vedanta 
theories of art seems to echo Schopenhauer’s view of art:
The aesthetic attitude stands higher than that of common every-
day life, which is generally characterized by personal interests . . . 
It is for this reason that Indian philosophers, especially Vedantins 
. . . compare the experience of art with that of the Ideal state . . . 
as moksha (salvation). But the two experiences are only of the 
same order and not identical . . . Art experience is (merely) tran-
sient, . . . seductive . . . and induced from outside.1

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
62
According to Schopenhauer, aesthetic contemplation is not confined 
to just man-made artworks. The great objects of nature too produce 
a feeling of the sublime. In encountering a magnificent spectacle of 
nature we become subjects of pure knowing, and our intimacy with 
Being of all things reveals itself. Natural objects of great spatial magni-
tude, and great antiquity, such as vast prairies of North America, high 
mountains, immense cliffs, rushing, roaming masses of water, complete 
deserts all arouse a feeling of the sublime. ‘Against such a ghost of our 
own nothingness . . . there arises the immediate consciousness that 
all these worlds exist’. One gets a feeling of belonging essentially to the 
Being of all that exists, as the obsession with one’s individuality is 
suppressed by a realization of one’s own nothingness against the mighty 
and powerful manifestations of nature. Schopenhauer explains the 
outcomes of the feeling of the sublime, with a quote from the Upani-
shads: ‘I am this creation collectively, and besides me there exists no 
other Being’ (W-I, 206).
In addition to reflecting on art and the artist in general, 
Schopenhauer examines the natures and scopes of various fine arts, 
and shows his comprehensive knowledge of prominent art forms. 
He thoroughly analyses their ranges of activities and offers original 
aesthetic theories with respect to architecture, horticulture, historical 
painting, sculpture, allegory, poetry, drama and finally music. 
Schopenhauer’s interest in the arts was not just theoretical but he was 
deeply involved in various art forms. His writings on aesthetics and 
the arts constitute a sizable portion of his total output. Besides devot-
ing the entire Third Book of volume I of the WWR to aesthetics, 
he added numerous supplementary essays in volume II to aesthetics 
and individual fine arts. In volume II of Parerga and Paralipomena, 
several essays are devoted to topics such as beauty, aesthetics, author-
ship, language, literature, architecture and music. In his personal life 
marked by loneliness and frustrating relationships with people 
around him, Schopenhauer always found a solace in the pursuit of 
the arts. He was a regular visitor to the opera and dramatic perform-
ances and to art museums. During his travels, art appreciation was an 
important part of his itinerary. He had a deep interest in observing 
objects of plant life and believed strongly that a keen observation 
of animal kingdom was a must for any serious investigation of life 
and philosophy. He was a fine scholar of classical languages and 
literature. His flute playing in the mornings as a daily ritual indicates 
his personal involvement with music.

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
63
His account of individual art forms applying his theory of aesthet-
ics that revolves around the apprehension of the Ideas as well as 
a will-less knowing is both original and insightful. He begins with a 
synopsis of architecture, along with some references to hydraulics 
and horticulture, and then offers a thorough account of historical 
painting and sculpture. Finally, he reflects on allegory and poetry 
and more extensively on music. It won’t be an exaggeration to say 
that more than one-fourth of his writings are devoted to aesthetics, 
arts and related matters. The reason for his deep involvement with 
art is not hard to guess. The suffering and pointlessness of life can 
only find solace and substantive remedy in the heroic practice of will-
lessness. Art is a mirror to the eternal Ideas behind phenomenal enti-
ties of the world and the hazards of endless cravings aroused by the 
will’s ceaseless strivings. Schopenhauer shows us that art is a catalyst 
for will-less knowing and becoming a pure subject bereft of one’s 
personal stakes in life. Art is an impetus to live the life of a denial of 
the will to live. Hence, the persistent and life long interest of this 
thinker in aesthetics and the arts.
In his hierarchy and classification of the arts in accordance with 
their subject-matter, Schopenhauer closely approximates the Platonic 
hierarchy of the Ideas, the lowest being those of inorganic natural 
matter. Higher than these grades of will’s objectification are plant 
life, and still higher is the animal world. At the summit of the objec-
tification of the will is humanity and the human world. Thus archi-
tecture deals with the lowest Ideas or the weakest objectivity of the 
will such as ‘gravity, cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, reaction to light and 
so on’ (W-I, 214). Horticulture and paintings of nature are concerned 
with somewhat higher grades of ideas pertaining to plant life. Drama 
and poetry are the arts dealing with the highest Ideas of humanity, 
character and actions of human beings. Although Platonic Ideas are 
the cornerstone of Schopenhauer’s aesthetics, he does not accept 
Plato’s view that individual things rather than the Ideas are the pro-
totype of painting and poetry (Republic, X-601), nor does he share 
Plato’s disdain and rejection of art (W-I, 212). For Schopenhauer, 
Ideas alone are the object of a genius artist, and art is most important 
for discerning reality and true purpose of life. Art is most important 
for knowing and living.
Before we move on to a brief consideration of Schopenhauer’s 
exposition of the major art forms, one more thing is to be kept in 
mind. In art creation as well as art appreciation, the two dimensions 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
64
of Schopenhauer’s theory of aesthetics, namely the apprehension of 
the Ideas and the will-less knowing of the pure subject do not happen 
equally and to the same extent in each and every art form. Rather, in 
different arts, different degrees of the subjective element, that is, the 
will-less knowing will appear. In arts dealing with lower grades of 
will’s objectivity and lower Ideas of inorganic and vegetative nature, 
such as architecture and horticulture, apprehension and enjoyment 
of will-less knowing is predominant. In the arts wherein animals and 
human beings and their humanity are the objects of aesthetic con-
templation, the objective apprehension of the Ideas is more promi-
nent and more sophisticated aspects of the revelation of the nature 
of the will. Historical painting and drama fall into the category of 
arts in which the objective element of the knowledge of the higher 
Ideas and the more comprehensive picture of details and meanings 
of the phenomena of the will are grasped. Thus although both the 
knowledge of the Ideas and the experience of will-lessness are present 
in all art forms, they are present in different proportion in different 
fields of art. Let us now briefly consider how Schopenhauer applies 
his theory of art to individual arts.
ARCHITECTURE
Architecture seems to be a manipulation of material stuff. Apparently, 
the qualities of matter are the subject-matter of aesthetic contemplation. 
These qualities are the phenomena of Ideas, even though matter as 
such cannot be the expression of an idea. Schopenhauer remarks 
that Plato was right in designating matter as something neither an 
idea nor an individual thing (Timaeus, 48–9). The most universal 
qualities of matter are ‘gravity, cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, reaction to 
light and so on’ (W-I, 214). These ideas are also the weakest objectiv-
ity of the will.
Architecture can be a fine art even though it serves the will in cre-
ating useful entities such as buildings, etc. As a fine art it performs 
the function of highlighting some of the Ideas pertaining to the qual-
ities of matter which are at the lowest grades of will’s objectivity such 
as gravity, cohesion, rigidity, hardness, etc. These are the visible qual-
ities of stone, ‘the simplest, dullest visibilities of the will, the funda-
mental bass-notes of nature’. According to Schopenhauer, the simple 
aesthetic material of architecture is the conflict between gravity and 
rigidity. Architecture aims at making this conflict appear distinctly in 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
65
many creative ways. For example, a building presses on to the earth 
due to gravity whereas with various devices of architecture rigidity, 
which is also an objectivity of the will resists the gravity and thwarts 
its tendencies by letting it happen only indirectly, for example, by let-
ting the joist, beams and arches press on to the earth by means of 
columns and square pillars. To show by enforced digressions and 
deliberate hindrances, the interplay between rigidity and gravity is 
the fundamental aesthetic purpose of architecture. Since these forces 
of gravity and rigidity are best reflected in stone, other building mate-
rials such as wood, pumice-stone or other artificial substances fail 
to show real architectural achievement. According to Schopenhauer, 
what addresses us through architecture is not symmetry or ornamen-
tation, which is something borrowed from sculpture, but the inter-
play between the fundamental forces of nature, that is, rigidity and 
gravity, the primary Ideas at the lowest grades of will’s objectivity. 
These are the least subtle and most visible and basic forms of the 
will. Symmetry and ornamentation please the eye, but these are not 
the principal things in architecture. ‘Even ruins are still beautiful.’
The works of architecture also have a special consideration for 
light, because the variety and illumination of light reveal the interplay 
between rigidity and gravity, distinctly and creatively. At the same 
time the nature and beauty of light itself, appears more distinctly in 
reaction the work of architecture. Schopenhauer’s theory regarding 
architecture is illustrated by the famous building Taj Mahal, although 
he does not cite this example. The beauty of the Taj lies in the highest 
quality of the marble stone and the solidity of its structure that seems 
to oppose the force of gravity in a unique way. The impact of light 
on this beautiful building, which is more a work of art than a mere 
mausoleum, is a wonderful spectacle. In the haze of the morning, in 
the full sunshine of the afternoon, in the twilight and in the moonlit 
night, transparent marble structure appears in different colours, in 
manifold forms of beauty. This is why an art critic called it ‘a poem 
in marble’. In the examples given by Schopenhauer, he contrasts 
buildings erected in the mild climates of India, Egypt, Greece and 
Rome with buildings from northern Europe where the necessities of 
a harsh climate required coffers, pointed roofs and towers. In his 
essay on architecture in volume II of WWR Schopenhauer contrasts 
Gothic architecture which borrows too much from sculpture, with 
ancient architecture of Greece marked by its ability to present the 
primary conflict between solid mass and gravity.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
66
Architecture differs from other arts insofar as in it the art is invari-
ably subordinated to practical ends. Because of the largeness of its 
structure and the costs involved, architectural works are produced 
by professionals supported by society. The art achievement of the 
architects lies in how he or she makes the architectural beauty of a 
temple, a palace, a prison or an office building compatible with its 
functionality. The only sister art of architecture seems to be artistic 
arrangement of water, where the idea of lucidity, mobility and trans-
parency appear as distinctly as rigidity and gravity do in architecture. 
However, this art is seldom combined with practical hydraulics in the 
same way as art and utility are combined in architecture.
HORTICULTURE, LANDSCAPE AND ANIMAL PAINTING 
OR SCULPTURE
Moving one step upwards in the next realm of ideas, we have artistic 
horticulture. Although landscape beauty depends on the nature’s 
objects present in it, the artistic horticulture achieves clearer separa-
tion, association and succession of these objects. This art is not a 
master of its material just as architecture is, and is helpless against 
inclemency of weather. Schopenhauer does not distinguish between 
non-representational and representational art, as he arranges the arts 
in accordance with the hierarchy of Ideas. Since the cornerstones 
of his aesthetics are the emergence of the Ideas as well as the will-free 
knowledge, arts are not arranged according to their materials but 
according to the kinds of Ideas they depict. Thus, according to 
Schopenhauer, along with horticulture, landscape painting too depicts 
the plant world. In painting of still life, architectural works, ruins, 
church interiors, etc. the subjective, that is, will-free knowledge aspect 
is predominant, not as much the manifestation of Ideas as such. But 
in landscape paintings, which depict vegetation and nature, Ideas 
depicted are more suggestive, the aesthetic experience is more bal-
anced between Ideas and pure knowledge. A still higher grade of 
will’s objectivity is revealed in animal paintings and animal sculpture. 
In these the objective aspect prevails over the subjective aspect of 
aesthetic experience. Knowledge of these Ideas of the animal species 
is accompanied by a peace of the silencing of the spectator’s will. But 
the full impact of this peace is not felt because human beings share 
the same will with animals, and the animal’s restlessness and monstro-
sity disturbs the peace of the art experience. Yet the animal appears 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
67
in its originality, freedom and innocence because their will unlike 
human will is not controlled by thoughtfulness. This is what explains 
human interest in animal kingdom.
HISTORICAL PAINTING AND SCULPTURE
These arts deal with the highest grade of Ideas, in which the will 
attains the highest degree of objectification, namely, the presentation 
for perception the aspects of humanity. Schopenhauer points out 
that in case of any manifestation of the human being in an artwork, 
the character of the species has to be presented alongside the charac-
ter of the individual human subject. In case of animal painting or 
sculpture, the character of the species alone is the problem for the 
artist, and not the character of the individuality of the animal. Thus 
historical painting and sculpture deal with a complex combination 
of Ideas. The objective apprehension of the Ideas or pleasure in the 
beauty is more predominant in historical painting and sculpture 
whereas the subjective reaction is less pronounced. Schopenhauer 
calls beauty as something that has to do with the Idea of the species, 
and character as something that concerns the Idea of the individual-
ity of the individual. The artist of historical painting has to present 
both beauty and character in the same individual. The knowledge of 
the beauty, that is, the Idea of the perfections of the species is not 
something that the artist learns by experience, but as a genius he has 
the a-priori ability to anticipate the perfect aspects of the species. In 
the true genius, the anticipation of the Idea is ‘accompanied by . . . a 
recognizing in the individual thing, its Idea . . . understands nature’s 
half-spoken words . . . He impresses on the hard marble the beauty 
of the form which nature failed to achieve in a thousand attempts’ 
(W-I, 222). In presenting the peculiar character of the individual 
alongside the perfect attributes of the species to which the individual 
belongs, the painters and sculptors depict the individual’s being not 
as an oddity or an accidental appearance of a peculiar entity, but ‘as 
a side of the Idea of mankind, specially appearing in this particular 
individual’ (W-I, 222). In other words, the artist presents a masterful 
combination the general humanity and a particular manifestation of 
the Idea of humanity, which is itself an Idea, and not just a quality 
of the general Idea of the species. Since ‘the individual always belongs 
to humanity . . . and humanity always reveals itself in the individual, 
. . . therefore, beauty cannot be abolished by character, or character 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
68
by beauty’ (W-I, 225). This creative combination of a particular 
world of a particular people with the worldhood of the human world 
in general is the hallmark of a great work of art, maintains Heidegger 
in his ‘The Origin of the Work of Art’.2 In his own terminology, 
Heidegger seems to echo Schopenhauer’s insights into the nature of 
the world and the depiction of that world in the great specimens of 
art such as historical painting. ‘To fit the fleeting world which is for-
ever transforming itself, in the enduring picture of particular events 
that nevertheless represent the whole, is an achievement of the art of 
painting’ (W-I, 231).
According to Schopenhauer, historical painting reaches its acme 
in the works in which the real ethical spirit of Christianity is revealed 
in the depiction of persons in full possession of this spirit, usually 
a group of saints along with Christ, often as a child with his mother 
and angels. The great masters of this art form are Raphael and 
Correggio. These paintings are most expressive because they reflect 
not only the highest objectification of the will in depicting true 
humanity but also the denial of the will on the part of the spiritual 
beings shown in such paintings. Their eyes show most perfect knowl-
edge of Ideas and the inner nature of the world and of human life. 
‘The perfect resignation which is the innermost spirit of Christianity 
as of Indian wisdom, the giving up of all willing . . . the abolition of 
the will . . . and hence, salvation’ (W-I, 233).
POETRY
The basic aim of poetry is to reveal Ideas and to communicate them 
to the reader. The medium in which the Ideas are made to be per-
ceived by the reader with the power of the reader’s own imagination 
are the concepts. The abstract concepts which are the direct material 
of poetry are transmitted through the words of the poet which sculpt 
the reader’s representation and imagination towards the perception 
of the Idea. Schopenhauer points out that the range of Ideas that 
poetry communicates is the widest; it is not confined to a limited 
grade of will’s objectification as architecture or animal sculpture are. 
Plastic and pictorial arts may surpass poetry in the presentation of 
the lower grades of will’s objectification, that is, in inanimate matter 
or plant and animal life, because these subjects may reveal their inner 
being in their outer forms in a static moment. Man’s Being on the 
other hand, is a much more complex issue, which is captured by 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
69
poetry in a network of human actions, thoughts and emotions, 
through a dynamic approach. Poetry is able to capture progress and 
movement of its objects in a manner that the plastic and pictorial 
arts cannot.
Schopenhauer maintains that ‘far more real, genuine, inner truth is 
to be attributed to poetry than to history’ (W-I, 245). The historian 
focuses on the significant actions with historical consequences and 
influence of powerful characters, and bypasses the significant actions 
of distinguished individuals such as writers, artists and reformers 
who are not political power players. ‘The poet, however, apprehends 
the Idea, the inner being of mankind outside all relation and all time’ 
(W-I, 245). Thus poetry is closer to truth in capturing time-less being 
of man whereas the historian is caught up in transitory and ulti-
mately trivial upheavals. According to Schopenhauer, some classical 
historians are borderline poets when they rise above the historical 
data and unfold human nature in their portrayals of the Idea of man-
kind. However, the hands of the historian are never free of historical 
facts and this is why the works of the great classical poets offer a 
truer and clearer picture of man’s inner essence.
Schopenhauer does not find history as the most accurate study 
of man’s inner nature. He gives a greater value to biographies and 
particularly to autobiographies than to history proper. In these stud-
ies of the lives of actual human beings, the data of human life are 
put together more accurately and more completely, whereas history 
proper seldom considers real humanity as over and above nations 
and armies, pomp and circumstances. Schopenhauer disregards the 
critique that autobiographies are usually full of exaggerations and 
dissimulation. Biographies and especially autobiographies are closer 
to truth because they show ‘the conduct of men in all its nuances and 
forms, the excellence, the virtue, and even the holiness of individuals, 
the perversity, meanness and malice of most, the profligacy of many’ 
(W-I, 247) as they intersect a single life. This idea of Schopenhauer 
that biography and autobiography can be the best medium and 
method of philosophizing, was discussed and emulated in European 
hermeneutics. Wilhelm Dilthey (1833–1911) captures life-world-
experiences (Erlebnisse) and lived-worlds (Lebenswelt) of several 
thinkers and wrote their biographies, maintaining that composing a 
biography was the best way of doing philosophy.
Schopenhauer discusses the various forms of poetry and the way 
they reveal Ideas. In lyric poetry, the depicter and the depicted can be 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
70
the same, when the poet describes his own subjective state. In other 
forms of poetry, the depicter may conceal himself entirely. In the 
ballad, the subjective is still present, which diminishes in the Idyll, 
still more in the romance, almost entirely in the epic. In the drama, 
which according to Schopenhauer is the most objective, most com-
prehensive and most difficult form of poetry, there is no vestige of 
the subjective.
In romance, epic and drama, which are the more objective forms 
of poetry, the Idea of mankind is unfolded by the presentation of 
important characters and in the creation of remarkable situations 
in which the characters show their personality. According to 
Schopenhauer, tragedy must be placed at the summit of poetic art, 
due to the greatness of its impact and the difficulty of its authorship. 
Tragedy reveals the real nature of the world and of human existence, 
which is marked by real and unsurpassable misery, unremitting pur-
suit of the will and almost sure barrage of frustrations resulting from 
thoughtless subservience of the will. Why Schopenhauer regards 
tragedy as the most accurate and powerful art form is graphically 
spelled out in his excellent prose:
The unspeakable pain, the wretchedness and misery of mankind, 
the triumph of wickedness, the scornful mastery of chance, and 
the irretrievable fall of the just and the innocent are here presented 
to us; and here is to be found a significant hint as to the nature of 
the world of existence. It is the antagonism of the will with itself 
which is here most completely unfolded at the highest grade of its 
objectivity, and which comes into fearful prominence. (W-I, 253)
At the same time, tragedy reveals the reaction of certain thought-
ful characters to the misery of life, in their ability to see through the 
veil of maya, egoism and false individuality. As they relinquish the 
motives of the will, the true knowledge of the real nature of the world 
dawns upon them and serves as a quieter of their will, produces res-
ignation and renunciation. Schopenhauer cites some famous trage-
dies of European literature which show the final resignation by their 
main characters, for example, The Prince of Calderon, Gretchen in the 
Faust and by Hamlet. Schopenhauer takes Samuel Johnson to task 
for critiquing Hamlet for lack of poetic justice, and thereby showing 
a lack of understanding of the nature of tragedy. Real tragedy has 
no poetic justice. When we wonder what wrong have Ophelias, 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
71
Desdemonas and Cordelias have done, we misunderstand what trag-
edy really conveys, namely, the true nature of life which is unjust and 
full of undeserved pain. Often not just the wicked but also good peo-
ple are cruel to others. Good people at times end up inflicting pain on 
others without intending any harm.
According to Schopenhauer, the presentation of great misfortune, 
essential to tragedy, is achieved by the poet in one or more of the fol-
lowing three ways: (a) through extraordinary wickedness of a charac-
ter (e.g. Othello, Shylock, Iago); (b) through blind fate, chance or 
error (e.g. Oedipus, Romeo and Juliet); (c) through the very attitude 
of the persons to one another in the web of human relations (e.g. 
Hamlet, Faust). According to Schopenhauer, it is the third kind of 
tragedy that is really excellent in showing the true nature of life. Here 
‘the characters . . . are so situated with regard to one another that 
their position forces them, knowingly, and with their eyes open, to do 
one another the greatest injury, without any of them being entirely in 
the wrong’ (W-I, 255). In this kind of tragedy, life itself makes these 
characters to act out the real nature of life, that is, unfair and replete 
with unwanted but regularly unfolding suffering. Hamlet’s heartless-
ness towards Ophelia and Othello’s cruelty towards Desdemona are 
the examples of the harshness of life and circumstances.
MUSIC
Music stands apart from all the other arts insofar as it does not stim-
ulate or present the knowledge of Ideas. According to Schopenhauer, 
the power of music lies in its unique imitation of the inner nature of 
the world, in its being a copy of the will itself rather than being 
a copy of the Ideas. Ideas constitute the adequate objectivity of the 
will and are the subject-matter of all the other arts except music. 
Music is the only art that imitates and transmits the nature of the 
will without the medium of the Ideas. Schopenhauer reflects on the 
power and the impact of music on human beings. ‘It is such a great 
and exceedingly fine art, its effect on man’s innermost nature is so 
powerful, and it is so completely and profoundly understood by him 
in his innermost being as an entirely universal language’ (W-I, 256). 
Furthermore, music which everyone can instantly relate to and 
understand, seems to have a certain infallibility due to the fact it has 
definite rules and an inner connection with numbers, which cannot 
be violated if it is to be music proper. Schopenhauer says that after 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
72
a deep reflection on the different forms of music, he arrived at ‘an 
explanation of the inner essence of music and its imitative relation to 
the world’ (W-I, 257). This explanation is obviously grounded on 
Schopenhauer’s all important concept of the will.
All the arts other than music stimulate the knowledge of the Ideas 
by depicting specific and remarkable ‘things’ as works of art, and 
they bring about this knowledge of the Ideas to the connoisseur by 
transforming him or her into a pure subject of knowing that over-
comes his or her individuality. In other words, the artist lends his own 
eyes to the connoisseur to witness the Ideas in a thing called the work 
of art. Heidegger seems to offer a similar account of the artwork in his 
‘The Origin of the Work of Art’,3 albeit in his own non-metaphysical 
terminology. Although Heidegger is silent on the role of Platonic 
Ideas in art, he begins his essay by reflecting on the thinghood of 
art works and mentions that art works are after all things first and 
foremost. Just as Schopenhauer, Heidegger emphasizes the self-
transformation in the connoisseur and the fact that the connoisseur 
must become a ‘preserver’ of the art work by being bereft of the 
worldly assumptions of his or her own times. Heidegger also seems 
to agree with Schopenhauer that the purpose of art is to offer a dis-
closure of the worldhood of the world.
According to Schopenhauer, music is unique among fine arts inso-
far as it does not offer a specific thing or object as a work of art. It 
offers a knowledge of the worldhood of the world in another manner. 
Music is independent of the phenomenal world. The phenomena are 
the ‘appearance of the Ideas through plurality through entrance into 
the principium individuationis, the form of knowledge possible to the 
individual’ (W-I, 257). Unlike the other arts, music is ‘as immediate 
an objectification and a copy of the whole will as the world itself is’. 
This is why the impact of music on the humans is more powerful, 
penetrating, and universal than any other art. Other arts speak only 
of the shadows (Ideas, phenomena) whereas music speaks of the 
essence (will, Being, world).
Just as Ideas of things have various grades such as inanimate 
nature, plant life, animal life and humanity, which together reflect the 
nature of the phenomenal world, musical harmony too expresses the 
concomitance of these species albeit in a non-phenomenal manner. 
According to Schopenhauer, the lowest grade of will’s objectification, 
that is, the inorganic matter is represented by the ground-bass in a 
harmony. In between the bass and the leading voice, the ripienos 

AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
73
producing the harmony, the various grades of the will’s objectifica-
tion, namely, inorganic nature, and animal world are represented. 
In the melody, in the singing voice that leads the whole harmony, and 
is a complete whole in itself, represents that highest grade of will’s 
objectification that is the life of the human mind, the intellectual 
endeavours of man, according to Schopenhauer. Whatever we place 
under the notion of feeling, that which is not strictly covered by the 
abstractions of reason comes alive in melody. Schopenhauer cites 
Plato and Aristotle to back up his claim that melody represents the 
finest feelings and states of the soul (W-I, 260). Plato says that move-
ment of the melody imitates the passions of the soul (Laws, VIII, 
812 c). Aristotle remarks that melody, even though it is mere sound, 
represents the states of the soul (Problemata, c 19).
But from Schopenhauer’s point of view, the most remarkable thing 
about melody as well as about music in general is that it expresses the 
different forms of will’s efforts, especially suffering that is inherent in 
the will’s endless strivings as well as brief satisfactions followed by 
more striving. Will’s temporary satisfaction is indicated by harmoni-
ous interval and returns to the keynote. The adagios represent great 
and noble human quests. The composition of a melody that exposes 
the deepest levels of human willing, feelings and emotions is the work 
of a genius. The composer reveals a copy of the will in a language 
that his reasoning faculty does not understand. It is a spontaneous 
creation without the aid of concepts. However, ‘In the composer, 
more than in any other artist, man is entirely separate and distinct 
from the artist’ (W-I, 260). In music, the composer overcomes his 
own individuality, in being a subject of pure knowing, and creating 
music through inspiration and spontaneity. This is how this artist 
builds his composition to present a copy of the inner movements of 
the will. A great musician offers an objective rather than a subjective 
picture of the will. ‘Music does not express this or that particular 
or definite pleasure, this or that affliction, pain, sorrow, horror, gai-
ety, merriment or peace of mind, but joy, pain, sorrow, horror, gaiety, 
merriment, peace of mind themselves. . . .’ (W-I, 161). Schopenhauer’s 
thoughts on the fine art of music are comparable to the classical 
Indian theories of art, specifically the theories of rasa (sentiments), 
for example in Bharata’s Natyasastra, which mentions eight funda-
mental sentiments or emotions (rasas) as objects of art, namely, exotic, 
comic, pathetic, furious, heroic, terrible, odious and marvellous. In 
the words of Hiriyanna, the rasa theory shows that ‘art aims rather 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
74
at inducting in us a unique attitude of mind which signifies not only 
pleasure, but also complete disinterestedness and a sympathetic 
insight into the whole situation.’4 Thus music as an art exposes not a 
specific or subjective sorrow, horror and gaiety but gives us a taste of 
what sorrow, horror and gaiety are like in their essences as part and 
parcel of the will to live. ‘Music gives the innermost kernel preceding 
all form, or heart of things’ (W-I, 263). Because music shuns all con-
ceptualizations and rational network of meanings to get at the heart 
of things, we feel an immediate affinity with it but neither the com-
poser, nor the listener can explain it in concepts. ‘The inexpressible 
depth of all music, by virtue of it floats past us as a paradise quite 
familiar and yet eternally remote, and is so easy to understand and 
yet so inexplicable’ (W-I, 264). Because emotions or up and down 
swings of the will are its subject matter, music cannot offer rational 
or conceptual exposition of elusive but deeply felt emotions. It repro-
duces the will’s upswings and downswings in a way that we can imme-
diately relate to, but cannot fully explain.

75
CHAPTER SIX
THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
By reflecting on the nature of love between man and woman, 
Schopenhauer claims to cover an uncharted territory on the part of 
philosophers. Although a few philosophers including Plato, Rousseau, 
Kant and Spinoza have touched on the mystery of love, their treat-
ments have been limited and shallow according to Schopenhauer. 
Plato’s account seems to concern ‘only the Greek love of boys’, 
Rousseau’s is ‘false and inadequate’, Kant’s ‘without special knowl-
edge’ and Spinoza’s, amusing due to its ‘excessive naivety’. Thus 
Schopenhauer exclaims: ‘I have no predecessors either to make use 
of or refute’ (W-II, 533) on this issue. However, one is amazed to wit-
ness the overwhelming preoccupation of poets and novelists, espe-
cially the writers of romances, with the subject of love between the 
sexes. We must acknowledge that love must be very consistent with 
human nature since it has been so consistently described by poets 
and novelists and accepted by their readers with undiminished inter-
est. The passion of love does not merely exist among the characters 
of fictional works, but newspapers often inform us about many a 
lover ending their lives when their chances of uniting with their part-
ners seemed hopelessly thwarted. Many more end up in the mad-
house as victims of the same passion. Thus one must wonder why ‘a 
matter that plays so important a part in the life of man has hitherto 
been almost entirely disregarded by philosophers’ (W-II, 532).
Schopenhauer believes that the basic doctrines of his own system 
hold a key to the resolution of the enigma of love between the sexes. 
He hopes to bridge a gap in the history of philosophy by presenting 
a philosophical account of the force that seems to take over the 
minds of the individuals involved and unbeknown to lovers them-
selves, the project of a higher life force gets underway through them. 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
76
Schopenhauer apologizes in the beginning of his exposition that his 
description may seem ‘too physical, too material’ to the lovers under 
the sway of this passion.
Schopenhauer begins his essay with a very definitive statement 
about the nature of love. ‘All amorousness is rooted in the sexual 
impulse alone, is in fact . . . specialized and . . . individualized sexual 
impulse, however ethereally it may deport itself’ (W-II, 533). Love 
is often understood as something beyond mere sexual attraction, 
even as entirely asexual in forms known as Platonic love, higher love, 
meeting of souls, etc. But Schopenhauer asserts very strongly that 
all romantic love is sexual, no matter how much this truth is covered 
up or given transcendental interpretation by the lovers. This sexual 
impulse is not general but fixed towards a specific individual. 
Schopenhauer was one of the first thinkers in Europe to recognize 
the important part played by sexuality in human life and especially in 
the life of the mind. No wonder he was a major influence on the 
thought of Sigmund Freud.
The impact that the sexual love has on the individuals affected by 
it is simply overwhelming. Schopenhauer affirms that it is next only 
to the love of life itself in being one of the strongest motives that 
prompts far-reaching activity in the pursuit of its goals. It especially 
lays claim to the bulk of the thoughts and powers of the young, it 
jeopardizes important affairs, interrupts serious occupations, and in 
many cases the ‘negotiations of statesmen and investigations of the 
learned’. This passion can damage valuable relationships, and lead to 
quarrels and disputes and even wars. It can alter upright characters 
into traitors, deceivers and practitioners of disloyalty, in many cases 
destroying health, wealth and happiness.
‘Why all this noise and fuss? Why all the urgency, uproar, anguish 
and exertion? Is it merely a question of every Jack finding his Jill?’ 
(W-II, 534). Schopenhauer believes that he can provide an expla-
nation of the intense and overwhelming nature of love, and the 
rush of feelings of those in love seems to stem from a higher force. 
The fervour of love in the individual is indeed in keeping with the 
importance of the matter for the human species. According to 
Schopenhauer, what is decided by love is nothing shorter than the 
formation of the next generation. Individuals in love have the delusion 
that they are serving their very own interest, but in fact they are act-
ing according to the deeper objective of the will-to-live to perpetuate 
itself. For the sexual impulse appearing in an individual consciousness 

THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
77
is essentially the will-to-live. But this sexual impulse fixed towards 
a definite individual is the will-to-live ‘as a precisely determined 
individual’. What Schopenhauer means is that in order to achieve its 
hidden purpose of bringing forth a new human being, the nature 
conspires to bring two individuals of the opposite sex together in 
amorous attraction. The affair of the hearts is a stratagem of the 
will-to-live to perpetuate the species and what counts in it is not the 
mutual affection and compatibility but ‘possession’, that is, physical 
fulfilment. This is in keeping with Schopenhauer’s assertion that ‘all 
amorousness is rooted in the sexual impulse alone’.
‘The collected love-affairs of the present generation taken together 
are accordingly the human race’s serious meditation on the composi-
tion of the future generation on which in their turn innumerable 
generations depend’ (W-II, 534). Thus, love and falling in love has 
a serious purpose, often hidden from the lovers themselves. It is 
something necessary from the standpoint of the species that it must 
perpetuate itself. It does so through the natural amorous and sexual 
attraction between men and women and makes them couples. Two 
individuals of opposite sex enter into a bond of fixed attachment. 
Each individual in such a relationship wants a union with his or her 
partner and this partner alone to fulfil his or her intense desire, which 
is in fact, the nature’s hidden purpose to produce a specific child 
through this and this union alone. These partners are meant for 
each other do a specific job for nature which only they can do, says 
Schopenhauer. Thus every love affair is distinct and individual, just 
as every individual has an individuality. Hence the anguish and frus-
tration to be suffered by the individual when the nature’s purpose 
fails against unfavourable worldly circumstances.
The connection between love as mutual affection and possession is 
highlighted by Schopenhauer. He maintains that the certainty of 
mutual liking and admiration can never make up for the lack of pos-
session, that is, physical fulfilment. Forced marriages and a woman’s 
favour purchased with gifts and even rape, indicate that possession as 
physical enjoyment is often considered more important than mutual 
affection and compatibility. ‘The true end of the whole love-story, 
though the parties concerned are unaware of it, is that this particular 
child may be begotten; the method and manner . . . is of secondary 
importance’ (W-II, 535). Thus, Schopenhauer explains why posses-
siveness and jealousy are natural accompaniment of romantic love. 
Love as mutual adoration is never enough. It must be consummated 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
78
in the formation of a couple with mutual and exclusive possession. 
For nothing less will fulfil nature’s goal, namely, the producing and 
nurturing of a healthy child.
What pulls two individuals of the opposite sex together so power-
fully in the will-to-live that abides in the whole human species and 
seeks in the new individual which this couple can potentially pro-
duce, an objectification and expansion of its true nature? Thus, the 
will uses the lovers to realize the aim of its own continued objectifica-
tion and propagation of the species. ‘The quite special and individual 
passion of two lovers is just as inexplicable as is the quite special 
individuality of any person, which is exclusively peculiar to him’ 
(W-II, 536). Thus, the mystery of and mystifying nature of love 
between a specific couple is ultimately inexplicable just as the indi-
viduality of an individual is ultimately inexplicable. This is because 
the will as the spirit of the human species is involved in both cases. 
A specific love affair is not just a matter of a rational and calculated 
decision taken by the individuals concerned. The same way the 
quite special character of the personality of any individual is not just 
a sum total of that person’s experiences and rational decisions. It 
carries within it a uniqueness that is ultimately inexplicable and 
inimitable. Sometimes we name it the mystery of the self.
Schopenhauer tries to reflect on many perplexing questions con-
cerning the nature of love between a man and a woman. What makes 
the bond between those involved in such a relationship stronger since 
not all couples seem to be equally compatible? The highest degree 
of the passion of love seems to be related to the suitability of the two 
individuals to each other. According to Schopenhauer, the child to be 
produced will inherit the character from the father and intellect from 
the mother and for this new individual, the will-to-live feels a longing. 
The suitability of the lovers to each other in practice amounts to a 
correspondence in regard to what is to be produced, since no two 
individuals are exactly similar. Thus, really passionate love is as rare 
as the meeting of two perfectly suitable individuals. But since this 
possibility exists in everyone’s destiny, the descriptions of true love 
in poetic works, makes an appeal to all of us. The suitability of the 
lovers is defined by whether the future progeny will inherit harmoni-
ous bodily and mental qualities from the parents. Thus, one parent 
could supplement the looks in the other as well as complement each 
other’s traits. Thus, a short person may choose a tall partner and 

THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
79
a blond person may fancy a dark-haired lover. The seemingly incom-
patible marriages, which makes us wonder at the choices made by 
these individuals, may be explained by the longing of the will fulfill-
ing its purpose of producing a harmoniously formed new being 
by deluding the individuals to make what seems to them, their own 
decisions. Thus, ‘nature can attain her end only by “implanting in the 
individual a certain delusion”, and by virtue of this, that which in 
truth is merely a good thing for the species, seems to him to be a good 
thing for himself’ (W-II, 538).
Schopenhauer explains the mysteries of romantic love within the 
architectonics of his own metaphysics. The problem with all meta-
physics is that in its project of explaining everything in a neatly 
crafted system, it may fall short of truth. What really makes two 
individuals of opposite sex strongly attracted to each other is an 
inner striving to subserve nature’s procreative drives, according to 
Schopenhauer. Will-to-live, which is the name he gives to being of 
all beings, is a striving beyond the dichotomy of matter and form, 
material and spiritual, consciousness and the body, constantly needs 
to renew itself. Love between two mortal individuals subserves 
that renewal according to Schopenhauer. But is love merely a physi-
cal and sexual drive? What about devotion, loyalty, divinity, selfless-
ness or living arrangement, partnership, family as a social unity? 
Schopenhauer’s account does not seem to cover the ground between 
romantic love and love in general. However, his metaphysics does 
explain numerous puzzles associated with love and marriage in his 
own concepts and terms.
Consistent with his view of love as a feeling that subserves procrea-
tion, Schopenhauer remarks that ‘by nature, man is inclined to 
inconstancy in love, woman to constancy’ (W-II, 542). Since nature 
wants greatest possible increase of the species, man by nature longs 
for variety in sexual partners. For a man can beget numerous children 
in a given year, woman could have only one pregnancy in this time 
span. Thus man is seldom satisfied with one woman, whereas a 
woman clings to one man for nature urges her to hold on to the father 
and sustainer of the offspring. ‘Accordingly, conjugal fidelity for the 
man is artificial, for the woman natural . . . and adultery on the part 
of the woman is much less pardonable’ (W-II, 542). These remarks 
can easily be viewed as sexist and unduly exaggerating the difference 
between man and woman due to their biology. In fact, disloyalty on 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
80
the part of women in the bonds of love and marriage is as common 
as that of men as some victimized men will argue. Feminist thinkers 
argue that women’s chastity and loyalty are the vestiges of patriarchi-
cal social norms, as women were compelled to suppress their sexual-
ity in old times of family values. On the other hand, no matter how 
liberated a society becomes, the differences between male and female 
sexuality will still remain significant and enigmatic to the extent of 
being inexplicable. That is why issues such as ‘what a woman really 
wants’ or ‘what men are really like’ will continue to be debated.
Next, Schopenhauer discusses some aesthetic and anatomical 
details of the factors that guide ‘the pleasure in the other sex’. These 
may seem oddly placed in a philosophical work, but deemed by him 
as important to his argument. According to him, age, health, skele-
ton, fullness of flesh, beauty of the face are all major considerations 
in the arousal of the sexual attraction. For example, ‘every individual 
loses attraction for the opposite sex to the extent that he or she 
is removed from the fittest period for procreation’ (W-II, 543). The 
diseases that could pass on to the child will repel us. The figure and 
the shape of the skeleton, any deformities, fullness or leanness of 
flesh are all important considerations for prospective lovers. Most 
of all, beauty of the face and particularly the shape of the nose 
are important determinants of sexual selection. Nature and instinct 
play a major role in this selection and somehow proper formation of 
the future progeny is the main goal of the will that brings the lovers 
together. The rational considerations often take a back seat. Thus, ‘it 
is a vain and ridiculous pretense when women assert that they have 
fallen in love with a man’s mind . . . on the other hand . . . men are 
not determined by the woman’s “qualities of character”; hence so 
many Socrateses have found their Xanthippes’ (W-II, 545). What 
Schopenhauer implies is that men and women instinctively choose a 
partner with whom they could produce and nurture a properly 
formed and healthy child. Often they will go for a person who com-
plements and supplements what they themselves have as well as what 
they themselves lack.
Often the considerations of whether the person chosen will make 
an ideal life partner or has a compatible personality are set aside and 
such a union makes a bad marriage. Because the procreation is the 
instinctive factor, both the man and the woman are guided or misled 
by the anatomy of the prospective partner which they scrutinize care-
fully and comprehensively in the process of making their selection. 

THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
81
Women prefer ‘thirty something men at the acme of procreative 
power and are won mainly by man’s strength and the courage con-
nected with it’, men who can beget strong children and are likely to 
be courageous protectors of the family. Thus, women never care for 
the superiority of the mind in a man, but go for manly men even if 
they are dim-witted and ugly. Of course, such speculation is highly 
one-dimensional on the part of Schopenhauer. But it seeks to explain 
everything about the selection of lovers and spouses, by invoking 
the will.
At the same time, Schopenhauer resolves some perplexing issues 
pertaining to relationships of lovers and married couples. Why is it 
that marriages based on love start so well but end up as unhappy 
ones? Why does the ‘harmony of the souls’ so quickly result in a 
‘howling discord’? As pointed out above, it is the suitability of the 
couple with respect to the being to be produced and the perfection of 
that being that has drawn the lovers to each other, not any ‘harmony 
of the souls’ as they might presume. According to Schopenhauer, the 
proper constitution and procreation of the human race is what Cupid 
is occupied with. Compared to the importance of this business, the 
details of the love stories and affairs of the individuals have no 
significance. However, the intensity of love between two individuals 
of the opposite sex increases with a high degree individualization, 
that is, the lovers are specifically involved with each other and it is 
not just a union between any man and any woman. Due to the 
nature’s hidden purpose one partner is quite specially, the comple-
ment of the other and they find each other irreplaceable. That is why 
mere sexual union without regard to a special and deeper attach-
ment, is regarded by all as ‘base and ignoble’, because such a union 
will procreate the species with respect to quantity only and not the 
quality. Quality is the outcome of the union between two individuals 
entirely suitable and complementary to each other for the purpose of 
producing a harmoniously constituted and healthy offspring. ‘The 
will-to-live desires to objectify itself here in a quite particular indi-
vidual that can be produced only by this father together with this 
mother’ (W-II, 550).
On a larger canvas of reality, the will is always forming couples 
suitable for procreating the race. In line with the belief regarding rein-
carnation in Hinduism and Buddhism, Schopenhauer remarks that 
the conduct of love between the sexes indicates ‘that an infinity of space, 
time and matter, and consequently an inexhaustible opportunity for 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
82
return, stand open to the will-to-live’ (W-II, 550). This may have 
influenced Nietzsche’s concept of the external return of the selfsame. 
In longing of love, an inexhaustible subject in the works of the 
poets of all ages, which grips the lovers as an unearthly force against 
which their individuality becomes helpless, issues forth from what 
Schopenhauer calls the spirit of the species. The travails of separa-
tion and the sighs of lovers are indeed ‘the sighs of the spirit of the 
species, which sees here to be won or lost, an irreplaceable means to 
its end, and therefore groans deeply’ (W-II, 551).
The intense craving, infinite longing and deepest pain of separa-
tion in love happen because of this transcendent nature of love that 
does not merely attack one’s individuality but the core of that indi-
viduality that is the will. In this mode the will summons the individ-
ual to subserve the cause of the species. Hence, the overwhelming 
attachment, jealousy, torments and pangs of separation. When a 
hero wails over lost love, it does not seem odd to the spectators of the 
drama, because ‘it is not he but the species that wails’ through him. 
The same passion of love makes one do uncharacteristic things. 
Honourable people of high station end up in scandals, adultery and 
unconscientious conduct in complete disregard of honour, duty and 
loyalty. It is true to say that a higher force takes possession of those 
in love, as the lovers often feel that worldly morality and conventions 
no longer apply to them. Schopenhauer offers a very profound 
quote from Chamfort: ‘when a man and a woman have a very strong 
passion for each other, . . . (they) belong to each other “by nature” 
and by “divine right” in spite of laws and human conventions’ (W-II, 
553). Schopenhauer maintains that it is their service of the spirit 
of the species that uplifts the lovers from their seemingly narrower 
selfish gratification. It is due to the higher calling as well as the nobler 
and blameless nature of love that audiences of plays and readers of 
novels find themselves sympathetic to the efforts of the lovers towards 
their ultimate union.
Schopenhauer’s view of the real source of love in something other 
than the intellect will be readily acceptable to all who have experi-
enced the onslaughts of romantic love. The core of one’s individual-
ity is identified by him as the will, which has to be more powerful and 
based in something more than mere individuality. The will seems to 
identify itself with the species rather than a specific individual. While 
will is the ground of all self-love and all urges to live and live it up in 

THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
83
the world, it is more than mere individuality. For it can look away 
from that individuality and use it as tool for its own ends. That is 
why, while in love, an individual feels as if he is ruled by an alien 
power. Whether romantic love which must have some connection 
with love in general, is a mere ploy of the procreative urge in us and 
nothing more, remains a debatable issue.
Romantic love brings out comic or strange behaviour in the 
affected individual, and at times it may lead to tragedy. One seems to 
be possessed in this state by something, which Schopenhauer identi-
fied as ‘the spirit of the species’. One seems no longer one’s usual self 
as if ruled by a transcendent inclination. The will of the person in 
love seems to be ‘caught up in the whirlpool of the will of the species’. 
In extreme cases it may lead to extreme depression, madness, suicide 
or double suicide. Often the individual under the sway of this pas-
sion, acts against his or her own rational judgement, and ends up 
opting for a marriage partner entirely unsuitable and discordant. 
This is why we often witness ‘very rational and even eminent minds’ 
tied to ‘termagants and matrimonial fiends, and cannot conceive 
how they could have made such a choice’ (W-II, 555). The woeful 
matrimonial lives of Socrates, Shakespeare, Albrecht, Durer and 
Byron are cited by Schopenhauer. We may add to that the case of 
Tolstoy whose noble life was harassed by a shrew of a wife. We can 
be sure that many female celebrities might have faced similar fate in 
the age when divorce was uncommon. This certainly lends truth to 
the adage ‘love is blind’. The reason that romantic love, often appears 
as a temporary episode in one’s life or declines with the passage of 
time, or its spontaneity is transformed into a challenge for the mar-
ried couples, is explained by Schopenhauer as something bound to 
happen after the will of the species has fulfilled its purpose. Contem-
porary studies on love and sex reveal that love fever is most intense in 
the first nine to twelve months of the courtship, which is exactly the 
time required for conceiving and delivering a child.
Schopenhauer believes that legendary god of love, Cupid correctly 
represents the genius of the species. He has been described as 
spiteful, cruel and notorious god with a childish appearance. He is 
also an impulsive and dictatorial demon. That he is the lord of gods 
and men is indicated by the following words of Euripides quoted by 
Schopenhauer: ‘Eros, tyrant of gods and men’ (W-II, 556). All these 
attributes of Cupid are exposed in the nature of love described by 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
84
Schopenhauer in his essay. There is spitefulness and cruelty in the 
rejection suffered by a lover as well as a childlike spontaneity. The 
vehemence of love has despotic hold over an individual in the grip of 
this passion and even gods were believed to be subjected to the darts 
of Cupid. That this strong feeling makes the lovers take leave of their 
faculty of reason is amply illustrated in Schopenhauer’s account.
Since sexual love ultimately serves the interest of the species, 
Schopenhauer maintains that marriages based on romantic love, for 
the most part, do not deliver happiness and compatibility for the 
couple. After the passion wanes, the partners discover that they have 
different natures due to which they cannot get along and their initial 
experience of compatibility on other scores was a delusion. The obvi-
ous differences of rank, education, cultural background, financial 
well-being, etc., which were dismissed as unimportant in the fever of 
love, become real problems with the passage of time. Thus ‘marriages 
contracted from love prove as a rule unhappy . . . He who marries 
from love has to live in sorrow, says the Spanish proverb’ (W-II, 557). 
But this is not the case with marriages of convenience, that is, those 
based on rational considerations, including those contracted through 
the active involvement of the parents and families of the prospective 
spouses, the so-called arranged marriages. In case of such arranged 
marriages, the prime consideration is the well-being of the individu-
als rather than well-being of the species. Thus, in marriage, conven-
ience and passionate love seldom appear together and either the 
interest of the species or of the individual must suffer.
Towards the end of his essay on love between the sexes, 
Schopenhauer retraces the connection between the metaphysics of 
love and his metaphysics on the whole. In other words, he wants to 
emphasize that the attraction between the sexes is not just a periph-
eral matter but a central aspect of the philosophy of human existence. 
Schopenhauer brings home the insight that if meditation on death is 
the chief task and prime mover of philosophical thinking, the con-
nection between death and love is also a central theme of philosophy. 
Thus, the hitherto neglected philosophical investigation of love is 
undertaken by Schopenhauer in this pioneering work. The connec-
tion between love and death and between this essay on love and his 
philosophical system on the whole is explained by Schopenhauer as 
follows. Man’s true being-in-itself is indestructible, as exposed in 
the essay on death and indestructibility of our true nature. In other 
words, man’s being has a stake in the coming generation. This explains 

THE ENIGMA OF LOVE
85
why the impulse of love exercises such a powerful influence on him or 
her. The race that follows man’s current life-span cannot be entirely 
different from him, and he is not absolutely perishable in death. This 
does not mean that Schopenhauer endorses reincarnation of the 
individual in ‘flesh and hair’ in a simplistic way. He wants to empha-
size that man’s inner craving to live on enables him to live on in the 
species. ‘His true being-in-itself lies rather in the species than in the 
individual’ (W-II, 559).
As explained above, the root of all love affairs is the best possible 
constitution of the species. Being in love of a man and a woman 
demonstrates that being of the species is nearer or more real to them 
than his or her being as an individual. ‘Why, then, does the man in 
love hang with complete abandon on the eyes of his chosen one? . . . 
Because it is his “immortal part” that longs for her’ (W-II, 559). 
A treatise on devotional love in the Hindu tradition called Narada 
Bhakti Sutra similarly argues that love is basically a longing for 
immortality; it is a longing to transcend the tedium of usual worldly 
life of self-interest and material pursuits to peep into the immortal 
aspect of our existence where happiness of happiness given to another 
becomes more important than personal gratification. Schopenhauer 
expresses the same thought as follows. ‘Now this is the will-to-live, 
and hence precisely that which has so pressing and urgent a desire for 
life and continuance. Accordingly, this remains immune from, and 
unaffected by death’ (W-II, 560).

86
CHAPTER SEVEN
A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
It is well known that Schopenhauer was greatly impressed with 
Eastern philosophies and religions from the very beginning of his 
academic studies. His interest in Eastern thought, especially in the 
Indian thought-systems of Vedanta and Buddhism, deepened with 
the advance of his scholarly career. It is quite obvious even from 
a casual perusal of his works that he was an admirer of Indian phi-
losophy and was greatly influenced by the insights contained in the 
Upanishads and Buddhist texts. While some of the impacts of these 
Eastern philosophies on Schopenhauer’s system and its doctrines are 
explicitly acknowledged by him, many other implicit Eastern influ-
ences and comparable assumptions and outlooks can be detected by 
a serious student. It would not be an exaggeration to say that a rudi-
mentary knowledge of Vedanta and Buddhism is essential for a 
proper understanding of Schopenhauer’s concepts. While the avail-
able secondary works on Schopenhauer’s thought have done a good 
job of tracing the influences of Platonic and Kantian philosophies 
on Schopenhauer’s system, there are hardly any comprehensive 
studies of the third major influence on his thought, namely, the 
Upanishadic and Buddhist systems. Schopenhauer himself identifies 
these three major influences on his thinking in a notation in his intel-
lectual diary, during the writing (1814–1818) of the first volume of 
WWR: ‘By the way, I admit that I do not believe that my doctrine 
could have ever been formulated before the Upanishads, Plato and 
Kant were able to cast their light simultaneously onto a human mind’ 
(MR, XI, 459). In most of the scholarly studies of Schopenhauer’s 
thought, this thinker’s connections to Eastern thought are acknowl-
edged, but only briefly mentioned and inadequately treated. This 
has often led to a gross misunderstanding of some of his important 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
87
concepts such as those of eternal justice, death and the aftermath of 
man’s essential being, the nature of life and its sufferings, etc. These 
misunderstandings on the part of his critics to a great extent are 
rooted in their lack of knowledge of even the basics of Eastern phi-
losophy in general and Vedanta and Buddhism in particular. Many 
of these criticisms are expressions of bafflements with respect to 
Schopenhauer’s seemingly radical and un-Western pronouncements 
on human life, suffering, death, the denial of the will-to-live, ascetic 
and saintly life, salvation, etc.
SCHOPENHAUER’S APPROACH TO EASTERN THOUGHT
But the issue of Schopenhauer’s connections with Eastern thought 
is by no means simple and straight forward. Several issues related to 
his use of the Eastern materials need to be resolved. First, we need 
to appreciate his general attitude towards non-Western schools of 
thought. It seems to me that he was not interested in Indian philoso-
phies in a merely casual way to sample something foreign and exotic. 
He was rather a trans-cultural thinker in the sense that he adopted a 
foreign tradition as his own by sympathizing with its universal mes-
sage and insight. He freely adopted the Vedantic and Buddhist con-
cepts within his own system, thereby showing his conviction that 
the philosophies of the world are one body of knowledge, and the 
compartmentalizations of philosophy as such into Western, Eastern, 
Indian, Chinese, Greek, etc. are artificial at a fundamental level. 
Schopenhauer was an atheistic and secular thinker who wished phi-
losophy to steer clear of the Judeau-Christian dogmas. In this regard 
his was a very different approach from his contemporary, Hegel. On 
the other hand, Schopenhauer believed that philosophy should not 
be closed to the insights into reality and life offered by the major 
noble religions of the world. He had a high regard for the Christian, 
Hindu and Buddhist religious outlooks, whereas he showed a lack of 
sympathy with Judaism, Old Testament Christianity and Islam. He 
found New Testament Christianity quite compatible in its spirit with 
Hinduism and Buddhism, since all of these hold deep-rooted beliefs 
regarding the illusory and painful character of worldliness, in some 
sort of theories of original sin or karma, and uphold the lives of 
moral quest and renunciation as the highest. Schopenhauer believes 
that philosophy and religion have a meeting point insofar as both 
offer guidelines for better living and coping with inevitable sufferings 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
88
of life. But the aspects of religion that shares the ground with philo-
sophy have to be free of superstition, ritualism and dogmatism. This 
ground includes the insights into a simpler and pure living and moral-
ity of the highest order. Philosophy to Schopenhauer is not just a 
pursuit of truth but also a guide to a higher life of wisdom and com-
passion. It is also an application of wisdom to the problems of avoid-
ing trivial pursuits or vulgar activities to overcome boredom and of 
managing the foolish, the envious and the ill-intentioned people in 
one’s life. Schopenhauer’s philosophy and compassion were certainly 
not lacking in worldly wisdom combined with his characteristic pessi-
mism. In fact, he is one of very few philosophers who apply philoso-
phy directly to the problems of day-to-day living in the world and 
suggest pathways to an authentic life.
Next, we must keep in mind the way Schopenhauer’s intellectual 
involvement with Eastern philosophy reflects itself in his works. The 
Indian philosophies of Vedanta and Buddhism were his favourite 
sources for revalidating the truth and universality of his own system. 
He cited extensively from the texts of Indian philosophies and reli-
gions, which were gradually appearing in translation, and from a 
handful of scholarly accounts available in Europe. His interest in 
Indian philosophy was sparked by his attendance of the lectures by 
the famous Buddhist F. Majer (1813) in his university days. By the 
time he published the first edition of WWR (1819), Schopenhauer 
was quite familiar with Indian philosophies, as evident in the several 
citations of Eastern sources that appeared in this work. Two sub-
sequent enlarged editions of WWR (1844, 1859) have even more 
references to Vedanta and Buddhism. He continues to explore and 
creatively employ Indian philosophical terminology in his later 
works, particularly in On the Will in Nature (1854) and Parerga and 
Paralipomena (1851). Schopenhauer pays a supreme homage to his 
love for Upanishadic thought in Parerga and Paralipomena, by way of 
praising Anquetil Duperron’s Latin translation of a Persian version 
of the Upanishads, entitled Oupnek’hat (1802), which Schopenhauer 
kept by his bedside for many years. He remarks regarding the 
Oupnek’hat: ‘with the exception of the original text it is the most prof-
itable and sublime reading that is possible in the world; it has been 
the consolation of my life and will be that of my death’ (PP-II, 397)
For serious scholars who wish to examine Schopenhauer’s involve-
ment with Eastern thought, the following basic issues need to be 
investigated. First, did Schopenhauer know the fundamentals of 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
89
Vedanta and Buddhism well enough prior to the publication of 
WWR, in order for the scholars to claim that the conception of this 
work is heavily influenced by Indian thought? Perhaps this claim is 
too extreme since Schopenhauer himself denies comprehensive 
knowledge of Indian thought-systems, prior to 1819, the year in which 
WWR was published. He, however, acknowledges being surprised 
with the ‘harmony’ of his thought with Buddhism subsequent to the 
publication of his chief work. This subsequently discovered harmony 
of his thought with classical Indian systems also convinced him 
of the truth value of his own work. Second, we must ask whether 
Schopenhauer’s interpretation of Vedantic and Buddhist texts was 
fair as well as adequate even for his day and age. Can we say that he 
misused Indian concepts to subserve his own system? Can we claim 
that his interpretation of Vedanta and Buddhism was unjustifiably 
pessimistic to suit his own outlook and to seek revalidations of his 
own assumptions? These questions have often troubled those scholars 
who do not find Vedanta and Buddhism as fundamentally pessimistic.
SOME MISUNDERSTANDINGS OF SCHOPENHAUER’S 
CONCEPTS RELATED TO EASTERN THOUGHT
Some of the fundamental concepts of Schopenhauer’s system remain 
puzzling for the interpreters of his philosophy. In the secondary 
literature one finds frequent bafflements and scathing criticisms of 
his notions of the nature of the human world, the inevitable suffer-
ings of human life, the undesirable status of existence, the concepts 
of eternal justice, original sin, asceticism and the denial of the will, 
etc. To a large extent these hasty rejections and critiques of some of 
Schopenhauer’s basic concepts are rooted in a lack of a thorough 
assessment of his universal outlook, his original and somewhat non-
Western ways of thinking. Those misunderstandings of his concepts 
have happened due to the reluctance of many of his critics to accept 
his system on the whole and due to their selective reading of his work. 
But most of all, many of Schopenhauer’s concepts are grossly mis-
understood, trivialized and rejected due to a lack of appreciation and 
under-estimation of his Eastern sources. A knowledge of the basics of 
Indian philosophy may not be essential reading for all students of West-
ern philosophy, but it is so for a serious interpreter of Schopenhauer’s 
thought. Unfortunately, many established Schopenhauer scholars are 
innocent of Eastern thought and choose to remain, for the most part, 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
90
silent on the Eastern systems which were deeply and consistently 
admired, studied and commented upon by this thinker. Although these 
scholars have done well in pointing out Schopenhauer’s connections 
with the Platonic and Kantian systems, they are either silent or too 
brief about Schopenhauer’s Eastern sources and the impact of East-
ern thought on his way of thinking. A comparison of Schopenhauer’s 
basic concepts concerning existence and the world with those of 
Vedanta and Buddhism, can help to resolve some of the superficial 
problems and inconsistencies that trouble some interpreters of this 
thinker’s work.
One of the most puzzling things about Schopenhauer for many of 
his interpreters schooled in Western philosophy is his sharp disdain 
of the world and existence as such. His rejection of individualism, 
an all-important Western value, as well as his obsession with suffer-
ing and downplaying of happiness makes many of his readers won-
der whether this thinker is an extremist. Thus many scholars of 
Schopenhauer’s work have called him an extreme pessimist and have 
charged him with absurdity, perversity and hypocrisy. Perhaps no 
other philosopher’s life has been so consistently scrutinized to find 
faults and character flaws as that of Schopenhauer. However, it is 
quite fair to call him a pessimistic thinker. He clearly rejects optimis-
tic presuppositions such as Leibniz’s notion of this world being the 
best of all possible worlds, and habitually downplays satisfactions 
and glories of human existence. However, the current secondary lit-
erature on Schopenhauer, for the most part, goes too far in turning 
his pessimism into perversity and eccentricity. His biographers have 
left no stone unturned in caricaturizing his life-style of a morbid 
recluse, misanthrope and misogynist and seem to condemn him for 
not living up to the standards of a purely ascetic life as upheld within 
his own philosophy.
Among the various concepts of Schopenhauer that are misunder-
stood in the secondary literature, the ones that stand out are those of 
the world, existence, asceticism and denial, eternal justice, salvation, 
and individual existence and its moral possibilities. Schopenhauer’s 
statements such as the following have caused much bewilderment: 
‘Every individuality is really a special error, a false step, something 
that it would be better should not be, in fact, something from which 
it is the real purpose of life to bring us back’ (W-II, 492). This is the 
kind of pronouncement that really puzzles many of Schopenhauer’s 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
91
interpreters, and makes them see superficial problems and inconsis-
tencies in his thought. For example Michael Fox writes:
The doctrine of palingenesis as permulgated by Schopenhauer is 
indeed difficult to comprehend, and there is more than one lacuna 
in his account . . . After all, Schopenhauer makes the perverse 
claim that for mankind it would have been better not to have come 
into being than to exist; life is merely a disturbing interruption 
of the blissful non-existence. Schopenhauer’s doctrine of self-
renunciation must be examined independently of his entirely per-
verse and absurd position . . . that man is guilty and inexpugnably 
sinful, not because of his deeds but merely because he exists.1
In a similar unsympathetic reaction to Schopenhauer’s seemingly 
pessimistic but philosophically profound statement ‘we are at bottom 
something that ought not to be’ (W-II, 507), David Cartwright 
expresses his displeasure as follows.
We suffer and die because we deserve it. The world is perfectly 
retributive. We deserve what we receive because we are guilty. We 
are guilty because we exist. Schopenhauer’s logic is now as clear as 
it is unconvincing . . . If we explore these claims they seem highly 
implausible.2
The above-mentioned statements of Schopenhauer have received 
somewhat exaggerated and distorted interpretations by Fox and 
Cartwright not to mention their frequent use of the negative terms 
like ‘perverse’, ‘absurd’, ‘lacuna’, ‘unconvincing logic’, ‘implausible’, 
etc. In such statements concerning the nature of the world, of course, 
Schopenhauer is being very pessimistic. But at the same time he is 
interpreting classical Vedic and Buddhist beliefs that being born into 
and thoughtlessly clinging to samsara (world or excessive worldli-
ness) is not desirable and hence no event for celebration. This ancient 
wisdom warns of the dangers of a thoughtless submerging of oneself 
into excessive and obsessive worldliness. This wisdom also brings 
the same message through the myth of reincarnation and the law of 
karma, and especially in Buddhism, in the law of dependent origina-
tion. Schopenhauer gave his seal of approval to this Eastern wisdom 
for he found these critiques of excessive worldliness quite compatible 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
92
with his own descriptions of the human subservience to the will-
to-live. He also finds the laws of karma and dependent origination 
quite logical and in harmony with the thrust of his own metaphysical 
system. Although he read all this in his pessimistic way, he found 
a revalidation of his ideas in these classical sources. This is not to 
say that Schopenhauer borrowed the fundamentals of his own sys-
tem, fully promulgated in the first edition of WWR, from Eastern 
philosophy. As he himself mentions, he was pleased to discover the 
parity of his thought with Eastern systems only subsequently. It was 
this discovery that made him delve more and more into Vedanta and 
Buddhism for the rest of his life. Thus, a comparative analysis of 
Schopenhauer’s works with Indian philosophies is not only impor-
tant but vital for a fuller appreciation of his way of thinking. The 
absence of such analysis has made him look not only more pessimis-
tic than he is but also to the eyes of some scholars, ‘perverse, absurd 
and illogical’. It has also led some of his biographers to exaggerate 
his oddities, his gloominess and his offbeat conduct. For instance 
Bryan Magee writes in the biographical note appended to his The 
Philosophy of Schopenhauer:
In the light of the present day knowledge there can be little doubt 
that Schopenhauer’s despairing view of the world, above all his 
conviction of the terribleness of existence as such, were in some 
degree neurotic manifestations which had roots in his relationship 
with his mother . . . If actions speak louder than words, his life 
as in fact he lives it . . . tells us of a man in whom protean pleasures 
are being experienced side by side with mountainous frustration, 
misanthropy and desolate miseries of neurosis.3
While it is true that Schopenhauer did not have good relations with 
his mother and was not the one to suffer the company of philistines, 
it is really an extreme judgement to call him a neurotic. There is 
evidence that he tried to live according to his philosophy as well as 
according to his preferences. He chose to live alone, remained unmar-
ried like many other Western philosophers, and devoted himself con-
tinuously to his work. He was neither a saint nor claimed to be one. 
His philosophy upholds the denial of the will and asceticism. In his 
own way he was an ascetic but not a perfect one. As he himself said, a 
maker of a handsome sculpture does not have to be handsome himself. 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
93
There is no evidence that he enjoyed ‘protean pleasures’ as alleged by 
Magee. Perhaps Magee is referring to his large appetite and orders of 
extra sauces during his lunches at the Englischer Hof, mentioned by 
several biographers. It is common enough for older persons living 
by themselves to have large appetites. But enough of these cross-
references to Schopenhauer’s life. Let us return to the philosophical 
work of the Sage of Frankfurt.
In Buddhism, the bliss of nirvana (salvation) is contrasted with 
the unsatisfactoriness or dukkha (suffering) of samsara (world). The 
notion of nirvana as a release from the cycle of rebirth is a mythologi-
cal version of the philosophical insight that samsara (or frivolous 
clinging to the will-to-live) ought not be valued. A life of dharma 
(moral law) must overcome excessive love of the world. According to 
Vedanta, individuality or ego (aham) and self-love (mamta or mine-
ness) are the traps for the worldly individual that take him or her 
further away from the real self (atman). Schopenhauer’s statement 
that at bottom ‘every individuality is a false step, something that it 
would be better not be’ makes sense in comparison to the Vedantic 
insight that self-love prevents real knowledge of the self and the Bud-
dhist teaching that in fact there is no self or ego; it is all a chimera. 
‘Something that it would be better not be’ indicates that there are no 
grounds to value existence absolutely. Coming into being, mere living 
and love of living is not what is valuable or a cause for celebration. 
It is ego-less living and being ready to die that depicts a higher life. 
Schopenhauer’s enigmatic pronouncements produce a suffusion of 
the Western philosophy of death elucidated by Socrates, Plato, Plotinus 
and other classical Greek and Roman thinkers with Indian thought. 
In Indian thought the disdain of samsara, aham (ego) and maya 
(illusory worldliness) are expressed philosophically as well as in the 
religious myths of reincarnation, rebirth, karma and nirvana. Thus, 
Schopenhauer shows his acumen as a universal thinker. Consistent 
with these Eastern philosophies is Schopenhauer’s teaching that the 
real purpose of human life is to bring ourselves back from the indi-
viduality-based, narrow minded existence of the seemingly rational 
pursuits of the irrational and blind will-to-live. The will-to-live 
deludes us by making our so-called rational mind a partner in the 
crimes of the heart.
Many scholars including those from India are critical of 
Schopenhauer’s interpretations of Vedanta and Buddhism and his 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
94
use and abuse of Eastern concepts within his own system. It is clear 
that he was a pioneer of trans-cultural philosophy, and his admira-
tion for Eastern thought was remarkable for his day and age. His 
universal outlook and his treatment of the world’s philosophies as a 
single body of knowledge was something that places him far ahead 
of his times. However, despite his rigorous study of the materials of 
Eastern thought available in his time, he may have interpreted 
Vedanta and Buddhism within the range of his own presuppositions 
and might not have done justice to some of the other relevant doc-
trines and concepts of these systems. One of the major critiques of 
Schopenhauer’s interpretation of Eastern thought is regarding the 
issue of pessimism. It would be unfair to regard either Vedanta or 
Buddhism pessimistic on the whole and Schopenhauer’s attempts to 
seek the revalidation of his own system in classical Eastern thought 
may have conveyed that negative impression. Just because these East-
ern philosophies are other-worldly in their outlook does not mean 
that they are pessimistic about this world of here and now.
It is important to keep in mind the history of Schopenhauer’s 
involvement with Eastern thought, even though he claims that the 
first publication of WWR in 1819 was hardly affected by his studies 
of Indian sources. However, his Manuscript Remains that contain his 
intellectual diary indicate that he had started to read Eastern texts as 
early as 1813. After the appearance of WWR, Schopenhauer was 
surprised to find the affinity of his metaphysical system with Indian 
philosophy. It was at this point that he began serious studies of the 
translations and commentaries of Indian texts, although unlike some 
other Indologists of the day he did not learn the Sanskrit language 
systematically. The study of Vedanta and Buddhism, his admired 
systems of thought, had become a life long scholarly and personal 
involvement for him. The remainder of his personal library available 
in the Schopenhauer Archives in Frankfurt contains numerous 
works on Indian philosophy, including his personal copy of Anquetil 
Duperron’s Latin translation of the Upanishads, a book he adored 
more than any other. The evidence of his Eastern studies appeared in 
the form of some additional references to Vedanta and Buddhism 
in the subsequent editions of WWR and numerous citations and 
comments regarding Indian philosophies in his later works, most 
notably in the Will in Nature and Parerga and Paralipomena. All in 
all, Schopenhauer made a substantive contribution to the popular-
ization and scholarly recognition of Eastern thought in the West.

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
95
SCHOPENHAUER AND VEDANTA
The term Vedanta literally means ‘the end of the Veda’. The Vedas 
are the basic scriptures of the Hindus believed to be the oldest books 
of the world, some parts as old as 5,000 years, containing in them 
the reservoirs of Indian civilization, orthodox religion, philosophy 
and culture. The Upanishads are the texts containing philosophical 
dialogues appended to the Vedas in later centuries. There are four 
Vedas and more than a hundred Upanishads but only 13 of them are 
regarded as classical, primarily because these are the oldest. The 
eighth-century Hindu philosopher Sankara wrote commentaries on 
13 Upanishads and believed that these contained the essence of Vedic 
insight. Thus Vedanta is supposed to be the end of the Vedas in the 
sense of the Vedic knowledge culminating in the Upanishads, and 
also the end in the sense of the aim or the essence of the Vedas. 
Vedanta is a term applied to the central philosophy associated with 
Hinduism, but it is also the name of one of the six classical philo-
sophical systems of Hindu thought. The advaita (non-dualistic) 
Vedanta school, of which Sankara was the chief exponent, is one of 
the sub-systems of the Vedanta system of Hindu philosophy. In sum, 
Vedanta is a term used for the central and most recognized philo-
sophy of Hindu thought, in itself, offering the essence of the Vedic 
world-view.
There are three recognized classical texts of Vedanta or Hindu 
thought in general, namely, the Vedas, the Upanishads and the 
Bhagvadgita. Bhagvadgita or ‘The Song of the Blessed One’, which 
itself is a chapter from the Hindu Epic, Mahabharata, was elevated 
to the rank of Sruti (revealed knowledge) along with Vedas and 
Upanishads by all classical exponents of Hindu thought, including 
Sankara. Whereas the contents of the Vedas and Upanishads are 
quite unsystematic and full of ambiguities, the Bhagvadgita, in con-
trast, is a lucid and succinct expression of the Hindu world-view, a 
world classic of religion and philosophy. In addition, there is a body 
of classical commentarial literature including that of Badryana and 
Sankara that interpreted the Sruti texts into holistic world-views. 
Schopenhauer was very fond of the Upanishads and the Bhagvadgita 
and quoted from them in his writings consistently. He also read most 
of the translations and commentaries on Indian thought available in 
Europe in his times. It is obvious from his writings that Schopenhauer 
greatly admired the Vedanta school of philosophy. However, his 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
96
perceptive and creative expositions of Vedanta are not always justified 
and comprehensive enough. His own validations of atheism, extreme 
asceticism and pessimism are not in accord with the spirit of Vedanta. 
His concept of the will-to-live, despite its all-pervasive character, is 
not comparable to that of Brahman, which as the ground of the world 
is described as sat-chitta-ananda (Being-consciousness-bliss) by the 
Hindu philosopher Sankara. Vedantic thought which became more 
theistic with the advent of the Bhagvadgita is opposed to atheism and 
pessimism. In book 4 of the WWR, Schopenhauer cites the examples 
of Hindu sadhus, yogis and munis (monks), along with the Christian 
saints and mystics as the practitioners of the denial of the will-to-
live. Although such ascetics and holy men are common in the Hindu 
tradition, extreme asceticism as such is not recommended by its 
scriptures. The pursuit of a higher moral life (dharma) is not described 
as a matter of affirmation and denial of the world. In the Bhagvadgita, 
a fusion or union (yoga) of action (karma), devotion (bhakti) and 
knowledge (jnana) is described as vital for an authentic life. Thus 
action has to be devoted and selfless and designed in the light of the 
knowledge of Brahman, having all these three ingredients at the same 
time. Bhakti is offered as an alternative to asceticism, a method of 
voluntary love rather than a deliberate stifling of one’s desires. Thus 
Schopenhauer has a good reason to admire Hindu saints, sadhus and 
yogis, but he seems to oversimplify things by his reading of Hindu 
doctrines as a combination of asceticism and pessimism.
The concept of will-to-live is often compared with the Vedantic 
concept of maya (illusion, illusory worldliness). Schopenhauer him-
self considered maya or veil of maya as equivalent to his notion 
of principium individuationis as akin to the will-to-live. All in all, 
Schopenhauer found Vedanta and Buddhism quite conducive to his 
own approach to reality. While he built his system around the all-
pervasive, blind and ultimately meaningless will-to-live, he offered 
an original critique of the European tradition of rational, represen-
tational and calculative thinking as well as a critique of the basic 
Judeo-Christian presuppositions such as the personal god, man as 
the unique entity made in the image of god and human being as the 
measure of all things. He also opposed the historical approach in 
philosophy. Thus he did not just have a personal contempt for Hegel 
but opposed all aspects of Hegelianism as the embodiment of all the 
above-mentioned presuppositions. Through the discovery of the will-
to-live he sought to correct the firmly embedded Western notions of 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
97
a personal god, the supremacy of the rational and the dismissal of the 
instinct. While Indian concepts did cast a spell on Schopenhauer’s 
thinking, he did not just borrow them to design his notion of the will. 
He just found these concepts surprisingly akin to his already deve-
loped metaphysical system, and in a way able to elucidate the inner 
nature of the will. He was also able to validate the truth of his own 
ideas by finding their parallel in the ancient world-views of the Indian 
civilization.
SCHOPENHAUER AND BUDDHISM
We may surmise that Schopenhauer was impressed with the notion 
of dukkha, the literal meaning of which is suffering or pain. In the 
very first sermon that the Buddha is supposed to have delivered soon 
after the attainment of enlightenment (bodhi), the term dukkha is 
mentioned several times. This remarkable statement on the nature of 
human existence in words that produce for many the echo of truth:
Now this, O monks, is the noble truth of dukkha; the birth is 
dukkha, old age is dukkha, sickness is dukkha, death is dukkha; 
sorrow, lamentation, dejection and despair are dukkha. Contact 
with unpleasant things is dukkha; not getting what one wishes is 
dukkha. In short, five clusters (skandhas) of grasping are dukkha.4
It is easy to imagine the impact of this unalloyed statement of human 
reality on Schopenhauer. Taken in the literal sense all-pervasiveness 
of dukkha or pain creates the impression that the Buddha has painted 
a dark picture of life or, a rather pessimistic characterization of human 
sojourn on this earth. This selective reading of only the first part of 
the four noble truths may lead to the conclusion that Buddhism 
emphasizes a pessimistic account of reality. But when we read the 
noble truths in their entirety, that is, all four of them, we notice that 
whereas a malady is identified and a bitter truth is unveiled, its cause 
and its remedy are also offered. Furthermore, if we re-read the first 
noble truth, keeping in mind what exactly it says and what it does not 
say, we are led to a more moderate interpretation of the text. What is 
said is that there are inevitable occasions of dukkha in any life, such 
as old age and death, some dejections and despairs, having to deal 
with unpleasant things and non-fulfilment of many a wish. What 
the first truth does not say is that the entire life is dukkha, or life is 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
98
nothing but dukkha. It was easy for the Buddha to say: listen O, 
monks, life (jivan) is dukkha. But instead he chose to specify some 
unavoidable occasions of dukkha, proposing that one must be wise 
enough to recognize them and strong enough to cope with them. 
Some sort of pre-preparation and an appropriate moral programme 
is needed to recognize, accept and properly respond to dukkha that is 
around the corner. Thus, the Buddha’s account of life points towards 
some specifics; it is not a general statement.
The next three truths are full of optimism of a spiritual kind. The 
second noble truth identifies the cause of all dukkha, and the third, 
expresses the faith that dukkha can be eliminated ‘without a remain-
der’, whereas the fourth and final truth outline the path that leads to 
the removal of dukkha. But before we examine these later portions of 
the Buddha’s first sermon, we must explain what the Buddha means 
by his opening statement ‘the birth (janma) is dukkha.’ Obviously, 
Schopenhauer was overwhelmed with this statement for it serves as a 
foundational stone of his pessimistic view of the world. By being 
born, one is already doomed. It is hard to find a spark of optimism 
in this pronouncement on human life. But let us pause. There is more 
here than meets the eye. While the Buddha offers an original world-
view distinct from that of Vedanta, he refrains from being too original. 
He had to take into account the age-old beliefs of the people he was 
addressing. Thus he retains the law of karma and the myth of rein-
carnation which was already existed in orthodox Hinduism. It is also 
quite fair to assume that he found the law of karma and the possibil-
ity of ‘rebirth’, a modified reincarnation, quite logical and consistent 
with his own theory of dependent co-origination of all things. Thus, 
he declares to the monks ‘the birth is dukkha,’ that is, being born in 
the world (samsara) as such is no cause for celebration. Being caught 
up in cycle of rebirth and inevitable occasions of dukkha is far less 
preferable to being free and being in nirvana. The downplaying of 
samsara, and being free from the trappings of worldly projects, crav-
ings, indulgences and from the false promises of the world is the pre-
requisite of wisdom. Thus a disease should not be masked with the 
false claims of health. Being born cannot be called a happy occur-
rence, because to say so would mean that the world, that is, the 
samsara or the world with the love of worldliness, cannot be called 
preferable to moral freedom (life of dharma) and nirvana. Life itself 
or living in any which way cannot be called preferable to a higher 
moral life. Therefore the Buddha begins the discourse by realistically 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
99
acknowledging the fact that being born is already a challenge not to 
be lost in the singing of the glories of life at the outset. Schopenhauer 
gladly embraces the literal meaning of the pronouncement of the 
Buddha in the sense that life is doomed at the outset. He also likes 
the Buddhist version of reincarnation, that is, rebirth unrelated to 
any notion of the transmigration of the soul and calls it palingenesis. 
While he finds the Hindu reincarnation based on the theory of the 
permanence of the soul, which he calls metampsychosis, interesting 
and logical, he prefers the Buddhist palingenesis, since it is closer to 
his own version of the will perpetuating itself through the species, 
and the individuality facing total annihilation in death.
Thus it would be simplistic to say that the four noble truths which 
enunciate the essentials of Buddhism, offer a pessimistic account of 
reality and of human life. However, Schopenhauer fails to highlight 
the hopeful and morally uplifting tenor of these truths in the way he 
describes them:
In [Buddhism] all improvement, conversion and salvation to be 
hoped from this world of suffering, from this samsara proceed 
from the knowledge of the four fundamental truths: (1) dolor (suf-
fering) (2) doloris ortus (origin of suffering) (3) dolaris interitus 
(cessation of suffering) (4) octoparita via ad doloris sedationem 
(the eightfold path to the calming of suffering). [W-II, 623]
Schopenhauer reduces the entire detail of the first noble truth to one 
word, namely, dolor or suffering, and interprets samsara as the world 
of suffering. He does acknowledge in his philosophy that human life 
is the only form of life in which the will has the possibility to deny 
itself. He views this as possibility to attain real conversion and salva-
tion from this world of suffering, as the only hopeful sign in the four 
truths. The word dukkha is taken in the literal sense of ‘suffering’ by 
him, and its larger meaning of unsatisfactoriness of existence or the 
challenging nature of life is not explored by him.
In the second noble truth, trishna (a thirst, craving) is identified 
as the cause of dukkha; ‘Now, this, O monks is the noble truth of the 
cause of dukkha; that craving (trishna) which leads to rebirth, com-
bined with pleasure and lust, finding pleasure here and there, namely, 
the craving for passion, the craving for existence, the craving for non-
existence.’ It is also implied that trishna that leads to rebirth com-
bines mythos and logos. This craving is usually a craving for passions 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
100
(of the world) and a craving for the ‘continuation of existence’. At 
times, it becomes a craving for religious salvation, or nirvana, which 
is equally doomed because the pursuit of nirvana should not be a 
craving, but must begin with a giving up of the self. This is the mes-
sage in the following stanza of the Visuddhi-magga scripture: ‘Nirvana 
is but not the man who seeks it, the path exists but not the traveller on 
it.’5 That is, giving up of the self and all its cravings is the prerequisite 
for walking on the road to nirvana. The description of trishna in the 
second noble truth is so similar to Schopenhauer’s account of the 
will-to-live, which seeks pleasure here and there. The word will-to-
live is called a ‘pleonasm’ by Schopenhauer; it is primarily a will for 
continued living, a ‘craving for existence’ as the second noble truth 
mentions. It is easy to see why Schopenhauer will find a revalidation 
of his concept of the will-to-live in Buddhist scriptures. However, he 
fails to get the message regarding the craving for non-existence in the 
second truth. For his notion of the denial of the will-to-live resem-
bles the craving for non-existence. The Buddha has forewarned that 
mitigation of the cravings, must not become yet another craving and 
take the form of extreme asceticism and/or a denial of the genuine 
needs of the body. Schopenhauer’s reduction of the living of an ideal 
life to a practice of denials may be useful as a guideline but is both 
artificial and extreme as a way of life.
The third noble truth is the most hopeful and optimistic statement 
regarding the nature of things:
Now this O monks, is the noble truth of the cessation of dukkha; 
the cessation without a remainder of that craving, abandonment, 
forsaking, release, non-attachment.6
This declaration assures us that craving ‘without a remainder’ is a 
very much achievable, uncommon but possible prospect for a human 
life. To achieve detachment and a release from cravings is not a 
fantastic undertaking but quite realistic for those who resolve to 
abandon and forsake the bondage to samsara. For Schopenhauer, 
abandonment and forsaking of the machinations of the will or 
subservience of the will happens alongside the arising of the self-
knowledge of the will. Such self-analysis and self-criticism of the will 
can happen only in human existence for which saying ‘nay’ to the 
will’s passions is a realistic possibility. Schopenhauer discusses the 
exemplary lives of ascetics, saints, mystics, sadhus, munis (silent saints) 

A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
101
from the Christian, Hindu and Buddhist tradition in book IV of the 
WWR. While he dismisses the religious dogmas of these pious indi-
viduals as superstition, he studies their life-styles as examples of the 
voluntary practice of the denial of the will-to-live. Once again the 
issue of such detachment from the material world is not discussed as 
part and parcel of a multi-pronged programme of a spiritual life, or 
of a life of dharma with practice of an all-encompassing thoughtful 
life as is done in Buddhism.
The fourth noble truths offer such a comprehensive moral pro-
gramme replete with the practice of compassion and wisdom in all 
departments of human life.
This, O monks, the noble truth of the way that leads to the cessa-
tion of dukkha; this is the noble eightfold path, namely, right 
views, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, 
right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.7
This truth brings home the insight that higher life of freedom and 
nirvana cannot be achieved by doing a single thing. There is no magic 
formula. By practicing a moderate and well-balanced conduct in all 
aspects of living in one’s views, intentions, speech, actions, livelihood, 
spiritual efforts, knowledge and meditation, the march towards 
nirvana begins. The word translated as ‘right’ in fact is samma which 
means appropriate, well-balanced and moderate. Schopenhauer seems 
to miss this element of moderation and balance. He hardly paid any 
attention to the Buddha’s prologue to the four noble truths:
These two extremes, O monks, are not to be practiced by one 
who has forsaken samsara. What are the two? That conjoined with 
passion . . . and that conjoined with self torture. Avoiding these 
two extremes the Tathagata (Thus-arrived one; the Buddha) has 
gained the knowledge of the middle way.8
Thus according to the Buddha, the thoughtless and vulgar pursuits 
of passion in the samsara driven life, as well as self-torture and need-
less asceticism are to be avoided. The middle-way in thought and in 
living is the way to go. Thus Schopenhauer’s pessimism and his ado-
ration of asceticism are not in accord with the middle-way recom-
mended by Buddhism.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
102
EPILOGUE
All in all, Schopenhauer’s achievement should not be measured by 
the correctness or incorrectness of his interpretations of Vedanta 
and Buddhism. It is to be assessed by the substantive contribution 
he made to the introduction of Eastern thought in the West. The 
attitude of openness towards philosophies of other cultures, and the 
treatment of world philosophy as one body of knowledge, is nothing 
short of devising a new method of philosophizing. His practical 
example of the use of concepts from different traditions within the 
elucidation of his own system indicates that in his intellectual hori-
zons, he was able to rise above the boundaries of East and West and 
many rigid assumptions of his own tradition.

103
CHAPTER EIGHT
ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
It is quite common to divide philosophy into the theoretical and the 
practical or pure and applied. To do such a thing would be both naïve 
and artificial according to Schopenhauer. He maintains that all phi-
losophy is always theoretical; it must always have a contemplative 
attitude and must focus on inquiring rather than prescribing. In other 
words philosophy does not just define what is good but also explains 
why the good is good. While Schopenhauer agrees with the previous 
Western thinkers including Kant that ethical action and the nature 
of virtue are deeply philosophical issues, he takes the field of ethics a 
step further. Without letting ethics be a prescriptive knowledge, he 
includes in it the issues of the desirability or undesirability of exist-
ence itself, of the acceptance and rejection of worldly life, of ultimate 
freedom and salvation. ‘For here, where it is a question of the worth 
or worthlessness of existence, of salvation and damnation, not the 
dead concepts of philosophy decided the matter, but the innermost 
nature of man himself’ (W-I, 271).
Ethics is a matter of living a life of compassion by gaining a con-
viction based on an inquiry into the ‘innermost nature of man’ rather 
than searching for rational imperatives and maxims applicable to one 
and all, as conceived by Kant. It is the inquiry into the fundamental 
status of man and his or her will that reveals to us that empathy 
rather than rationality is the pathway to true virtue. Virtue must deal 
with will directly rather than its subordinate functionary, the intellect. 
Moral systems of philosophy are there to explain rather than moral-
ize or train the deviants: ‘Virtue is as little taught as is genius . . . We 
should therefore be just as foolish to expect our moral systems and 
ethics would create virtuous noble and holy men, as that our aesthet-
ics would produce poets, painters and musicians’ (W-I, 271). Virtue is 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
104
always a matter of the heart rather than of the intellect. That is why 
all religions promise reward for the qualities of the heart in the here-
after, and not for the qualities of the intellect, Schopenhauer reminds 
us. It is empathy (Mitleid; literally: suffering-with), not rationality 
that is the soul of ethics. Here Schopenhauer agrees with the Buddha 
that the main thing to be reckoned with in existence is suffering 
(dukkha), and proper response to dukkha is compassion (karuna; 
literally: melting of the heart).
FREEDOM AND NECESSITY
The will, of which man is the ‘most complete phenomenon’, is free 
because it is the thing-in-itself according to Schopenhauer. The phe-
nomenon, however, is always governed by the principle of sufficient 
reason, that is, has necessity based in it due to the presence of conse-
quents and their grounds. All that is object for the subject is from one 
point of view ground or reason, and from another a consequent. But 
the will itself is not subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason. 
Thus it is never consequent of a reason, nor led by any necessity. It is 
absolutely free. Freedom therefore is a negative concept, that is, 
absence or denial of necessity. Whereas man is the most complete 
phenomenon of the will, he is not an ordinary phenomenon like the 
objects of the world. Whereas he partakes of the freedom of the will, 
he also has some necessity, owing to the possession of a distinctive 
character built into him. Man is a case of the union of freedom with 
necessity. ‘Just as everything in nature has its forces and qualities that 
definitely react to a definite impression, and constitute its character, 
so man also has his character, from which motives call forth his 
actions with necessity’ (W-I, 287).
In what sense the freedom inherent in will extends to man in order 
to make him a special phenomenon, that Schopenhauer calls the most 
complete phenomenon of the will. First, man is endowed with such 
a high degree of knowledge that he can fathom the inner nature of 
the world as a representation. That is, man can apprehend ideas that 
can be called the ‘pure mirror of the world’. In man, will can attain 
its full self-consciousness and can have knowledge of its own inner 
nature. Art happens due to the activity of this kind of knowledge 
of the Ideas, as shown in Schopenhauer’s reflections on art and the 
art forms (see Chapter Five). Man has freedom of a fundamental 
kind, which never appears in another phenomenon of nature. Will can 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
105
attain to the freedom of self-denial in man. Will can abolish its own 
self-nature and yet allow the phenomenon to continue in time to 
complete its term in existence. In order words, as a result of the high-
est knowledge of the will’s nature prevailing in himself, man can 
decide to deny or nullify that will, and can possibly live a transformed 
life of the denial of the will. This is never a complete or absolute 
transformation. It has to be earned anew in conduct all the time. But 
such a denial as such, such a freedom from the usual worldliness is a 
distinctive possibility of man, according to Schopenhauer. Heidegger 
offers a similar account of authenticity (Eigentlichkeit) or attaining 
of one’s own-ness in his analytic of Dasein, which is also not meant 
to be an absolute or irreversible transformation. Schopenhauer says 
that in this sense not only the will, but also man can be called free. 
In this sense, man partakes of the freedom inherent in the will and 
detaches himself from the necessity of worldliness, while still being in 
the world.
CHARACTER: INTELLIGIBLE, EMPIRICAL, ACQUIRED
Man is a complete and distinctive phenomenon of the will that is 
free, should not be taken to mean that an individual human being 
is not subject to any necessity. It also does not mean that the force 
of the motives within man is less effective than that of the causes 
within the objective world. Schopenhauer explains that although an 
individual is a phenomenon of a free will, he is, in fact, ‘the already 
determined phenomenon’ of a free will’s free willing. That is, he is 
a by-product of the free will and thus determined in a sense. As he 
enters in the form of all objects, that is, the principle of sufficient 
reason, the unity of that will is split into the plurality of actions. This 
plurality of his actions appears in subordination of the principle of 
sufficient reason in the form of the law of motivation, whereas the 
unity of the free will remains outside time. Thus a human individual 
is and knows himself or herself as a priori free. However, from a 
reflection on one’s experience, one recognizes oneself to a posteriori 
subject to a necessity. One learns that one’s motives are consistent 
with a pattern of behaviour or a distinct character.
Schopenhauer points out that Kant was the first to explain the 
coexistence of a necessity with the freedom of the will in terms of 
the intelligible and empirical characters of man, and this was Kant’s 
outstanding achievement. Schopenhauer borrows these concepts of 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
106
Kant to explain in his own way, how freedom and necessity prevail 
within all human actions, and to explain why each individual seems 
to have a changeless character and a distinct personality, never to be 
duplicated within any other human being.
The intelligible character of every man is to be regarded as an act 
of will outside time, and thus indivisible and unalterable. The phe-
nomenon of this act of will, developed and drawn out in time, 
space and all the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, is the 
‘empirical character’ as it exhibits itself for experience in the man’s 
whole manner of action and course of life. (W-I, 289)
Man was earlier described as the complete phenomenon of the 
will; complete in the sense of being not only determined by the 
will but also participating in the freedom of the will. Schopenhauer 
calls the distinctive intelligible character of an individual an act 
of will which is time-less. Just as in the objective world, there are 
numerous Platonic Ideas which are timeless, on the subjective side 
of reality, there are numerous timeless intelligible characters. Just as 
an Idea manifests itself in many objects, an intelligible character 
manifests itself in many acts of the individual which collectively 
depict his empirical character. While the intelligible character grants 
a distinctive slant to an individual’s actions and interpretations, it is 
never really known, except through the individual’s empirical charac-
ter, visible in the patterns of his behaviour which is geared by the 
principle of sufficient reason, in the forms of space, time and the laws 
of motivation. Our intelligible character gives us the intimations of 
its existence, but is mostly hidden from us. Thus one never knows 
who one is, and one never fully knows the why of one’s own actions. 
According to Schopenhauer, all of an individual’s needs are the rep-
etitious manifestations of his intelligible character. His empirical 
character is an ‘induction’ of the sum of all his actions, judged in an 
a-posteriori fashion. In other words, the intelligible character is the 
not fully known origin and source of the action, the empirical char-
acter is the better known way in which the actions have already 
occurred.
Schopenhauer cautions that people often entertain the ‘delusion’ that 
they find an absolute freedom of the will in their self-consciousness. 
He explains that because the will is fundamentally free, the feeling or 
originality and arbitrariness must appear in self-consciousness along 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
107
with all its acts, even though all these acts are determined. At the 
same time, the individual has the illusion of an empirical freedom of 
his or her will. A feeling of the freedom of the individual acts of 
consciousness arises due to the way the intellect relates to the will. 
Schopenhauer explains that in fact, the intellect always knows the 
decisions of the will a posteriori, that is, after they have happened 
and their empirical outcome has appeared. Whenever a choice is 
encountered by the intellect, it has no idea how the will is going to 
act on it. It is the intelligible character of the person which makes a 
definite and necessary decision from out of several given motives. 
But the intelligible character is not known to the intellect. It knows 
only the empirical character based on the acts of the will after they 
have already happened. At the same time the intellect has the delusion 
that two opposite outcomes were equally possible in a given case, 
having no idea about the already determined decision of the intelligi-
ble character. Regarding the choice to be made, the role of the intel-
lect is confined to ‘a distinct unfolding of the motives’. It has to await 
the real decision like a spectator.
There is another reason that the freedom of the will is both mis-
construed and misunderstood in the history of Western philosophy, 
says Schopenhauer. Traditionally, man’s inner nature has been 
described on the basis of the concept of the soul, which was con-
ceived to be both a knowing and thinking entity and only because of 
its knowing and thinking a willing entity. Thus will was given a sec-
ondary status and the soul was considered primarily a seat of knowl-
edge (nous). Descartes and Spinoza, even called will an act of thought 
and understood it as judgement. This view led to the belief that man 
appears in the world as a moral cipher. But Schopenhauer makes no 
compromises with his firm belief that will is primary and a paramount 
thing in the Being of man. ‘The will is first and original; knowledge 
is merely added to it as an instrument belonging to the phenomenon 
of the will’ (W-I, 292). Man is born with an original intelligible char-
acter. But fundamentally man knows that he is distinct and unlike 
any other person. ‘With those other thinkers, he wills what he knows, 
with me he knows what he wills’ (W-I, 293). Schopenhauer’s concept 
of intelligible character fits very well with his theory of eternal jus-
tice, and in a very subtle way is in accord with the law of karma as it 
appears in Hindu and Buddhist thought. According to this line of 
thinking, man is not born as a moral clean slate. He has brought the 
core of his morality and his destiny with him from elsewhere, which 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
108
will make the slant of his actions seem predetermined, even though 
the predispositions of his soul are truly self-made. The core of our 
self is distinct, original and cohesive but for our actions and for 
our efforts, it is always something yet to be uncovered. The Socratean 
dictum ‘know thyself’ assumes a new meaning in Schopenhauer’s 
moral thought.
These allusions to existence of a fixed intelligible character and its 
mirror image in the empirical character may convey the impression 
that the individual’s own role in shaping his or her destiny is 
minimal, according to Schopenhauer. Of course the human individ-
ual is not merely a passive spectator to the unfolding of his or her 
intelligible character within an empirical character. To explain the 
individual’s creative role in the building of his character that enables 
him to make his mark in life, Schopenhauer refers to yet another 
kind of character, namely, the acquired character. The empirical 
character that an individual encounters appears to have the features 
of being unalterable and also irrational, like a natural tendency. It 
would seem that it is needless and pointless to build one’s own char-
acter or acquire a character in the face of so many unalterable fea-
tures that are identified as part of one’s empirical character. But the 
reality is different. Although one finds oneself acting, thinking and 
choosing the same way, one surely does not understand oneself until 
one has acquired an adequate level of self-knowledge. This self-
knowledge obviously comes through experience and reflection.
In trying to know oneself, to recognize one’s cherished aspirations, 
in looking for one’s vocation, in learning about one’s distinctive abili-
ties that will assure success, a thoughtful person forges ahead in a 
distinct direction. Schopenhauer remarks that ‘our physical path on 
earth is always a line and not a surface.’ In order to possess some-
thing worthy we have abandoned many others that fall on the right 
or the left of the line. A zigzag movement on the surface of life will 
produce a rolling stone.
Mere willing and mere ability to do are not enough by themselves, 
but a man must know what he wills, and know what he can do . . . 
Until he reaches this, he is still without character, in spite of the 
natural consistency of empirical character. (W-I, 304)
It is only our experience that teaches us the consistent character of 
our own inner dispositions. It also teaches us that others also possess 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
109
inflexible characters, which no efforts, no entreaties, no rational argu-
ments can ever alter. We must learn from experience the difference 
between what we would like to do and what we can do. We must 
know which ways of life are unsuited to our will that reveals itself in 
our dispositions. When we have this self-knowledge combined with 
the worldly knowledge of others, we have obtained our acquired char-
acter, which is nothing but ‘the most complete possible knowledge 
of our own individuality’. When we have an acquired character, our 
individuality to us is not just an abstraction or a dogma but is con-
cretely understood in terms of the world and remains the fruit of our 
own experience. Schopenhauer seems to imply that it is acquired 
character alone that prepares us to take a heroic attitude against the 
sufferings of life which are inevitable and which come not in single 
spies but in battalions. It is hard to imagine anyone who will resolve 
to live a life of the denial of the will to live, without having developed 
an acquired character. It is the knowledge of our strong points and 
our weaknesses that enables us to ‘escape in the surest way, as far as 
our individuality allows, the bitterest of all sufferings (and) dissatis-
faction with ourselves’ (W-I, 307).
RIGHT AND WRONG AND PUNISHMENT
Egoism is a natural outcome of the affirmation of the will and a 
matter of course tendency of the human entity. It is only thought or 
knowledge that enables an individual to overcome the egoism inher-
ent in him, according to Schopenhauer. Under the sway of egoism 
human being can very easily commit the wrong. Schopenhauer defines 
wrong and right in terms of his all important notion of the will, or 
more precisely, in terms of the affirmation of the will. The will pro-
duces self-affirmation and love of their own bodies in numerous indi-
viduals who happen to be living beside each other in society. Due 
to egoism inherent in each and every individual, one’s affirmation of 
one’s will can easily cross the boundary of another’s affirmation of 
will. An individual may injure or destroy the other’s body or compel 
the other to subserve his own will. ‘This breaking through the bound-
ary of another’s affirmation of will’ is what is denoted by the word 
wrong (Unrecht), according to Schopenhauer. Being an act of the 
denial of the will of another to promote the affirmation of the will of 
one, the commission of wrong is never an abstract matter but one 
that jolts the feelings of both the sufferer and perpetrator; it often 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
110
causes physical and mental pain. Schopenhauer cites various, typi-
cally wrongful acts like injury, murder, seizure of another’s property, 
violence and lying in terms of his concept of wrong as the conduct 
through which one individual ‘extends the affirmation of will that 
appears in his own body so far that it becomes the denial of the will 
that appears in the bodies of other’ (W-I, 339).
The concept of right (Recht) has its origin in the negation of wrong 
or those instances in which wrong by violence was warded off. The 
warding off of the violence against oneself or denial of the will in 
oneself by another cannot be wrong. Even responding to violence 
with violence could be justified by the rightness of one’s motives. One 
has what Schopenhauer calls a right of compulsion to make the per-
petrator desist from the denial of one’s will. This would also create 
a right to lie and a right to not cooperate with the inflictor of the 
wrong. What Schopenhauer wants to bring home to the reader is that 
right and wrong are pure moral determinations that have validity in 
an impassioned consideration of human conduct. These concepts 
of right and wrong are valid even in the state of nature; these are 
not merely conventional notions as the empirically-minded Hobbes 
seems to think. The doctrine of right is a chapter of morality, has to 
do with doing and not with suffering, for human actions alone are 
manifestations of the will, and its proper subject-matter.
These natural notions of wrong and right are ultimately responsi-
ble for the existence of the law and the state, Schopenhauer explains. 
We may notice that the German word Recht means both right and 
law. To diminish suffering it was thought reasonable that all men 
should renounce ‘pleasure to be obtained from doing wrong’. This 
explains the origin of the state contract or the law. In cases of anar-
chy and despotism, the state did not really exist for which a common 
accord, and people willing to sacrifice their own good to that of the 
society, are required. Schopenhauer maintains that the state exists 
‘on the correct assumption that pure morality, i.e. right conduct from 
moral grounds, is not to be expected. The state, aiming at well-being, 
is by no means directed against egoism, but only against the injurious 
consequences of egoism’ (W-I, 345).
The object of the punishment is ‘the fulfilment of the law as a 
contract’; but the sole aim of the law is ‘to deter from encroachment 
on the rights of others’. Thus punishment as the fulfilment of the law 
aims at the future, and not at the past. This aim distinguishes punishment 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
111
from revenge, for revenge is a reaction to what occurred in the past. 
Retaliation by individuals is not ethically justifiable, nor is evil for evil 
desirable on any other grounds. The state aims to achieve the safety of 
society by forbidding all wrongful actions defined as ‘criminal’ with 
the threat of punishment, which is actually carried out to make it 
serve as a real deterrent. Thus, the object of punishment is always to 
prevent the recurrence of similar criminal acts in the future. To explain 
this Schopenhauer quotes Seneca’s summation of Plato’s theory of 
punishment: ‘No sensible person punishes because a wrong has been 
done, but in order that a wrong may not be done’ (W-I, 349).
ETERNAL JUSTICE
The concept of the will necessarily provides for the existence of an 
eternal justice in the world which unlike the temporary justice meted 
out by the state is not dependent on time, nor wavering and imper-
fect. Schopenhauer maintains that an infallible and in controvertible 
eternal justice is built into the very nature of things which in many 
ways is far superior to the temporal justice of human institutions 
which delivers punishment as a deterrent to secure compliance of the 
law in future. Schopenhauer seems to imply that whenever we men-
tion a higher tribunal of justice over and above man-made justice, we 
are not necessarily referring to the kingdom of God, but the very 
nature of things, the very fact that all existent things are phenomena 
of the same will, must mean that an eternal justice prevails in the 
world. We often remark that ultimately things have a way of ‘setting 
themselves aright’ or ‘in the end truth always prevails’ or ‘those who 
do evil deny themselves the good,’ etc. In the same spirit Gandhi pro-
foundly says that ‘the deniers of God may be many, the deniers of 
truth there are none.’ Whenever we explain these allusions to an 
invisible tribunal built into the nature of things, we are referring to 
the eternal justice which Schopenhauer strongly believes existing as 
part and parcel of the same will that abides in all things.
Schopenhauer’s concept of eternal justice has baffled many schol-
ars and interpreters of his thought who are unable to accept his shift 
from temporal justice, up to which point his thought is crystal clear, 
towards the higher plane of invisible but infallible eternal justice. They 
find his speculation hard to accept especially because Schopenhauer 
sprinkles it with heavy dose of pessimism and a very dark picture 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
112
of the nature of the world and the destiny of man. Nevertheless, 
Schopenhauer’s belief in the eternal justice is perfectly in accord with 
classical Greek thinkers such as Heraclitus, Pythagoras and Plato 
as well as with the law of karma which is an important concept of 
Hindu and Buddhist thought. It is consistent with the concept of 
logos as well as those of dharma and karma. The myths of the rein-
carnation of the souls, prevalent in Hinduism as well as in ancient 
Greek thought, and a subtle modification of it as rebirth based on 
cumulative karma in Buddhism, these are all different way of express-
ing the logical truth that ‘the world itself is the tribunal of the world’ 
(W-I, 352). Schopenhauer quotes Euripides to illustrate that actions 
of men have their immediate reward or punishment, and infallible 
moral repercussions: ‘The whole of heaven would not be great enough 
to contain the sins of men, were Jove to record them all, nor would 
he . . . assign to each his punishment. No! The punishment is already 
here, if only you will see it’ (W-I, 351).
However, what Schopenhauer is referring to is neither a myth nor 
something based on religious dogma. He tries to prove by a philo-
sophical analysis that the omnipresence of the will necessarily entails 
eternal justice. This bond between all existent things assures an ulti-
mate fair play and due compensation for all deeds done by man or 
animal. Of course this eternal justice is not visible like the temporal 
justice delivered by the courts and judges. But it has to be there if 
all phenomena of the will are inter-connected and are objects of the 
same thing-in-itself. Thus we can safely conclude that ‘all that hap-
pens or indeed can happen to the individual, justice is always done 
to it’ (W-I, 351). Accordingly Socrates says with conviction in the 
Apology, ‘nothing bad can happen to a good man.’ Schopenhauer 
remarks in his pessimistic interpretation that when we want to con-
sider man’s moral worth in general, we cannot ignore that his exist-
ence necessarily contains want, suffering, lamentation and certainty 
of death. Were there no original sin to be expiated or a sentence to be 
carried out, the human existence would not be as it is, full of suffer-
ing and doomed to various hazards and death. The blind will-to-live 
in man makes him pay little attention to the facts of existence, but 
prompts him to seek whatever gratifications he can obtain and what-
ever mastery he can exercise over other phenomena of the world. 
Little does he appreciate that thing-in-itself is one and the same, but 
he witnesses only the diverse objects in time and space through the 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
113
principium individuationis; his eyes covered with the veil of maya as 
Hinduism describes the hiddenness of the ultimate unity of all things. 
In his limited knowledge governed by the principle of sufficient 
reason, the human subject ‘sees not the inner nature of things, which 
is one, but its phenomena as separated, detached, unnumerable’ (W-I, 
352). He considers pleasure and pain as two different things, pleasure 
as desirable and pain as avoidable. The human individual differenti-
ates between the murderer and the victim, between the rich and the 
poor. According to Schopenhauer, he runs after pleasures and joys 
of life and does not realize that by his very affirmations of the will, 
he has embraced sufferings and negative outcomes. The better knowl-
edge of the unity of all eludes him when he does not refrain from 
exploiting others and denying and intruding upon their will’s affir-
mation to advance his own will. He does not have the vision to know 
that cumulative suffering of the whole world is his own for he lacks 
empathy. He confines himself to his actual and possible sufferings as 
an individual.
But eternal justice is recognized only by one who can see beyond 
the principle of sufficient reason, to the common origin and com-
mon being of all things, the thing-in-itself, which is unified, free and 
omnipresent. Such a person then ‘sees that the difference between the 
inflictor of suffering and he who must endure it, is only phenomena. 
. . . The former is mistaken in thinking that he does not share the 
torment, the latter in thinking that he does not share the guilt’ 
(W-I, 354). Schopenhauer reminds us that the vivid knowledge of 
the eternal justice will always be out of reach of most people, nor 
will they readily recognize the related virtue of empathy. They can 
easily dismiss this line of thinking because it urges them to take a 
step above the rational and worldly thinking which regards only the 
range of the principle of sufficient reason as the real sphere of things. 
Schopenhauer says that the Upanishadic dictum tat tvam asi (that 
thou art) best describes the reality that all things are bound together 
and emanate from the same unity. Schopenhauer calls it the will, but 
the Vedanta system calls it brahman. Whereas both these notions are 
of a unifying being of all existents, it would be wrong to treat them as 
comparable. Brahman is called ‘ever-existent and blissfully pure con-
sciousness’ whereas will, according to Schopenhauer a blind urge to 
exist, gratify and procreate. Schopenhauer often uses peculiar inter-
pretations of Vedantic and Buddhist concepts to subserve his system.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
114
COMPASSION AS THE SOUL OF ETHICS
We might be led to believe that moralizing that lacks argument, may 
have some impact on the moral conduct of the individual. According 
to Schopenhauer, mere moralizing usually fails to motivate. Even 
what seems to motivate greatly may not have moral worth if it exploits 
egoism. The genuine virtue does not arise due to rational knowledge 
either- or by the extensive use of abstractions and arguments, main-
tains Schopenhauer. Genuine and real virtue is based on an ‘intuitive 
knowledge that recognizes in another’s individuality the same inner 
nature as in one’s own’ (W-I, 368). Genuine moral excellence or virtue 
is a matter of disposition and has to do with compassion.
What is this intuitive knowledge that has a direct impact on virtue 
and why is conceptual knowledge unable to do so? Intuitive knowl-
edge is not the kind that is communicable in words. If it were so, one 
could teach virtue to another. Schopenhauer points out that virtue 
can no more be taught than the systems of aesthetics can teach 
anyone how to be a poet. Just as the concept cannot produce art, it 
cannot produce virtue. Schopenhauer’s insight is valid because we 
know that a professor of ethics is not necessarily a morally upright 
person, and instances of unfairness, racism and flawed hiring practices 
are as rampant in the universities as they are in the general society. By 
asserting that ‘will cannot be taught’ (velle non discitur), Schopenhauer 
points towards the difference between willing and conceptualizing 
which is rooted in the fact that will is free and not bound by concep-
tual knowledge which uses abstract, discursive concepts of reason. 
As explained in the section on the world as representation in WWR, 
the immediate representation of perception is only subsequently 
interpreted by concepts of reason (W-I, 35). Thus neither the abstract 
dogmas nor the abstract reason directly affects virtue, which classi-
cally means ‘moral excellence’ and Schopenhauer here explains as 
‘goodness of disposition’ (W-I, 368). However, abstract reasoning 
does perform a function; it enables the individual who is virtuous 
due to a superior disposition, to comprehend his own moral attitude 
in terms of concepts, thereby putting together an accountability for 
his own faculty of reason. In other words, he attempts to interpret 
and spell out his moral attitude in rational terms for himself, cor-
rectly or incorrectly, he shall never know. For fundamentally disposi-
tion of the will can never be exactly put into words. We can only 
approximately judge the actions that are the outcome of the will.

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
115
Dogmas and religious teachings seem to have an influence on con-
duct, and so do customary ways of a people, and examples set up by 
the leaders and saints. According to Schopenhauer, these influences 
on the outward actions of people occur because most of them do 
not trust their own judgement, that is, they find it convenient to be 
followers of custom and experience of others, being too aware of 
their own weakness and inability to do an original ethical assessment. 
The religious dogmas also have a great deal of self-love or egoism 
built into them and are found to be attractive due to the utter clarity 
of their moral formulas. In cases of religious dogmas assuming a vio-
lent form, Schopenhauer says that one who burns a heretic is no dif-
ferent from a bandit who murders to claim a payment, since these 
crimes of religion and acts of terror are done to earn a place in heaven, 
and rooted in egoistic superiority of one’s own faith (W-I, 369).
It would be bad business if the principle thing in a man’s life, his 
ethical worth that counts for eternity, depended on something 
whose attainment was so very much subject to chance as are dog-
mas, religious teachings, and philosophical arguments. (W-I, 368; 
italics mine)
The true source of morality in one is not something subject to 
time and chance. It is something as timeless and free as the will itself, 
essentially indefinable but inalterably there as part and parcel of 
one’s intelligible character. Not to recognize the moral significance 
of the world of which man’s ethical worth is part and parcel is 
a wrong philosophical approach; doctrines based on materialism 
represent the real perversity of mind. As Schopenhauer remarks in 
Parerga and Paralipomena: ‘That the world has only a physical and 
not a moral significance is a fundamental error . . . the real perversity 
of the mind’ (PP-II, 201). The myths of reincarnation say that it is 
the cumulative karma of many past lives that shapes the current inner 
disposition, or svabhava as it is called in Buddhism, and which is one 
of the five clusters of grasping (skandhas) that constitute a human 
entity.
Although the true source of morality is eternal and not directly 
available to the faculty of reason, the individual can have an intuitive 
knowledge of it through one’s own disposition, and through a recog-
nition that in others individualities abides the same inner nature as 
in one’s own. Schopenhauer transforms the Vedantic concept of 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
116
knowledge (jnana) regarding the vision of the atman (soul) abiding in 
all entities, which is expressed in the Upanishads as tat tvam asi (that 
thou art) in his own terminology as ‘the will in me is the same as the 
will in all things.’ When one realizes that another’s weal and woe is no 
different from one’s own, the pre-existing disposition prompts one 
towards a moral life and a moral conduct. At the summit of the intu-
itive ethical knowledge is the will’s self-realization, or an individual’s 
realization of the pointlessness and inherent suffering contained in 
all of his or her actions, prompted by his or her life’s saga of the vari-
ous affirmations of the will. This realization prompts the individual 
to see through the machinations and traps of the will, to arrive at 
the conviction that one must lead a life of the denial of the will, an 
ascetic life, which Schopenhauer finds reflected in the lives of saints 
and ascetics. Although Schopenhauer does not seem to accept any 
compromises in his view of asceticism, the realization of the traps 
of raging and surging will in oneself, can inspire one to lead a simpler, 
moderate personal life and a life of compassion and loving kindness.
The will can be approximated only in the motives. But motives 
cannot alter the will itself, they can only change the way will mani-
fests itself. By a study of the actions alone we cannot make a moral 
judgement of the other’s conduct. Schopenhauer maintains that 
actions are in themselves empty figures. It is the disposition behind 
the action that gives actions their moral importance. Why does 
Schopenhauer emphasize the disposition rather than an analysis 
of human actions that most other philosophical systems are pre-
occupied with? It is because the dispositions are the basic inclina-
tions of willing, whereas actions are the conceptualized outcomes of 
that willing. The same disposition can produce a variety of actions, 
some quite discordant with each other. The same degree of wicked-
ness and egoism can surface as murder and cannibalism in one 
nation, and as court intrigues, and political manoeuverings, subjuga-
tion of the weak through exploitation and war at home and abroad, 
in another so-called civilized democratic nation. The same disposi-
tion can produce very different external realities. Thus a mere super-
ficial analysis of actions and motives does not arrive at the heart of 
the ethical matter, until it arrives at the disposition to the existence 
or non-existence of compassion, the ground of which is the sameness 
of the will in all, in us and in them.
The intuitive knowledge of the ground of virtue cannot be put into 
words, cannot be reasoned away, but reflects itself in pattern of deeds 

ETHICS AND ETERNAL JUSTICE
117
of a person, in his or her conduct. The person who refrains from 
denying the affirmation of will in others, even where no state or law 
interdicting it is watching over it, is truly just. Schopenhauer says 
that the disposition of justice prompts some individuals like Pascal 
or St Francis of Assisi or some Hindu rajas to embrace voluntary 
poverty; current examples being Gandhi and Mother Teresa. 
Whereas a strong distinction imposes itself on most individuals 
between their own ego and another’s is due to the principium indi-
viduationis that defines separation of phenomena. But for an indi-
vidual with a truly moral disposition this distinction is not absolute. 
The suffering of the other seems to him quite like his own suffering. 
The next step in this empathy is that such an individual denies him-
self his privileges in a bid to strike a balance between the have and the 
have-nots, and his having realized the pointlessness of the unbridled 
affirmation of his own will. Such a moral individual begins to live in 
all living things, and does not cause pain even to the animal. Schopen-
hauer was one of the first Western philosophers to recognize and 
argue for the rights of animals, condemning the cruelty to animals in 
many of his own writings.
The performance of a disinterested deed gives us a strange satis-
faction as we get in touch with our ‘good conscience’. According to 
Schopenhauer, such action without a trace of egoism, verifies that 
within us exists a knowledge of our kinship with everything that lives. 
Through such altruistic action, our heart feels enlarged. In fact the 
inner knowledge of our bond with others, made us feel like doing such 
a deed. Schopenhauer spells out his original approach to ethics which 
is unlike other Western philosophers including Kant. Schopenhauer 
disagrees not only with the rational methods of Kant and his pre-
occupation with the moral laws and oughts, but also with his refer-
ence to human dignity. He pooh-poohs Kant’s notion of ‘the dignity 
of man’, which fails to find a credible ground of morality. The circu-
lar argument of morality resting on dignity, and dignity on morality, 
does not explain the source of morality within man. Furthermore, 
Schopenhauer says in his pessimistic tone: ‘The notion of dignity 
could be applied only ironically to a creature like man, who is sinful 
in will, so limited in intellect . . . so feeble in body’ (PP-II, 202). What 
Schopenhauer implies is that the very being of man, and of every 
other animal contains within it the entire will-to-live. ‘Every indi-
vidual even the most insignificant, every “I” seen from within is all in 
all; seen from without he is nothing’ (W-II, 600). Being connected 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
118
and related to all existents cannot be narrowed down to an assumed 
dignity of man. Although man alone is able to fathom his own will 
and its universality, to give him a privileged status would be anthro-
pocentricism inconsistent with the fact that nature can destroy man 
as easily as it can annihilate an insect. Man’s actual conduct towards 
his fellow beings scarcely gives him a badge of dignity or of morality.
Whereas other thinkers have come up with ‘precepts for virtue and 
laws necessarily to be observed’, Schopenhauer says that he has ‘no 
ought or law to hold before the eternally free will’. What concludes 
his thought on the subject of ethics is as follows: ‘All love (agape, 
caritas) is compassion or sympathy’ (W-I, 374). Schopenhauer 
remarks in his On the Basis of Morality that ancient Greek thinkers, 
including Plato, failed to include ‘loving-kindness’ (agape, caritas) as 
a cardinal virtue. It was first called a virtue, even the greatest virtue 
by Christianity. In word and in deed Christianity extolled the love of 
the neighbour and even called for loving of the enemy. But in Asia ‘a 
thousand years earlier, the boundless love of one’s neighbour has 
been the subject of theory and precept as well as of practice in Veda, 
dharma-sastras . . . as well as the teaching of the Buddha’ (BM, 163). 
Loving-kindness is called karuna (empathy; literally, melting of the 
heart) in Buddhism and repeatedly advocated in the ancient dis-
courses (sutras) of the Buddha.
The influence of Vedanta is unmistakable on Schopenhauer’s theo-
ries of ethics. Regarding the bond that exists owing to the sameness of 
the will in all, he remarks: ‘I do not know how this truth can be more 
worthily expressed than the formula: tat tvam asi (that thou art).’ 
He acknowledges the debt of his moral philosophy to Vedanta in his 
final work Parerga and Paralipomena as follows: ‘The readers of my 
ethics know that with me the foundation of morality rests ultimately 
on the truth that has its expression in the Veda and Vedanta . . . 
tat tvam asi, which is stated in reference to every living thing’ 
(PP-II, 219).

119
CHAPTER NINE
DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
The issue of death is the central problem of Schopenhauer’s 
philosophical system. His metaphysics revolves around the single 
fundamental reality, namely, the will-to-live. Regarding his philo-
sophical enterprise he says that his ‘whole work is the unfolding of a 
single thought’ (W-I, 285). This single thought is obviously regarding 
the will-to-live. The connection between will-to-live and death can-
not be denied. The will recoils from death and yet in the case of the 
human entity, death is always to be reckoned with in the life of the 
mind. Death has both an explicit and implicit impact on man’s way 
of being. One has an explicitly rational recognition as well as a gut 
feeling about one’s mortality whereby one develops an anxious atti-
tude to cope with this knowledge and feeling. Schopenhauer explores 
all these nuances of the presence of death in human life, and thus he 
can be recognized as a philosopher of death (a thanotologist) in the 
Socratean tradition, which regards only contemplators and practi-
tioners of death as true philosophers. It is also to be noticed that the 
denial of the will-to-live has been exposed as an authentic practice 
of death by Schopenhauer, as a mark of superior human wisdom. 
Thus, no other subject is as important and as omnipresent in 
Schopenhauer’s system as death, with the exception of that of will-
to-live which is but a constant evasion of death.
DEATH AND PHILOSOPHY
In his celebrated essay on Death in volume 2 of WWR, Schopenhauer 
begins with the remark that the presence of death in human life is the 
foremost inspiration for the philosophers to philosophize. ‘Death is 
the real inspiring genius or muse of philosophy and for this reason 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
120
Socrates defined philosophy as a “practice of death”. Indeed without 
death there would hardly have been any philosophizing’ (W-II, 463).
If philosophy arises out of a wonder about the nature of things as 
Aristotle says, the meaning and implications of death arouse our 
boundless amazement about the fragile status of human existence. 
Hence, Socrates named death as the foremost theme of philosophy, 
and the acceptance and practice of death as the prerequisites of a 
genuinely philosophical life. Schopenhauer embraces this Socratean 
dictum regarding the fundamental bond between death and philoso-
phy within his own system. His preoccupation with death shows itself 
in his all important notion of existence as will-to-live as well as in his 
portrayal of an ideal human life as a denial of the will-to-live. The 
denial of the will-to-live is very much comparable to what Socrates 
calls the practice of death. Furthermore, the fact that Schopenhauer 
regards death as the muse of his own philosophy is indicated by his 
various explicit discussions of the meaning and implications of death 
in many of his early and later philosophical writings. More impor-
tant is the fact that the issue of death is implicitly present in his major 
concepts.
According to Schopenhauer, although animals as embodiments 
of the will-to-live recoil from the danger to their lives just as humans 
do, they are obviously not aware of their mortal status. The faculty 
of reason constantly informs man of his certain death. Thus, the 
reflecting mind always designs some metaphysical interpretations of 
death in order to cope with the terrible reality of the impending 
death. All religions and philosophical systems provide such meta-
physical resolutions and function as ‘antidotes to the certainty of 
death’, although some religions and philosophies do so better than 
others. Schopenhauer asserts that the doctrines of Hinduism and 
Buddhism regard arising and passing away as superficial and enable 
their believers to look death calmly in the face. This is not the case 
with those faiths which consider man as a creature made out of noth-
ing, namely Judaism, Christianity and Islam (W-II, 463).
Any careful reader of Schopenhauer’s body of work cannot fail 
to notice that in it philosophy and death are shown to be intimately 
connected. While he has successfully shown that the reality of death 
is what inspires and sets into motion the activity called philosophiz-
ing, and no existential thinking is complete without an analysis of 
death, he has also attempted to outline the meaning of death along 
with its existential implications. At the same time, he has not shied 

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
121
away from a comprehensive account of death and its aftermath 
through a creative combination of religious thought and philosophy. 
He has also shown that philosophy is not just an abstract speculation 
about the nature of reality, but it must be relevant to the project of 
living. Thus, he offers an original analysis of life as it is, along with 
examples from everyday life, based, of course, on his own presuppo-
sitions and the ground-concepts of his system. Death, therefore, as 
something embedded in life receives his foremost intellectual atten-
tion. The acceptance, the welcoming and the practice of death in life 
are the outstanding human virtues that he seeks to highlight. He 
regards the outlining of such possibilities of a contemplative life as 
the chief business of philosophy.
DEATH AND AFTER-LIFE
According to Schopenhauer, the common opinion generally vacil-
lates between the view that death is absolute annihilation and that we 
are, ‘so to speak, with skin and hair, immortal’. Both of these notions 
are equally false. Death is usually taken as a great misfortune and as 
a loss, and the mere thought of it arouses dread. It is considered great 
evil because it signifies absolute annihilation. The fear of death and 
the negative judgement regarding it could not have come from knowl-
edge, but its source has to be the will-to-live, says Schopenhauer. For 
knowledge must take into account the evils of life. ‘That death is a 
serious matter could already be inferred from the fact that, as every-
one knows, life is no joke’ (W-II, 465). The reason for our boundless 
attachment to life is obviously the will-to-live. This attachment is 
both irrational and blind and, to the will, life is the highest good. 
Knowledge opposes attachment to life for it offers both a metaphysi-
cal consolation concerning death and discloses life’s worthlessness, 
Schopenhauer asserts in his pessimistic manner. This is why the tri-
umph of knowledge over will is honoured as great and noble in the 
case of the selfless and the brave men who face death courageously. 
Those who receive death with despair and strive to cling to life at all 
costs are deemed as weak and contemptible.
Schopenhauer points out that somehow the issue of our state after 
death is discussed ‘ten thousand times’ more than our state before 
birth. In fact, one is as much of a problem as the other, because there 
is no reason to believe that non-existence after death has to be differ-
ent from non-existence before birth. Schopenhauer is preparing the 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
122
ground for a consideration of the presence of something within us, 
which always was and always will be.
As classical thinkers like Plato and Epicurus have pointed out, it is 
absurd to regard death as evil. Schopenhauer remarks that Epicurus 
was quite right in reminding us that ‘when we are, death is not, and 
when death is, we are not. To have lost what cannot be missed is no 
evil’ (W-II, 468). This again shows that fear of death is not rooted in 
the intellect but in blind will, whose nature is to crave existence above 
everything else.
The death of an individual, that is, of a particular phenomenon of 
the universal force active in numerous similar phenomena, does not 
imply the cessation of that force itself, just as the stopping of the 
spinning wheel does not indicate the death of the spinner. This uni-
versal life principle, active in all things alive is the will-to-live, which 
is the indestructible element. Thus, death cannot be regarded as the 
entire destruction of a human being because the will that propelled it 
lives on, albeit in other shapes and forms. What transpires in nature 
reveals that she is indifferent towards life and death of the individual. 
Nature seems to care much more about the perpetuation of the 
species. Schopenhauer remarks that
[n]ow since nature abandons without reserve her organisms con-
structed with such inexpressible skill, not only to predatory instinct 
of the stronger, but also to the blindest chance, . . . she expresses 
that the annihilation of these individuals is a matter of indiffer-
ence to her, does her no harm. . . . With man she does not act 
otherwise than she does with animals. (W-II, 474)
Schopenhauer maintains that this insight concerning something 
universal in the particular as the inner being of everything according 
to Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, was vivid in those ‘sublime authors of 
the Upanishads of the Vedas’. Kant’s teaching that our intellect does 
not comprehend the true essence of things but merely phenomena 
leads to the same path (W-II, 476). Thus, death should be looked 
at in the light of this fundamental insight of the ancient sages 
and major philosophers, which leads us to the conviction that ‘the 
true inner being of everything, which, moreover evades our glance 
everywhere and is thoroughly mysterious, is not affected by that 
arising and passing away’ (W-II, 474). The operations of this invisible 
being of all things are evident in animal life provided we rise above 

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
123
our supposed superiority over and distinctness from other entities 
endowed with life. Schopenhauer remarks that the animals of many 
kinds which come into existence at all times and seem to be full of 
vitality and drive could never have been nothing before coming into 
existence.
Thus everything lingers only for a moment, and hurries on to 
death. The plant and the insect die at the end of the summer, the 
animal and man after a few years; death reaps unweariedly. But 
despite all this, in fact as if this were not the case at all, everything 
is always there and in its place, just as if everything was imperish-
able . . . Death is for the species, what sleep is for the individual, or 
winking for the eye. (W-II, 478, 479)
The will is embedded in and manifests itself, first and foremost 
in the Idea or the species. Thus, a study of nature reveals that the will 
is really concerned with the continuance of the species, and it has 
little regard for the individual. Nature’s care for the species over the 
individual is nature’s way of expressing the reality of the Ideas over 
entities. Nature seems to express the truth that only the Ideas are real, 
and not the individuals. However, we may question Schopenhauer’s 
excessive reliance on Plato’s theory of Ideas by taking into account 
the fact that, within nature, examples of the extinction of some spe-
cies can be found. The species are more durable than the entities, but 
even the species may not be permanent. All living things, animals as 
well as humans, seem to have a confidence and serenity with which 
they move about through hazards and chances that could cause their 
instant death any moment. Schopenhauer believes that this peace 
and serenity of animals and humans against possible death springs 
from a deeper consciousness of imperishability that each and every 
living thing has. This strange confidence that defies the intellectual 
awareness of possible and certain death, in the case of humans, must 
be rooted in a deep seated realization that there is no threat to the 
continuation of the species. The confidence of the species translates 
itself as the practical and instinctual defiance of death that enables 
the human beings to be engrossed in their worldly projects. Unlike 
Heidegger who calls the forgetfulness of death as a project of inau-
thenticity and one’s belonging to the world of the they (das Man), 
Schopenhauer explains this confidence against death as something 
natural and instinctual. According to him, it has to do with the will’s 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
124
inner realization that it shall always be there through the species, 
which unlike the individuals, is imperishable. Schopenhauer crea-
tively applies Plato’s theory of Ideas to expose that there is some-
thing in man’s inner being that is untouched by death.
This vital force in us, that is, the will-to-live shows itself in the form 
of hunger and an instinctual fleeing from death with respect to the 
individual. However, with respect to the species, the same force gives 
rise to the sexual impulse and an instinctual desire to have and nur-
ture the offspring. However, all evidence points towards the fact that 
individuality of the individual that he or she values above everything 
else is really something unimportant for the will. It seems to use the 
individual as a means to the higher end of the perpetuation of the 
species. Schopenhauer suggests that to say enough is enough regard-
ing our own individuality is the sign of highest wisdom. Therefore, 
the highest ranking thinkers and saints have shown a detachment 
from self-love and the love of life in their exemplary lives. ‘It seems 
just as absurd to desire the continuance of our individuality, which is 
replaced by other individuals, as to desire the permanence of the 
matter of our body, which is constantly replaced by fresh matter’ 
(W-I, 277). We may notice here that Schopenhauer is putting into 
practice his declaration that ‘philosophy is an antidote to the cer-
tainty of death’.
DEATH AND THE WORLD
As part of his meditations on the meaning of death, Schopenhauer 
offers valuable insights on the human entity’s connection with its 
world. These reflections on the man–world relation seem to have 
influenced subsequent philosophy including that of Nietzsche and 
Heidegger. Regarding man’s interminable bond with the world he 
says:
We are far more at one with the world than we usually think. . . . 
The difference between the continuance of the external world after 
his death and his own continuance after death will vanish for one 
who could bring this unity or identity of being to distinct con-
sciousness. . . . The world is no less in us than we are in it, and the 
source of all reality lies within ourselves. (W-II, 486, 487)

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
125
Schopenhauer is here dwelling on the existential as well as the meta-
physical implications of the man–world relationship. In fact, from 
the existential point of view, it is not even a relation because man and 
world are mutually foundational, and one cannot persist without the 
other. As Heidegger will put it, man’s being is always a being-in-the-
world. But unlike Heidegger, Schopenhauer takes it to a metaphysi-
cal level. Man realizes his continuation after death in the truth that 
he continues through all things that are in being at all times. His inner 
being was always at one with being of everything else. The will in him 
is the will in everything which continues on despite the lawful passing 
away of its phenomena. Schopenhauer is certainly taking a cue from 
his study of the Upanishads and his much admired philosophy of 
Vedanta, which maintains that all things are pervaded by Brahman as 
the soul (atman) of all beings which never perishes but changes its 
forms (bodies). It also maintains that one’s larger self (atman) is more 
important than one’s narrower individuality or ego (aham); and at a 
higher level of knowledge (jnana) one’s own self is viewed as the self 
(atman) of everything that exists.
Schopenhauer rejects the notion that all existents have originated 
out of nothing as the handiwork of a creator God and will pass into 
nothing. He rather subscribes to a cyclical notion of the universe 
and finds the law of karma subscribed by Hinduism and Buddhism 
quite logical, although he critically examines and modifies its details 
with respect to the possibility of reincarnation (metempsychosis) and 
re-birth (palingenesis) within his own theory of after-life rooted in 
the concept of the imperishability of the will-to-live. What he finds 
most satisfactory about Hinduism and Buddhism is the fact that they 
view the world (samsara) as a cycle of birth and death: ‘Brahmanism 
and Buddhism . . . quite consistently with a continued existence after 
death, have an existence before birth, and (maintain that) the pur-
pose of this life is to atone for the guilt of that previous existence’ 
(W-II, 488). Schopenhauer continues to regard the Christian notion 
of original sin and the Eastern notion of karma quite logical, when 
he says ‘what exists necessarily exists. Consequently, everyone has to 
conceive himself as a necessary being. . . . He who conceives his exist-
ence as merely accidental, must certainly be afraid of losing it through 
death’ (W-II, 488, 489).
But the urge for salvation must surpass the urge for the continua-
tion forever of one’s individuality, which is both undesirable and 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
126
unlikely in the scheme of things. The love of one’s own self and the 
obsession with one’s individuality, which is ultimately superficial and 
a mere phenomenon of the will, is an error. Schopenhauer goes 
against the grain of Western preoccupation with individuality and 
the self in this powerful assertion:
To desire immortality for the individual is really the same as want-
ing to perpetuate an error forever; for at bottom, every individual-
ity is a special error, a false step, something that it would be better 
should not be, in fact something from which it is the real purpose 
of life to bring us back. (W-II, 492)
What Schopenhauer means by his apparently radical statement that 
‘every individuality is a special error’ should be interpreted in the 
light of his critique of egoism and the basic assumption of his phi-
losophy that the will abides in everything and individuality is a tem-
porary phenomenon of the will. To cling to the individuality will 
amount to taking the affirmation of the will too far and shutting the 
doors to the higher knowledge that prompts human beings to freely 
deny that will and to lead a truly ethical life. These assertions also indi-
cate Schopenhauer’s vote of confidence in the Vedantic and Buddhist 
beliefs that to repeatedly return to samsara (the world-cycle) and to 
be endlessly subjected to a worldly (will-affirming) life is not a desir-
able prospect for human destiny. Salvation (nirvana) is precisely 
defined by these systems as the freedom from samsara.
DEATH, WILL AND THE ETERNAL IN US
A reflection on the meaning of death reveals the nature of the force 
that sustains life. Schopenhauer maintains that man as phenomenon 
is certainly perishable but his inner being is not. This inner being, 
that is the will-to-live, is named as the same thing as the thing-in-
itself, declared as unknowable by Kant. Schopenhauer explains his 
own position regarding the thing-in-itself as follows:
We must here keep in mind that we have not, like Kant, absolutely 
given up the ability to know the thing-in-itself; on the contrary we 
know that it is to be looked for in the will. It is true that we have 
never asserted an absolute and exhaustive knowledge of the thing-
in-itself. . . . We know our own will always only as a phenomenon, 

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
127
and not according to what it may be absolutely in and by itself. 
(W-II, 494)
In the Western philosophical tradition the inner substance of man 
has been identified as the soul (psyche). This soul was primarily 
understood as the seat of knowledge. Schopenhauer breaks with this 
tradition by considering something other than knowledge or intellect 
as the inner being of man. While reflecting on death and after-life, he 
becomes convinced that the will remains the primary substantiality 
of man while the intellect, that man alone among all living things 
is endowed with, is something secondary. Regarding this issue, he 
clearly writes:
The sharp distinction between will and knowledge, together with 
the former’s primacy, a distinction that constitutes the fundamen-
tal characteristic of my philosophy, is therefore the only key to the 
contradiction . . . that death is our end, and yet we must be eternal. 
. . . All philosophers have made the mistake of placing that which 
is metaphysical, indestructible, and eternal in the intellect. It lies 
exclusively in the will, which is entirely different from the intellect, 
and alone is original. (W-II, 495)
This original insight of Schopenhauer regarding the primacy of 
the will has influenced subsequent thinkers, most notably Nietzsche 
and Freud. It also constitutes a fundamental critique of Plato’s 
idealism and the idealistic tradition, even though Schopenhauer 
expressly follows Platonism with respect to the problems of repre-
sentation and perception. Based on his notion of the primacy of the 
will, Schopenhauer explains the connection between consciousness 
and death. He maintains that ‘with death consciousness is certainly 
lost, but not what produced and maintained consciousness. Life is 
extinguished, but . . . not the principle of life’ (W-II, 496). All human 
beings have a feeling of having an imperishable element in them, even 
though they know that death is certain. But they do not know clearly 
what this imperishable element in them is. It is neither consciousness 
nor the body, for the consciousness itself is an off-shot of the body. 
The imperishable and the eternal within man must be something on 
which both the body and the consciousness depend. ‘It is, however, 
just that which by entering into consciousness, exhibits itself as will’ 
(W-II, 496). Schopenhauer points out that we can only encounter the 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
128
immediate phenomenal appearance of the will, because we cannot expe-
rience it beyond the consciousness. Thus, according to Schopenhauer, 
what the will might be, other than its appearance in consciousness, or 
what it might be absolutely in itself, cannot be known. But we can 
safely conclude that ‘the entire will-to-live is in the individual as it 
is in the race, and thus the continuance of the species is merely 
the image of the individual’s indestructibility’ (W-II, 496). What 
Schopenhauer means to suggest is that one’s indestructibility beyond 
death can only be appreciated by those who overcome their obsession 
with the individuality, and realize their kinship with the entire king-
dom of the will, especially, the being of the entire human race.
The fear of death does not stem from the intellectual knowledge 
of the certainty of death, but directly from the will, according to 
Schopenhauer. ‘Just as we are allured into life by the wholly illusory 
inclination for sensual pleasure, so are we firmly retained in life by 
the fear of death, certainly just as illusory’ (W-II, 498). Although the 
will is assured of its continuation and eternity, its blind thrust is 
towards life; it is will-to-live. Knowledge teaches us that death is 
not evil, as many philosophers have demonstrated with convincing 
argument. The fear of death is rooted in the will, for by nature it 
recoils from the threat to life. This is why, says Schopenhauer, that all 
religions and philosophies promise a reward in eternity for the virtues 
of the heart (i.e. the will) and not for the virtues of the intellect.
We have all often wondered about a contradiction in human nature. 
On the one hand, all human beings are aware of their certain death 
and the fact that it is possible any moment. On the other hand, peo-
ple seldom brood over death and go through life as if death is of no 
immediate concern to them. Each one of us is able to say to oneself 
death certainly and lawfully occurs to all human beings, but ‘right 
now it has nothing to do with me,’ as Heidegger spells out the typical 
inauthentic attitude towards death. In the Hindu epic Mahabharata, 
the oldest of Pandava brothers, Yudhishtra, calls this contradiction 
within humans the wonder of all wonders. Schopenhauer attributes 
this serenity against death to the self-assurance that the will within us 
has regarding its own survival against all odds. He outlines and 
explains this human enigma as follows:
Man alone carries about with him in abstract concepts the cer-
tainty of his own death, yet this can frighten him only very rarely 
and at particular moments, when some occasion calls it up to 

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
129
the imagination. Against the mighty voice of nature, reflection 
can do little. In man, as in the animal that does not think, there 
prevails as a lasting state of mind the certainty, springing from 
innermost consciousness, that he is nature, the world itself. By 
virtue of this, no one is noticeably disturbed by the thought of 
certain and never-distant death. (W-I, 281)
DEATH AND THE WORLD
Schopenhauer indicates that the fear of death stems from the artifi-
cial separation between the individual and the world, produced by 
the principium individuationis. In fact, the individual and the world 
are co-foundational; one does not make sense without the other. It 
shows us that Schopenhauer was convinced of the Being-in-the-
world of man, which Heidegger treats at length in his Being and Time. 
Schopenhauer exposes the inseparation of man and world in very 
simple words invoking his all important notion of the will: ‘This 
world will accompany the will as inseparably as a body is accompa-
nied by its shadow; and if will exists, then life, the world, will exist’ 
(W-I, 275). However, unlike Heidegger, Schopenhauer emphasizes 
the metaphysical and spiritual meanings of Being-in-the-world which 
inform us about man’s destiny beyond death, whereas Heidegger’s 
musings remain strictly existential or this-worldly. Schopenhauer 
continues to treat individuality as a grand illusion, in the manner of 
Vedanta philosophy. Although unlike Vedanta, which regards the ulti-
mate reality (Brahman) as everlasting bliss and pure consciousness, 
Schopenhauer’s absolute reality is a blind urge to live and live it up 
more comparable to maya (illusory worldliness). In any case, regard-
ing the bond between the individual and the world, Schopenhauer 
says:
The terrors of death rest for the most part on the false illusion that 
then the I or ego vanishes, and the world remains. But rather is the 
opposite true, namely that the world vanishes; on the other hand, 
the innermost kernel of the ego endures, the bearer and producer 
of that subject, in whose representation alone the world had its 
existence. (W-II, 500)
The world does not have an independent status because it exists in 
the representation of man. Rather, the world is nothing but a network 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
130
of representations. It seems to us that the individual entirely vanishes 
when his or her death occurs. In fact, the force of which the individ-
ual was a phenomenon remains. The will will be here and about in 
another form. But the world that individual carried in his head, will 
be no more. This is a curious way Schopenhauer brings home the 
co-foundationality of man and the world as well as the illusory nature 
of individuality.
WE OUGHT NOT TO BE
Schopenhauer suggests that to impart the dying man the larger teach-
ing of death we might say to him: ‘You are ceasing to be something 
which you would have done better never to become’ (W-II, 501). In 
this enigmatic statement Schopenhauer tells us that the individual 
who had become engrossed in his individuality and, in the love of the 
world and all its enticements, needs to learn from death the lesson 
that he could have spent his life otherwise than he had. He could have 
denied the will rather than affirming all its dictates. Schopenhauer 
spells out the philosophical and moral lessons of death in the follow-
ing summation of his standpoints on life and death:
At bottom, we are something that ought not to be. Therefore, we 
cease to be. Egoism really consists in man’s restricting all reality to 
his own person, in that he imagines he lives in this alone and not 
in others. Death teaches him something better, since it abolishes 
this person, so that man’s true nature, that is his will, will hence-
forth live only in other individuals. (W-II, 507)
That ‘we are something that ought not to be’ seems to be a radically 
pessimistic statement. But there are implicit philosophical insights 
and moral standpoints in it. Consistent with Vedanta and Buddhism, 
Schopenhauer says that coming into the world (samsara) should not 
be presumed to be a happy event, for such an assumption promotes 
love of the world, in other words, thoughtless affirmations of the 
will-to-live. What distinguishes human life from all other existences is 
the opportunity to overcome the love of the world, to seek salvation, 
that is, by a denial of the will-to-live. That denial requires detach-
ment rather than the love of the world. It is better, therefore, to begin 
with the assumption that mere coming into the world and being in it 
is not a glorious event. This does not mean that one should forthwith 

DEATH, PHILOSOPHY AND AFTER-LIFE
131
end one’s life. It means that one should live, as far as possible, a life 
of detachment from the world. The same insight is contained in 
Socrates’ statement that it is not just living but living well that counts. 
Schopenhauer also takes a stand against egoism. It seems to him that 
the greatest teaching of death is to show us how absurd egoism is. 
Death destroys all the pride and self-love of man in one stroke and 
demonstrates the unreality of egoism. It shows that a radical dualism 
between oneself and the others is a false assumption and so is that 
between oneself and the world out there. This insight is contained in 
the well-known saying of the Upanishads, tat tvam asi (that thou art).
Schopenhauer expresses his admiration for the belief in re-birth 
(metempsychosis) that prevails in Brahmanism and Buddhism, as 
well as among the ancient Greeks and Egyptians, and many other 
ancient and modern cultures. He says that metempsychosis prevails 
even now ‘among more than half of the human race, as the firmest 
of convictions, with an incredibly strong practical influence’. It is 
Judaism and two religions springing from it, that is, Christianity and 
Islam that lack this belief for they assume man’s creation out of 
nothing. Regarding reincarnation, Schopenhauer laments that ‘They 
have succeeded, with fire and sword, in driving that consoling, primi-
tive belief of mankind out of Europe and of a part of Asia; for how 
long it is uncertain’ (W-II, 506). However, Christianity does have 
the doctrine of original sin which replaces the theory of the transmi-
gration of souls. Schopenhauer shows his distinct preference for re-
birth (palingenesis) over reincarnation (metempsychosis). Palingenesis 
is supposed to be re-birth as the result of a previous existence but 
appearing in a different form and with a new intellect without any 
recollection of the past life. Schopenhauer recognizes that this doc-
trine is found in ‘its subtlest form’ in Buddhism. Because Buddhism 
does not subscribe to the concept of soul, it contains a theory of 
re-birth without any reference to a transmigration of the soul. Thus, 
it regards a new birth occurring based on karma (deeds) of the previ-
ous birth, but appearing in a form and intellect entirely different from 
the past life.
Schopenhauer finds the re-birth doctrines of Hinduism and 
Buddhism quite logical, but he does not simply adopt their mythical 
forms in his own theory of after-life. He finds Buddhist palingenesis 
quite compatible with his theory that the will receives a new form 
and a new intellect after the death of the individual, but there is a part 
of the individual, namely the will, that is indestructible and lives on. 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
132
We do not come back with skin and hair, the same as we are. But we 
do not entirely perish or sink into nothingness. The degree to which 
death is regarded as an annihilation depends on how much one clings 
to the world and how sharp and absolute one regards the difference 
between oneself and the others. The loss of individuality should be 
regarded as the loss of a phenomenon, not of the thing-in-itself. 
Death also shows us that the man–world dichotomy is an artificial 
pre-supposition. ‘From the metaphysical standpoint, the sentences 
“I perish but the world endures” and “the world perishes, but 
I endure” are not really different at bottom. . . . Death is the great 
opportunity no longer to be I; to him, of course, who embraces it’ 
(W-II, 507).
Schopenhauer pays homage to the death-contemplators like 
Socrates, who embraced their death readily and cheerfully, having 
lived their life in the shadow of death, practising life-long, the detach-
ment from excessive worldliness. They regard everything around and 
especially other human beings, part and parcel of their larger self, 
and die in the conviction that their inner being shall not perish. Such 
a one aims for nothing less than salvation:
As a rule, the death of every good person is peaceful and gentle; 
but to die willingly, to die gladly, to die cheerfully, is the preroga-
tive of the resigned, of him who gives up and denies the will-to-
live. For he alone wishes to die actually and not apparently, and 
consequently needs and desires no continuance of his own person. 
He willingly gives up the existence that we know; what comes to 
him instead of it is in our eyes nothing, because our existence 
in reference to that one is nothing. The Buddhist faith calls that 
existence nirvana, that is to say, extinction. (W-II, 508)

133
CHAPTER TEN
DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
Human existence is unique in the sense that it has the possibility 
of knowing the overall nature of the will and acting in a way that 
Schopenhauer calls the denial of the will. The possibility of the will 
wilfully denying itself seems like a contradiction, and the turning of 
the will against itself will mean a forsaking of the will’s essential 
nature. If the intuition of the thing-in-itself appears in our conscious-
ness as will-to-live, then its complete negation or denial would seem 
to be an impossibility. It would amount to Being turning into noth-
ingness or the deliberate ending of an existence. Of course, the noble 
and praiseworthy conduct that Schopenhauer calls the denial of the 
will-to-live and describes as the summit of ethical life, cannot be an 
absolute denial or annihilation of the will, even though his descrip-
tions literally convey that impression. The denial of the will must 
mean a radical and uncommon toning down of the will’s usual 
projects in an enlightened human existence. Schopenhauer maintains 
that the source of all goodness, virtue and nobility of character in 
man is the same as that which ultimately produces the denial of the 
will-to-live (W-I, 378). Thus, such a denial is qualitatively similar to 
a superior ethical life and conduct.
The denial of the will is a controlling of the blind will that pro-
ceeds from a holistic knowledge of the machinations of the will and 
of the nature of the world in which the will is omnipresent. A person 
who is not totally immersed in egoism and is able to see through the 
principium individuationis realizes his kinship with everything that 
exists around him. The whole world seems as close to him as his 
own person seems to the egoist. Endowed with a holistic knowledge, 
and overwhelmed with empathy with all living things, such a person 
finds the nature of this world and its sufferings unacceptable, and no 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
134
longer wishes to chase the motives of his selfish projects through end-
less willing. According to Schopenhauer, a sense of detachment is 
bound to arise in one who witnesses suffering and vain striving in the 
world. Thoughtfulness and compassion sublimate his egoism and 
incessant craving and striving for personal indulgences.
How could he with such knowledge of the world, affirm this very 
life through constant acts of will . . . bond himself more and more 
firmly to it . . . On the other hand, that knowledge of the whole, 
of the inner nature of the thing-in-itself becomes the ‘quieter’ of 
all and every willing . . . Man attains to the state of voluntary renun-
ciation, resignation, true composure and complete will-lessness. 
(W-I, 379)
What Schopenhauer seems to suggest is that it is within the range 
of human possibilities that the arising of a superior knowledge can 
enable the will to turn against itself, that is, to go against its own 
nature to keep on willing and striving for worldly aims and gains. 
Knowledge can possibly become the quieter of willing. Schopenhauer 
uses drastic language in describing the denial of the will as an absolute 
transformation from ‘willing everything’ to ‘willing nothing at all’. 
As pointed out above, according to Schopenhauer’s own accounts, a 
total annihilation of the will is not possible when one is still alive. 
Thus, knowledge becoming ‘quieter of all and every willing’ must 
mean for practical purposes, ‘the calming down’ or ‘reduction of 
willing’ to a bare minimum. The point of this denial is to ‘deprive 
desires of their sting, close the entry to all suffering, purify and sanc-
tify ourselves’ (W-I, 379). ‘Depriving desires of their sting’ implies 
much like in the Buddhist sense that one must work on eliminating 
those desires which are cravings and obsessions that ultimately pro-
duce suffering. Desires for moral good (dharma) and creativity 
should be cultivated. Schopenhauer’s emphasis on complete renun-
ciation and mortification of the flesh seems to miss the point of the 
middle-path stressed by the Buddha, as it also overlooks the golden 
mean suggested by Aristotle.
ASCETICISM AS THE HIGHEST ETHICS
Schopenhauer recognizes the difficulties in the path of a denier of 
the will-to-live. This state is far from being a complete transformation 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
135
into a born again life. Rather, one has to constantly resist the tempta-
tions of the world and struggle to stay detached from the allurements 
of the will from moment to moment.
But the illusion of the phenomenon soon ensnares us again and its 
motives set the will in motion once more . . . the allurements of 
hope, the flattery of the present, the sweetness of pleasures, the 
well-being that falls to the lot of our person amid the lamenta-
tions of a suffering world governed by chance and error, all these 
draw us back to it, and rivet the bonds anew. (W-I, 379)
The state of the denial of the will is described by Schopenhauer as 
‘the transition from virtue to asceticism’. The practitioner who sees 
through the principium individuationis does not merely love his neigh-
bour, but sympathizes with and begins to have a sense of kinship to 
all that exists. At the same time, the realization of the toughness and 
misery of all existence arouses in him an aversion for the will of which 
he himself is to be a phenomenon. This gives him or her an impetus 
to live a life of utmost simplicity, voluntary poverty and asceticism. 
Such an ascetic practises voluntary and complete chastity, for the 
sexual impulse is the crux of the will-to-live. It is only the human 
existence that has the possibility of voluntary and complete renuncia-
tion that earns the human entity the eligibility for eventual salvation, 
also described as attaining to God by theistic religions. ‘The rest of 
nature has to expect its salvation from man who is at the same time 
priest and sacrifice’ (W-I, 381).
The ascetic renounces property and embraces voluntary poverty, 
not merely to offer it to the needy, but takes renunciation of owner-
ship as an end in itself. Such a one does not want any sweets of life 
that may ‘stir the will’ or any ties that bind him to worldly business. At 
the same time, having given up self-love, the renunciate practises 
utmost humility and does not hit back at his critics and detractors. He 
endures ‘such ignominy and suffering with inexhaustible patience and 
gentleness, returns good for all evil without ostentation’. The lived 
testimony of the saints of all noble religions points towards this real 
possibility of virtue culminating in asceticism. Schopenhauer indi-
cates that this is where philosophy and religion validate each other.
And what I have described here with feeble tongue, and only in 
general terms, is not some philosophical fable, invented by myself 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
136
and only of today. No, it was the enviable life of so many saints 
and great souls among Christians, and even more among the 
Hindus and Buddhists and also among the believers of other 
religions. Different as were the dogmas that were impressed on 
their faculty of reason, the inner, direct and intuitive knowledge 
from which alone all virtue and holiness can come, is nevertheless 
expressed in precisely the same way in the conduct of life. (W-I, 383)
Schopenhauer regards the saints, monks, sadhus and sufis from 
different religions as the prototypes of the denial of the will-to-live 
and holds them in high esteem for their self-abnegation. However, he 
maintains that his doctrine which is expressed in philosophical and 
abstract terms is free from myth and superstition whereas the saints 
and ascetics are invariably motivated by religious viewpoints of the 
specific sects they belong to. As far as their conduct in life goes, the 
ascetics of different traditions show a similar self-denial and a dis-
regard of the worldly temptations. Schopenhauer’s following remarks 
indicate that the difference between a saint and a philosopher is to 
be expected. They also seem to respond to the criticisms made by 
several of Schopenhauer’s biographers that he did not live up to the 
standards of an ascetic himself.
It is therefore just as little necessary for the saint to be a philoso-
pher as for the philosopher to be a saint; just as it is not necessary 
for a perfectly beautiful person to be a great sculptor, or for a great 
sculptor to be himself a beautiful person. In general, it is a strange 
demand on a moralist that he should commend no other virtue 
than that which he himself possesses. (W-I, 383)
On the other hand, a philosopher’s life is expected to show some 
impact of his or her professed philosophy. Schopenhauer’s philoso-
phy is distinguished in so far as it deals with problems of existence 
and everyday living, although it continues to be primarily a search 
for truth. Schopenhauer is quite willing to use the resources of reli-
gion to explore the nature of a good and moral life. While exploring 
the common boundaries of philosophy and religion, Schopenhauer 
strives to remain non-prescriptive as he mentions in his introductory 
remarks to the fourth book of WWR: ‘All philosophy is always theo-
retical since it is essential to it always to maintain a purely contem-
plative attitude, whatever to be the immediate object of investigation; 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
137
to inquire not to prescribe’ (W-I, 271). Thus, in this inquiry into the 
rare but distinguished conduct of a select few including saints and 
ascetics, there must be something to admire and practise for those 
who are not saints themselves. When it comes to outlining the possi-
bilities and merits of the denial of the will for all thoughtful but 
ordinary human beings, Schopenhauer takes things to the extreme. 
There seems to be no room for a middle way or moderation. The 
denial of the will, according to him, is a total abnegation and is 
essentially sparked by one’s pessimism and disgust towards the way 
the world is an arena of suffering. The world’s denial is an authentic 
attitude chosen by a select few who let their knowledge suppress their 
will as Schopenhauer quotes Spinoza: ‘All that is excellent and emi-
nent is as difficult as it is rare’ (Ethics, V, 42).
However, it is possible to look at the example of the saints in 
another light and to recognize the relevance of the denial of the will 
for the non-saintly humanity. A simple and moderate life that rejects 
excessive materialism may receive its impetus from moral and con-
templative goals rather than a total disgust of the world. A saint 
may be driven by higher spiritual truths to set up an example of an 
austere life so that people may find such a devoted life realistic rather 
than fantastic, and may emulate him or her to an extent. The saints 
and ascetics usually have a mission, something to teach and to inspire. 
They teach by example that a non-material life is very much possible 
and desirable.
Schopenhauer says that the philosophical doctrine of the denial of 
the will-to-live is visible in experience and reality in the lives of the 
saints and ascetics of various Western and Eastern traditions, but to 
learn about their lives we have to rely on inadequately written bio-
graphies and hagiographies. From the Christian tradition, he has 
particular regard for St Francis of Assisi, ‘that true personification 
of asceticism and prototype of all mendicant friars’, who embraced 
voluntary poverty and, in line with the Hindu attitude, recognized 
kinship with the animals. Christian mystics like Meister Eckhart are 
greatly admired by him. He also recommends the autobiography of 
Madame de Guyon ‘a great and beautiful soul whose remembrance 
always fills me with reverence’ (W-I, 385). Schopenhauer also admires 
the biography of Fraulein Klettenberg, penned by Goethe. In his 
discussion of the lives of the saintly souls, Schopenhauer abandons 
his usual gender bias, which was perhaps rooted in his disapproval of 
his mother’s extravagant ways.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
138
Schopenhauer laments that the history of the world maintains a 
silence about persons whose conduct was the noblest and the best, 
for history for the most part is a record of the affirmations and mani-
festations of the will in the form of power-plays, conquests, regime 
changes, shrewd rulers and tyrants. To recognize and celebrate the 
deniers of the will becomes the responsibility of philosophers for 
whom the life-sketches of these renunciates, badly written as they 
might be, are ‘incomparably more important than even Plutarch and 
Livy’. It may be noticed that Schopenhauer places high value for 
philosophy contained in biographical literature. Other subsequent 
European thinkers including, Wilhelm Dilthey, would express similar 
faith in biographies as the reservoirs of lived-world-experiences 
(Erlebnisse) and as vital source-materials for philosophy.
Schopenhauer maintains that the lives of the Buddhist monks, given 
in the Eastern Monarchism by Spence Hardy, offer similar illustra-
tions of the denial of the will as shown in the accounts of the lives 
of Christian saints. The same is the material of numerous biographies 
and religious histories (puranas) of the Hindu sanyasis (monks) and 
ascetics. Herein, we see that the ethics of the Hindus ordains ‘love of 
the neighbor with complete denial of self-love, love in general not 
limited to the human race, but embracing all that lives’ (W-I, 388). 
The similarities in New Testament Christianity, Hinduism and 
Buddhism are found to be striking by Schopenhauer. It is their sus-
picion of and reflection of the worldliness and their approval of 
renunciation that brings theistic Christianity and Hinduism and 
atheistic Buddhism together. This is why their saints and renunciates 
appear to have the same lifestyle. Schopenhauer remarks that ‘we 
cannot sufficiently wonder at the harmony we find, when we read the 
life of a Christian penitent or saint and that of an Indian’ (W-I, 389).
Schopenhauer warns once again that the denial of the will is not a 
permanent state, but its practitioner has to work on it constantly. ‘We 
must not imagine that after the denial of the will-to-live has once 
appeared . . . such denial no longer waivers or falters, and we can rest 
on it as inherited property. It must be achieved afresh by constant 
struggle’ (W-I, 391). Schopenhauer seems to portray the denial of the 
will as a matter of severe self-control or something like a constant 
battle with the raging will within us. In Twilight of the Idols, Nietzsche 
rejects the glamourization of the monk and speculates that modera-
tion can be an instinctual attribute. Some people with a healthy make 
up and outlook may not need or want constant stimulation, that is, 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
139
they may become less subjected to the will by nature. At the same 
time, humans being creatures of habit may not have to stifle their will 
when they have had sufficient practice of will-lessness, which they 
have freely chosen as their way of life. Thus, the saint may be a very 
moderate person by nature with a superior wisdom to dislike and 
renounce the world to the extent possible, and at the same time well-
practised in giving up what people call the high life. If the doctrine of 
the denial of the will has to have a general following, and not just the 
lifestyle of a distinguished spiritual élite, Schopenhauer’s extreme 
view of it needs modification. Of course, the saints and ascetics are 
the role models of a possibility that is open to all. Moderation and 
simplicity are options for everybody.
SUFFERING AND THE DENIAL OF THE WILL
Schopenhauer says that most people who choose the path of the 
denial of the will very often do so after encountering personal suffer-
ings. A major loss or disappointment can be a catalyst for a spiritual 
conversion that prompts a complete resignation and ascetic life. Only 
a chosen few are lead by pure knowledge to practise the denial of the 
will. These are the persons who are greatly affected by the sufferings 
of the world in general and are able to see through the principium 
individuationis and be overwhelmed by universal love of mankind. 
They recognize in the sufferings of others their own suffering and, 
through a vision of their universal self, they want no better life for 
themselves than the lot of the bulk of suffering humanity. Whether 
one is converted by personal suffering and hopelessness or through 
empathy with the sufferings of others, the denial of the will is related 
to suffering and its practice involves voluntary embracing of self-
denial and rejection of what the world calls the good life. This prac-
tice has been aptly called the practice or the rehearsal of death or 
a true philosophical life by Socrates. Schopenhauer describes such a 
practitioner of the will’s denial as follows:
We see him know himself and the world, change his whole nature, 
rise above himself and all suffering, as if purified and sanctified 
by it, in inviolable peace, bliss and sublimity, willingly renounce 
everything he formerly desired with the greatest vehemence, and 
gladly welcome death. (W-I, 393)

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
140
In many cases, the experience of suffering serves as a catalyst for 
a life of the will’s denial. For some, death being near at hand and 
hopelessness is the cause of their renunciation. For some others, it 
can be a sudden misfortune or setback that leads them to realize the 
vanity of all endeavour. Sometimes kings, heroes and adventurers, 
suddenly convert to being hermits and monks. Schopenhauer cites 
the cases of two such conversions: Raymond Lull, who after suddenly 
witnessing the cancer-eaten bosom of his ladylove, gave up royalty 
and went on to a hermit’s life; Abbe de Rance, whose youth was spent 
in pursuit of pleasures, suddenly stumbled against the severed head 
of his beloved Madame de Montebazon, later became the chief 
reformer of La Trappe monastic order in France. He revitalized this 
group of ascetics, whose monks are known to this day for severe aus-
terities and utmost humility. Such examples of conversions are not 
confined to the previously rich and powerful, but at times even the 
hardened criminals, convert to a spiritual outlook while face to face 
with their impending execution. Schopenhauer records several so-
called gallows-sermons delivered by such convicts shortly before their 
execution, remarkable for their spiritual insight (W-II, 631). These 
accounts were obviously culled by Schopenhauer from his daily read-
ings of The Times and other English newspapers. This shows how 
down-to-earth and directly related to everyday life Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy is.
Suffering contains within it a sanctifying force, according to 
Schopenhauer. This is because suffering makes one humble and resigns 
oneself to reality. ‘But the sufferer . . . is worthy of reverence only 
when his glance has been raised from the particular to the universal, 
and when he regards his own suffering merely as an example of the 
whole . . . so that the whole of life conceived as essential suffering, 
thus brings him to resignation’ (W-I, 396). It seems that Schopenhauer 
does not distinguish between having deep compassion for the suffer-
ings of others and subscribing to the pessimistic outlook that claims 
that all life is suffering. While it is true that suffering is a sanctifying 
force that enables us to recognize that life is not a bed of roses and 
that the suffering of others ought to be our foremost concern, it 
may not and perhaps should not lead us to the extremely pessimistic 
view that life is a vale of tears and suffering is ineradicable. Not all 
saints and religious ascetics have subscribed to Schopenhauer’s pes-
simistic world-view, according to which all sainthood and rejection 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
141
of materialistic life has to be inspired by the notion that life is essen-
tially suffering.
The Buddha certainly did not propound this simplistic viewpoint. 
While in the first noble truth he says that sufferings within life are 
real and must be the foremost concern of all thoughtful and compas-
sionate persons, in the third noble truth he clearly maintains that 
dukkha (suffering) can be ‘removed without a remainder’ if the eight-
fold path of dharma (moral law), compassion and moderation are 
followed. Similarly, the saints of other religions are known for their 
cheerful disposition and their heroic resolve to help the poor, needy 
and downtrodden. They were not mere recluses and hermits who 
entirely forsake the world. Schopenhauer maintains that when a 
practitioner of the denial of the will rises above his personal suffer-
ing, and his grief extends beyond his narrower self and is extended to 
all life, then through a withdrawal of his own will he feels ‘a certain 
loosening of his bonds, a mild foretaste of death’ (W-I, 396). This 
indicates that denial of the will is essentially what Socrates called 
the practice of death, in Schopenhauer’s terms, a seeing through the 
principium individuationis, a movement of knowledge beyond the 
principle of sufficient reason.
THE DENIAL AND THE ORIGINAL SIN
Schopenhauer’s interpretation of original sin in the form of original 
guilt of humanity along with his concept of eternal justice has 
baffled many scholars of his work as well as his readers. He seems to 
have produced these notions by combining the Christian concept 
of original sin with the law of karma which is a basic doctrine of 
Hinduism and Buddhism. Since he regards the spirit of these religions 
as the same, he has no difficulty in fusing karma and original sin to 
come up with the notion that human beings are born laden with a 
guilt that is not the result of their current actions. This is perfectly 
understandable if we don’t subscribe to the Judaic and Old Testament 
notion that we are God’s handiwork and made out of nothing.
That man comes into the world already involved in guilt can 
appear absurd only to the person who regards himself as just hav-
ing come from nothing, and the work of another. Hence in conse-
quence of this guilt, which must therefore have come from his will, 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
142
man rightly remains abandoned to physical and mental sufferings, 
even when he has practiced all these virtues, and so he is not happy. 
This follows from ‘eternal justice’ of which I spoke in Section 63 
of Volume I. (W-II, 603)
It is easy to see that for us virtue is not always equal to happiness 
and very often bad things happen to good people. If all suffering 
happened due to a lack of virtue, we would just need moral good 
rather than salvation. But salvation has been identified as the highest 
goal of human life. Schopenhauer points out that Christianity, 
Hinduism and Buddhism proclaim this with one voice. It is clear that 
virtuous action is not good enough. St Paul, Augustine and Luther 
all maintain that ‘works do not justify since we all are and remain 
essentially sinners’ (W-II, 603). Schopenhauer emphatically says that 
‘original sin is really our only true sin’ (W-II, 604). As these religions 
highlight ‘we need to become something different from, indeed the 
very opposite of what we are . . .we need a complete transformation 
of our nature and disposition’ (W-II, 604). Schopenhauer maintains 
that Hinduism, Buddhism and Christianity all teach a ‘heavy guilt of 
the human race through existence itself’, although Christianity does 
so indirectly, that is through the myth of the fall of man. Christianity 
could not be as explicit on this issue as Hinduism and Buddhism, 
because it had to cling to the Jewish theism and the dogma regarding 
creation out of nothing by the Almighty. Speaking philosophically 
rather than in terms of the religious myths, Schopenhauer explains 
why the denial of the will is necessary to properly respond to the 
existential guilt.
To speak without the myth, as long as our will is the same, our 
world cannot be other than it is. It is true that all men wish to be 
delivered from the state of suffering and death; they would like . . . 
to attain the eternal bliss . . . but not on their own feet; they would 
like to be carried there by the course of nature. But this is impos-
sible; for nature is only the copy, the shadow, of our will . . . 
she cannot bring us anywhere except always into nature again. 
(W-II, 605)
Thus, according to Schopenhauer, the denial of the will is not just the 
attitude that saints and thinkers adopt due to their superior knowl-
edge of the operations of the will as endless striving that is doomed 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
143
to be frustrated. But it is also a proper response on their part to the 
nature of human condition laden with original sin (or cumulative 
karma). Schopenhauer draws some conclusions which can be baf-
fling for a reader steeped in strictly European and rational thinking:
Existence is certainly to be regarded as an error or mistake, to 
return from which is salvation . . . In fact, nothing else can be 
stated as the aim of our existence except the knowledge that it 
would be better for us not to exist. This, however, is the most 
important of all truths and must therefore be stated, however 
much it stands in contrast with the present day mode of European 
thought. (W-II, 605)
Schopenhauer’s radical assertion that ‘the aim of our existence (is) . . . 
the knowledge that it would be better for us not to exist’ should be 
analysed in the light of its deeper meanings, implications and his 
sources which do not lie in ‘the present day mode of European 
thought’. Many scholars of Schopenhauer’s philosophy have dis-
missed such statements as confusing and illogical as well as unaccept-
ably pessimistic. Of course, at first sight it is a pessimistic thing to 
say that it would have been better for us not to have come into being 
for this world is an unsatisfactory place to be in. It is an arena of 
perpetual suffering and endless striving for vain goals of the will. 
That is a simple rationale for Schopenhauer’s pessimistic conclusions 
stated in the above quote. However, in order to outline the justifica-
tions for the denial of the will, he refers to the selfless lives of not 
only Christian but Hindu, Buddhist and Sufi saints. Now, if we ask 
the question regarding the rationale for the renunciation of the world 
by the saints and mystics, it would be both simplistic and incorrect to 
dismiss them as the pessimistic crowd. In the same manner, if we 
ask ourselves whether it is wise to dismiss all of the Eastern religions 
as, on the whole, pessimistic just because Schopenhauer uses a pecu-
liar interpretation of these to revalidate his own philosophy, the 
answer should be in the negative. So what is the real rationale for the 
saints and mystics to disparage and discard the worldly ways of life? 
Why do Hinduism and Buddhism cast aspersions on the worldly 
existence (samsara) and uphold salvation (nirvana) as the highest 
goal of human life?
It is because these world views regard too much attachment to 
the worldly goals and being excessively caught up in the enticing and 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
144
illusory worldliness (maya) as counter-productive for the spiritual 
growth of the human being. In order to persuade humans to go 
against the current of raging worldliness, they depict the world at 
hand (samsara) as inferior to salvation (nirvana) so that merely being 
in the world and loving the world does not become the highest goals 
of life. Those religions have created several mythological beliefs that 
go hand-in-hand with their philosophical viewpoint that the world 
must be looked at with suspicion and as something to be overcome. 
The belief in reincarnation depicts coming into the world cycle 
(samsara) as undesirable. This is not done because the world is utterly 
bad but because too much worldliness is an impediment to spiritual 
advancement. Thus, existence, world and worldliness are taken as 
challenging realities that require self-introspection, scepticism and 
restraint. Thus, whether the existence is assumed to be hazardous or 
glorious in itself depends on one’s assumptions. This fundamental 
assumption of Hinduism and Buddhism that coming into samsara is 
undesirable was put forward to wean people away from the excessive 
love of the world.
However, Schopenhauer, who is already committed to the notion 
that the world as the arena of will’s endless and hopeless striving, has 
found a revalidation of his pessimistic world-view in his pessimistic 
interpretation of Hindu and Buddhist standpoints. He downplays 
the optimistic accounts of those traditions regarding human life 
as a glorious opportunity to lead the life of dharma (moral law), 
gain knowledge of the spirit (jnana) and experience the bliss of love 
(bhakti) and move forward on the path to salvation (nirvana). 
Schopenhauer chooses to concentrate on the seemingly negative char-
acterization of the world (samsara) in these traditions along with 
their theories of reincarnation and karma. In any case, his assertions 
such as ‘it would be better for us not to exist’ are based on a simplistic 
and pessimistic interpretation of Hindu and Buddhist doctrines 
which meaningfully maintain that being subject to the cycle of birth 
and coming back into samsara should not be viewed as a glorious 
event. Thus, the reasons behind the very first phrase in the Buddha’s 
sermon on the four noble truths, namely, ‘Birth is dukkha (suffering)’ 
is much deeper than it seems. To understand it fully, we must combine 
it with the statement in the third noble truth, that is, ‘dukkha can be 
removed without a remainder,’ an optimistic assertion which promotes 
and justifies the life of dharma (moral law). Schopenhauer chooses 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
145
to ignore the third noble truth and focuses on the first phrase 
‘Birth is dukkha’ which appears in the form of the statements such 
as ‘the aim of life (is) . . . to know that it would be better for us not 
to exist’.
DENIAL, DETACHMENT AND ASCETICISM
True knowledge is not only an ability to see through the principium 
individuationis and gain a conviction that the same will abides in 
all phenomena, but also an overcoming of a delusion regarding 
one’s separate identity and regarding meaningfulness of the will’s 
projects. According to Schopenhauer, ‘to return from this (delusion) 
and hence to deny its whole present endeavour is what religions 
describe as self-denial . . .’ (W-II, 606). Schopenhauer says that 
the denial of the will is the pinnacle of ethics; moral virtues are 
merely the means of advancing self-denial or denial of the will. ‘The 
virtuous action is a momentary passing through the point, the per-
manent return to which is the denial of the will-to-live’ (W-II, 610). 
Permanent return does not mean that the denier no longer struggles 
and guards against the inroads of the will. It means that the self-
transformation of the denier of the will is more sustained than that 
of one who performs sporadic acts of goodness. A practitioner of 
the denial is someone who accepts death as lawful and not as a catas-
trophe, for he or she is already well-rehearsed in voluntarily giving up 
what people call ‘the life’, that is, the life of the will. Thus, a denier of 
the will is not afraid of death but has a special relationship with it. 
Schopenhauer explains the detachment of such a one from the love 
of existence: 
He will be least afraid of becoming nothing in death who has 
recognized that he is already nothing now, and who consequently 
no longer takes any interest in his individual phenomenon, since 
in him knowledge has, so to speak, burnt up and consumed the 
will, so that there is no longer any will, any keen desire for indi-
vidual existence, left in him. (W-II, 609)
The attachment that the worldling has with his own well-being and 
self-gratification is much reduced in one who denies the will, although it 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
146
is hard to imagine that it can be non-existent in him, as Schopenhauer’s 
radical statements indicate. However, having experienced a sort of 
voluntary death of the worldliness such a one is ready for the actual 
death because he neither clings to the world nor loves himself as 
intensely as most people do.
Schopenhauer indicates that he is aware that his philosophy will be 
accused of being excessively negative because it seems to end up with 
a negation in upholding the denial of the world as the highest ethical 
attitude. If philosophy is to remain connected with the problems of 
authentic living and coping with the suffering contained in life, in 
short, with actual life itself, then philosophy cannot shy away from 
the issues of quietism and asceticism. Schopenhauer thinks that these 
themes are part and parcel of metaphysics and ethics. Schopenhauer 
clearly believes that philosophy must pronounce on an ideal philo-
sophical life and thereby remain relevant to life as such, including 
the problem of defining the nature of life as well as dealing with the 
problems of living and suffering. Although philosophy should not be 
too prescriptive, it cannot shy away from the philosophical task of 
outlining ethical versus the thoughtless life.
Such problems of the life-world experience should not be dismissed 
by philosophers just because they are also discussed in the domain of 
religion. Rather, religious beliefs and world-views can be analysed 
philosophically, so that all avenues to the issues of Being are explored 
through philosophical methods. While Schopenhauer explicates and 
admires several world-renouncing concepts of Christianity, Hinduism, 
Buddhism and Sufism, he filters out their mythological, ritualistic 
and superstitious elements, and outlines only those aspects of religious 
thought that elucidate the problems of metaphysics and existence that 
religion in the broader sense, shares with philosophy. Schopenhauer 
believes that all accounts of human life and Being are interesting 
for philosophy. In this sense, he was a precursor of contemporary 
European hermeneutics which defines the scope of human sciences 
as sciences of the spirit (Geistwissenschaftliche) whose subject-matter 
includes history, literature, religion, philosophy and other social and 
human sciences. Schopenhauer thinks that he is not less of a philo-
sopher for making the leap from philosophy to a philosophical life. 
That leap is not only an age-old tradition in the West enriched by the 
likes of Socrates, Jesus and Plotinus and a series of Christian mystics, 
but also a time-honoured essence of the Eastern faiths. Thus, reflecting 
on an ideal philosophical life and on the actual lives of philosophers 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
147
who lived their philosophy is part and parcel of a genuine philosophy 
as far as Schopenhauer is concerned.
In speaking about the philosophical and religious developments 
together, Schopenhauer reiterates that Christianity has the same 
world-renouncing spirit that Brahmanism and Buddhism possess. 
According to him, Christianity, although formally connected with 
Judaism and the Old Testament, is different in spirit from both 
Judaism and Islam. It also carries in it a radical departure from 
ancient Greek thought, which is preoccupied with the cosmos, and 
despite the reorientation of the philosophical enterprise towards the 
study of the soul introduced by Socrates, remains dominantly world 
oriented. Greek and Roman thought remains cosmocentric, and 
Christianity alone taught them to ‘look beyond the narrow, paltry, 
and ephemeral life on earth, and no longer to regard that as an end 
in itself’ (W-II, 627). Regarding the most important issue in philoso-
phy, namely, the necessity to rise above the worldly-mindedness and 
to embrace truly philosophical life, namely a life of asceticism, the 
ancient Greek philosophy is certainly deficient. ‘Although the ancients 
were far advanced in almost everything else, they had remained chil-
dren in the principal matter . . . the fact that one or two philosophers, 
Pythagoras and Plato, taught otherwise, alters nothing as regards the 
whole’ (W-II, 628).
Thus, Christianity presented a fundamental truth which is the 
same as it appears in Hinduism and Buddhism, namely, the need for 
salvation from an imperfect world, attainable through renunciation, 
otherwise known as the denial of the will. This denial involves 
going against nature or the matter-of-course worldly ways. But this 
practice is both difficult and against the natural tendency of man-
kind, Schopenhauer acknowledges. The motives of those who follow 
this path remain abstract and inaccessible to most people. Thus, reli-
gions sought the aid of mythology to bring home this truth to the 
masses. Hence, they present the picture on a larger canvass through 
the myths such as the fall of man and reincarnation, etc. However, 
philosophy must approach this issue directly in terms of abstract 
concepts. Thus, philosophy being free of myth and symbolism is 
related to religion ‘as a straight line is to several curves running near 
it’. Philosophy makes it clear that true freedom for the human being 
has to do with the ability of the will to affirm or deny. Thus, denial 
of the will can be the experience of the highest freedom if it is not a 
mere mortification, but a freely chosen way of life.

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
148
IS DENIAL OF THE WILL POSSIBLE?
Is denial of the will a realistic possibility even for a saint? Since 
Schopenhauer devotes a sizable portion of his work to this theme 
and regards this concept as the finest achievement of his philosophy, 
he must be seriously recommending this practice for all thoughtful 
persons. Is there a contradiction between Schopenhauer’s assertion 
that the will is ever-present and omnipresent and that it can possibly 
be denied or eliminated? If human being is will through and through 
and if it is the very thing-in-itself, then how can an existing human 
being deny the core of his existence? The denial as such seems to be 
an act of will too. But it is an act of the will to abolish itself. We will 
have to acknowledge that an absolute denial of the will is impossible 
for a person still alive. He or she cannot stop willing altogether 
while in a body. Thus, the denial of the will must mean practice of 
restraint and willing only for the purposes of existing and serving 
higher goals of benevolence and compassion. It must be a turning 
away from intense cravings of a selfish nature to positive goals of an 
altruistic kind. It must be a decision of the will to transform itself 
from a mode of stronger willing to a weaker willing. It must be a 
self-restraint of the will, not the self-annihilation of the will. At the 
same time, the practice itself must be subject to stronger or moderate 
degrees. The denial of a saint is much stronger and serves as an exam-
ple for thoughtful persons to imbibe the self-restraint of the saint in 
their lives to the extent possible in their worldly existence. It is the 
same as to say suicide is not warranted for one who practises death or 
contemplates death in the acts of living. Although Schopenhauer’s 
statements regarding the denial of the will appear to be too radical 
and hinting towards the possibility of the slow killing of the will, he 
does not do so at the cost of compromising the indestructibility of 
the will which he compares to the indestructibility of matter.
What are the gains or aftermath of the practice of the denial of the 
will-to-live. Schopenhauer suggests that the gains or the rewards of 
such a denial cannot be described in terms of the worldly reality. It is 
often said that one gets nothing or sheer freedom from everything. 
Schopenhauer explains it as follows. ‘My teaching . . . can speak here 
only of what is denied or given up; but what is gained in place of this, 
what is laid hold of, it is forced to describe as nothing . . . yet it still 
does not follow from this that it is nothing absolutely’ (W-II, 612). 

DENIAL AND ASCETICISM
149
Schopenhauer seems to suggest that a superior knowledge that 
prompts one to practice self-denial is not altogether profitless. It gives 
one tranquility and relief from suffering involved in chasing the will’s 
inexhaustible aims. At the same time, this peace of mind is the result 
of a knowledge of one’s kinship with all that exists and especially 
with all living things. This feeling appears after the giving up of all 
obsessions with one’s narrower self or a false sense of individuality, 
and experiencing a freedom from principium individuationis. One 
gains an insight that one possesses a larger death-less self and the 
feeling of deathlessness has to be a liberating experience.
Some critics have pointed out that while Schopenhauer speaks 
like a Vedantist here, outpouring the gains of his readings of the 
Upanishads, he seems to amalgamate the Vedic Hindu world-view 
with Buddhism. Not only that, he also asserts that Christianity 
upholds the same viewpoint regarding the spiritual possibilities of 
self-denial. He finds it curious that there is hardly any difference in 
the lifestyles and spiritual insights of Christian, Hindu, Buddhist 
and Sufi ascetics. It is amazing that these mystics and saints, who had 
little or no knowledge of each other, even within the same tradition, 
would arrive at remarkably similar conclusions regarding the nature 
of things. Schopenhauer quotes the Christian mystic, Madame de 
Guyon in her wonderful biography Les Torrens, remarking that ‘in 
true love there is no sense of I or me or mine.’ This is what a Hindu 
mystic experiencing the vision of Brahman would say; this is what 
Tamil Bhakti saints of South India say in the Kural. The Hindu 
Vedanta tradition places a high value on getting rid of mine-ness 
(mamta) and self-love (moha). Schopenhauer also quotes the Buddha 
as saying ‘my disciples, reject the idea that I am this or this is mine’ 
(W-II, 614). He also calls the life of St Francis of Assisi as a ‘sanyasi 
existence’, that is, the typical existence of a homeless Hindu monk. It 
is amazing that St Francis has the same regard and love for animals 
that the Hindus are conjoined to have by their scriptures. St Francis 
calls animals his sisters and brothers consistent with Hindu and 
Buddhist beliefs (W.II, 614).
But those with a scholarly bent of mind will frown upon 
Schopenhauer’s amalgamation of the saints of Christianity, Hinduism 
and Buddhism. How could these actively religious faithful abandon 
their distinct dogmas and pre-suppositions? How could the state of 
mind of a Hindu mystic who believes in the identity of the personal 

SCHOPENHAUER: A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
150
self (atman) with the universal self (brahman) be the same as a 
Buddhist saint (arhat) who got rid of the notion that there exists 
anything like self (atman), and who has little to do with God? How 
could these Eastern religions be similar to Christianity for which 
existence of God is all important? While Schopenhauer acknowledges 
that such doctrinal distinctions do exist and matter a lot to the believ-
ers of these religions, the other-worldly spirit and the view of the 
current lifespan as not being all in all for the human entity is what 
brings these traditions together. They also teach overcoming of self-
love and practice of the love of the neighbours, compassion and 
nonviolence the same way. No wonder then, despite their doctrinal 
differences, they produce a large number of renunciates indistinguish-
able from each other in their asceticism and spiritual outlooks. The 
denial of the will-to-live is at the summit of Schopenhauer’s philo-
sophical achievement and through a secularization and universaliza-
tion of the examples from religion he has attempted to bridge the gap 
between philosophy and philosophical life.

151
NOTES
CHAPTER THREE: THE WORLD AS WILL
1 Martin Heidegger, ‘The Thinker as Poet’ in A. Hofstadter, ed. and trans. 
Poetry, Language, Thought (New York: Harper & Row, 1971), p. 4.
2 For a thinker that thought is the inspiration and the goal, the point of 
departure and the endpoint of his thinking.
CHAPTER FIVE: AESTHETICS AND THE ARTS
1 M. Hiriyanna, Art Experience (Mysore: Kavyalaya Publishers, 1954), 
p. 27.
2 Martin Heidegger, ‘The Origin of the Work of Art’ in A. Hofstadter, ed. 
and trans. Poetry, Language, Thought (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), 
pp. 15–87.
3 Heidegger, ‘The Origin of the Work of Art’, pp. 15–87.
4 Hiriyanna, Art Experience, pp. 2, 7.
CHAPTER SEVEN: A WELCOME TO EASTERN THOUGHT
1 Michael Fox, ‘Schopenhauer on Death, Suicide and Self-renunciation’, 
in Michael Fox, ed., Schopenhauer: His Philosophical Achievement 
(New York: Barnes and Noble Books, 1980), p. 161.
2 David Cartwright, ‘Schopenhauer on Suffering, Death, Guilt and the 
Consolation of Metaphysics’, in Bric von der Luft, ed., Schopenhauer: 
New Essays in Honour of his 200th Birthday (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellon 
Press, 1988).
3 Bryan Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1997), pp. 13, 260.
4 From Samyutta-nikaya, in S. Radhakrishnan and C. A. Moore, ed. 
A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1973), p. 274.

NOTES
152
5 Ibid., p. 289.
6 Ibid., p. 274.
7 Ibid., p. 274.
8 Ibid., p. 274.

153
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
SCHOPENHAUER’S WORKS
Schopenhauer’s writings are lucid, free of scholarly quibbles and 
adorned by classical citations.  The power of his writing shines even 
through a translation.  That makes him an exceptionally accessible 
philosopher for scholarly as well as general readers. Although there 
is still a need for scholarly analyses of his system, his concepts and 
his sources, the reading of his original works remains indispensable 
for serious students of his philosophy.
The World as Will and Representation, Volumes I and II, trans. E. F. J. Payne. 
New York: Dover Publications, 1966.
The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, trans. E. F. J. Payne. 
La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing Company, 1974.
Parerga and Paralipomena: Short Philosophical Essays, trans. E. F. J. Payne. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974.
Essay on the Freedom of the Will, trans. Konstantin Kolenda. New York: The 
Bobbs- Merrill Company, 1960.
On the Basis of Morality, trans. E. F. J. Payne. New York: The Bobbs-Merrill 
Company, 1965.
Manuscript Remains in 4 Volumes, ed. Arthur Hübscher, trans. E. F. J. Payne. 
New York: Berg, 1988.
On the Will in Nature, trans. E. F. J. Payne. New York: Berg, 1992.
LIFE AND TIMES OF SCHOPENHAUER
Safranski, Rüdiger, Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy, trans. 
Edward Osers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
Wallace, W., Life of Schopenhauer. London:  Walter Scott, 1890.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
154
Zimmern, H., Schopenhauer: His Life and His Philosophy. London: 
Longmans, Green & Co., 1876.
WORKS ON SCHOPENHAUER
Atwell, John, Schopenhauer: The Human Character. Philadelphia:  Temple 
University Press, 1990.
Barua, Arati, ed., Schopenhauer and Indian Philosophy. New Delhi: Northern 
Book Centre, 2008.
Berger, Douglas L., The Veil of Maya: Schopenhauer’s System and Early 
Indian Thought. Binghamton, NY: Global Academic Publishing, 2008.
Copleston, Frederich, Arthur Schopenhauer: Philosopher of Pessimism. 
London: Barnes & Noble, 1975.
Halbfass, Wilhelm, India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding. Albany, 
NY: State University of New York Press, 1988.
Hamlyn, D. W., Schopenhauer: The Arguments of the Philosophers. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
Hannan, Barbara, The Riddle of the World: A Reconsideration of 
Schopenhauer’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Jacquette, Dale, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer. Montreal: McGill Queen’s 
University Press, 2005.
Janaway, Christopher, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Magee, Bryan, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1983.
Singh, R. Raj, Death, Contemplation and Schopenhauer. Aldershot, Hampshire, 
UK: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2007.
Wicks, Robert, Schopenhauer. Malden, MA:  Blackwell Publishing, 2008.
Young, Julian, Schopenhauer. New York: Routledge, 2005.

155
abstract representations 16–17, 
21, 25
acquired character 108–9
“Additional Remarks on the 
Doctrine of the Suffering of 
the World” (Schopenhauer) 53
“Additional Remarks on the 
Doctrine of the Vanity of 
Existence” (Schopenhauer) 50
aesthetics 56
Platonic ideas and 58, 60, 62–4
after-life 121–2
anatomical features
as determinant of sexual 
selection 80–1
animal(s)
humans compared and contrasted 
with 20, 24, 25, 35
understanding 19
animal painting/sculpture 66–7
animal rights 12, 117
architecture 63, 64–6
Aristotle 120
on causality 22, 23
on melody 73
art(s) 104
genius and 60
hierarchy and classification of 63
rasa theory 73–4 
Vedanta theory 61
will-lessness and 60–4
see also specific forms of art, e.g., 
architecture
asceticism 92, 96, 116, 135–9, 
143–4, 146–7
atheism 96
Atma (Schopenhauer’s dog) 12
Badryana 95
beauty 67
Being
philosophical problem of 48–9
being of things 31–3, 34
Berkeley, George
on subject-object 
relationship 15–16
Bhagavadgita (Song of the 
Blessed One) 95
bhakti 96, 144
biographies 
as accurate study of human 
lives 69, 138
of saints and ascetics 137–8 
on Schopenhauer 1–2, 90, 92–3
boredom 41, 51–2, 54
Brahman 96, 113, 125, 149
Buddhism 47, 88–9
death 120 
existential guilt 125, 142
importance of salvation 143–4, 
147
pessimism and 97
rebirth 98, 99, 131
Schopenhauer’s appreciation 
of 46–7
similarities between Christianity 
and 87, 138, 149–50
suffering 53, 97–101, 141, 
144–5
Butz (Schopenhauer’s dog) 12
INDEX

INDEX
156
Cartwright, David 91
causality 
functions of 24
sufficient reason and 17, 18–19, 
23–5
Christianity see New Testament 
Christianity; Old Testament 
Christianity
compassion (karuna) 104, 117–18
conceptual reasoning 19–22, 25
conjugal fidelity 79–80
consciousness 32
death and 127–8
Correggio 68
cravings (trishna) 60, 99–100
detachment and release 
from 100–1, 134
Cupid (Roman deity) 81, 83–4
Dasein 34, 105
death 122–3, 132
consciousness and 127–8
denial of will and 139–40 
fear of 121, 122, 128–9
instinctual defiance of 123–4
love and 84–5
philosophy and 119–21
suffering and 41
will-to-live and 119, 121
world and 124–6
De Guyon, Jeanne Marie 137, 149
denial of will 34, 44, 45–7, 50, 
100–1, 120, 130–1, 133–5, 
136–7, 138–9, 145–6
art experience and 56
original sin and 141–5
possibility of 148
rewards of 148–9
suffering and 139–41
dependant co-origination 
(pratitya samutpada) 16, 91, 
92, 98
Descartes, René 23
Dilthey, Wilhelm 69, 138
“Din and Noise” 
(Schopenhauer) 10
Dorguth, F. 13
Doss, Adam von 13
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 49
Duperron, Anquetil 88
Eastern Monarchism (Hardy) 138
Eastern thought
critique of Schopenhauer’s 
interpretation of 94
influences on Schopenhauer 47, 
49, 86–7
Schopenhauer’s approach 
to 87–9
Schopenhauer’s oversimplification 
of 96
see also Buddhism; Vedanta
Eckhart, Meister 137
ego (aham) 93, 125
egoism 109, 130, 131
meanness of 42
empirical character 105–6, 107, 108
Epicurus
on death 122
eternal justice 107–8, 111–13, 141
ethics 103–4
actions and dispositions 116
source of morality 115–16, 117
Euripides 112
evil 47
humans and 48
existence 47, 133
Buddhist view on 98–9
guilt and 125, 141–2
real purpose of 93
suffering and 43–4, 46, 52
tragic dramas and 70–1
undesirability and worthlessness 
of 46–7, 49–52, 90, 143
experience 18
female sexuality 79–80
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 7, 11

INDEX
157
forces of nature see natural forces
The Fourfold Root of the Principle 
of Sufficient Reason 
(Schopenhauer) 7, 22
Fox, Michael 91
Francis of Assisi, Saint 137
Frauenstädt, Julius 2, 13
freedom of will 104–5
Freud, Sigmund 76, 127
gallows-sermons 140
genius 59–60
art and 60
Goebel, Angilbert 14
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 
8, 137
Greek philosophy 112, 147
Gregoire, Anthime 4
ground, principle of 22–3
guilt 141–2
Gwinner, W. 2, 14
happiness 40, 42, 44–6, 51
Hardy, Spence 138
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich 10, 11, 23, 87, 96
Heidegger, Martin 15, 129
on death 123
distinction between 
understanding and 
interpretation 19–20
on existentiell understanding 29
on language 17
on man-Being relationship 34
on painting 68
on principle of ground 22
Hinduism
death 120 
existential guilt 125, 142
importance of salvation 143–4, 
147
reincarnation in 95, 112
Schopenhauer’s appreciation 
of 54
similarities between Christianity 
and 87, 138, 149–50
see also Vedanta
Hiriyanna 61, 73
historical painting 67–8
history/historians 69
as record of affirmations of 
will 138
horticulture 63, 66
The House of the Dead 
(Dostoyevsky) 49
Hübscher, A. 2
human body 19
suffering of 29
will and 28–32
human nature
Schopenhauer’s critique of 48
Hume, David 49
“Iconoclasm in German 
Philosophy” 13–14
ideas, Platonic 34, 35, 57–8
art and 58, 62–4, 72
death and 123–4
illusion (maya) 96, 129, 143–4
immortality
love and 85
individuality 35–6, 124, 126
character and 67
inorganic matter 35–6, 37
instinct 19
intelligible character 105–6, 
107–8
intuitive representations 17–19, 26
judgements 21, 25–6
Kant, Immanuel 12, 16, 86, 126
on coexistence of freedom of will 
with necessity 105–6
critique of idea of love of 75
on ethics 103
principle of ground 23
on time and space 17

INDEX
158
karma theory 49, 98, 107–8, 112, 
125, 141
Klettenberg, Susanna von 6, 137
knowledge 37–8
capacity of pain and 49, 54
death and 121
landscape painting 63, 66
laws of nature 36
Leibniz, Gottfried 49
Lindner, Otto 13
logical necessity 25–6
love 35–6
death and 84–5
see also romantic love
love of life 52
loving-kindness 118
Lull, Raymond 140
Magee, Bryan 92, 93
Majer, F. 88
male sexuality 79–80
man-Being relationship 34
man-world relationship 124–5, 
129–30
marriages
success/failure of 81, 84
mathematical necessity 26
matter
Platonist 64
time, space and 17–18, 24, 26
May, Elizabeth 14
Mayer, Frederick 8
melody 73
metaphysics 79, 84
moral life (dharma) 93, 96, 
141, 144
moral necessity 26–7
motivation 27
will and 31–2
music 71–4
mutual co-arising (pratitya 
samutpada) 51
Narada Bhakti Sutra 85
natural forces
architecture and 65
conflict and 37 
will and 34–7
nature
care for species over 
individual 123
laws of 36
Natyasastra (Bharata) 73
necessity
four forms of 24–7
freedom of will and 104–5
New Testament Christianity 
55, 87
fall of man 142
historical paintings of 68
similarities between Eastern 
religions and 87, 138, 149–50
Nietzsche, Friedrich 127, 138
Old Testament Christianity 
Schopenhauer’s critique of 55, 87
“On the Freedom of the Will” 
(Schopenhauer) 11
“On the Vanity and Suffering of 
Life” (Schopenhauer) 45
“On Women” (Schopenhauer) 6
optimism
Schopenhauer’s rejection of 
49–50, 90
original sin 125, 131
denial of will and 141–5
Osars, Edward 2
Oupnek’hat (Duperron) 88, 94
pain 49, 53, 54
root cause of 60
of separation in love 82
Parerga and Paralipomena 
(Schopenhauer) 6, 13, 14, 50, 
51, 62, 94
Eastern influences 88

INDEX
159
perception
of genius 59
knowledge of causality and 18–19
reason and 20–1
pessimism 1, 46–8, 51–2, 90–2, 
94, 144
Buddhism and 97
philosophy
death and 119–21
as guide to higher life of 
wisdom 87–8
need for 30–1
“Philosophy in the Universities” 
(Schopenhauer) 10
Plato 86, 127
critique of idea of love of 75
on death 122
ideas see ideas, Platonic
on melody 73
theory of punishment 111
poetry 68–71
procreation 35–6
love and 76–82, 83
punishment 110–11
Rance, Abbe Jean-Armand de 140
Raphael 68
reason
conceptual activity of 19–22, 25
will and 33–4
rebirth/reincarnation 98, 99, 125, 
131–2, 144
religion
philosophy and 87–8, 135–6, 146–7
religious activities 42
religious dogmas 115
representations 15–16, 38
causal form 23
revenge 110–11
right and wrong 109–10
romantic love 76, 77
aesthetic, anatomical features 
and 80–1
impact of 82, 83–4
mutual affection and 
possession 77–8
neglect of philosophical 
investigation on 75
pangs of separation 82
suitability of lovers 78–9, 81
Royal Danish Academy
Schopenhauer’s angst against 11
Safranski, Rüdiger 2
saints 44, 96, 100–1, 124, 
135–6, 137–9, 141, 148, 
149–50
reason for discard of worldly 
life 143–4
salvation (moksha/nirvana) 45, 
46–7, 93, 98, 100, 126, 142, 
143–4, 147
Sankara 95, 96
satisfaction 40, 42, 44–5, 51
Schleirmacher, Friedrich 7
Schopenhauer, Adele 4, 5
Schopenhauer Archives 14
Schopenhauer, Arthur 1, 102
academic career 9–10
admirers and disciples 13–14
as ascetic 92, 136
business acumen 9, 11
criticism of contemporary 
philosophers and writers 
6, 7, 10
criticism of philosophers and 
writers 49, 75
early influences 7, 8
early life 3–5
Eastern studies 94, 95
education 5–8
influences on 86–7
intolerant and quarrelsome 
nature 10
involvement with art 62–3
last years 13–14

INDEX
160
Schopenhauer, Arthur (Cont’d)
misunderstandings and critiques 
of 89–94
parentage 2–3
routine in later life 12–13
self-awareness of his 
greatness 8–9
as thanotologist 119
trans-cultural thinker 87, 94
works of 7, 11, 14
Schopenhauer, Heinrich 2–3, 4–5
Schopenhauer, Joanna 3, 5–6, 7–8
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst 6
self-knowledge 28–9
self-love (mamta) 93, 125–6, 149
sexual attraction and selection 35
determinants of 80–1
sexual love 76, 84
Socrates 30, 47, 112, 120, 131, 132, 
139, 146
soul (atman) 107, 125, 127
space 24
as intuitive form of 
representation 17–18, 26
species
consciousness of 
imperishability 123–4
“spirit of the species” 82–3, 85
speech
reason and 20
state, the 110
punishment and 110–11
stimuli 37
striving 39–40, 41, 53–4
subject-object relationship 15, 16, 
18–19
suffering (dukkha) 39–45, 53–5, 90
of body 29
in Buddhism 53, 97–100, 141, 
144–5
cause of 99–100
cessation of 100–1
denial of will and 139–41
notion 40
vanity and 45–50, 52
sufficient reason 16, 22–7
time and 17–18
supremacy
struggle for 37, 53–4
tat tvam asi (that thou art) 113, 
116, 118, 131
temporal justice 110–11
thing-in-itself 28, 30–1, 33–4, 48–9, 
56, 57, 58, 104, 126–7
time 24
as intuitive form of 
representation 17–18, 26
tragedy 70–1
La Trappe monastic order 140
Twilight of the Idols 
(Nietzsche) 138
The Two Fundamental Problems of 
Ethics (Schopenhauer) 11, 14
understanding 18, 19
of animals 19
basic function of 24–5
existentiell 29
Upanishads 88, 94, 95
vanity 50–3
suffering and 45–50
Veda(s) 95
Vedanta 47, 88–9
meaning of 95
Schopenhauer and 95–7, 118
see also Hinduism
virtue 103–4, 142
culmination of 135
intuitive knowledge of 114–16
Wallace, W. 2
will 16, 29, 31–3, 40
affirmation of 109–10, 112–13, 
130, 138

INDEX
161
body and 28–31
conflict and 37–8
objectification of 34–7, 63, 
72–3, 78
primacy and paramountcy 
of 107, 127
reason and 33–5
subordination of knowledge to 38
temporary goal 40
Will in Nature (Schopenhauer) 11, 
14, 88, 94
will-to-live 48–9, 52, 93, 96–7
compared to trishna 100
death and 119, 121
imperishability of 123–4, 125
love and 76–9, 81–2, 85
suffering and 39–45
Wolff, Christian 22
Wolf, Friedrich August 7
women
Schopenhauer’s views on 6
The World as Will and 
Representation 
(Schopenhauer) 7, 8, 9, 22, 
28, 56
editions 11, 14, 88
volume I 62
volume II 35, 45, 54, 62, 
65, 119
worldliness (samsara) 45, 47, 48, 
54, 91–2, 99, 126, 130, 143–4
wrong see right and wrong 
Zimmern, Helen 2

