
Schopenhauer: A Very Short Introduction

VERY SHORT INTRODUCTIONS are for anyone wanting a stimulating
and accessible way in to a new subject. They are written by experts, and have
been published in 25 languages worldwide.
The series began in 1995, and now represents a wide variety of topics
in history, philosophy, religion, science, and the humanities. Over the next
few years it will grow to a library of around 200 volumes - a Very Short
Introduction to everything from ancient Egypt and Indian Philosophy to
conceptual art and cosmology.
Very Short Introductions available now:
ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY
Julia Annas
THE ANGLO-SAXON AGE
John Blair
ANIMAL RIGHTS
David DeGrazia
ARCHAEOLOGY 
Paul Bahn
ARISTOTLE Jonathan Barnes
AUGUSTINE 
Henry Chadwick
BARTH ES Jonathan Culler
THE BIBLE John Riches
BUDDHA 
Michael Carrithers
BUDDHISM 
DamienKeown
CLASSICS 
Mary Beard and
John Henderson
CLAUSEWITZ 
Michael Howard
CONTINENTAL PHILOSOPHY
Simon Critchley
COSMOLOGY 
Peter Coles
DARWIN 
Jonathan Howard
DESCARTES Tom Sorell
DRUGS 
Leslie Iversen
EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY
BRITAIN 
PaulLangford
THE EUROPEAN UNION
John Pinder
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
William Doyle
FREUD Anthony Storr
GALILEO 
Stillman Drake
GANDHI 
BhikhuParekh
HEGEL Peter Singer
HEIDEGGER Michael Inwood
HINDUISM 
KimKnott
HISTORY John H.Arnold
HOBBES 
Richard Tuck
HUME 
A.J. Ayer
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY
Sue Hamilton
INTELLIGENCE 
Ian). Deary
ISLAM 
Malise Ruthven
JUDAISM 
Norman Solomon
JUNG Anthony Stevens
KANT 
Roger Scruton
KIERKEGAARD 
Patrick Gardiner
THE KORAN 
Michael Cook
LITERARY THEORY
Jonathan Culler
LOGIC Graham Priest
MACHIAVELLI 
Quentin Skinner
MARX 
Peter Singer
MEDIEVAL BRITAIN
John Gillingham and
Ralph A. Griffiths
MUSIC 
Nicholas Cook
NIETZSCHE 
Michael Tanner
NINETEENTH-CENTURY
BRITAIN 
Christopher Harvie and
H. C. G. Matthew
PAUL E. P. Sanders
PHILOSOPHY 
Edward Craig
POLITICS 
Kenneth Minogue
PSYCHOLOGY 
Gillian Butler and
Freda McManus

ROMAN BRITAIN
Peter Salway
ROUSSEAU 
Robert Wokler
RUSSELL A. C. Grayling
RUSSIAN LITERATURE
Catriona Kelly
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
Steve Smith
SCHOPENHAUER
Christopher Janaway
SHAKESPEARE 
Cermaine Greer
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
ANTHROPOLOCY
John Monaghan and Peter Just
SOCIOLOGY Steve Bruce
SOCRATES C. C.W.Taylor
STUART BRITAIN John Morrill
THEOLOGY 
David F. Ford
THE TUPORS John Guy
TWENTIETH-CENTURY
BRITAIN 
Kenneth 0. Morgan
WITTGENSTEIN 
A. C. Grayling
Available soon:
AFRICAN HISTORY
John Parker and Richard Rathbone
ANCIENT EGYPT Ian Shaw
ARCHITECTURE
Andrew Ballantyne
A RT HISTO RY Dana Arnold
ASTRONOMY 
Michael Hoskin
THE BRA IN 
Michael O'Shea
BRITISH POLITICS
Anthony Wright
CAPITALISM James Fulcher
CHAOS 
Leonard Smith
CHRISTIAN ART 
Beth Williamson
CHRISTIANITY 
Linda Woodhead
CITIZENSHIP 
Richard Bellamy
CLASSICAL ARCH ITECTU RE
Robert Tavernor
CLONING 
Arlene Klotzko
THE COLD WAR 
Robert McMahon
CONTEMPORARY ART
Julian Stallabrass
THECRUSAPES
Christopher Tyerman
CRYPTOGRAPHY
Fred Piper and Sean Murphy
DADA AND SURREALISM
David Hopkins
DEMOCRACY 
Bernard Crick
DESIGN JohnHeskett
DREAMING J. Allan Hobson
THE EARTH 
Martin Redfern
THE ELEMENTS 
Philip Ball
ECONOMICS 
Partha Dasgupta
EMPIRE 
Stephen Howe
EVOLUTION
Brian and Deborah Charlesworth
FASCISM Kevin Passmore
FILM 
Markjancovich
THE FIRST WORLD WAR
Michael Howard
FREEWILL Thomas Pink
FUNDAMENTALISM
Malise Ruthven
HIEROGLYPHS Penelope Wilson
HIROSHIMA 
B. R. Tomlinson
IPEOLOGY Michael Freeden
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Paul Wilkinson
LINGUISTICS 
Peter Matthews
MANDELA 
Tom Lodge
MATHEMATICS 
Timothy Cowers
MEDICAL ETHICS Tony Hope
T H E M I N P 
Martin Davies
MODERN IRELAND 
Senia Paseta
MOLECULES 
Philip Ball
NORTHERN IRELAND
Marc Mulholland
PERCEPTION 
Richard Gregory
PHILOSOPHYOF RELIGION
Jack Copeland and Diane Proudfoot

PHILOSOPHYOF SCIENCE
Samir Okasha
PHOTOGRAPHY 
Steve Edwards
PLATO 
Julia Annas
POSTCOLONIALISM
Robert Young
POSTMODERNISM
Christopher Butler
POSTSTRUCTURALISM
Catherine Belsey
PREHISTORY 
Chris Cosden
QUANTUM THEORY
John Polkinghorne
THE RAJ DenisJudd
THE RENAISSANCE 
Jerry Brotton
RENAISSANCE ART
Ceraldine Johnson
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Chris Frith and Eve Johnstone
THE SECOND WORLD WAR
Joanna Bourke
THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR
Helen Graham
SPINOZA 
Roger Scruton
TERRORISM
Charles Townshend
TRAGEDY 
Adrian Poole
TH E TWENTI ETH-CENTURY
Martin Conway
WORLD MUSIC 
Philip Bohlman
For more information visit our web site
www.oup.co.uk/vsi

Christopher Janaway
SCHOPENHAUER
A Very Short Introduction
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS

OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6op
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
Sao Paulo Shanghai Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto
and an associated company in Berlin
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Christopher Janaway 1994, 2002
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as an Oxford University Press paperback 1994
First published as a Very Short Introduction 2002
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 0-19-280259-3
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Typeset by RefineCatch Ltd, Bungay, Suffolk
Printed in Spain by Book Print S. L., Barcelona

Contents
Preface viii
Abbreviations and works cited ix
List of illustrations x
Schopenhauer's life and works 1
Within and beyond appearance 14
The world as will and representation 28
Will, body, and the self 42
Character, sex, and the unconscious 55
Art and ideas 70
Ethics: seeing the world aright 88
Existence and pessimism 103
Schopenhaner's influence 119
Further reading 129
Index 133

Preface
This book aims to give a sympathetic but critical account of
Schopenhauer's philosophy. He constructed a system which embraces
metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of mind, aesthetics, ethics, and
the meaning of life. But as a complete system his philosophy has had
few adherents, and he never founded a school of thought. His influence
on the history of thought was rather that of provoking and inspiring
generations of artists and thinkers from Wagner through to
Wittgenstein. Some of his ideas prefigure those of Freud, and his most
important philosophical impact was on Nietzsche, who at first found his
pessimist conclusions attractive and later regarded them as repulsive,
but was always in close dialogue with his 'great teacher'. Schopenhauer
was a true atheist, who fundamentally questioned the value of human
existence. Existence for Schopenhauer is a purposeless, painful striving,
driven by an unconscious force that we cannot control. Release from
this existence comes from losing one's individuality in aesthetic
experience, in compassion for the world, and in self-denial. While
examining all the main aspects of Schopenhauer's philosophical system,
this book hopes to bring out the challenging nature of the questions he
asks about human existence.
C.J.
August 2001

Abbreviations and works cited
Schopenhauer's works are referred to as follows, in translations by
E. F. J. Payne, unless otherwise stated. Some very minor changes are
made to some quoted passages.
B 
On the Basis of Morality (1841; Bobbs-Merrill, 1965).
F 
On the Freedom of the Will (1841), tr. K. Kolenda (Blackwell, 1985).
Mi-M4 Manuscript Remains, vols. 1-4, ed. A. Hiibscher (Berg Publishers,
1988-90).
N 
On the Will in Nature (1836; Berg Publishers, 1992).
Pi, P2 
Parerga and Paralipomena, vols. 1 & 2 (1851, Clarendon Press,
1974).
R 
The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason (1813,1847;
Open Court, 1974).
Wi, Wi The World as Will and Representation, vols. 1 & 2 (1819,1844;
Dover, 1969).

1 
Schopenhauer:
daguerreotype,
4 June 1853 
xii
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
2 
Schopenhauer as a youth,
1802 
7
Reproduced from Arthur
Hiibscher, Schopenhouer-Bi/dn/sse
(Frankfurt am Main: Waldemar
Kramer, 1968)
3 
Schopenhauer: miniature
portrait by
Karl Ludwig Kaaz, 1809 
n
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
4 
Schopenhauer: photograph
byjohann Schafer,
April 1859 
13
Hulton Archive
5 
Schopenhauer: portrait by
Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl,
around 1818 
23
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
6 
Title page of The World as
Will and Representation
1859 
38
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
7 
Manuscript extract from
the second volume of The
World as Will and
Representation 
56
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main

Schopenhauer: Hamel
portrait by
Julius Hamel, 1856 
72
Schopenhauer-Archiv. Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
Schopenhauer's flutes
among other objects in the
Schopenhauer-Archiv,
Frankfurt am Main 
86
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main
Title page of The Two
Fundamental Problems
of Ethics 1841 
91
Schopenhauer-Archiv, Stadt- und
Universitatsbibliothek, Frankfurt
am Main

1. Schopenhauer: daguerreotype, 4 June 1853

Chapter 1
Schopenhauer's life
and works
Arthur Schopenhauer was born in 1788 in Danzig, and died in Frankfurt
am Main in 1860. There are a number of photographs taken during the
last decade of his life, from which we derive our most immediate sense
of the man. He looks unconventional and grimly determined, but the
sparkle in his eye is that of someone vigilant, incisive, and capable of
mischief - not altogether different from the persona which emerges
from his writings. At the end of his life Schopenhauer was just beginning
to enjoy a measure of fame. His philosophy, however, is not a product of
old or middle age. Although most of the words which he published were
written after he settled in Frankfurt at the age of 45, it was in the years
between 1810 and 1818 that he had produced the entire philosophical
system for which he became celebrated. As Nietzsche later wrote, we
should remember that it was the creative, rebellious energy of a man in
his twenties which produced The World as Will and Representation. The
mature Schopenhauer occupied himself in consolidating and
supplementing the position he had presented in this masterpiece, which
was, until very near the end of his life, neglected by the intellectual
world.
Independence of spirit is the trait most characteristic of Schopenhauer.
He writes fearlessly with little respect for authority, and detests the
hollow conformism which he finds in the German academic
establishment. But behind this is the significant fact that he was also

financially independent. When he came of age in 1809, he inherited
wealth which, with astute management, was sufficient to see him
through the rest of his life. His father, Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer, had
been one of the wealthiest businessmen in Danzig at the time of
Arthur's birth. A cosmopolitan man, committed to the liberal values of
the Enlightenment and to republicanism, he left Danzig when it was
annexed by Prussia, and moved to the free city of Hamburg. Arthur had
in common with his father a love of French and English culture and a
horror of Prussian nationalism. The name 'Arthur' was chosen because it
was shared by several European languages - though the intention here
was chiefly to fit the infant for his envisaged career in pan-European
commerce. Later Arthur felt he had also inherited his father's intense,
obsessive personality. His father's death in 1805, probably by suicide,
was a great blow to him.
Schopenhauer received a broad and enriching education in school,
jjj enhanced by the travel and social contacts that his wealthy family made
g^ possible. Sent to France at the age of 9 when his sister was born, he
•g acquired fluent French. After some years of schooling, at the age of 15
he embarked with his parents on a two-year trip to Holland, England,
France, Switzerland, and Austria. He saw many of the famous sights of
the day, and at times was deeply affected by the poverty and suffering
he witnessed. While his parents toured Britain, however, he was
consigned to a boarding-school in Wimbledon, whose narrow,
disciplinarian, religious outlook (a marked contrast to the education he
had hitherto received) made a negative impression that was to last. This
episode says much about Schopenhauer's character and upbringing. He
was a seething, belligerent pupil who would not submit to the
stultifying practices that surrounded him, and he seems quite isolated
in his defiance. His parents wrote to him, his father niggling about his
handwriting, his mother gushing about the wonderful time they were
having and pleading with him to take a more reasonable attitude, but
neither showed much inclination to see things from his point of view. It
is tempting to view the situation as a microcosm of his later life. As his

life progressed, it became clearer that it would not be constructed
around close relationships with others. He began to see company as like
a fire 'at which the prudent man warms himself at a distance' (Mi, 123),
and resolved to be lonely even when with others, for fear of losing his
own integrity. He later wrote that five-sixths of human beings were
worth only contempt, but equally saw that there were inner obstacles
to human contact: 'Nature has done more than is necessary to isolate
my heart, in that she endowed it with suspicion, sensitiveness,
vehemence and pride' (M4, 506). He was prone to depression, and
confessed 'I always have an anxious concern that causes me to see and
look for dangers where none exist' (M^, 507).
Some writers on Schopenhauer's personality have looked to his
relationships with his parents, and what they have found is not
surprising. His father was an anxious, exacting, and formidable man,
very ambitious for his son. Johanna Schopenhauer, nee Trosiener, also
from a successful business family in Danzig, was quite different. A lively,
sociable person, she had literary aspirations, which culminated in a
career as a romantic novelist, making her during her lifetime more
famous than her son. She was a significant force in his life, but relations
between them were never warm. In her marriage too, as she herself
wrote, she saw no need to 'feign ardent love' for her husband, adding
that he did not expect it. After Heinrich Schopenhauer died, the
independently minded Johanna was free to embark on her own career,
and moved to Weimar, where she established an artistic and intellectual
salon frequented by many of the luminaries of the day. Arthur benefited
from so,me of the relationships he established in this circle, notably with
Goethe, and with the oriental scholar Friedrich Majer, who stimulated in
him a life-long interest in Indian thought. However, his relationship with
his mother became stormy, and in 1814 she threw him out for good,
never to see him again.
By the time this happened Schopenhauer had abandoned the career in
business which his father had projected for him, and had found his way

into the life of learning. In 1809 he went to the University at Cottingen,
from where he was to move on to Berlin two years later. He attended
lectures on a variety of scientific subjects, having originally intended
to study medicine; but he soon gravitated towards philosophy.
The Cottingen philosopher G. E. Schulze played a decisive role in
Schopenhauer's career when he advised him to begin by reading
the works of Plato and Kant. Though Schopenhauer was, by any
standards, a widely read and scholarly thinker, it is fair to say that
his reading of these two philosophers provoked in him the
fundamental ideas that shaped his philosophy from then on. The
Hindu Upanishads, which he learned of through Friedrich Majer, were
the third ingredient which he later blended with Platonic and Kantian
elements to make something quite original in The World as Will and
Representation.
When he moved to Berlin, Schopenhauer heard lectures by
= Schleiermacher and Fichte, two of the philosophical heavyweights of
£ the day, though, true to form, he was fairly contemptuous of them, and
jg certainly did not seem to think he was there to absorb what they had to
say. His lecture notes and marginal annotations to the books he was
reading (preserved in Manuscript Remains) show him keen to object and
debate, and, for a young student, he reacts with an almost uncanny
sureness of his own position. This too is a pattern that was not to vary
greatly. Schopenhauer did not learn in association with others, by
exchanging ideas and submitting himself to scrutiny. He learned, and
wrote, by relying on his own judgement and treating other people's
ideas as raw material to be hammered into the shape he wanted. What
he could not use he sometimes decried as rubbish, with a witty style of
mockery that usually succeeds in keeping the reader on his side.
Schopenhauer would have made far less of himself without such single-
minded determination, but the same feature has its compensating
weakness: it can be a virtue for a philosopher to exhibit more give and
take, more sense of dialogue and self-criticism, than Schopenhauer
sometimes does.

When Schopenhauer was ready to write his doctoral thesis, in 1813, war
broke out. Schopenhauer had an aversion to fighting, and even more of
an aversion to fighting on the Prussian side against the French. He fled
south to Rudolstadt near Weimar and there completed his first work, On
the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, which gained him
his doctorate at Jena, and was published in an edition of 500 copies in
the same year. The book takes a stock academic topic, the principle of
sufficient reason (which says that, for everything that is, there must be a
ground or reason why it is), lays out concisely the ways in which it has
been dealt with in the history of philosophy, then proceeds to a four-
part explanation of the different kinds of reason. The systematic
framework is derived from Kant, whose thought Schopenhauer has
clearly assimilated, though not uncritically. There are enough twists to
make this the beginning of something new, and more than a hint of
what is to come in his major work. Schopenhauer always considered The §1
Fourfold Root essential to understanding his thought, and undertook a 
"S
revision of it for re-publication in 1847. 
|
s:
Another early publication is the essay On Vision and Colours, of 1816. This »
short book is a product of his involvement with Goethe, whose anti- 
j "
Newtonian theory of colours had been published at the beginning of 
jr
the decade. In discussing this theory, Schopenhauer and Goethe came
to know each other quite well. Schopenhauer did not regard it as a
central project of his own, but understandably did not turn down the
invitation to work with one of the greatest men he was ever likely to
meet. Goethe, forty years his senior, recognized the rigour of
Schopenhauer's mind, and regarded him as someone with great
potential, but was less concerned to foster his talent than to receive help
in his own intellectual endeavours. The brief period in which they
worked together is the one exceptional collaboration in Schopenhauer's
career - but still he did not have it in him to become anyone's disciple.
His own work On Vision and Colours diverged somewhat from Goethe's
thinking, and he did not disguise the fact that he thought it superior.
The partnership tailed off, Schopenhauer disappointed, though not

crushed, by Goethe's lukewarm response. He later sent Goethe a copy
of The World as Will and Representation, and had an apparently cordial
meeting with him in 1819. But by now the two had parted company. As
Goethe was to say, they were like two people who eventually shook
hands, one turning to go south, the other north.
Schopenhauer's true destination is revealed in Volume I of The World as
Will and Representation, which he completed in Dresden and published
in 1818, although 1819 is the date that stands on the title-page. The
dispassionate, Kantian exercise which Schopenhauer carried out in The
Fourfold Root of 1813 did not reveal the driving force of his philosophy. It
did not address questions concerning suffering and salvation, ethics and
art, sexuality, death, and the meaning of life, but it was in these areas
that his preoccupations already lay. The collected Manuscript Remains
show Schopenhauer's greatest book in a process of composition over a
period of almost ten years. Adapting the thought of both Plato and
| 
Kant, he had become convinced that there was a split between ordinary
a consciousness and a higher or 'better' state in which the human mind
•g could pierce beyond mere appearances to a knowledge of something
more real. The thought had aesthetic and religious overtones:
Schopenhauer wrote of both the artist and the 'saint' as possessing this
'better consciousness' - though it should be said straightaway that his
philosophical system is atheist through and through. He also struck one
of the keynotes of pessimism, saying that the life of ordinary
experience, in which we strive and desire and suffer, is something from
which to be liberated. Such thoughts were well established in
Schopenhauer's mind by 1813.
The idea which allowed his monumental book to take shape was his
conception of the will. In the finished work, as its title indicates,
Schopenhauer presents the world as having two sides, that of
Vorstellung (representation), or the way things present themselves to us
in experience, and that of Wille (will), which is, he argues, what the
world is in itself, beyond the mere appearances to which human

2. Schopenhauer as a youth, 1802
II
"
wT
I
s
knowledge is limited. The will is not easy to define. It is, to begin with,
easier to say what it is not. It is not any kind of mind or consciousness,
nor does it direct things to any rational purpose (otherwise 'will' would
be another name for Cod). Schopenhauer's world is purposeless. His
notion of will is probably best captured by the notion of striving towards
something, provided one remembers that the will is fundamentally
'blind', and found in forces of nature which are without consciousness
at all. Most importantly, the human psyche can be seen as split:
comprising not only capacities for understanding and rational thought,
but at a deeper level also an essentially 'blind' process of striving, which
governs, but can also conflict with, the conscious portions of our nature.
Humanity is poised between the life of an organism driven to survival
and reproduction, and that of a pure intellect that can rebel against its
nature and aspire to a timeless contemplation of a 'higher' reality.

Though he does still envisage a kind of resigned 'salvation',
Schopenhauer thinks ordinary existence must involve the dual miseries
of pain and boredom, insisting that it is in the very essence of humanity,
indeed of the world as a whole, that it should be so.
Many have found Schopenhauer's philosophy impossible to accept as a
single, consistent metaphysical scheme. But it does have great strength
and coherence as a narrative and in the dynamic interplay between its
different conceptions of the world and the self. What is set down at the
beginning should be treated not so much as a foundation for everything
that is to come, but as a first idea which will be revealed as inadequate
by a second that seems to undermine it, only to reassert itself in
transformed guise later on. There is a superficial resemblance here to
the method of his contemporary Hegel, though everything to do with
Hegel was anathema to Schopenhauer, and in other respects they could
hardly differ more as writers. Thomas Mann likened Schopenhauer's
book to a great symphony in four movements, and it is helpful to
approach it in something of this spirit, seeking contrasts of mood and
unities of theme amid a wealth of variations. Certainly there have been
few philosophers who have equalled Schopenhauer's grasp of literary
architecture and pacing, and few whose prose style is so eloquent.
For all this, the great work went virtually unnoticed for many years after
its publication. Schopenhauer was embittered, but he was not one to
think that the world was right and he was wrong; he continued
throughout his life to believe in the supreme value of his work. In 1820
he was awarded the right to lecture at the University in Berlin, after
speaking before a gathering of the faculty chaired by Hegel, the
professor of philosophy. Schopenhauer duly presented himself to
lecture, under the stunning title 'The whole of philosophy, i.e. the
theory of the essence of the world and of the human mind'. But he had
chosen to speak at the same time as Hegel. Two hundred attended the
lecture of the professor, who was at the peak of his career, and the
unknown Schopenhauer was left with a pitiful few. His name was on the

lecture-schedule in later years, but he never returned to repeat the
experience, and this was the end of his lecturing career. Hegel was the
epitome of everything that Schopenhauer disliked in philosophy. He
was a career academic, who made use of the institutional authority
which Schopenhauer held in contempt. He upheld the church and the
state, for which Schopenhauer, an atheist and an individualist, had no
time. Although thoroughly conservative himself, Schopenhauer
regarded the political state merely as a convenient means for protecting
property and curbing the excesses of egoism; he could not stomach
Hegel's representation of the state as 'the whole aim of human
existence' (Pi, 147). Hegel was also an appalling stylist, who seemed to
build abstraction upon abstraction without the breath of fresh air
provided by common-sense experience, and Schopenhauer - not alone
in this - found his writing pompous and obscurantist, even dishonest.
The emblem at the head of Hegelian university philosophy, he says, 
g!
o
should be 'a cuttle-fish creating a cloud of obscurity around itself so that "S
no one sees what it is, with the legend, mea caligine tutus (fortified by 
c
my own obscurity)' (N, 24). It is not true to say that Schopenhauer's 
£
philosophy was based on opposition to Hegel - Hegel was far from his 
£
mind as he created his major work - but Hegel's triumphant success, 
f
coupled with his own continuing lack of recognition, nevertheless 
jf
produced in him a rancour which dominated much of his subsequent
During the 18205 Schopenhauer was at his least productive. He travelled
to Italy, suffered during and after his return journey from serious illness
and depression, and continued an affair with Caroline Richter, a chorus
girl at the National Theatre in Berlin. He planned a number of writing
projects, such as translations of Hume's works on religion and of
Sterne's Tristram Shandy, but nothing came of them. His notebooks
were filled, sometimes with invective against Hegelianism which he
reworked for inclusion in later works, but he completed no more
publications while in Berlin. It is especially sad that the English publisher
he approached about translating Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and

other works should have turned him down. Schopenhauer's English was
good, his feel for literary form superb, and his knowledge of Kant's work
intimate. One can only speculate how the history of ideas would have
been affected had he succeeded in making Kant more accessible to the
English-speaking world at this comparatively early date. (By contrast, a
result of his scholarship to which we are indebted is the rediscovery of
the first edition of the Critique, which was republished in 1838 partly
thanks to his efforts.)
In 1831 cholera reached Berlin, apparently claiming Hegel among its
victims, and Schopenhauer left the city. After some indecision he
settled in Frankfurt, where he was to continue living an outwardly
uneventful life, balanced between writing and recreation - theatre,
opera, walking, playing the flute, dining out, and reading The Times in
the town's library. Now he was able to produce more books. In 1836 he
published On the Will in Nature, which was designed to support his
| 
doctrine of the will by putting forward corroborative scientific evidence
a from independent sources. It is still a work of interest, although
•g arguably it does not stand very well on its own apart from The World
as Will and Representation. However, in 1838 and 1839 Schopenhauer
entered for two essay competitions set by the Norwegian Royal
Scientific Society and its Danish counterpart, and the two occasions
produced a pair of fine self-standing essays, On the Freedom of the
Will and On the Basis of Morality, which were published together in
1841 under the title The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics. In terms
of doctrine these pieces are not radical departures from his earlier
work, but both are well-constructed and persuasive pieces in which
local parts of the grand design are presented with clarity. They can
readily be recommended to a student of ethics today. In the essay
on freedom Schopenhauer presents a convincing case for
determinism, only to say, as some more recent philosophers have,
that the deeper issues of freedom and responsibility are scarcely
resolved thereby. This essay was rewarded with a gold medal by
the Norwegians.
10

•*>
3. Schopenhauer: miniature portrait by Karl Ludwig Kaaz, 1809

The second essay, part of which is a thorough criticism of Kant's ethics,
suffered a different fate in Denmark: despite its being the only entry, the
Royal Society refused to award it a prize. It had not, they judged,
successfully answered the question set - and they took exception to the
'unseemly' manner in which a number of recent philosophers of distinction
had been referred to. Who did they mean? asked Schopenhauer in his
Preface to the essays: Fichte and Hegel! Are these men the summi philosophi
one is not allowed to insult? It is true that Schopenhauer had not been
playing the conventional game of academic politeness, but now he seizes
the chance to let rip with all the means at his command. He produces
an escalating series of allegations about the emptiness and confusion of
Hegel's philosophy, throwing in a picturesque quote from Homer about
the chimera, which is a compound of many beasts, and ending
Further, if I were to say that this summus philosophus of the Danish
Academy scribbled nonsense quite unlike any mortal before him, so
S 
that whoever could read his most eulogized work, the so-called
£ 
Phenomenology of Mind, without feeling as if he were in a madhouse,
•= 
would qualify as an inmate for Bedlam, I should be no less right. (B, 16)
In 1844 a second volume of The World as Will and Representation was
published along with a new edition of the first volume. Schopenhauer
was wise in not trying to rewrite his youthful work. What he provides
instead is a substantial elaboration of the original, clarifying and
extending it with the benefit of mature reflection. The second volume is
actually longer than the first, and the two combine well to produce a
single work. They were published together again in a third edition in
1859, the year before he died. Schopenhauer's final new publication was
another two-volume book, entitled Parerga and Paralipomena, which
appeared in 1851. The imposing title means 'complementary works and
matters omitted', and the contents range from extended philosophical
essays to the more popular 'Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life', which
have often been published separately. Somewhat strangely, it was
this late work, which was reviewed favourably first in England, that
12

led to Schopenhauer's becoming well known. There was demand
for new editions of his writings, and he even became a topic for
German university courses. He received many visitors, and much
correspondence, including the complete libretto of The Ring of the
Nibelung from an ardent fan, Richard Wagner, of whose music,
incidentally, he did not think very highly. In the first fifty years after his
death Schopenhauer was to become one of the most influential writers
of Europe. Though he made no claim to be a poet, the verses which
came to stand at the very end of Parerga and Paralipomena (P2, 658)
are no doubt an honest reflection of what he felt in his last years:
1856
Finale
I now stand weary at the end of the road;
The jaded brow can hardly bear the laurel.
And yet I gladly see what I have done,
Ever undaunted by what others say.
I
y01
4. Schopenhauer: photograph byjohann Schafer, April 1859
13

Chapter 2
Within and beyond
appearance
Appearance and thing in itself
Schopenhauer's philosophical thinking is easiest to grasp if one first
sees the backbone that runs right through it. This is the distinction,
which he found in Kant, between appearance and thing in itself. The
world of appearance consists of things as we know them by the ordinary
means of sense experience and scientific investigation, in other words
the empirical world. Appearance is not to be understood as
straightforward illusion: the things that meet us in our empirical
knowledge are not hallucinations, but to use the Greek word for
appearances, they are the phenomena that make up the world.
However, there is still the question whether the whole world consists
only of these phenomena. Should we regard 'what there is' as being
exhausted by our empirical knowledge? We can at least conceive of a
reality independent of what we could experience, and this is what Kant
meant by talking of things 'in themselves'.
Kant's achievement was to show that knowledge was limited: we could
never know how the world was in itself, only how it could appear to us,
as scientists or ordinary perceivers. The pretensions of traditional
metaphysicians to know about God, the immortality of the soul, or a
supernatural order pervading the whole universe were therefore
doomed. According to Schopenhauer's assessment (in his 'Critique of
14

the Kantian Philosophy' [Appendix to Wi, 417-25]), Kant had added to
this destructive achievement two others that were more positive. The
first was the idea that the world of appearance had fundamental and
necessary organizing principles which could be discovered. The second
was the view that ethics could be separated off from the sphere of
appearance, and was not knowledge in the way that science was: when
considering ourselves as beings who must act and judge things to be
right or wrong, we were not dealing with how matters lay in the
empirical world.
First, let us take the idea that appearance, the world as we know it, has a
necessary structure. Kant thought that the world of appearance must
occupy space and time. It is obviously hard to imagine there not being
space or time, but Kant went further and argued that without them
there could not be a knowable world at all. A similar point applies to 
§
cause and effect, and to the principle that things can endure unchanged =
through time. The rules of the empirical world are that it must contain 
£
enduring things, arranged in space and time, and having systematic 
1
effects upon one another. Nothing else, Kant argued, could ever count 
.»
as an empirical world that we could know. However, his most startling 
8
01
claim is that all these rules are not present in the world as it is in itself. 
jj
They are all rules simply about how the world must be if we are to be
able to experience it. So space and time, cause and effect, relate only to
the way in which things have to appear to us. Take away the
experiencing subject, and none of the world's structure would remain.
The second positive point from Kant concerns our view of ourselves. As
well as trying to understand the world, we are called upon to act and
make decisions, and these will ultimately be governed by questions of
morality. Kant argues that morality can work only if each of us conceives
himself or herself purely as a rational being, who is constrained by duty,
and has freedom to choose the principles on which he or she will act. No
kind of empirical investigation could reveal us to be such purely rational,
free beings: if you like, there are no such things in the physical world.
15

Nevertheless, it is a conception of ourselves which we must have. So,
even though my knowledge is limited to the empirical world, I cannot
ever believe that what I am is limited in the same way. Kant's idea,
simply put, is that I must think that in myself, beyond appearances, I am
a free and purely rational agent.
Now when Schopenhauer came across the Kantian philosophy as a
student at Cottingen, he found it convincing, but incomplete. He
embraced the distinction between appearance and thing in itself. On
the appearance side, he wanted to modify Kant's views, but was happy
to agree that the empirical world did not exist in itself, and was given its
structure by rules of space, time, and causality imposed by us. It was,
however, on the side of the thing in itself that he felt Kant had fudged
his account. What is the world really, in itself? And what am I? This was
the double riddle which Kant had left by distinguishing appearance
from thing in itself, and claiming that it was only of appearances that
jj one could have knowledge. The conception of the thing in itself gave
£ rise to other philosophical problems which had been much discussed in
^ 
the German academic world. Both Schopenhauer's first teacher,
Schulze, and Fichte, whose lectures he heard in Berlin, were prominent
in the debate. In presenting his solution to the riddle, claiming that the
thing in itself, both in the world and in the microcosm of the human
being, was will, Schopenhauer was addressing a burning problem of the
day, and to some extent trading on a familiar post-Kantian idea.
The better consciousness
At the beginning, the young Schopenhauer was reading not only Kant,
but also Plato, and here he encountered another way of understanding
the difference between what appears and what 'really is'. What 'really
is' for Plato is a set of unchanging entities called Ideas or Forms.
Individual things are imperfect, they come and go, but this does not
affect the fundamental order in the universe, which is constituted by
absolute and eternal Forms. Plato thought that the greatest
16

achievement for humanity would be to gain an understanding of these
eternal Forms, such as Justice itself, Goodness itself, and Beauty itself.
The human soul would be elevated to a plane where it transcended the
limitations of mere opinion and mortal appetite, gained an
apprehension of absolute standards of value, and achieved a release
from conflict and suffering. At a crucial phase in his development
Schopenhauer succumbed to this vision. Even though the Kantian thing
in itself was supposed to be beyond the limits of human knowledge,
while Plato's Ideas were the objects of knowledge par excellence,
Schopenhauer conflated what the two were saying, and formed a
Platonic view about what an insight into the thing in itself beyond
appearance would be like. For many years he thought he had made an
important discovery: 'Plato's Ideas and Kant's thing-in-itself... that these
two are one and the same is as unheard of as it is sure and certain' (Mi,
377). Although he did come to see that the positions of the two great 
§
philosophers were in fact distinct, the fusion created in his mind had 
=
acquired an energy of its own. He believed that empirical 
£
consciousness, limited as it was to the phenomena of space, time, and 
1
causality, was something inferior which we should aspire to escape 
»
from, if possible. Only if there was a 'better' consciousness could human Z
DJ
beings find anything that was of true value. 
|
The term 'better consciousness' appears only in Schopenhauer's earliest
unpublished manuscripts. It was not a very well-focused concept, and
he abandoned it. But his later ideas about the value of art and about
resigned detachment from life are continuous with his early view. In
1813, for example, he wrote the following in his notebooks:
As soon as we objectively consider, i.e. contemplate the things of the world,
then for the moment subjectivity and thus the source of all misery has
vanished. We are free and the consciousness of the material world of the
senses stands before us as something strange and foreign which no
longer wears us down. Also we are no longer involved in considering the
nexus of space, time and causality (useful for our individuality), but see
17

the Platonic Idea of the object . . . This liberation from temporal
consciousness leaves the better eternal consciousness behind. (Mi, 50)
Ordinary consciousness is seen as something to which 'misery'
attaches; if only we can break the Kantian rules that limit knowledge to
appearance, we shall enter into a realm in which both we ourselves and
the objects of our direct 'contemplation' are timeless. This 'liberation'
Schopenhauer thinks may be found in art, and in the attitude to the
world which he calls that of the 'saint'. Both the artistic genius and the
saint supposedly contemplate reality from a standpoint which
transcends ordinary empirical understanding. Many recent
commentators have played down the influence of Plato, and treated
Schopenhauer as a rather unorthodox Kantian. But the 'better
consciousness' is dramatically un-Kantian; Schopenhauer's own
assessment that Kant and Plato were united in his philosophy is nearer
the mark, even if the two make themselves felt in quite different ways.
I
* 
In fact, Schopenhauer was prone to cite three influences: 'I do not
•g believe my doctrine could have come about before the Upanishads,
Plato and Kant could cast their rays simultaneously into the mind of one
man' (Mi, 467). What of the third influence? Schopenhauer's knowledge
of Plato and Kant, and his notion of the 'better consciousness', were
already formed when he encountered the Upanishads, the sacred Hindu
writings which he acquired in 1814 (in a Latin version taken from the
Persian and entitled Oupnek'hat) and which he described in his late years
as 'the consolation of my life' (P2,397). We may note two principal ideas
which impressed Schopenhauer in the Hindu writings he studied: one is
Maya or illusion, the other the identity of the individual with the world
as a whole, embodied in the powerful Sanskrit saying 'tot tvam as;' ('this
art thou'). Schopenhauer often refers to our ordinary experience as not
penetrating the Veil of Maya'. This is not the common sceptical thought
that we cannot trust our senses to tell us about the material world, but
rather the idea that the material world of our experience is not
something eternal, and not something we should ultimately put our
18

trust in. Schopenhauer thinks that the world of material things which
we experience and can investigate in science must be cast aside as of no
genuine worth by comparison with the timeless vision open to artists
and saints. The suspension, or denial, of one's complete differentiation
from the rest of the world ('this art thou') will be a feature of that
timeless vision. Schopenhauer had to work out how one's
understanding of both the world and the self would be transformed on
abandoning ordinary empirical consciousness, and what came to play a
central role here was the notion of losing the sense of oneself as a
separate individual. Some of his ideas have a kinship with Buddhism
which he later emphasized, though the relationship here was one of
convergence rather than influence (1/1/2,169).
The Fourfold Root 
g
i
While all these thoughts began to form, Schopenhauer set himself to 
=
write his doctoral dissertation, On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of 
£
Sufficient Reason. In it he makes no mention of the 'better 
|
consciousness', and deals simply with the principles governing ordinary .§
experience and reasoning. He was obviously satisfied with the answers 
8
he reached, since he later retained them substantially unchanged, and 
|
frequently refers back to the dissertation. The fact that he produced an
expanded version of the dissertation in 1847 confirms his statement that
it is to be considered part of his complete system of thought. The text of
The Fourfold Root we usually read today is this later version.
Schopenhauer begins The Fourfold Root with the single principle of
sufficient reason which was the stock-in-trade of the eighteenth-
century academic tradition associated with Leibniz and Christian Wolff.
The principle states simply: 'Nothing is without a ground or reason why
it is' (R, 6). Nothing is self-standing; everything is in relation to
something else which is the reason for its being, or the explanation of it.
However, there are, according to Schopenhauer, four distinct ways in
which something may relate to a ground or reason, associated with four
19

different kinds of explanation, which, he claims, none of his
predecessors has clearly distinguished. The most familiar kind are causal
or physical explanations, where we explain one event or state in terms
of its relation to another which caused it. Then there are cases where we
explain why some judgement is true by relating it to the grounds for its
truth, such as an empirical observation or another truth from which it
can be inferred. Thirdly, there are mathematical explanations - in which
we explain, for example, why a triangle has the properties it does.
Finally, there is explanation of what people do. We explain actions by
relation to motives, which are their reasons, or causes, or both. In all
these cases we are dealing with relations imposed by the mind,
Schopenhauer thinks, and in each case the relation is one of necessity.
Hence, in his terms, there are physical necessity, logical necessity,
mathematical necessity, and moral necessity. Once we understand what
the mind is doing when it operates with these relationships, we will
have understood the forms that all explanation takes, and hence the
true significance of the principle of sufficient reason. Let us deal with the
four kinds of relation in turn.
By far the most substantial section of The Fourfold Root is devoted to the
principle of causal explanation. An obvious class of objects the mind can
grasp is that of the particular perceptible things that occupy space and
time, and make up empirical reality. Space and time, as we saw, provide
the basic structure of empirical reality. But space and time are not
perceivable; what we can perceive is what fills space and time, and that,
for Schopenhauer, is simply matter (R, 46). Were there not both time
and space, there could be neither distinct material things nor change,
and so nothing for causality to apply to. Now the principle of causality
states that every change in the world of material things must have a
cause, or, as Schopenhauer puts it, 'every state that appears must have
ensued or resulted from a change that preceded it' (R, 53). The principle
allows of no exceptions: what we usually call the cause of some event is
merely a particular change that preceded it, but that change must itself
have ensued from some previous changes, and so on. By ensuing,
20

Schopenhauer means following regularly, or 'as often as the first state
exists'. Cause and effect are related in such a way that, if the first occurs,
the second cannot but occur. This relation is seen as one of necessity.
Schopenhauer has a simple, uncluttered view about the nature of
empirical reality. Individual material things exist in space and time. A
material thing is something capable of interacting causally with other
material things. And every change that occurs to a material thing is
the necessary result of some preceding change that occurs to a
material thing. One complication, however, is that Schopenhauer is
not a realist about material things, but an idealist: that is, material
things would not exist, for him, without the mind. He holds, with
Kant, that the whole structure we have just described exists only as
something presented to us as subjects, not in itself. When
Schopenhauer says that empirical things in space and time are objects,
he means that they are objects for a subject. 'Object' in his parlance
means something met with in experience, or in the subject's
consciousness. Space and time are the fundamental forms brought to
experience by us. So the material occupants of space and time would
not exist if it were not for the subject, and the causal connections
which obtain between the states of material things are connections
which we, as subjects, impose.
In Schopenhauer's account of perception, the human intellect 'creates'
the world of ordinary material things (R, 75), and does so by applying
the principle of cause and effect to sensations received by our bodily
senses. We apprehend some change in our bodily state. The intellect
then applies the principle of causality, and projects as cause of the
sensation a material object 'outside' in space - and this projection is the
object which we say we perceive. Thus the principle of causality is
doubly important to Schopenhauer: it not only governs all interaction
between material things, but is responsible for our construction of
those very material things in the first place. The account has a certain
ingenuity, but is troubling. For one thing, where do bodily sensations
21

come from? They must surely be originally caused in the body by
something prior to the operation of the intellect, but Schopenhauer
does not discuss what that prior cause might be. Secondly, how do we
apprehend the initial sensation? It cannot be that the mind perceives
the sensation as a change in a material thing (the body), and yet if it
does not do so, why is the principle of causality, which governs changes
of material things, called into operation at all?
Schopenhauer's second class of objects for the mind is made up of
concepts. Concepts are, for Schopenhauer, mental representations
which are by nature secondary: he calls them 'representations of
representations'. The basic representations are experiences of things in
the material world, such as a particular tree; the concept tree is, by
contrast, a general representation formed to stand for many such
objects, by leaving out the detailed elements of what is experienced in
each case. Schopenhauer is fond of emphasizing that concepts are
S always at least one step removed from direct experience, for which he
* 
uses the Kantian term Anschauung (intuition or perception). He thinks
•§ that a concept, to be of much use to us, must always be capable of
being cashed out in terms of experience. Concepts such as being,
essence, or thing, have the least cash value in these terms (R, 147,155). As
we shall see, Schopenhauer also takes the view that in some areas, such
as art and ethics, abstract conceptual thinking can actually stand in the
way of genuine insight.
Nevertheless, possession of concepts is a distinctively human
characteristic for Schopenhauer, raising us above the consciousness of
which other animals are capable. Other creatures, in his view, can have a
perception of material things existing in space and time, much as we
do - in a remarkable passage he laments the fact that 'in the West
where [man's] skin has turned white' we have ceased to acknowledge
our kinship with animals whom we demean as 'beasts or brutes' (R,
146). But the other animals do lack conceptual representations, and so
lack the ability to make judgements, to reason, to have a language, or
22

5. Schopenhauer: portrait by Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl, around 1818

an understanding of past and future. Thinking, or making judgements,
is the fundamental function of concepts. Schopenhauer calls a
judgement a combination or relationship of concepts, though he is not
very clear about what this relationship involves. He is more interested in
the idea that a judgement can express knowledge, and it is here that the
principle of sufficient reason comes in again. 'If a judgement is to
express a piece of knowledge, it must have a sufficient ground or reason;
by virtue of this quality, it then receives the predicate true. Truth is
therefore the reference of a judgement to something different
therefrom' (R, 156). It is a familiar thought that a judgement amounts to
knowledge if it is true and sufficiently grounded in something outside
itself. Schopenhauer's brief remarks appear to make no distinction
between a judgement's having a sufficient ground and its being true.
Whether he would accept a notion of truth as correspondence with the
way things are, independently of grounds for judging them to be so,
remains obscure.
What Schopenhauer succeeds in establishing is that true judgements
may be grounded in quite different ways. They may be grounded in
another judgement, as when we argue, conclude, or infer (R, 157-8)
from one truth to another. They may, on the other hand, be 'empirical
truths', grounded not in another judgement, but in experience. For
example, our judgement 'There is snow on the trees' may have its
justification in the evidence of our senses. On the other hand in the
syllogism 'There is snow on the trees. Snow is a white substance.
Therefore, there is a white substance on the trees.' the truth of the final
judgement is grounded simply in the truths of the two premisses.
Schopenhauer calls this a 'logical' or 'formal' truth, meaning simply one
whose ground is based on deduction, rather than observation. There
are two other kinds of truth in his account, which he calls
transcendental truth and metalogical truth. These occur respectively
when a judgement is founded on the conditions of experience or on the
conditions of thought in general. A notable transcendental truth is
'Nothing happens without a cause', which is neither grounded in
24

observation nor on deduction from any other truths, but is an
underlying principle on which all experience is based. (Schopenhauer is
here following Kant closely.) Metalogical truths are supposedly a kind of
judgement where, if we try to go against them, we cease to be able to
think properly at all. One example Schopenhauer gives is 'No predicate
can be simultaneously attributed and denied to a subject': we cannot
think, for example, 'Snow is and is not white.' The principle of sufficient
reason itself is a truth of this kind, Schopenhauer claims, though in
some of its guises, especially the principle of causality, it appears as a
transcendental truth (/?, 162).
Schopenhauer's third class of objects in The Fourfold Root is made up
simply of space and time. Once again, we are close to Kant, who
thought that we can have knowledge not only of the particular things
that fill space and time, but of the basic properties of space and time as 
|
such. Geometry and arithmetic, on this view, are bodies of knowledge
concerning position in space and succession in time, but they are 
£
I
neither scientific empirical knowledge, nor a matter of mere logical
deduction. With this view of geometry and arithmetic, which would 
£
now be disputed, Kant arrived at the idea that we must be able to grasp !
1
space and time in a pure, non-empirical way in our minds.
Schopenhauer follows suit, and produces his third form of the principle
of sufficient reason. The relation between a triangle's having three sides
and its having three angles, for example, is that the one is grounded in,
is a sufficient reason for, the other. But, Schopenhauer argues, this
relation is not that between cause and effect, and is not that between a
piece of knowledge and its justification either. We must distinguish not
only the ground of becoming (change grounded in causes) and the
ground of knowing (knowledge-claims grounded in justifications), but
also the ground of being. If we say that a triangle has three angles
because it has three sides, the ground we are referring to is simply the
way that space, or one facet of it, is.
The final form of the principle of sufficient reason has application to only
25

a single object for each subject. Each of us can be aware of himself or
herself as a subject of will. We experience our own states of wanting and
making decisions, and can always ask 'why?' (R, 212). Our willing, we
assume, is preceded by something which is its ground, and which
explains our action or decision. This prior something is what
Schopenhauer calls a motive, and the principle in operation is what he
terms the 'law of motivation', or the principle of the sufficient reason of
acting. It states simply that every act of will can be explained as ensuing
from some motive. The connection between motive and act of will is
one of cause and effect, the same as holds universally for changes in the
material world. Motivation is thus, as Schopenhauer puts it, 'causality
seen from within' (R, 214).
The limits of sufficient reason
The Fourfold Root is a remarkable sustained attempt to separate
j different forms of explanation which the tradition before Schopenhauer
i had not always distinguished. We may certainly sympathize with his
i request that henceforth 'every philosopher, who in his speculations
bases a conclusion on the principle of sufficient reason or ground, or
indeed speaks of a ground at all, should be required to state what kind
of ground he means' (R, 233). However, clarifying the framework which
governs our experience and reasoning was only one part of
Schopenhauer's task. He remarks in the enlarged edition of 1847 that
none of the relationships he has dealt with applies beyond the
phenomena out of which our experience is composed: the principle of
sufficient reason would not apply in any of its forms to the world
considered as thing in itself (R, 232-3). He also reminds us that 'the
sublime Plato' degrades phenomenal reality to what is 'always only
arising and passing away, but never really and truly existing' (R, 232).
In his 1813 notebooks Schopenhauer returned to his task of revealing
what lay beyond all these subject-imposed modes of connection. Now
something of great importance occurred: as he proceeded in his
26

investigations, it became clear that revealing the nature of the thing in
itself and clarifying the 'better' Platonic consciousness were two distinct
enterprises. The thing in itself was a hidden essence working away
underneath the order we imposed on the objects of our experience. It
was also his own inner nature, something in him that drove him on - it
was the world, as it were, surging up within him. To this hidden nature
he gave the name will, and with it he now associated the 'misery' which
ordinary life had to offer. By contrast, if only he could cease being this
will, and cease imposing all subjective forms of connection, the same
world would take on a wholly different aspect, revealing itself spread
out before him in timeless objective glory as a panoply of Platonic Ideas.
Schopenhauer's philosophy really took shape once he attained this
distinction between thing in itself (will) and Platonic Ideas: the first the
murky reality underlying the empirical world in which the individual
toils and tries to understand the connections of things, the other an
exceptional vision to aspire to, of all connections undone and a brighter •
reality contemplated without striving and pain. 
£
27

Chapter 3
The world as will
and representation
Schopenhauer's greatest work, The World as Will and Representation, is
divided into four books, with a long appendix on Kant's philosophy in
Volume I. Each of the four books sets out a distinct movement of
thought. The first presents the world as representation, or as it is for our
experience. The second book adds that this same world (and we
ourselves within it) must be viewed under another aspect, as will. We
called the appearance/thing in itself distinction the backbone of
Schopenhauer's philosophy: now 'the world as representation' is what
falls on the 'appearance' side of this line, while 'the world as will' is the
thing in itself. But then in Book 3 aesthetic contemplation emerges as a
cessation of willing in the individual, which transforms the world of
objects into a timeless reality of Ideas, and finally Book 4 intensifies
Schopenhauer's pessimistic view of the ordinary life of desire and
action, and advocates an abolition of the will within oneself as the path
to what is ethically good, and ultimately to a kind of resigned mystical
salvation.
Representation
In its first aspect, then, the world is representation. The world, in other
words, is what presents itself in a subject's experience. (A more old-
fashioned translation of the German Vorstellung gives us 'the world as
idea' - but to retain this could be misleading because of Schopenhauer's
28

use of Idee for a Platonic Idea elsewhere in the system.) Schopenhauer
begins by expounding an idealist position. This is the view that the
material objects which we experience depend for their order and their
existence on the knowing subject. He calls his position transcendental
idealism, which is Kant's term, but he also emphasizes his continuity
with Berkeley, as he sees in the latter's doctrine that 'to be is to be
perceived' the initial glimmer of the truth in idealism - Kant's
contribution being to explain how what is perceived constitutes a
world of objects when it is governed by the necessary rules of space,
time, and causality. Schopenhauer's account of the world of empirical
things is what it was in The Fourfold Root: empirical things consist
of matter, which fills distinct portions of space and time, and which
is in causal interaction with other such portions. But his idealism
says that without the subject of experience, all such objects would 
H
not exist. 
|
s.
01
To be more specific, it is individual things that would not exist without 
s
the experiencing subject. What we experience in the ordinary course of §
our lives are distinct things. One table is an individual distinct from 
.3
another, one animal or person likewise. But what is the principle on 
j»
which this division of the world into individual things works? 
£
Schopenhauer has a very clear and plausible answer: location in space 
a
and time. Two tables are distinct individuals because they occupy
distinct portions of space, or of time, or of both. Now if you take this
view, and also think, with Kant, that the organizing of things under the
structure of space and time stems from the subject, and applies only to
the world of phenomena, not to the world as it is in itself, then you will
conclude that individuals do not exist in the world as it is in itself. The
world would not be broken up into individual things, if it were not for
the space and time which we, as subjects, impose. Here then are two
important tenets of Schopenhauer's philosophy. Space and time are the
principle of individuation, or in his favoured Latin version, the principium
individuationis; and there can be no individuals on the 'in itself side of
the line.
29

Schopenhauer has four main arguments for idealism. One alleges that
we cannot imagine anything which exists outside our own minds,
because 'what we are imagining at that moment is . . . nothing but just
the process in the intellect of a knowing being' (M/2, 5). This is
reminiscent of a controversial argument attempted by Berkeley, who
thought that an unperceived tree could not be imagined.
Schopenhauer's use of the argument is not very convincing, however,
because even though my imagining a world independent of my mind
does presuppose my own mind, the existence of what I imagine - a
world independent of my mind - does not. A second argument is the
claim that idealism is the only viable alternative to scepticism.
Scepticism maintains that we can have no certain knowledge about the
existence or nature of material things, because all that we can be certain
of is what falls within our own consciousness. If you deny idealism (the
argument runs) and think that the world of material things has to exist
wholly outside a subject's consciousness, then you will have to admit
S that scepticism wins the day, and that we can never have certain
£ knowledge about a world of material things. If we wish to preserve our
•g entitlement to knowledge concerning the world of things that occupy
space and time and follow causal laws, the solution is to accept that
they do not lie outside our consciousness.
Schopenhauer's third argument adds to this by suggesting that
realism - the alternative to idealism - saddles itself with two 'worlds',
one of which is redundant:
According to realism, the world is supposed to exist, as we know it,
independently of this knowledge. Now let us once remove from it all
knowing beings, and thus leave behind only inorganic and vegetable
nature. Rock, tree, and brook are there, and the blue sky . . . But then let
us subsequently put into the world a knowing being. That world then
presents itself once more in his brain . . . Thus to the first world a second
has been added, which, although completely separated from the first,
resembles it to a nicety . . . . All this proves absurd enough, and thus
30

leads to the conviction that that absolutely objective world outside the
head, independent of it and prior to all knowledge, which we at first
imagined we had conceived, was already no other than the second world
already known subjectively, the world of the representation, and that it is
this alone which we are actually capable of conceiving. (1/1/2, 9-10)
Schopenhauer is here in a territory littered both before and after him
with debates of some complexity. The three arguments so far discussed
can be found already in Berkeley. They are, however, not decisive for
quite simple reasons. The realist may reply to the 'scepticism' argument
by saying that if the choice is between scepticism and idealism, then
scepticism is the better option. The idea that material things depend on
the subject for their existence may seem too high a price to pay for a
guarantee of knowledge. Also the argument only says that if we can 
^
have any certain knowledge, idealism must be preferred. One might 
|
settle for not having certain knowledge, and insist that the empirical 
s
world must nevertheless be conceived as existing independently of the 
s
subject's consciousness. To the third argument, that the world of things 3
existing outside consciousness is redundant, the realist can reply simply 3
that this world outside consciousness would be the world. It is only the 
«
idealist who wants to say that the picture of material things which we 
£
have in consciousness is already a world of material things. The realist 
a
does not accept this, and makes a clear distinction between the one
world existing independently of us and our picture of it. However,
Schopenhauer's points correspond to familiar parts of the debate, and
are valuable against some opponents. A realism which said both that we
can be certain only about what lies within consciousness, and that the
world outside consciousness exactly resembles the picture we have
built of it, would be threatened by his criticisms.
The fourth argument for idealism is the one which Schopenhauer most
relies on. It rests on the concepts subject and object. The subject is that
which knows or experiences, the object that which is known or
experienced. The world of representation, for Schopenhauer, requires
31

both. He makes two large claims: first, that nothing can be both object
and subject; secondly that there can never be a subject without an
object, or an object without a subject. It is the last point which he takes
to establish idealism, and indeed to make it something obvious.
Nothing can be an object for experience without there being a subject
to experience it or think about it. But why must we think of material
objects in space and time in this way? Schopenhauer would argue that
the point of calling them objects is to indicate that they can and do fall
within our experience. But then he also requires us to believe that
whatever we can experience must exist only in relation to our
experiencing it. This simple principle is central to Schopenhauer's
position. Because of it, he does not think that idealism can be seriously
doubted, once one properly understands it. But it is surely a
questionable principle.
A fair proportion of Book I of The World as Will and Representation is
| 
devoted to the distinction between perception and conceptual
£ reasoning. As we saw in the previous chapter, Schopenhauer thinks that
•K we share our perceptual abilities with other animals, but that concepts
and reasoning are what mark us out from them. Perceiving the world is
the business of what he calls intellect or understanding, and he
suggests that conceptual thinking and judgement play no part in this.
On the other hand, manipulating concepts to form judgements, relating
judgements to one another as premiss and conclusion, and so on, is the
business of what he calls reason. By playing down the significance of
reason and treating concepts as more or less faint abstractions out of
direct experience or intuition, Schopenhauer paves the way for a close
assimilation between the human mind and that of other living
creatures.
Will
As we cross from the First Book into the Second, a sudden reversal takes
place. This focuses on a key question. In the world as representation,
32

what am I? The world spreads out before me, containing individual
material things in space and time which change according to causal
laws - but I myself am just the subject which is distinct from every
object that it experiences, including that object which I call my body.
Something is missing. I seem to be 'a winged cherub without a body'
(l/l/t, 99), the world confronting me as something alien to which I do not
belong.
For the purely knowing subject as such, this body is a representation like
any other, an object among objects. Its movements and actions are so far
known to him in just the same way as the changes of all other objects of
perception; and they would be equally strange and incomprehensible to
him, if their meaning were not unravelled for him in an entirely different
way. Otherwise, he would see his conduct follow on presented motives 
H
with the constancy of a law of nature, just as the changes of other objects 
j
follow upon causes, stimuli, and motives. But he would be no nearer to 
£
»
understanding the influence of the motives than he is to understanding 
5
the connexion with its cause of any other effect that appears before him. 
Sj
(Wi, 99-100) 
3
|
Schopenhauer is generating a puzzlement in order to make us receptive 
£
to the central idea of the whole book, which is now unveiled: 
3
All this, however, is not the case; on the contrary, the answer to the
riddle is given to the subject of knowledge appearing as an individual,
and this answer is given in the word will. This and this alone gives him the
key to his own phenomenon, reveals to him the significance and shows
him the inner mechanism of his being, his actions, his movements. To the
subject of knowing, who appears as an individual only through his
identity with the body, this body is given in two entirely different ways. It
is given in perception of the intellect as representation, as an object
among objects, liable to the laws of these objects. But it is also given in a
quite different way, namely as what is known immediately to everyone,
and is denoted by the word will. (WT, 100)
33

What Schopenhauer means is that when I act (when I do something) my
body moves; and my awareness of its movement is unlike my awareness
of other events that I perceive. I am 'outside' other objects, or they are
'outside' me - but my own body is mine in a uniquely intimate way. This
can be expressed by saying that other events are merely observed to
happen, whereas movements of my body are expressions of my will.
Schopenhauer's account of acts of will is anti-dualist. A dualist would
maintain that the mental realm and the bodily realm are distinct, and
that willing (or volition) was an event in the mental realm, while the
movement of the body was something distinct that occurred in the
physical realm. Schopenhauer denies this:
The act of will and the action of the body are not two different states
objectively known, connected by the bond of causality; they do not
stand in the relation of cause and effect, but are one and the same thing,
though given in two entirely different ways, first quite directly, and then
| 
in perception for the understanding, (ibid.)
i
•g Wanting, striving, and trying are to be seen as things that we do with
our bodies, not as events that occur in detachment from our bodies.
They manifest themselves in physical reality, but also retain an 'inner'
aspect, because each of us knows what he or she strives for, in a direct,
non-observational way. Thus what Schopenhauer calls the 'action of the
body' is neither in a wholly mental or a wholly physical realm, but is one
single occurrence which presents two aspects: we each have 'inner'
awareness of something that is also part of the ordinary empirical
world, and can be observed as such.
This account of acts of will is a decisive step for Schopenhauer, since it
places the human subject firmly within the material world. If striving
towards ends is setting the body in motion, then, while we will, we are
rooted in the world of objects. Schopenhauer thus cannot conceive of a
subject of will as being anything other than bodily. He also makes the
converse claim that our bodily existence is nothing other than willing.
34

Whenever we undergo feelings of fear or desire, attraction or repulsion,
whenever the body itself behaves according to the various unconscious
functions of nourishment, reproduction, or survival, Schopenhauer
discerns will manifesting itself - but in a new and extended sense.
What he wants to show is that ordinary conscious willing is no different
in its basic nature from the many other processes which set the body, or
parts of it, in motion. Admittedly, willing to act involves conscious
thinking - it involves the body's being caused to move by motives in the
intellect - but it is, for Schopenhauer, not different in principle from
the beating of the heart, the activation of the saliva glands, or the
arousal of the sexual organs. All can be seen as an individual organism
manifesting will, in Schopenhauer's sense. The body itself is will; more
specifically, it is a manifestation of will to life (Willezum Leben), a kind of
blind striving, at a level beneath that of conscious thought and action, 
H
which is directed towards the preservation of life, and towards 
s
engendering life anew. 
E
St
|
This interesting idea is wrapped up in the much wider claim that the 
§
whole world in itself is will. Just as my body's movements have an inner 3
aspect not revealed in objective experience, so does the rest of the 
j»
world. Schopenhauer seeks an account which makes all fundamental 
£
forces in nature homogeneous, and thinks that science is inherently 
a
unsatisfying because it always tails off without explaining the essence
or hidden inner character of the phenomena whose behaviour it
accounts for. His unifying account of nature is that all natural processes
are a manifestation of will. This is likely at first sight to be dismissed as
fanciful - but we should heed Schopenhauer's warning that he is vastly
extending the concept 'will':
hitherto the identity of the inner essence of any striving and operating
force in nature with the will has not been recognized, and therefore the
many kinds of phenomena that are only different species of the same
genus were not regarded as such . . . Consequently, no word could exist
to denote the concept of this genus. I therefore name the genus after its
35

most important species, the direct knowledge of which lies nearest to us,
and leads to the indirect knowledge of all the others. But anyone who is
incapable of carrying out the required extension of the concept will
remain involved in a permanent misunderstanding. (Wi, m)
So we must not transfer 'will' simple-mindedly from human actions to
the whole of nature. It serves only as the most convenient term where
none yet exists. Nevertheless, this aspect of Schopenhauer's philosophy
is puzzling. What is the 'required extension' of the concept? Perhaps it is
an extension of sense: if 'will' is now to have a new meaning, this might
save Schopenhauer from claiming something ridiculous. But this line
should not be taken too far. Schopenhauer insists that 'will' is not
interchangeable with 'force', for example (Wi, 111-12), and that the issue
is not a mere 'dispute about words'. In saying that all processes are will,
'we have in fact referred something more unknown to something
infinitely better known, indeed to the one thing really known to us
immediately and completely' (Wi, 112). To subsume willing under force
(or energy, which has also been suggested) is not Schopenhauer's
intention. The global doctrine of will can tell us something informative
only because we have some grasp of what willing is from our own
actions. An alternative interpretation is that Schopenhauer is keeping
the sense of 'will' fixed, and simply widening the range of phenomena
that it refers to. He does say that in mechanics 'seeking shows itself as
gravitation,... fleeing as reception of motion' and similar things
(W2, 298); he is prepared to speak in remarkable terms of 'the powerful,
irresistible impulse with which masses of water rush downwards, the
persistence and determination with which the magnet always turns back
to the North Pole, the keen desire with which iron flies to the magnet'
(Wi, 117-18). How are we to take this? If meant literally, it is merely
embarrassing. But perhaps he is doing something more subtle here, and
attempting to teach us our own kinship with nature by rhetorical
means: the behaviour of the inorganic world is to an extent 'like the
vehemence of human desires' and so 'it will not cost us a great effort of
the imagination to recognize once more our own inner nature, even at
36

so great a distance'. This is not to say that iron really desires anything,
or that water rushes because it wants to.
What we usually call willing is supposed to be a clear guide to the way
the world is. So 'will' must still be understood in terms of its application
to human actions; however, we must enlarge its sense at least far
enough to avoid the barbarity of thinking that every process in the
world has a mind, a consciousness, or a purpose behind it. For the most
part, Schopenhauer assures us, the world operates blindly and 'in a dull,
one-sided, and unalterable manner' - and the same is even true of many
manifestations of the will within each human individual. The following
passage states Schopenhauer's view as clearly as any:
only the will is thing in itself... It is that of which all representation, all 
H
object, is the phenomenon, the visibility, the objectivity. It is the 
g
innermost essence, the kernel, of every particular thing and also of the 
S.
whole. It appears in every blindly acting force of nature, and also in the 
g
deliberate conduct of man, and the great difference between the two 
g
Q.
concerns only the degree of the manifestation, not the inner nature of 
I!
what is manifested. (Wi, no) 
8
5'
This surely means that every force in nature, those that involve 
3
conscious purpose and those that do not, must be understood as some
form of striving or end-seeking, even if in highly attenuated form.
Two more peculiarities of this doctrine should be noted. First, if the will
is the thing in itself, it is not something occupying space and time.
Space and time are merely the subject-imposed structure of the world
as representation, and the thing in itself is what remains when the
world as representation is thought away. Given Schopenhauer's idea
that space and time are the principle of individuation, the thing in itself
cannot be split up into separate individuals. Beyond representation,
space, and time, it is simply the world as a whole that is to be conceived
as will. Secondly, there can be no causal interaction between the will, as
37

6. Title page of The World as Will and Representation

thing in itself, and events in the ordinary empirical world. Causality too
is something which operates only at the level of empirical changes
occurring to individual material things, not at the level of the thing in
itself. Kant seemed to require that the thing in itself could impinge upon
us causally, rather like some empirical object, and Schopenhauer was
well aware that this claim was the stumbling-block of Kantianism for
many of his contemporaries. Schopenhauer himself avoids the problem,
and never claims that the will as thing in itself is a cause. But then what
is the relationship between the world in itself and the things and events
that lie within our empirical knowledge? Schopenhauer talks sometimes
of the will's 'manifestation' in empirical reality, but his preferred term is
'objectification'. This means just that the world shows to us the side of it
which we can experience. We have to think of the single will and its
objectification in a multitude of phenomena as two sides of a coin, two 
^
n
aspects of the same world. 
£
2.
Q.
Dl
A big problem here concerns the knowability of the thing in itself. 
g
Schopenhauer's doctrine of the will is metaphysical. Metaphysics, for 
g
him, gives an account of the fundamental nature of reality, but uses the 3
data of experience as the only possible guide: 'the solution to the riddle »
of the world must come from an understanding of the world itself... 
S
the task of metaphysics is not to pass over experience in which the 
a
world exists, but to understand it thoroughly, since inner and outer
experience are certainly the principal source of all knowledge' (Wt.
428). Strictly speaking, our knowledge reaches only as far as the
phenomena of inner and outer experience. So we do not - cannot -
know the bare thing in itself. When I am conscious of my own willing in
action, what I know is a phenomenal manifestation of the will, not the
thing in itself. Nevertheless, it is this knowledge of my own willing
which is to provide the key to knowing the nature of the whole world in
itself. How?
As we saw, Schopenhauer sets up a contrast between experience of the
world of material objects and 'immediate' awareness of one's own
39

willing. Sometimes he writes as if the latter amounted to knowledge off
the thing in itself directly: 'my body is the only object of which I know
not merely the one side, that of the representation, but also the other,
that is called will' (Wi, 125); 'Everyone finds himself to be this will, in
which the inner nature of the world consists' (Wi, 162); 'a way from
within stands open to us to that real inner nature of things to which we
cannot penetrate from without' (Wz, 195). This may suggest direct
cognitive contact with the thing in itself inside us, and a further
inference that everything in the world has a similar inner nature. But we
must wonder how this can be achieved, if the thing in itself is strictly
unknowable. When he is being more careful, Schopenhauer says that
even the act of will which we know 'immediately' is an event in time,
and is therefore part of our representation, rather than the thing in
itself. Still, he says, the thing in itself, though it 'does not appear quite
naked', has 'to a great extent cast off its veils' in our 'inner' awareness of
action (1/1/2,197). In consciousness of our own willing we are still on this
= side of the divide between representation and thing in itself, but we can
}= say that we come closer to knowledge of the thing in itself. This is still
u troubling, however. If knowledge of our acts of will is the nearest we get
to the thing in itself, and if even here we do not know it directly, what
grounds do we really have for claiming to know what it is?
As an exercise in metaphysics, Schopenhauer's doctrine of the will as
thing in itself is so obviously flawed that some people have doubted
whether he really means it - perhaps will is just a concept which explains
a wide range of phenomena, and is not supposed to extend to the
unknowable thing in itself? On the other hand, if that were the whole of
his position, he could offer no 'solution to the riddle' in the way that he
clearly intends. Given such problems, it is perhaps not surprising that his
metaphysics has had few followers. Nevertheless, to stop there would
be short-sighted. Schopenhauer's more restricted notion of the will to
life, which characterizes observable aspects of human and animal
behaviour, is an interesting and powerful idea. His conception of will
expressing itself within humanity, and the polarity he discovers
40

between our being governed by the will and our escaping it, enables
him, as we shall see, to present large tracts of our lives in a new light. It
enables him to explain thought-processes as having an organic,
survival-directed function, to show the influence of unconscious drives
and feelings on the intellect, to suggest that our picture of ourselves as
rational individual thinkers is in some sense an illusion, to place
sexuality at the core of human psychology, to account for the power of
music and the value of aesthetic experience, to argue that ordinary life
is inevitably unfulfilled, and to advocate the renunciation of individual
desires as the route to reconciliation with our existence. It has been
these applications, rather than the bald metaphysical statement that
the thing in itself is will, that have had the most influence on
philosophers, psychologists, and artists of later generations.
I
I
41

Chapter 4
Will, body, and the self
Unity of body and will
Schopenhauer's claim 'My body and my will are one' (Wi, 102) has a
number of different aspects to it. The first, as we saw, is the idea that
acts of will are movements of the body. Schopenhauer takes a robust
line on this, saying that 'every true, genuine, immediate act of the
will is also at once and directly a manifest act of the body' (Wi, 101).
This would suggest, somewhat perversely, that there can be no such
thing as a willing which goes unfulfilled because one's muscles or
nerves do not function in the right way. (Would Schopenhauer say
that stroke victims have not 'genuinely' willed, if their bodies fail to
move as they want them to?) But Schopenhauer is trying to oust the
traditional division between mental and physical, and to supplant it
with a division between will on the one hand and intellect and reason
on the other. Perception, judgement, and reasoning are all functions
of what he has called representation. We observe the way a state of
affairs is in the world of objects, judge that it should be altered or
preserved, and form the intention to act. Schopenhauer's chief point
is that none of this is yet willing. The operations of perception,
thought, and intention are quite separate preparatory events
which may trigger the will - the body, that is - into action. He
plays down the gap between willing and the movements one carries
out with one's body, concentrating instead on the gulf between
42

representing the world of objects, and being in goal-seeking motion
within it.
Schopenhauer's other evidence for the unity of will and the body is that
almost everything that impinges on the body sets off some reaction of
the will, and that conversely, when the will is aroused, there are always
bodily manifestations. The list of mental states included under the
heading of the will is extensive:
all desiring, striving, wishing, demanding, longing, hoping, loving,
rejoicing, jubilation, and the like, no less than not willing or resisting, all
abhorring, fleeing, fearing, being angry, hating, mourning, suffering
pains - in short, all emotions and passions. For these emotions and
passions are weaker or stronger, violent and stormy or else quiet
impulsions of one's own will, which is either restrained or unleashed,
satisfied or unsatisfied. In their many variations they relate to the 
1
successful or frustrated attainment of that which is willed, to the 
a
endurance or the overcoming of that which is abhorred. Consequently, 
u
they are explicit affections of the same will which is active in decisions 
g.
n
and actions. (F, n) 
8_
Sometimes, Schopenhauer admits, when the bodily senses are affected
our reaction is neutral, and does not rouse the will in any of these ways -
but only rarely. For the most part, such an occurrence is to some degree
painful or pleasant, welcome or irritating. Similarly, when we are in one
of the mental states on Schopenhauer's list, there is usually a
characteristic bodily accompaniment: the heart beats faster, the blood
drains from our face or suffuses it. Thus 'every vehement and excessive
movement of the will, in other words, every emotion, agitates the body
and its inner workings directly and immediately' (Wi, 101). For
Schopenhauer these considerations tend to show the identity of the
body with the will. They do at least suggest a close affinity between
bodily existence and the empirical manifestations of willing in
Schopenhauer's broader sense.
43

A representation in the conscious mind which causes the body to move
in action is what Schopenhauer calls a motive. We share some kinds of
motive with other animals that perceive the world. For example,
behaviour in a cat which is caused by perceiving a predator or some
food would be classed by Schopenhauer as willing brought about by a
motive. Humans, on the other hand, are distinctive in being able to act
not just on perceptual motives, but also on rational ones: representing
matters conceptually, we reason ourselves to a conclusion about what
to do, and this process plays a causal role in setting us into action. A cat
may eat because it senses food and is hungry, a human being because
doing so is judged the best course of action. But willing manifests itself
in the body's movements in the same way in both cases. Different kinds
of willing really differ, for Schopenhauer, only in the causes that precede
them. He makes a basic distinction between three kinds of cause. These
are motive, stimulus, and cause pure and simple (as found in
mechanical and chemical changes).
I
£ So far 'willing' has stood for a range of mental states which have bodily
•g manifestations, including active striving, the emotions, and feelings of
pleasure and pain. But some manifestations of the will in the body are
not what we should call mental states at all, and are of a kind which we
share even with lowlier parts of nature. Plants behave in certain ways in
reaction to light, moisture, gravity, and so on. They do not perform
actions, and their movements and modifications are not caused by
motives, for the simple reason that they have no minds with which to
perceive. The plant's turning towards the sun is caused by a stimulus,
rather than by a motive. Nevertheless, Schopenhauer is prepared to call
such plant-behaviour a manifestation of will, because he thinks it can
only be understood as goal-directed, even if there is no mind present to
entertain the goal. Having located will in bodily movement, and
distinguished it from representation, he sees an affinity between the
plant's movement in response to stimuli and those of the cat and the
human brought about by motives. It is clear that human beings and
animals also respond to stimuli - the involuntary contraction of the

pupil of the eye provides but one example. This occurrence, for
Schopenhauer, is equally a manifestation of the will - though not an act
of will, because it is not caused by a conscious representation of the
world.
Will to life
Schopenhauer's conception of the will is not restricted to the body's
episodic reactions to motives and stimuli, for he claims that 'the whole
body is nothing but the objectified will' (Wi, 100), meaning that the way
in which the body grows and develops, and the way in which its parts
are organized, reveal a principle of striving towards ends which is
'blindly' at work:
Teeth, gullet, and intestinal canal are objectified hunger; the genitals are
objectified sexual impulse; grasping hands and nimble feet correspond to 
1
the more indirect strivings of the will which they represent. (Wi, 108) 
o°
01i.
What underlies and explains the body's functioning, indeed its very 
j
n
existence, is its being directed towards life - or what Schopenhauer calls 8.
its will to life. (The usual translation of Wills zum Leben as 'will to live' is
linguistically correct, but what Schopenhauer has in mind is more
inclusive; it is a striving not just to live, but also to engender life and to
protect offspring. [See 1/1/2,484-5.] In other words, life, rather than living,
is the common end of all Wille zum Leben.) Schopenhauer is boldly
seeking a single hypothesis to explain the ways in which all life-forms
grow, function, and behave.
It is easy to think that the idea of the 'will to life' is wrongly fixated on
the idea that there are purposes in nature. However, although
Schopenhauer speaks of 'purposes' or 'ends' being fulfilled by behaviour
patterns and the workings of particular organs, he clearly does not think
that organisms entertain any conscious purposes - for the will works
'blindly':
45

we see at once from the instinct and mechanical skill of animals that the
will is also active where it is not guided by any knowledge . . . The one-
year-old bird has no notion of the eggs for which it builds a nest; the
young spider has no idea of the prey for which it spins a web; the ant-lion
has no notion of the ant for which it digs a cavity for the first time. . . .
Even in us the same will in many ways acts blindly; as in all those
functions of our body which are not guided by knowledge, in all its vital
and vegetative processes, digestion, circulation, secretion, growth, and
reproduction. (Wi, 114-15)
So, despite superficial appearances, Schopenhauer does not simply wish
to understand nature in anthropomorphic terms. Although he asks us to
interpret the world using concepts applied first to ourselves, the notion
of the will to life has the effect of demoting humanity from any special
status separate from the rest of nature. First, in our bodies, the same
'blind' force operates as throughout nature: we are organized to live
| 
and to propagate life not by any conscious act of will. Secondly, there is
£ a close continuity between even the conscious, purposive willing of
•= human action and the life-preserving functions and instincts at work
elsewhere. In our seeking of mates and providing for offspring, we are
driven by the same instincts as other animals. And Schopenhauer sees
the human capacities for perception, rationality, and action as an
offshoot of the same wider principle which leads insects to build nests,
feathers to grow, and cells to divide. In this respect, the will to life can
seem quite a forward-looking notion. Another crucial feature is
Schopenhauer's steadfast opposition to anything approaching an
external or divine purpose for nature. Even though it is 'a single will'
which expresses itself throughout the multiplicity of phenomena, this
means only that all behaviour is of the same striving or goal-directed
kind. All life-forms strive towards life; but there is no coordinated
purpose to nature, rather the kind of purposelessness and conflict which
are usually associated with Darwinism. Schopenhauer derides those
'pantheists' and 'Spinozists' who think the world divine, but have not
'the remotest idea why the whole tragi-comedy exists' (W2,357).
46

On the other hand, Schopenhauer does believe that the various species
of animate and inanimate things in the world are eternal and static.
There are not only individuals, which we happen to classify as ants, or
oak trees, or magnetic fields. Rather, each individual is of a kind, and the
kinds that can exist are fixed. Thus, while individual things come and go
over time, the ant or the oak tree, as a kind, is a permanent feature of
empirical reality. Schopenhauer has two ways of expressing this point,
which he frequently repeats. One is to say that the will (the thing in
itself) manifests or objectifies itself in a series of grades. The other is to
say that the ant and the oak tree as such are Ideas, or as he often puts it
'(Platonic) Ideas'. The most adequately objective knowledge we could
have would be of the nature of these abiding forms 'fixed in the nature
of things'. Such objective knowledge would not consist in knowing the
thing in itself in its naked form, which is impossible, but in knowing the
timeless patterns of the things that are experienceable by us.
The following passage shows quite well how Schopenhauer uses his
doctrine of the will to life and his notion of the order of Ideas in
nature:
everywhere in nature we see contest, struggle, and the fluctuation of
victory ... Every grade of the will's objectification fights for the matter,
the space, and the time of another... This universal conflict is to be seen
most clearly in the animal kingdom. Animals have the vegetable
kingdom for their nourishment, and within the animal kingdom again
every animal is the prey and food of some other. This means that the
matter in which an animal's Idea manifests itself must stand aside for the
manifestation of another Idea, since every animal can maintain its own
existence only by the incessant elimination of another's. Thus the will to
life generally feasts on itself, and is in different forms its own
nourishment, till finally the human race, because it subdues all the
others, regards nature as manufactured for its own use. (IVj, 146-7)
47

Intellect as an outgrowth of will
Now we come to a step in Schopenhauer's argument whose importance
cannot be overestimated. He claims that all our knowledge of the
empirical world is the product of the kind of organism we are. The
structure of knowledge and of its objects depends on the kind of
manifestation of will to life which its subject happens to be. Everything
the reader was told at the outset about the world of representation, the
forms of space, time, and causality which govern the objects of our
experience, and the concepts and judgements which we can obtain
from them by abstraction - all of this is merely a surface beneath which
lurks the driving force of our nature, the will. We grow into creatures
who can perceive, judge, and reason, in order to fulfil the ends of life:
survival, nourishment, and reproduction. In Schopenhauer's narrative
this is a marked change of fortune for the human subject. The capacity
for knowledge on which we pride ourselves suddenly appears as merely
a way in which a particular species manipulates the environment that
impinges on it, so as to foster its well-being:
[the intellect] is designed for comprehending those ends on the
attainment of which depend individual life and its propagation. But such
an intellect is by no means destined to interpret the inner essence-in-
itself of things and of the world, which exists independently of the
knower. (W/2, 284)
To establish this picture, Schopenhauer has to claim not only that all
biological functions are manifestations of will to life, but also that
knowledge, perception, and reasoning are biological functions. This he
does by espousing a particularly blunt form of materialism: states of
mind are states of the brain. If, instead of regarding our processes of
thought and perception from the point of view of self-consciousness,
we take an 'objective' view of them, we must conclude them to be
'nothing more than the physiological function of an internal organ, the
brain' (1/1/2, 273). The whole world of individual objects in space and
48

time consists only of our representations, and representations are brain-
functions. So the brain, the 'pulpy mass in the skull', supports the whole
world of objects - Schopenhauer's materialist account of mental states
combines with his idealism to produce the claim that the empirical
world of individual things is a product of the brain's functioning. For
fear of saying such things, people in the past invented the notion of an
immaterial soul, but Schopenhauer will have none of that:
We say fearlessly that this pulpy mass, like every vegetable or animal
part, is also an organic structure, like all its humbler relations in the
inferior dwelling-place of our irrational brothers' heads, down to the
humblest that scarcely apprehends. (W2, 273)
Finally, the brain is a biological organ, and so it cannot be exempt from
Schopenhauer's doctrine of the will to life:
the will-to-know, objectively perceived, is the brain, just as the will-to-
walk, objectively perceived, is the foot; the will-to-grasp, the hand; the
will-to-digest, the stomach; the will-to-procreate, the genitals, and so on.
(W2.259)
So the position is this: our capacity for knowledge of empirical objects
resides in the functioning of the brain, the brain is an organ of the body,
and all organs of the body have developed in order to propagate life.
Our much-vaunted knowledge is thus a derivative feature of what we
are; the primary element in us is the will that manifests itself in the body
as a whole. Conscious actions, caused by perception of the world and
reasoning about it, are merely one way in which this will in our bodies is
set into motion. The individual human subject is different from other
kinds of striving thing in the world only by virtue of the fact that the
particular organization of his or her brain gives rise to self-consciousness
and reasoning. But these capacities are only the tip of an iceberg, whose
bulk is the will. Our predicament is to be driven by this will, whether we
like it or not, into conflict, pain, and frustration. Schopenhauer still
49

holds out the hope of rising above this predicament, but, as we shall
see, the will within us must be suspended or turn against itself before
we can exploit the capacities of our intellects to their full potential.
Knowledge must eventually 'throw off its yoke, and, free from all the
aims of the will, exist purely for itself, simply as a clear mirror of the
world' (Wi, 152). But for that to happen is very much an exception.
The self
What am I? Schopenhauer can say that I am an individual item in the
world, a living, bodily thing of a certain species, which is capable of self-
conscious thought and action. But he makes it something of a puzzle
how I can think of myself in this way. In his philosophy the self is seen
successively as a subject of experience and knowledge, a subject of will
and action, a bodily manifestation of will to life, and a pure mirror of
timeless reality. Sometimes it is as if a struggle for dominance is being
waged between these different conceptions. The dichotomy between
subject and object, which is the starting-point for the whole of The World
as Will and Representation, is especially important here. As we saw, he
explains that the subject is that which knows, the object that which
is known by it. But this must leave us in some doubt about what a
subject is.
A subject of representation is, for Schopenhauer, a single consciousness
in which many diverse experiences of objects are united. Material things
and conceptual thoughts are representations for the subject. But the
subject itself is the 'I' that thinks and perceives, as opposed to the
things thought and the things perceived. It is vital to understand that
Schopenhauer's subject of representations is not any part of the world
of objects. It is not a thing at all. It is not in space or time, does not
interact causally with objects, is not visible, not identified with the body,
or even with the individual human being. His favourite metaphorical
images for it are the eye that looks out on the world but cannot see
itself, and the extensionless point at which light-rays focus in a concave
50

mirror. The subject is where experiences all converge, but it is never
itself an object of experience: 'We never know it, but it is precisely that
which knows wherever there is knowledge' (Wi, 5). Schopenhauer is not
alone in having such a view of the subject. It is recognizable as a version
of Kant's conception of the pure T of self-consciousness (apperception);
moreover, says Schopenhauer, 'the fine passage from the sacred
Upanishad applies: "It is not to be seen: it sees everything; it is not to be
heard: it hears everything; it is not to be recognized: it recognizes
everything"' (R, 208). Wittgenstein later borrowed Schopenhauer's
image of the eye that cannot see itself and the idea that the subject was
not part of the world.
Schopenhauer's attitude to this pure subject of representation is
ambivalent. On the one hand, he says that 'Everyone finds himself as
this subject' (Wi, 5). We are conscious not only of what we think and
perceive, but of being that which thinks and perceives; moreover, he 
=
suggests, we cannot avoid the idea that that which thinks and perceives 
|
•<
is distinct from every object of which it is conscious - even the body, 
»
which is 'an object among objects'. At the same time, however, each of 
j
us is an individual distinct from others. Each of us is closely associated 
£
with one particular part of the material world, and, as a subject of
action or will, each of us must be a bodily thing. We seem to be two
kinds of subject at once: subject of willing, which is essentially
embodied, and subject of knowledge, which knows everything
objectively, including its own body and acts of will, and hovers outside
the world of individual things altogether. Our conception of ourselves
ought, perhaps, to be split. Yet we think of the T that thinks and
perceives and the T that acts as one and the same. Schopenhauer calls
this a 'miracle par excellence', saying that 'the identity of the subject of
willing with that of knowing by virtue whereof... the word " I " includes
and indicates both, is the knot of the world, and hence inexplicable'
(R, 211-12).
One may think that Schopenhauer inadvertently refutes his own
Oi

conception of the pure subject which is not an object. For he admits
that it provides at best an incomplete and perplexing way of thinking of
oneself, says that it is inexplicable how T could refer both to this pure
subject and to the acting, material body, and even has to invoke the
notion of a 'miracle' to get round the problem. We may also not be
convinced that we do 'find ourselves' as the pure knowing subject, or
that this is a conception which a philosophical account of self-
consciousness needs to use at all. However, Schopenhauer's difficulties
are not simply a matter of ineptness on his part - they go deep into an
area of enduring perplexity. Each of us is not merely an object in the
world; some account needs to be given of one's awareness of being
oneself, of being 'inside' one's experience and seeming to be distinct
from the rest of the world. Schopenhauer is not a dualist: he eschews
any notion that souls, spirits, or immaterial substances constitute part
of reality. Reality is material, and what each of us refers to using 'I' is,
partly, an active, material thing in the world. But he is surely right in
S saying that that cannot be the end of the story. It seems true that I
a somehow 'find myself as a subject', however precisely we account for
•g that. Some philosophers more recently have suggested that there is a
fundamental, perhaps insuperable problem in trying to square
'subjective' and 'objective' views of ourselves. The underlying
difficulty which Schopenhauer reveals is a substantial philosophical
issue.
The struggle between competing views of the self is made even more
intense by Schopenhauer's materialist account of the workings of the
intellect as brain-functions, and his doctrine that the individual's body is
an expression of will-to-life.
That which in self-consciousness, and hence subjectively, is the intellect,
presents itself in the consciousness of other things, and hence
objectively, as the brain; and that which in self-consciousness, and hence
subjectively, is the will, presents itself in the consciousness of other
things, and hence objectively, as the entire organism. (1/1/2, 245)
52

That focus of brain-activity (or the subject of knowledge) is indeed, as an
indivisible point, simple, yet it is not on that account a substance (soul),
but a mere condition or state . . . This knowing and conscious ego is
related to the will, which is the basis of its phenomenal appearance, as
the image in the focus of the concave mirror is to that mirror itself; and,
like that image, it has only a conditioned, in fact, properly speaking, a
merely apparent reality. Far from being the absolutely first thing (as
Fichte taught, for example), it is at bottom tertiary, since it presupposes
the organism, and the organism presupposes the will. (M/2, 278)
We need to tease out two distinct elements here. One is
Schopenhauer's materialism, the other his view that the will is our
essence.
We can consider ourselves both subjectively and objectively. If we are
considering ourselves objectively, as things occurring in the empirical
world, then materialism is the most plausible and consistent position to
take, according to Schopenhauer. To be a materialist pure and simple
would be 'one-sided' (1/1/2,13), because materialism can never give a
proper account of what it is to be a subject who experiences and
understands the world: 'materialism is the philosophy of the subject
that forgets to take account of itself. But one side of the truth is an
objective account of ourselves as things inhabiting the empirical world,
and the only choice here is to conceive of ourselves as material
occupants of space and time, falling under causal laws. So what from
one viewpoint we call thought and perception are, from the other
viewpoint, processes of the material brain and nervous system. From
this objective point of view, the subject which we take ourselves to be
is - in Schopenhauer's most extreme claim about it - 'merely apparent'.
But even this unsettled combination of subjective and objective views
about oneself is not the complete predicament which Schopenhauer
places us in. For brain and organism are not merely part of an inert,
material reality. They are expressions of the blind will in nature, enabling
53

conception of the pure subject which is not an object. For he admits
that it provides at best an incomplete and perplexing way of thinking of
oneself, says that it is inexplicable how 'I' could refer both to this pure
subject and to the acting, material body, and even has to invoke the
notion of a 'miracle' to get round the problem. We may also not be
convinced that we do 'find ourselves' as the pure knowing subject, or
that this is a conception which a philosophical account of self-
consciousness needs to use at all. However, Schopenhauer's difficulties
are not simply a matter of ineptness on his part - they go deep into an
area of enduring perplexity. Each of us is not merely an object in the
world; some account needs to be given of one's awareness of being
oneself, of being 'inside' one's experience and seeming to be distinct
from the rest of the world. Schopenhauer is not a dualist: he eschews
any notion that souls, spirits, or immaterial substances constitute part
of reality. Reality is material, and what each of us refers to using T is,
partly, an active, material thing in the world. But he is surely right in
| 
saying that that cannot be the end of the story. It seems true that I
5 somehow 'find myself as a subject', however precisely we account for
•§ that. Some philosophers more recently have suggested that there is a
fundamental, perhaps insuperable problem in trying to square
'subjective' and 'objective' views of ourselves. The underlying
difficulty which Schopenhauer reveals is a substantial philosophical
The struggle between competing views of the self is made even more
intense by Schopenhauer's materialist account of the workings of the
intellect as brain-functions, and his doctrine that the individual's body is
an expression of will-to-life.
That which in self-consciousness, and hence subjectively, is the intellect,
presents itself in the consciousness of other things, and hence
objectively, as the brain; and that which in self-consciousness, and hence
subjectively, is the will, presents itself in the consciousness of other
things, and hence objectively, as the entire organism. (W2, 245)
52

That focus of brain-activity (or the subject of knowledge) is indeed, as an
indivisible point, simple, yet it is not on that account a substance (soul),
but a mere condition or state . . . This knowing and conscious ego is
related to the will, which is the basis of its phenomenal appearance, as
the image in the focus of the concave mirror is to that mirror itself; and,
like that image, it has only a conditioned, in fact, properly speaking, a
merely apparent reality. Far from being the absolutely first thing (as
Fichte taught, for example), it is at bottom tertiary, since it presupposes
the organism, and the organism presupposes the will. (1/1/2, 278)
We need to tease out two distinct elements here. One is
Schopenhauer's materialism, the other his view that the will is our
essence.
We can consider ourselves both subjectively and objectively. If we are
considering ourselves objectively, as things occurring in the empirical 
1
world, then materialism is the most plausible and consistent position to 
£
take, according to Schopenhauer. To be a materialist pure and simple 
~u
would be 'one-sided' (Wi, 13), because materialism can never give a 
5
proper account of what it is to be a subject who experiences and 
B.
understands the world: 'materialism is the philosophy of the subject
that forgets to take account of itself. But one side of the truth is an
objective account of ourselves as things inhabiting the empirical world,
and the only choice here is to conceive of ourselves as material
occupants of space and time, falling under causal laws. So what from
one viewpoint we call thought and perception are, from the other
viewpoint, processes of the material brain and nervous system. From
this objective point of view, the subject which we take ourselves to be
is - in Schopenhauer's most extreme claim about it - 'merely apparent'.
But even this unsettled combination of subjective and objective views
about oneself is not the complete predicament which Schopenhauer
places us in. For brain and organism are not merely part of an inert,
material reality. They are expressions of the blind will in nature, enabling
53

life to exist and propagate itself. The will is primary, and lies beneath the
division between subject and object altogether. The larger contrast
between will and representation reasserts itself here. The subject that
represents and the object that is represented are both, in a sense,
illusory, because in the world in itself the division between subject and
object does not exist. Even if I the subject disappeared, and along with
me all the individual objects that make up my experience, the will would
still be there in itself, continuing to strive and throw up new life-forms.
And the most fundamental point about the self, for Schopenhauer, is
that this same will is exactly what now strives away within the bodily
organism that has produced me the subject.
y.
54

Chapter 5
Character, sex, and
the unconscious
NI and intellect
For Schopenhauer, the primary element in human beings is the will. The
intellect is only secondary; Schopenhauer explains it as a particular
manifestation of the will to life in the brain and nervous system, and 'a
mere tool in the service of the will' (W2, 205). Schopenhauer invents
many images for the relationship between intellect and will, but his
favourite is that of the sighted, lame man who is carried on the
shoulders of the strong, blind man. The intellect is conscious, and is our
window on the world, but the driving force which takes us where we are
going is deeper down inside the psyche, inside the body or organism
which we also are. The doctrine of the primacy of the will has many
applications which are broadly psychological or ethical. Schopenhauer is
in some respects a forerunner of twentieth-century views about the
unconscious mind and the influence of sexuality on our behaviour, both
of which emerge from his considerations of the opposition between
intellect and will. His ethics also depends on the idea that the core of
each individual, which makes them the person they are, is not the
intellect, but the enduring, underlying will.
Once again we find that the individual's sense of his or her identity is
something of a precarious affair. The self is a kind of compound
between the will and the intellect. Although objectively the intellect is
55

7. Manuscript extract from the second volume of The World as Will
and Representation

an expression of will as well, in our own self-consciousness we can
distinguish the intellect as that part of us which is occupied with
conscious perception and thought. The subjective symptoms of this
split are various kinds of conflict and domination of which we may be
aware: a 'strange interplay within us' between the intellect and the will
(1/1/2, 207). For example, the will is a comparatively primitive part of us,
and not sophisticated enough to react to imaginary ideas in a different
way from genuine beliefs:
I f . . . we are alone, and think over our personal affairs, and then vividly
picture to ourselves, say, the menace of an actually present danger, and
the possibility of an unfortunate outcome, anxiety at once compresses
the heart, and the blood ceases to flow. But if the intellect then passes to
the possibility of the opposite outcome, and allows the imagination to 
n
picture the happiness long hoped-for as thereby attained, all the pulses 
3
at once quicken with joy, and the heart feels as light as a feather, until the 
J5
A
intellect wakes up from its dream . . . We see that the intellect strikes up 
x
the tune, and the will must dance to it; in fact, the intellect causes it to 
i.
,,.„, 
,,„.*„. - . 
._ 
i 
i
different moods by chatter and tales alternating between pleasant and 
8
melancholy things. (IA/2, 207-8) 
§•
5
On the other hand, our ordinary experience of the world is suffused with
the positive or negative significance that comes from the will:
In the immediate perception of the world and of life, we consider things
as a rule merely in their relations . . . we regard houses, ships, machines,
and the like with the idea of their purpose and their suitability
therefor . . . Let us picture to ourselves how much every emotion or
passion obscures and falsifies knowledge, in fact how every inclination or
disinclination twists, colours, and distorts not merely the judgement, but
even the original perception of things. Let us recall how, when we are
delighted by a successful outcome, the whole world at once assumes a
bright colour and a smiling aspect, and on the other hand looks dark and
57

gloomy when care and sorrow weigh on us. Let us then see how even an
inanimate thing, which is yet to become the instrument for some event
we abhor, appears to have a hideous physiognomy; for example the
scaffold, the fortress to which we are taken, the surgeon's case of
instruments, the travelling coach of loved ones, and so on. (W/2,372-3)
We tend not to use the intellect in a 'pure'fashion.The way we confront
the world of objects in experience and thought is driven by the will -
further evidence for Schopenhauer that the will is primary in us. He has
many more examples of the bias the will exerts:
Our advantage, of whatever kind it may be, exercises a similar secret
power over our judgement; what is in agreement with it at once seems to
us fair, just, and reasonable . . . A hypothesis, conceived and formed,
makes us lynx-eyed for everything that confirms it, and blind to
everything that contradicts it. What is opposed to our party, our plan,
our wish, or our hope often cannot possibly be grasped and
comprehended by us, whereas it is clear to the eyes of everyone else.
(W2,217-18)
Anybody wishing to describe the mind as a centre of pure perception
and reasoning would have to overcome the considerable evidence
Schopenhauer amasses (from anecdote, general observation, and
introspection) for the contrary view, that our experience is largely
governed by what fits our own aims, instincts, and emotional
needs.
Where Schopenhauer shows uncommon insight is in his theory of the
unconscious, one of the more important and influential aspects of his
theory of the will. Since the will is something that operates
independently of our conscious representation of reality, it can be
credited with desires, aims, and feelings which are not consciously
entertained by the thinking subject, but which nevertheless control his
or her behaviour. One example (which he says is 'trifling and ridiculous!",
58

but nevertheless 'striking') is that when adding up our finances 'we
make mistakes more frequently to our advantage than to our
disadvantage, and this indeed without the least intention of dishonesty,
but merely through the unconscious tendency to diminish our debit
and increase our credit' (1/1/2, 218). But this is merely a small instance
of a widespread principle. Schopenhauer says that the intellect is
often excluded from 'secret decisions of its own will'. I do not
consciously decide what I wish to happen in a particular situation, but
at a certain outcome I feel 'a jubilant, irresistible gladness, diffused
over my whole being . . . to my own astonishment... [0]nly now
does my intellect learn how firmly my will had already laid hold of
the plan' (l/\/2, 209).
The will is here a part of the individual's mind which adopts attitudes 
n
and guides overt behaviour despite remaining out of sight of the 
3
conscious intellect. Schopenhauer even recognizes a process similar to 
.5
n
Freud's much later idea of repression: 
*
at
3n.
this will . . . makes its supremacy felt in the last resort. This it does by 
«
prohibiting the intellect from having certain representations, by 
8
absolutely preventing certain trains of thought from arising, because it 
§•
knows, or in other words experiences from the self-same intellect, that 
"
they would arouse in it any one of the emotions previously described. It
then curbs and restrains the intellect, and forces it to turn to other
things... We often do not know what we desire or fear. For years we can
have a desire without admitting it to ourselves or even letting it come
to clear consciousness, because the intellect is not to know anything
about it, since the good opinion we have of ourselves would inevitably
suffer thereby. But if the wish is fulfilled, we get to know from our
joy, not without a feeling of shame, that this is what we desired.
(Wz, 208-10)
In another interesting passage, Schopenhauer sees this mechanism as
responsible for some forms of madness:
59

Every new adverse event must be assimilated by the intellect... but this
operation itself is often very painful, and in most cases takes place only
slowly and with reluctance. But soundness of mind can continue only in
so far as this operation has been correctly carried out each time. On the
other hand, if, in a particular case, the resistance and opposition of the
will to the assimilation of some knowledge reaches such a degree
that . . . certain events or circumstances are wholly suppressed for the
intellect, because the will cannot bear the sight of them; and then, if the
resultant gaps are arbitrarily filled up for the sake of the necessary
connection; we then have madness. (W2, 400)
Sexuality and gender
Schopenhauer exaggerates in saying that all previous philosophers have
'ignored' sexual love ('I have no predecessors' [1/1/2, 533]), and his
dismissal of Plato's contribution in particular is unwarranted (1/1/2, 532).
= Nevertheless, in talking so bluntly about sexuality, and in making it such
£ a cornerstone of his philosophy, he is again unusually forward-looking
•§ for his day. Sex is ever-present in our minds, according to Schopenhauer,
'the public secret which must never be distinctly mentioned anywhere,
but is always and everywhere understood to be the main thing' (1/1/2,
571). 'It is the ultimate goal of almost all human effort; it has an
unfavourable influence on the most important affairs, interrupts every
hour the most serious occupations' (W/2, 533). None of this is surprising,
on Schopenhauer's theory. The impulse to sexual intercourse is at the
very core of our being, as an instinct which is the most direct and
powerful manifestation of will to life in our bodies: 'the genitals', he is
fond of telling us, 'are the focus of the will'.
Schopenhauer explains instinct as 'an action as if in accordance with
the conception of an end or purpose, and yet entirely without such a
conception' (I/I/2, 540). Sexual behaviour and anatomy are directed at
reproduction in a purpose-like manner. Reproduction may at times also
be a conscious purpose, of course, but to the extent that his or her
60

behaviour manifests instinct, the individual's conscious purposes are
irrelevant. According to Schopenhauer, the procreative 'purpose'
which sexual activity and its elaborate, all-pervading surroundings are
directed towards, is actually a 'purpose' of the human species, a
built-in drive to generate itself over again, for which the individual
acts as a mere vehicle. The seriousness with which individuals pursue
sexual goals reflects the magnitude of this underlying species-
purpose.
Thus Schopenhauer sees the individual's sexual behaviour as at the beck
and call of an impersonal force. His most striking way of putting this is
to say that it is the will to life of the as yet unconceived offspring which
draws a male and female partner together. Their view that they are
acting wholly in their own interests out of individual desires towards 
n
another individual is a 'delusion' (M/2, 538), and this delusion itself is a 
3
means by which 'nature can attain her end'. The 'longing of love' 
™
X
celebrated in poetry of all ages is on this account truly something 
*
external to the lover, and hence so powerful that the individual can 
a.
scarcely contain it: 
%
§
this longing that closely associates the notion of an endless bliss with the 
&
possession of a definite woman, and an unutterable pain with the 
"
thought that this possession is not attainable; this longing and this pain
of love cannot draw their material from the needs of an ephemeral
individual. On the contrary, they are the sighs of the spirit of the
species . . . The species alone has infinite life, and is therefore capable of
infinite desire, infinite satisfaction, and infinite sufferings. But these are
here imprisoned in the narrow breast of a mortal; no wonder, therefore,
when such a breast seems ready to burst, and can find no expression for
the infinite rapture or infinite pain with which it is filled. (W2, 551)
Schopenhauer also believes that once the ends of the species are
fulfilled between lovers, their rapture and their delusion must eventually
ebb away:
61

Forsaken by [the spirit of the species], the individual falls back into his
original narrowness and neediness, and sees with surprise that, after so
high, heroic, and infinite an effort, nothing has resulted for his pleasure
but what is afforded by any sexual satisfaction. Contrary to expectation,
he finds himself no happier than before; he notices that he has been the
dupe of the will of the species. (M/2, 557)
Of course, individuals will continue to feel sexual desire as a desire of
their own directed towards a particular person, and will be conscious of
the person's physical and mental attributes. Schopenhauer gives us a
detailed list of the qualities that men supposedly look for in women
(right age, health, proportion of skeleton, fullness of flesh, beauty of the
face - in that order) and that women supposedly look for in men (right
age, strength, courage). Looking away from such details, however, all
the features of attraction are to be explained in the same way: they
result from unconscious principles of selection through which the will of
= the species works to ensure the character of its next generation. Where
£ the intention of intercourse is expressly not to generate offspring,
•g Schopenhauer is nevertheless determined to explain subjective
attraction in terms of life-generating instincts. Even the case of
homosexuality does not deter him: such a widespread practice must
'arise in some way from human nature itself, he thinks, though his
explanation for it is somewhat desperate. Very young and very old
males, he supposes, have deficient semen, and are following an instinct
to discharge it in non-procreative fashion, thus still subserving the 'will
of the species' for the best possible offspring.
Some may find surprising another of Schopenhauer's convictions: that it
is the intellect which we inherit from our mothers, and the will from our
fathers. Not many philosophers have thought of the intellect as a female
characteristic, and the capacity for emotions as male. Schopenhauer is
convinced that there is empirical evidence for his claim, but he also
gives another argument in which he shows his true colours. The will is
'the true inner being, the kernel, the radical element', while the intellect
62

is 'the secondary, the adventitious, the accident of that substance' (W2,
517). So, the argument continues, we should expect the more powerful,
procreative sex to impart the will to its offspring, while the mother, the
'merely conceiving principle', is responsible for the merely secondary
intellect. The agenda here is to make sure that the female comes out as
superficial and secondary, the male as substantial, radical, and primary.
What is inherited from the father is the 'moral nature', the 'character',
the 'heart'. The view that the intellect is female in origin thus results
from a cross-fertilization between Schopenhauer's doctrine of the
metaphysical primacy of the will and his fairly conventional prejudice
that the female must be secondary to the male.
Schopenhauer's disparaging view of women, concentrated to most
corrosive effect in the short essay 'On Women' (P2, 614-26), has earned 
„
him some notoriety. To what extent it should single him out from any of 3
ji
his contemporaries and predecessors is debatable. On the one hand, he "
n
is perhaps especially worthy of note because of his attempt to imbue 
.x
ai
gender differences with such metaphysical significance, and because he i.
gives such prominence to sexuality in human life. On the other hand, it 
j
may be thought that his actual views are fairly commonplace for his 
8
time. What is not in question is the vehemence of his rhetoric on the 
§
topic:
Only the male intellect, clouded by the sexual impulse, could call the
undersized, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and short-legged sex the
fair sex; for in this impulse is to be found its whole beauty. (P2, 619)
Throughout their lives women remain children, always see only what is
nearest to them, cling to the present, take the appearance of things for
reality, and prefer trivialities to the most important affairs. Thus it is the
faculty of reason by virtue whereof man does not, like the animals, live
merely in the present... In consequence of her weaker faculty of reason,
woman shares less in the advantages and disadvantages that this entails.
(P2, 615-16)
63

There are a few compensating virtues. Schopenhauer allots to women
the greater share of humane loving-kindness, which for him is of
supreme moral worth; he also thinks they are more down-to-earth and
practical than men (the intellect at work again); but he is convinced that
they cannot reason very well, and have shallow characters. Their
interests are 'love, conquests, dress, cosmetics, dancing'; they regard
everything as a means to winning a man; dissimulation is inborn to
them 'just as nature has armed the lion with claws and teeth, the
elephant and boar with tusks, the bull with horns, and the cuttle-fish
with ink that blackens water' (P2, 617). Women may be talented, but
artistic geniuses can, apparently, only be male: 'generally speaking,
women are and remain the most downright and incurable Philistines'
(P2, 620-1). Occasionally, one glimpses a portrait of the novelist,
socialite, and mother Johanna Schopenhauer:
the original maternal love is purely instinctive and therefore ceases with
3 
the physical helplessness of the children. In its place, there should then
a 
appear one based on habit and reasoning; but often it fails to appear,
•g 
especially when the mother has not loved the father . . . Property
acquired by the long and constant hard work of men subsequently
passes into the hands of women who in their folly get through it or
otherwise squander it in a short time . . . The vanity of women ... is bad
because it is centred entirely on material things... and hence society is
so very much their element. (P2, 625-6)
Conventional male sentiment mixed with personal bitterness - the
result is scarcely edifying. But no account of Schopenhauer's philosophy
ought to suppress these ideas, which were clearly important to him.
Character
We have seen that in Schopenhauer's view the will is the primary
element within us, the intellect only secondary and 'adventitious'. In
this, the will often has the role of an impersonal force which is greater
64

than the individual, attaching to the species or to the world as a whole,
and expressing itself in each individual equally. However, Schopenhauer
also believes that each person has a distinct character. And here too the
intellect is secondary. It is not intellectual abilities and traits, or
continuity of consciousness, that marks out the true core of one's
separate identity as an individual.
The older we become, the more does everything pass us by without
leaving a trace. Great age, illness, injury to the brain, madness, can
deprive a man entirely of memory, but the identity of his person has not
in this way been lost. That rests on the identical will and on its
unalterable character; it is also just this that makes the expression of the
glance unalterable.... Our true self... really knows nothing but willing
and not-willing, being contented and not contented, with all the 
n
modifications of the thing called feelings, emotions, and passions. 
3
(W2,239) 
.5
£
ai
Each human being's character is unique for Schopenhauer, though since i.
we all belong to the same species, the differences may sometimes be 
j
very slight. Individual character comes into its own in explaining and 
8
predicting actions. An action follows on from motives, but only in 
|
combination with the character of the agent. The same set of objective
circumstances, perceived and comprehended in the same way by
different people, may lead them to act in quite different ways. Offer a
large bribe and some will take it, some will politely decline, and others
will turn you over to the authorities. The motive, in Schopenhauer's
sense (that is, the external state of affairs as apprehended by the
intellect) can be the same in all three cases, and the intellect itself can, if
you like, be working in exactly the same way. But the character is what
differs. If we knew each person's character thoroughly, and all the
motives they were exposed to, we could predict all their actions without
any remainder. In another of Schopenhauer's beloved Latin tags, operari
sequitur esse, 'acting follows from being': what we are partly determines
how we act. The principle is no different from that by which we predict
65

the varied behaviour of different natural substances under the same
influence: 'the effect of the same motive on different people is quite
different; as the sunlight gives to wax white colour and to chloric silver
black, so the heat makes wax soft, but clay hard' (F, 50). This doctrine of
character has consequences for freedom, responsibility, and morality, as
we shall discover later.
Schopenhauer sees the character as a person's 'being', something
distinct from the collection of all the person's actions put together. The
actions follow from the being, each of them bearing the stamp of the
person to whom they belong. This may make the character sound
mysterious, but Schopenhauer assures us that we only ever learn about
it, in other people or even in ourselves, from its empirical
manifestations - just the way we learn about the character of wax or
chloric silver, in fact. We observe many actions, and come to know
someone's degree of honesty, courage, or compassion over the course
| 
of time. Similarly with ourselves: until we see how we fare in action, we
a may be quite wrong about the qualities of character which we possess.
•I So Schopenhauer says that character is empirical. It is not identical with
the series of actions I carry out, yet is discovered only from observation
of those actions.
Schopenhauer maintains that each person's character is both constant
and inborn. We can neither choose nor change what we are. We can be
educated to understand the world and ourselves better, giving us
better, more refined motives on which to act, but the self that these
motives prompt into action really has not altered: 'Under the
changeable shell of his years, his relationships, and even his store of
knowledge and opinions, there hides, like a crab under its shell, the
identical and real man, quite unchangeable and always the same' (F, 51).
Schopenhauer thinks that many of our ordinary attitudes bear out this
claim: we assume not just identity of the person, but constancy in the
moral character as well. When we have gone on trusting someone to
behave in a certain way, and have eventually been disappointed, 'we
66

never say: "His character has changed", but "I was mistaken about
him"' (F, 52). For example, we say, on this view, not that someone used
to be honest and courageous, but is now deceitful and cowardly; rather
that the extent of their deceitfulness and cowardice was not fully
apparent until now. As further evidence for constancy of character
Schopenhauer cites the fact that we recognize others as the same after
many years from the manner in which they act, and that we feel
responsibility and shame for things we ourselves did forty years before.
With the claim that character is inborn we again find that human beings
are to be treated very much on a par with other parts of nature. You
would not try to produce apricots from an oak tree, says Schopenhauer.
Human beings clearly have inborn species-characteristics. Why are
people so loath to accept that there is inborn courage, honesty, or 
n
wickedness at the level of the individual? Schopenhauer's evidence, 
3
.
S
be a mere blank slate which awaits experience before it forms any 
.*
01
character at all. Before we can have knowledge or perceive the world 
i.
very well, we are creatures of will, reacting with positive or negative 
*
feelings to what impinges on us. Even at this stage, there is a basic core 8
to the person which is not moulded by what he or she has intellectually ~
apprehended of the world.
Schopenhauer also has the notion of acquired character. Especially when
we are young, we may not correctly understand what our character is.
We do not know what we really like, or want, or can succeed at.
Acquired character is a better self-understanding, which one comes to
have by gaining an insight into one's true constant character - an idea in
some ways reminiscent of Nietzsche's later notion of 'becoming who
you are'. This enlightened idea is, however, at odds with the rest of
Schopenhauer's account. For it seems that before I have attained the
acquired character, I may embark on ventures that go against my real
nature - which ought to be impossible if my inborn, unchanging
character determines all my actions.
67

Sometimes, however, Schopenhauer says things about the character
which are even more puzzling.
however old we become, we yet feel within ourselves that we are
absolutely the same as we were when we were young . . . This thing
which is unaltered and always remains absolutely the same, which does
not grow old with us, is just the kernel of our inner nature, and that does
not lie in time . . . [W]e are accustomed to regard the subject of
knowing, the knowing I, as our real self . . . This, however, is the mere
function of the brain, and is not our real self. Our true self... it is which
produces that other thing, which does not sleep with it when it sleeps,
which also remains unimpaired when that other thing becomes extinct in
death.. .The character/tse/f... is still exactly the same now as then. The
will itself, alone and by itself, endures; for it alone is unchangeable,
indestructible, does not grow old, is not physical but metaphysical, does
not belong to the phenomenal appearance, but to the thing in itself that
| 
appears. (W2, 238-9)
I
•= Here it is unclear what kind of thing the character is. On the one hand it
is unique and attaches to oneself as an individual. On the other hand it is
'not in time', it is 'not physical but metaphysical', and even 'remains
unimpaired' when the individual dies and his or her subjective 
,'
consciousness disappears. The problem, bluntly, is this: is my 'real self,
or 'the kernel of my inner nature', something that attaches to the finite
individual that I am, or is it the thing in itself, beyond space, time, and
individuation altogether? If the former, it is neither outside of time nor
unaffected by my own death. If the latter, it does not serve to explain
my personal identity at all. Schopenhauer seems to stumble into a quite
elementary difficulty. But in a way his confusion has a more profound
point behind it. For he wants to claim in the end that our individuality,
seemingly so fundamental to us, is not only a source of torment, but
some kind of illusion: 'at bottom every individuality is really only a
special error, a false step, something that it would be better should not
be' (W/2, 491-2). The Third and Fourth Books of The World as Will and
68

Representation - its great second half to which we now turn - explore
the possibilities of escaping from individuality, and from the will which
lies at our core.
.
i
69

6
Art and ideas
Aesthetic experience
Aesthetic experience deliberately reverses the trend of Schopenhauer's
book, for in it the will of the subject is suspended. As long as we
exercise the will, or are governed by it, we shall be forced to consider a
thing in a great mesh of relations to other things and to ourselves: Do
we want it? Can we use it? Is it better than something else? What made
it the way it is? What will it make happen? Just as our intellects are
organs developed to subserve the will, so all the usual connections
which we employ in order to understand objects are will-governed: we
perceive in order to manipulate, in order to live. Only if we cease to
will at all can the object stand out in our consciousness stripped of
the relations of time, place, cause, and effect.
Schopenhauer belongs to a tradition which equates aesthetic
experience with a 'disinterested' attitude towards its object, and is
often cited as one of the chief proponents of such a view. The idea is
that to experience something aesthetically, one must suspend or
disengage all one's desires towards it, attending not to any
consideration of what ends, needs, or interests it may fulfil, but only to
the way it presents itself in perception. In Schopenhauer's case,
aesthetic experience must always be an extraordinary episode in any
human being's life, since he has argued that the will is our essence,
70

and that our 'ordinary way of considering things' is permeated by
will:
so long as our consciousness is filled by our will, so long as we are given
up to the throng of desires with its constant hopes and fears, so long
as we are the subject of willing, we never attain lasting happiness or
peace.... Thus the subject of willing is constantly lying on the revolving
wheel of Ixion, is always drawing water in the sieve of the Danaids, and is
the eternally thirsting Tantalus.
When, however, an external cause or inward disposition suddenly raises
us out of the endless stream of willing, and snatches knowledge from the
thraldom of the will, the attention is now no longer directed to the
motives of willing, but comprehends things free from their relation to
the will. Thus it considers things without interest, without subjectivity,
purely objectively . . . Then all at once the peace, always sought but
always escaping us on that first path of willing, comes to us of its own 
3
ai
accord, and all is well with us . . . [F]or that moment we are delivered 
a.
from the miserable pressure of the will. We celebrate the Sabbath of the 
S
penal servitude of willing; the wheel of Ixion stands still. (Wi, 196)
After the brisk formality of the opening book on the world as
representation, and the incipient gloom as we descend into the world as
will, the Third Book of The World as Will and Representation has a
character of brightness and joy, which testifies to the importance of the
aesthetic for its author.
Schopenhauer states the central problem of aesthetics in an acute way:
'how satisfaction with and pleasure in an object are possible without
any reference thereof to our willing' (P2, 415). (His view of aesthetic
enjoyment is similar in some respects to that put forward by Kant in his
Critique of judgement, though Schopenhauer makes little of this
connection, and does not rate Kant's work on aesthetics as among his
best.) In the usual run of events, pleasure or satisfaction arises from the
71

i
•§ 8. Schopenhauer: portrait by Julius Hamel, 1856
I
fulfilment of some desire or end. What we call happiness is usually felt
on attaining one of our ends, or it may be the temporary absence of
anything further to strive for. But these kinds of pleasure and happiness,
since they depend on willing, also carry with them the permanent
possibility of suffering. In the first place, all willing 'springs from lack,
from deficiency, and thus from suffering' (Wi, 196). Secondly, when any
particular desire is stilled, the subject of willing soon experiences
another deficiency. Thus to be driven by the will is to oscillate between
suffering and satisfaction, and Schopenhauer is convinced that the
suffering lasts longer, the satisfaction being only a temporary return to
neutral before another lack is felt.
The problem for aesthetics is how there can be any kind of pleasure
other than that which is contained in this oscillation. If pleasure is
defined as the fulfilment of a lack or the satisfaction of a desire, then a
72

totally will-less state of contemplation ought to be one in which one
cannot experience pleasure at all. Clearly, the positive gain of being in
such a state would be the loss of the possibility of suffering, and
Schopenhauer makes a great deal of this point. But how could a will-less
state leave room for real pleasure? Sometimes Schopenhauer writes as if
it could not, as if aesthetic contemplation were a state purely of
knowledge, a dispassionate registering of objective reality - 'we have
stepped into another world, so to speak, where everything that moves
our will, and thus violently agitates us, no longer exists 
Happiness
and unhappiness have vanished' (Wi, 197). Yet he is also prepared to
describe aesthetic experience in terms such as 'peace' and
'blessedness', and as a special kind of pleasure or enjoyment. He even
states that when 'all possibility of suffering is abolished ... the state of
pure objectivity of perception becomes one that makes us feel
positively happy' (M/2, 368). These different claims can be reconciled by
saying that the usual kind of happiness (and unhappiness) depends on
willing, while the aesthetic kind depends on the cessation of willing.
This might be thought sufficient to give aesthetic experience the value
which Schopenhauer wishes to assign it. However, his version of the
'aesthetic attitude' theory is unusual in linking the state of will-less
contemplation with the achievement of the most objective kind of
knowledge. For him, an experience undergone in the absence of
subjective desires and aims will be one which distorts the world as little
as possible, so he can maintain that aesthetic experience is valuable not
only for the calming effect of escaping from one's own will, but because
it uniquely displays things as they eternally are. Aesthetic experience, in
other words, has high cognitive value, not merely the enriching or
therapeutic value of entering into a certain psychological state.
Objectivity and genius
The subject ordinarily experiences material objects that occupy space
and time, their causal connections to one another, and bodily acts of
73

will following upon motives. But Schopenhauer believes that we can in
exceptional moments gain access to a timeless reality that is not carved
up into individuals. Beyond the realm of individual things and events lies
the Idea, to which 'neither plurality nor change' belongs: 'While the
individuals in which it expresses itself are innumerable and are
incessantly coming into existence and passing away, it remains
unchanged as one and the same, and the principle of sufficient reason
has no meaning for it' (Wi, 169).
Schopenhauer begins his Third Book with a disquisition on Platonic
Ideas and their relation to the thing in itself. His claim will be that artists,
and all engaged in aesthetic experience, discern, however fleetingly, the
timeless reality of Ideas. Hence he owes us an attempt to set the
metaphysical record straight first: what are these Ideas? He calls them
'the most adequate objectivity' of the thing in itself. This sounds
obscure but is in fact quite a simple notion. The thing in itself cannot be
| 
known; but a knowable object which presented reality to the subject
| 
with the least possible degree of subjective distortion would be the
•= 'adequate objectivity' of the thing in itself. Thus Schopenhauer explains:
the 
Platonic Idea is necessarily object, something 
known, a
representation, and precisely, but only, in this respect is it different from
the thing in itself. It has laid aside merely the subordinate forms of the
phenomenon, all of which we include under the principle of sufficient
reason; or rather it has not yet entered into them. But it has retained the
first and most universal form, namely that of the representation in
general, that of being object for a subject. . . . Therefore, it alone is the
most adequate objectivity possible of the will or of the thing in itself;
indeed it is even the whole thing in itself, only under the form of the
representation. Here lies the ground of the great agreement between
Plato and Kant, although in strict accuracy that of which they both speak
is not the same. (l/Vi, 175)
Some strain is evident in the way that the Idea seems forced to serve at
74

both thing in itself and representation, when these two categories were
supposedly mutually exclusive at the outset. Also, although he
recognizes that the equation of Kant and Plato would be wrong 'in strict
accuracy', he is still prepared to make the extremely dubious statement
that 'the inner meaning of both doctrines is wholly the same' (Wi, 172).
Some commentators have regarded the Ideas as an awkward, hasty
afterthought. This is not wholly a fair assessment, however, as the Ideas
were one of the earliest parts of the system to fall into place, and
figured in the account of the will's objectification in nature in the
Second Book. What we should hold on to is the notion that nature
contains not only a multiplicity of individual things and events, but
unchanging single kinds to which they belong. There are not only
horses, but the species horse, not only pools and fountains but the
repeatable molecular structure H2O, not only many bodies falling to the
ground at different times and places, but a ubiquitous gravitational
force. Schopenhauer thinks of such kinds as timeless Ideas, and our
apprehension of them as the most objective knowledge of the world we a
can ever attain. Schopenhauer follows Plato in claiming that Ideas exist 
a.
in reality, independently of the subject. They are not concepts. Concepts 2
are the mental constructs we make in order to grasp reality in general
terms; but Ideas are parts of nature awaiting discovery. For
Schopenhauer, they are not even discovered by conceptual thinking, but
by perception and imagination.
What would consciousness of Ideas themselves be like? Schopenhauer
has a dramatic answer. Once we abandon the guidance of the principle
of sufficient reason,
we no longer consider the where, the when, the why, and the whither of
things, but simply and solely the what. ... 
[We] let our whole
consciousness be filled by the calm contemplation of the natural object
actually present, whether it be a landscape, a tree, a rock, a crag, a
building, or anything else . . . and continue to exist only as pure subject,
as clear mirror of the object, so that it is as though the object alone
75

existed without anyone to perceive it, and thus we are no longer able to
separate the perceiver from the perception.... What is thus known is no
longer the individual thing as such, but the Idea . . . at the same time, the
person who is involved in this perception is no longer an individual, for in
such perception the individual has lost himself; he is pure will-less,
painless, timeless subject of knowledge. (Wi, 178-9)
'At one stroke', Schopenhauer continues, the particular thing 'becomes
the Idea of its species', and the perceiving individual 'becomes the pure
subject of knowing' (Wi, 179). What Schopenhauer must mean is that I
see the particular as embodying a universal Idea, and momentarily lose
consciousness of myself as an individual. His claim is that one cannot
know Ideas if one retains an awareness of oneself as an individual
separate from the object contemplated ('we apprehend the world
purely objectively, only when we no longer know that we belong to it'
[I/I/2, 368]) - and conversely that one cannot fail to be knowing an Idea,
| 
once one's contemplation turns one into this 'pure mirror' of reality.
|
•g Although Schopenhauer clearly thinks that natural beauty often gives
rise to aesthetic experience (witness the examples of tree, rock, and
crag), it is to art that he gives most attention. He is fairly orthodox for
his day in believing that the production of art requires something called
genius, which must be distinguished from mere talent. But he does give
his own account of what genius is. It consists, he writes, 'in the knowing
faculty having received a considerably more powerful development
than is required by the service of the will' (W2,377). The person of genius
has two-thirds intellect and one-third will, the 'normal person' is the
other way round. It is not that the genius is lacking in will - such people
usually have strong emotions, for example - but rather that their
intellect is capable of detaching itself from the will to a much greater
extent, and has the power to function autonomously:
the gift of genius is nothing but the most complete objectivity . . . the
capacity to remain in a state of pure perception, to lose oneself in
76

perception, to remove from the service of the will the knowledge which
originally existed only for this service. In other words, genius is the ability
to leave entirely out of sight our own interest, our willing, and our aims,
and consequently to discard entirely our own personality for a time, in
order to remain pure knowing subject, the clear eye of the world; and this
not merely for moments, but with the necessary continuity and
conscious thought to enable us to repeat by deliberate art what has been
apprehended. (Wi, 185-6)
The genius stands for something impersonal, which Schopenhauer hints
at with the metaphor of 'the clear eye of the world'. The genius is not
only an individual, but 'at the same time a pure intellect that as such
belongs to the whole of mankind' (1/1/2, 390). Abandoning the will that
manifests itself in this particular individual, and letting the intellect soar
free of it, the genius has an uncommon ability 'to see the universal in
the particular' (W2,379). It is important that this is a capacity for
heightened perception. A great painter or sculptor sees with more 
3
intensity and more detail, and has greater ability to retain and 
|
reproduce what is seen. But perceiving merely what is present to hand 
S
is not enough: 'imagination is needed, in order to complete, arrange,
amplify, fix, retain, and repeat at pleasure all the significant pictures
of life' (W2, 379). Thus genius, in whichever art form, may go one
better than actual experience: a great work of art may reflect reality
all the better when the picture it conveys is a heightened one, having
more clarity and definition than is ever contained in ordinary experience
itself.
The true province of genius is imaginative perception, and not
conceptual thinking. Art which is structured around some proposition,
or worked out on a wholly rational plan, is dead and uninteresting by
comparison. One example is where pictorial art turns to a symbolic
form of allegory, and can be grasped only by deciphering images
according to a code, something alien to art as such, in Schopenhauer's
view (Wi, 239). Another is when 'imitators' or 'mannerists' set
77

themselves to produce according to a formula which they note to have
been successful in some other work. The result is offensive: prior
deliberation can always be discerned, and the constituent elements
they have minced together can always be 'picked out and separated
from the mixture'. The concept, 'useful as it is in life, serviceable,
necessary, and productive as it is in science, is eternally barren and
unproductive in art' (Wi, 235).
Geniuses are rare because they are in a sense unnatural. In the great
majority of people, the workings of the intellect are subordinate to the
attainment of individual ends, as Schopenhauer's theory would predict.
The intellect is an instrument of the will, and is not 'designed' for
purposeless imaginative work which grasps and relays eternal Ideas. By
the same token, people possessed of genius are commonly viewed as
oddities. With its heightened imagination and tendency to distract from
the immediate connections of things, genius has some resemblance to
= madness. Geniuses do not accommodate to the expectations of their
| 
own time and place, unlike people of mere talent, who are admired for
•I the ability to produce what is wanted when it is wanted (W/2,390). The
genius is also prone to impracticality, because of the degree to which
his intellect works independently of the end-seeking will. (I say 'his',
because Schopenhauer does not recognize female genius, even though
the intellect is supposedly a female inheritance. The difference is
presumably supposed to be that women's perception always remains
superficial and never rises to 'the universal'.)
The arts and their value
Schopenhauer commands respect among historians of aesthetics for his
deep and varied knowledge of the arts. While he has a single theory of
aesthetic appreciation as the will-less contemplation of Ideas, he
appreciates many different art forms, from architecture through
painting of different genres, to poetry and drama, and eventually to
music, which he sets apart from the rest. His aesthetics is not an
78

inflexible metaphysical monolith: its core is fleshed out with elegance
and sensitivity.
Before discussing the various arts, Schopenhauer makes a substantial
qualification to his theory. He has claimed that whenever we have an
aesthetic experience there occurs both a subjective cessation of willing
and an objective insight into the realm of Ideas. However, he now
admits that the value of a particular object of aesthetic experience can
reside in one or other of these factors almost to the exclusion of the
other:
with aesthetic contemplation (in real life or through the medium of art)
of natural beauty in the inorganic and vegetable kingdoms and of the
works of architecture, the enjoyment of pure, will-less knowing will
predominate, because the Ideas here apprehended are only low grades
of the will's objectivity, and therefore are not phenomena of deep
significance and suggestive content. On the other hand, if animals and 
jj
ai
human beings are the object of aesthetic contemplation or presentation, 
a.
S.
the enjoyment will consist rather in the objective apprehension of these 
8!
Ideas. (Wi. 212)
In other words, the cognitive import of aesthetic experience may often
be quite low. This may invite the thought that the single unifying
element in his aesthetics is really the notion of pleasurable will-free
contemplation, or even that his aesthetics is not unified. However, he
deserves credit for realizing that the arts are regarded both as a release
from the pressures of living, and as an intense form of knowledge.
The Ideas form a hierarchy of higher and lower grades of the will's
objectification. The lowest are the all-pervading natural forces, the
highest the Idea of humanity. Architecture is the art form that deals
with the lowest Ideas concerning the behaviour of solid matter: gravity,
cohesion, rigidity, and hardness (Wi, 214). Buildings must also be of
practical use, so that their potential to be pure art is, or should be,
79

restricted. But the real core of architecture as an art is the conflict
between gravity and rigidity. All the parts of a fine building should be
relevant to making this conflict manifest to the observer, and should
appear necessary rather than arbitrary: merely decorative elements
belong to sculpture, and not to architecture as such. Also, it matters
what materials a building is made from. An edifice which turned out to
be of wood or pumice-stone would be a kind of sham, because materials
less substantial than stone are not suited to bring out the Ideas of
gravity and rigidity. We must be able to grasp in our perception the
striving of the blocks towards the earth, and the counter-striving of the
rigid elements which prevent them from falling. All else is irrelevant -
mere beauty of shape is not a peculiarly architectural feature. The only
other aspect to architecture that Schopenhauer acknowledges is light.
The illumination of a building serves to reveal its fundamental structure
more clearly, while that structure, by intercepting and reflecting light,
'unfolds [light's] nature and qualities in the purest and clearest way, to
the great delight of the beholder' (Wi, 216). Similar to architecture is
'the artistic arrangement of water' (Wi, 217), which is less developed as
an art simply because it is less useful than the making of buildings. The
construction of fountains, waterfalls, and lakes does for the Ideas of
fluidity, mobility, and transparency what architecture does for those of
rigidity and cohesion.
Horticulture and landscaping provide a parallel in the realm of plants,
although here Schopenhauer reckons that it is predominantly nature
rather than art that does the work. Only in depictions of vegetation in
painting does art come into its own. Our aesthetic enjoyment of a
landscape painting whose subject is entirely vegetative or inanimate is
one where 'the subjective side of aesthetic pleasure is predominant',
residing in pure, will-less knowing, rather than in apprehending Ideas
(Wi, 218). But painting and sculpture become more concerned with the
objective depiction of Ideas when they take animals and finally human
beings as their subjects. Schopenhauer sees no important difference
between confronting a person or animal face to face, and looking at an
80

artistic representation - except that the abilities of a genius allow art to
provide us with exemplars of greater beauty than nature actually
provides: the genius 'impresses on the hard marble the beauty of form
which nature failed to achieve in a thousand attempts, and he places it
before her, exclaiming as it were, "This is what you desired to say!"'
(Wi, 222).
With depicted animals, as with animals themselves, the most
beautiful individual is the one most characteristic of the species (Wi,
220) - the lion, for example, in which we are best able to see the
universal Idea of the lion embodied. Here, what we enjoy is less the
calm of will-less contemplation, more our getting to know the animal
which we see in the painting or sculpture: 'we are occupied with the
restlessness and impetuosity of the depicted will' (Wi, 219). With
human beings, it is also true that the beautiful individual is the one
most characteristic of the species. But there are also considerations of
individual character and expression: a portrait ought to bring out the 
3
universal Idea of humanity, but of course must render the particular 
§;
character of the sitter. Is this not an objection to Schopenhauer's 
S,
theory that the point of art is always to express Ideas? May the
strength of a work of art not lie in its conveying something particular
and even arbitrary? Schopenhauer attempts to preserve the unity of
his theory by maintaining that 'each person exhibits to a certain
extent an Idea that is wholly characteristic of him' (Wi, 224). But if
apprehending an Idea is not always apprehending something
timeless, universal, and potentially common to many individuals,
it surely becomes less clear what sense we may attach to the
notion.
Many paintings depict scenes from history, or from some particular
legend or biblical story. But again, Schopenhauer urges that what makes
them artistically significant is the extent to which they express
something universal about mankind. Particular historical circumstances
are irrelevant: 'it is all the same as regards inward significance whether
81

ministers dispute about countries and nations over a map, or boors in a
beer-house choose to wrangle over cards and dice' (Wi, 231).
Schopenhauer is fond of contrasting the arts with history. He takes a
high-handed line, and often uses the opportunity to disagree with the
Hegelian conception of history. In his view, the essential kernel of
human beings is always the same, not liable to local variation or change
over time. Thus he makes the startling pronouncement that 'The
chapters of the history of nations are at bottom different only through
the names and dates; the really essential content is everywhere the
same' (I/I/2,442). History, he maintains, co-ordinates merely facts about
the changing surface of humanity, and can never get beyond this. The
contrasting form of discourse is poetry: 'paradoxical as it may sound, far
more real, genuine, inner truth is to be attributed to poetry than to
history' (Wi, 245). 'Genuine, inner truth' is supposedly truth about what
does not change, that is, the Idea of humanity.
= Poetry emerges as the art form which is able to express the Idea of
£ absolutely anything in the world, but which reigns supreme in
•g portraying the diverse characters and actions of mankind. Again
Schopenhauer distinguishes carefully between concepts, which are
abstract representations formed by the subject, and Ideas, which can be
accessed in direct experience and are part of the fabric of nature itself.
The task for the poet is to use the conceptual means which poetry has in
common with other linguistic practices, towards the distinctive end of
revealing an Idea to the mind of the reader. It is this that marks poetry
out as an artistic use of language, and as the province of genius - for the
writer cannot make an Idea perspicuous to the reader unless he or she
first has sufficient objectivity to perceive it. Poetry can be called 'the art
of bringing into play the power of imagination through words' (M/2,
424). It differs from the visual arts not only in using language, but in the
degree of work that must be done by the imagination of the recipient.
Schopenhauer says much that is of interest about the different genres
and styles of poetry: lyric, epic, and tragic, romantic and classical (which
he prefers). Sometimes the poet finds the material, the Idea of
82

humanity in him- or herself, the result of which is lyric poetry. At the
other end of the spectrum lies drama, in which the writer depicts
humanity from an objective point of view.
Schopenhauer gives particular attention to tragedy, as the 'summit of
poetic art' (Wi, 252). While he is not alone in considering tragedy a
supreme art form, it has especial importance for him because it is
uniquely able to portray human life in what he regards as its true
colours, containing the right degree of unfulfilled desire, conflict, and
unmitigated suffering: 'It is the antagonism of the will with itself which
is here most completely unfolded at the highest grade of its objectivity'
(Wi, 253). But seeing the Idea of humanity revealed in all its terrible
truth is not the end of the matter. Schopenhauer requires that we
understand also the ultimate human achievement (as he will later argue
it to be) of resigning oneself, and turning against the will to life: 'we see
in tragedy the noblest men, after a long conflict and suffering, finally
renounce for ever all the pleasures of life and the aims till then pursued 
3
3
so keenly, or cheerfully and willingly give up life itself (Wi, 253). 
a.
Witnessing the depiction of suffering and resignation in tragedy, we
learn by suffering in some measure ourselves. The best kind of tragedy,
in Schopenhauer's view (which admittedly leaves out many famous
instances of the genre) is where a catastrophe occurs in the course of a
more or less ordinary life through no particularly grave fault of the
protagonist. This kind of tragedy 'shows us those powers that destroy
happiness and life, and in such a way that the path to them is at any
moment open even to us.... Then, shuddering, we feel ourselves
already in the midst of hell' (Wi, 255). Is there room for pure aesthetic
pleasure amid such terror - amid such perturbations of the will?
Schopenhauer's answer invokes the Kantian conception of the sublime,
in which the contemplation of something potentially destructive,
viewed from the vantage point of present safety, brings a pleasurable
sense of elevation. Schopenhauer gives this his own twist, however.
What we rise to, above our shudderings at the depicted pain and misery
83

of the tragedy, is, he claims, a sense of the serene abandonment of all
willing which beckons from the very highest plateau that human life can
reach. 'What gives to everything tragic . . . the characteristic tendency
to the sublime, is the dawning of the knowledge that the world and life
can afford us no true satisfaction, and are therefore not worth our
attachment to them' (Wz, 433-4).
Music
Schopenhauer's philosophical theory of music is set apart from his
account of the other arts, and has enjoyed something of a life of its own
in musical circles and in aesthetics. It remains one of the most striking
theories of the power of music to express emotion, even if, like other
attempts to explain this phenomenon, it is not ultimately convincing.
Schopenhauer's view is that music is a 'copy of the will itself (Wi. 257).
Whereas all the other art forms present us with Ideas which are the
= experienceable manifestation of the will, music bypasses these Ideas,
5 and is 'as immediate an objectification and copy of the whole will as the
•§ world itself is'. The will expresses itself once as the whole world of
particular phenomena and universal kinds into which they fall; it
expresses itself over again as music. There are two parts to
Schopenhauer's view. One attempts to explain the significance of music
in terms of states of feeling and striving that we are familiar with in
ourselves. The other draws a large-scale analogy between the range of
phenomena in nature and the different elements of which music
consists.
Here is Schopenhauer's idea about music and conscious strivings:
The nature of man consists in the fact that his will strives, is satisfied,
strives anew, and so on and on; in fact his happiness and well-being
consist only in the transition from desire to satisfaction, and from this to
a fresh desire . . . Thus, corresponding to this, the nature of melody is
a constant digression and deviation from the keynote in a thousand
84

ways . . . [M]elody expresses the many different forms of the will's
efforts, but also its satisfaction by ultimately finding again a harmonious
interval, and still more the keynote. (Wi, 260)
Schopenhauer contends that the progression of musical notes through
time is immediately understood by the human mind as an analogy of
the progress of our own inner strivings. Here are some of the many
examples he gives:
as rapid transition from wish to satisfaction and from this to a new wish
are happiness and well-being, so rapid melodies without great deviations
are cheerful. Slow melodies that strike painful discords and wind back to
the keynote only through many bars, are sad, on the analogy of delayed
and hard-won satisfaction. . . . The adagio speaks of the suffering
of a great and noble endeavour that disdains all trifling happiness.
(Wi, 260-1)
The effect of the suspension also deserves to be considered here. It is a
dissonance delaying the final consonance that is with certainty awaited;
in this way the longing for it is strengthened, and its appearance affords
the greater satisfaction. This is clearly an analogue of the satisfaction of
the will which is enhanced through delay. (W2,455-6)
Many have found these ideas reflected especially in the composition of
Wagner's Tristan and Isolde.
A popular prejudice is that music expresses the emotion of the
composer or performer. But this is decidedly not Schopenhauer's view.
Music, for him, has the peculiarity of expressing what might be called
impersonal emotions:
music does not express this or that particular and definite pleasure, this
or that affliction, pain, sorrow, horror, gaiety, merriment, or peace of
mind, but joy, pain, sorrow, horror, gaiety, merriment, peace of mind
85

9. Schopenhauer's flutes among other objects in the Schopenhauer-Archiv, Frankfurt am Main

themselves, to a certain extent in the abstract, their essential nature,
without any accessories, and so also without the motives for them.
(Wi, 261)
If a person experiences some particular joy or sorrow in life, usually
some 'motive' or representation of the way things are gives rise to the
emotion. Emotions tend to be about something. But Schopenhauer is
proposing that in music we grasp directly and non-conceptually the
essential shape, as it were, of feeling joy or sorrow without any
content - without any representation of what the emotion is about.
Listeners thus recognize the pure ebb and flow of the will, of striving
and satisfaction, in which their own life consists, but without their own
desires being engaged, without feeling emotions themselves, and so
without any risk of pain. The account remains intriguing, though we
may question whether it really captures the essential nature of the
emotions, or explains just how the listener is supposed to apprehend
them. 
a
I
E
Schopenhauer's other central thought about music is that it parallels 
S
the world in the range of expressions of will which it achieves. The bass
is like the lowest grade of the will's objectification, 'inorganic nature,
the mass of the planet' (Wi, 258). The melody on top is analogous to
'the highest grade of the will's objectification, the intellectual life and
endeavour of man' (1/1/7, 259). All the parts in between, with their
intervals from one another, are the various manifestations of will
throughout the inorganic world and the plant and animal kingdoms.
Hence, music is not merely an expression of conscious human strivings,
but a copy of the will in its great diversity, and hence a re-run of the
whole phenomenal world. This idea, though fanciful, is a rather fine one.
Whether or not Schopenhauer's views about music can be subscribed to
literally, one can understand why musicians have often been drawn to
him. No other philosopher has given music such a weighty role, and few
have come nearer to the impossible achievement of evoking its
pleasures in a purely verbal medium.
87

Chapter 7
Ethics: seeing the
world aright
Against Kant's ethics
In Schopenhauer's view, the ethical sphere parallels the aesthetic in that
prescriptive rules, and conceptual thought in general, are not the
essential thing:
Virtue is as little taught as is genius; indeed, the concept is just as
unfruitful for it as it is for art, and in the case of both can be used only as
an instrument. We should therefore be just as foolish to expect that our
moral systems and ethics would create virtuous, noble, and holy men,
as that our aesthetics would produce poets, painters, and musicians.
(Wi. 271)
This suggests that people will either have intuitive ethical insight or they
will not; and we know that Schopenhauer thinks an individual's basic
character cannot be altered. Moral rules, in that case, are useful only in
channelling and curbing people's behaviour: you can train an egoistic
person so that his or her behaviour has less disastrous consequences,
but not make him or her into a good person. Since he takes this view,
Schopenhauer's philosophical ethics will not itself be prescriptive. Nor
will it attempt to debate whether moral laws are universally binding, or
consider what reason one has to obey them, or indeed give any theory
of'moral law' at all.

Schopenhauer's ethical theory does not stand entirely under Kant's
shadow, any more than his theory of knowledge or his aesthetics - yet
the shadow is always present. Kant's ethics is an ethics of duty, and tries
to formulate an imperative to which the actions of the ideally rational
being must conform. Schopenhauer's, by contrast, is an ethics of
compassion. It tries to explain the difference between good and bad in
terms of a divergence of attitudes which individuals may take towards
one another, and towards the world as a whole. Morality for
Schopenhauer is not a matter of duty or of 'ought'; nor can it be
founded in rationality. It is a matter of 'seeing the world aright', to use
Wittgenstein's later phrase. But to reach his position Schopenhauer first
has to argue with Kant in some detail.
The essay On the Basis of Morality contains a succinct and powerful
discussion of Kantian ethics, in which Schopenhauer brings forward 
§!
many objections, chiefamong them the objection that Kant's idea of an J
8
imperative, 'You ought', is a theological notion in disguise. The 
s
language in which Kant speaks here has biblical overtones, and, to the 
?
atheist Schopenhauer, the very idea of an absolute command either 
I
trades surreptitiously on the assumption of an absolute being who may »
issue it, or it is unfounded. When Kant later tries to show how ethics 
£
requires an idea of Cod, Schopenhauer is reminded of a conjuror who,
to our great surprise, pulls out of the hat something which he had
planted there all along (6, 57). On the other hand, if there is no Cod, we
should not simply swallow the idea of an absolute, universal imperative
in the first place.
To whom, in any case, would the Kantian imperative be addressed? Not
to human beings as such, but to 'all rational beings'. Schopenhauer is
again scathing:
we know reason as the exclusive attribute of the human race, and are by
no means entitled to think of it as existing outside that race, and to set
up a genus called 'rational beings' differing from its sole species, 'man'.
89

Still less are we justified in laying down laws for such imaginary rational
beings in the abstract... We cannot help suspecting that Kant here gave
a thought to the dear little angels, or at any rate counted on their
presence in the conviction of the reader, (fi, 63-4)
Kant's moral imperative has to be issued to rational beings in the
abstract, because his ethics sets out to be non-empirical, and to rest
wholly on principles knowable a priori - that is to say, knowable in
advance of experience. But this itself is something that should be
queried, according to Schopenhauer. Practical morality - decision-
making and judgement - is concerned with the actual conduct of
individual human beings who occupy the empirical realm. This should
also be the focus of the theoretical discussion which Schopenhauer calls
'morals'. He charges that Kant's moral imperative is by contrast purely
formal, and so without any 'real substance' (6,76).
| 
What about the Kantian appeal to rationality? Schopenhauer points
5 out that rational behaviour is not always morally good behaviour:
•§ 'Reasonable and vicious are quite consistent with each other, in fact,
only through their union are great and far-reaching crimes possible'
(6, 83). In other words, if one is evil, rationality will not make one any
less evil; it may simply make one a more efficient and deadly exponent
than an evil person who cannot think straight. Reason is instrumental,
concerning the means towards some end which one has. An imperative
will therefore motivate a rational being to action, only if he or she has an
interest or end already in view. Since human beings are material, striving
individuals who manifest the will to life, their ends tend to be egoistic.
Egoism is the 'paymaster' required to cash out any formal imperative (6,
89): what will rationally motivate me to act in any particular case will be
considerations about whether I can achieve my own ends.
One final criticism is perhaps worthy of mention. Schopenhauer is
affronted by Kant's idea of the 'dignity of man' - our supposed
'unconditioned incomparable value' - and by the idea that human
90

10. Title page of The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics

beings must be treated as 'ends in themselves'. One ground for his
criticism is that something can be a 'value' or 'end' only if it is the
fulfilment of something specific that is willed. 'Unconditioned value'
and 'end in itself would in that case be disguised contradictions. More
significantly, Schopenhauer finds this elevation of the human species at
the expense of other animals 'revolting and abominable'. Other species
are supposed to lack such dignity, and not to be ends in themselves,
solely through lacking reason; but the consequence is that, in
philosophical morals, animals
are mere 'things', mere means to any ends whatsoever. They can
therefore be used for vivisection, hunting, coursing, bull-fights, and
horse racing, and can be whipped to death as they struggle along with
heavy carts of stone. Shame on such a morality... that fails to recognize
the eternal essence that exists in every living thing, and shines forth with
inscrutable significance from all eyes that see the sun! (B, 96)
1
v Schopenhauer sounds almost our contemporary here. At the same
•g time, his lack of confidence in any special value attaching to humanity
or to rationality is an important element in his pessimism. As we shall
see, being an individual of the human species is neither a dignified nor a
good thing as such.
Freedom and determinism
Schopenhauer believes that actions are caused by a combination of
one's unchanging character and a motive occurring in one's
consciousness. This is the basis of his claim that all actions are
determined, and that, in one important sense, there is no freedom of
the will. But his discussion of the issue, especially in its concentrated
form in On the Freedom of the Will, is of considerable subtlety. As well as
arguing for determinism, he makes an important distinction between
different senses of 'freedom', and finishes with the reflection that the
truth of determinism does not make us any less inclined to feel
92

responsible for our actions - a fact which he rightly says still requires an
explanation.
Schopenhauer brings to light a distinction, which is often overlooked,
between freedom to will and freedom to act. Freedom to act is the
ability to do something, if one wills to do it. This freedom can be
removed by external obstacles to action, by constraining motives, laws
or threats of various consequences if one acts, or by impairment of the
subject's cognitive faculties. Being in prison, being at gunpoint, or
having sustained brain-damage are, for example, all ways in which there
can be some obstacle to one's doing what one wills. Schopenhauer
accordingly lists physical freedom, moral freedom, and intellectual
freedom as the three species of freedom to act. The deeper question,
however, is whether I have any freedom to will this or that course of
action. Schopenhauer arrives at his admirably straight answer to this
question by examining the only two available sources of evidence:
consciousness of ourselves and consciousness of things other than
ourselves.
Consciousness of ourselves is powerless to tell us whether we could ever
have willed otherwise than we did. In self-consciousness we are aware
of doing what we want to do, by being aware of our action itself and of
the motives that bring it about. But once I have chosen one course of
action, say, going to Frankfurt, can I tell whether I could equally have
chosen to go to Mannheim? The problem is this:
Everyone's self-consciousness asserts very clearly that he can do what he
wills. But since we can conceive of him as willing quite opposite actions,
it follows that if he so wills he can also do the opposite. Now the
untutored understanding confuses this with the proposition that he, in a
given case, can also will the opposite, and calls this the freedom of the
will. ... But whether in a given case he can will the one as well as
the other ... calls for a deeper investigation than the one which mere
self-consciousness could decide. (F, 23)
93

The question is not whether one can want or wish to do each of two
opposite actions, but whether one could will them - remembering that
(barring obstacles) willing is acting, for Schopenhauer. I went to
Frankfurt, and I am aware that if it had been my will to go to Mannheim,
I could have done that. The question is: could that have been my
will? Schopenhauer's sensible answer is that, from examining my
own knowledge of my actions and motives, I cannot decide this
question.
On the other hand, if one looks at the causal relation between the
external world and the subject who wills, one is bound to treat the case
as one treats any other cause-effect relationship. I cannot regard myself
alone as the one part of the world that is exempt from the principle of
sufficient reason; so, if the state of affairs which caused me to go to
Frankfurt were exactly repeated, it could only cause me to go to
Frankfurt. It makes no difference that part of the cause is a process of
rational deliberation. Schopenhauer contends that if my character and
the motive - my representation of reality - were to remain the same,
then I could not have willed otherwise. In this sense, there is no free will.
We think we have it, but all that we have is the freedom to do what we
will, with which it is so easily confused.
The argument is already cogent, but the way in which Schopenhauer
caps it shows his peculiar skill as a philosophical writer. Imagine a man
standing on the street at six o'clock in the evening, he says, musing on
the following thoughts: The working day is over. Now I can go for a
walk, or I can go to the club; I can also climb up the tower to see the sun
set' -and so on -'I also can run out of the gate, into the wide world, and
never return. All of this is strictly up to me, in this I have complete
freedom. But still I shall do none of these things now, but with just as
free a will I shall go home to my wife.' Schopenhauer's comment?
This is exactly as if water spoke to itself: 'I can make waves (yes! in the sea
during a storm), I can rush down hill (yes! in the river bed)' I can plunge
94

down foaming and gushing (yes! in the waterfall), I can rise freely as a
stream of water into the air (yes! in the fountain), I can, finally, boil away
and disappear (yes! at a certain temperature); but I am doing none of
these things now, and am voluntarily remaining quiet and clear water in
the reflecting pond. (F, 43)
After stating his case for determinism, however, Schopenhauer reserves
the right to a 'higher view'. 'For there is another fact of consciousness
which until now I have left completely aside', he says. This is the wholly
clear and certain feeling of the responsibility for what we do, of the
accountability for our actions, which rests on the unshakable certainty
that we ourselves are the doers of our deeds' (F, 93-4). As some
philosophers have said recently, the truth of determinism does not take
away this 'certain feeling' that we are accountable for our actions, that
they are in some sense 'up to us'. 
3.
a
s
Schopenhauer now turns to a distinction in Kant's ethics, namely that 
s
between a person's empirical character and their intelligible character, 
?
'one of the most beautiful and profound ideas brought forth by that 
I
great mind, or indeed by men at any time' (F, 96). This is another aspect S"
of the backbone distinction between appearance and thing in itself with 
^
which we have dealt all along:
the empirical character, like the whole man, is a mere appearance as an
object of experience, and hence bound to the forms of all appearance -
time, space, and causality - and subject to their laws. On the other hand,
the condition and the basis of this whole appearance . . . is his intelligible
character, i.e. his will as thing in itself. It is to the will in this capacity that
freedom, and to be sure even absolute freedom, that is, independence of
the law of causality (as a mere form of appearances), properly belongs.
(F.97)
The basic idea is quite simple: if I cannot escape from causal necessity as
part of empirical reality, then an aspect of me that is beyond empirical
95

reality may do so. Schopenhauer points out that when we hold
someone accountable we blame the person for his or her character,
or for what he or she is, using actions merely as evidence for this.
He suggests that I must be responsible for what I am - my intelligible
character behind appearances, from which issue all my actions.
Freedom is not eliminated, but moved out of the empirical
realm.
Here Schopenhauer faces some serious problems. One is that, on his
own view, my character is inborn and unchanging. In what sense can I
then be responsible for being what I am? Another problem is that /
seem to disappear from the world in itself. The thing in itself is not split
up into individuals - a crucial claim throughout Schopenhauer's
philosophy. 'My will as thing in itself, my intelligible character, ought
not to be separate from the world as whole; and so it is hard to see
how I could be held responsible for 'what I am in myself.
| 
Schopenhauer is right in saying that we do regard a person as
£ responsible for actions, thinking of the person as their true source,
| 
regardless of their place in a causal chain of events. But, although his
may be an acute diagnosis of the problem of free will, Schopenhauer's
solution is not really credible.
Egoism and compassion
What then is the true basis of morals, according to Schopenhauer? The
answer may be given in three stages. One concerns the single principle
which, he claims, all moral actions conform to, namely: 'Injure no one;
on the contrary, help everyone as much as you can' (which he gives in
Latin: Neminem laede, /mo omnes quantum poles, juva). The second stage
of the answer is an attempt to explain the basic psychological attitude
which alone can spur people on to moral actions, namely compassion or
sympathy. Ultimately, however, the basis of morals is not reached until
the third stage, in which we are given a metaphysical account of how
the compassionate attitude is both possible and justified.
96

The 'Neminem laede' principle can be broken into two parts: 'Injure no
one' and 'Help everyone as much as you can'. Actions which conform to
the first part Schopenhauer calls instances of voluntary justice, while
those which conform to the second are instances of disinterested
philanthropy, or 'loving-kindness' towards other human beings (and
presumably towards animals too: in line with his earlier censure of Kant,
Schopenhauer adduces the fact that we do feel compassion towards
animals [6,175-8]). No action except those of pure justice or
philanthropy can count as having true moral worth (6,138-9).
Schopenhauer takes it as a premiss that such acts, however rare and
surprising, are acknowledged to occur, and are universally regarded as
being good. Examples range from self-sacrifice in battle to someone's
returning a lost object which they could have kept without any
consequences, or giving alms to a beggar when they stand to gain
nothing from doing so. Justice and philanthropy both stem from
compassion, which manifests itself either as pure concern to promote
the well-being of another, or as pure distress at the suffering of
another.
Every human being, according to Schopenhauer, has some element of
compassion in their character (6,192). But there are vast differences in
the proportion of compassion with which we are endowed. Some are
overflowing with it, some have virtually none in them. Schopenhauer
thinks that only actions from compassion have moral worth, and that
we judge primarily what a person is, using their actions merely as
evidence. If we follow him in all this, we shall have to admit that some
human beings are greatly more good than others, and that some,
though they might occasionally act from compassion, are not good.
Whether or not that is a problem, it pales into insignificance compared
with the difficulty of explaining how, on his view, compassion is possible
at all, and how it can be an incentive to action.
If some part of everyone's make-up is compassion, what is the rest?
Schopenhauer's claim in full is this:
97

Man's three fundamental ethical incentives, egoism, malice, and
compassion, are present in everyone in different and incredibly unequal
proportions. In accordance with them, motives will operate on man and
actions will ensue. (B, 192)
Schopenhauer helps us with a succinct explanation of the three
incentives. Compassion is the incentive to seek the well-being of
another (or to alleviate their woe). Malice is the incentive to seek the
woe of another; egoism the incentive to seek one's own well-being. We
may wonder whether the logic of this triad is quite right: is not malice
really a kind of self-seeking, a kind of egoism? In Schopenhauer's
defence, the reply must be that some malice at least is not egoistic.
Much that we can set down as cruelty is done at the behest of one's own
gain in some form or other: it is then a means to an egoistic end. But
what Schopenhauer means by pure malice is something as exceptional
as pure philanthropy: the kind of depraved or 'devilish' action where the
agent sets aside his or her own well-being as an aim, simply in order to
harm someone else (8,136) - what one might call disinterested malice.
The triad of egoism, malice, and compassion is thus a genuine
threesome, although many cruel and wicked actions do not arise from
malice proper.
Nevertheless it is the egoistic incentive that compassion most has to
contend with, because it is egoism that makes up the bulk of each
individual: 'The chief and fundamental incentive in man as in the animal
is egoism, that is, the craving for existence and well-being' (B, 131). Each
individual is a material organism in which will to life expresses itself:
hence striving for one's own ends is fundamental to each individual.
Indeed, so fundamental is it on Schopenhauer's theory that one must
wonder how compassionate action is possible at all. If action is always a
bodily striving of the individual towards some end of its own,
compassion, which is supposedly the only genuine moral incentive,
ought never to move any individual to action. Egoism is 'colossal' and
'natural':
98

every individual, completely vanishing and reduced to nothing in a
boundless world, nevertheless makes himself the centre of the world,
and considers his own existence and well-being before everything else. In
fact, from the natural standpoint, he is ready for this to sacrifice
everything else; he is ready to annihilate the world, in order to maintain
his own self, that drop in the ocean, a little longer. This disposition is
egoism, which is essential to everything in nature. (Wi, 332)
Egoism 'towers over the world' (6,132) to such an extent that, without
the constraint of laws embodied in the state, individuals would be
engaged in helium omnium contra omnes, a war of all against all (6,133).
All this suggests that action motivated by pure concern for the well-
being of others should be not only rare, but so contrary to our nature as
to be impossible. Schopenhauer has to admit that compassion is one of
the mysteries of ethics. His only choice is to say that compassion is a 
|j
primitive anti-egoistic trait which, as a matter of sheer fact, is present in Jj
us. But how compassion can 'reside in human nature' (8,149) is deeply 
I1
mysterious given that the human being is a naturally egoistic expression £
of will to life. 
I
&a>
f
The metaphysics of morals
The final stage of Schopenhauer's ethics, however, seeks to rest the
compassionate attitude on a metaphysical foundation. Compassion
turns out to reflect a view of oneself and the nature of reality which
differs from that implicit in egoism, and is superior to it. Schopenhauer
can thus say that compassion is a good thing not only because it tends
to decrease the sum of suffering in the world, but because it embodies a
truer metaphysical picture.
The initial thought is that it is possible for me to feel compassion only if
'to a certain extent I have identified myself with the other person, and in
consequence the barrier between the I and the non-1 is for the moment
abolished' (6,166). Schopenhauer takes rather literally the idea
99

contained in 'compassion1 or 'sympathy' (German Mitleid) that one
person 'suffers with' another. Thought for my well-being has to yield its
place in my motivation to thought for another's well-being; and it
would be inexplicable how that could happen unless I could make the
other's suffering and well-being intimately my own concern. Only if I
share your suffering, in some sense feeling it as my own, can your well-
being, or the alleviation of your woe, come to motivate me. To be
compassionate, someone must, says Schopenhauer, 'make less of a
distinction than do the rest between himself and others' (6, 204).
But now he can argue that the compassionate person is committed to a
different metaphysical view:
The bad man everywhere feels a thick partition between himself and
everything outside him. The world to him is an absolute non-1 and his
relation to it is primarily hostile. . . . The good character, on the other
S 
hand, lives in an external world that is homogeneous with his own true
£ 
being. The others are not non-1 for him, but an 'I once more'. His
f 
fundamental relation to everyone is, therefore, friendly; he feels himself
intimately akin to all beings, takes an immediate interest in their weal
and woe, and confidently assumes the same sympathy in them. (B, 211)
Which is the correct view of the world? The appearance/thing in itself
dichotomy will tell us. From the point of view of the world of
representation, governed by space and time which are the principle of
individuation, reality consists of separate individuals, of which any
moral agent is one. So the person who thinks 'Each individual is a being
radically different from all others... everything else is non-l and foreign
to me' (B, 210) is right about the world of appearance. But beneath this
lies the world as thing in itself, which is not split up into individuals, but
just is the world - whatever that ultimately is. So the supposedly more
profound view is the one which considers individuation to be 'mere
phenomenon' rather than ultimately part of reality. From this point of
view, no one is distinct from anything else in the world, and so can
100

recognize 'in another his own self, his own true inner nature' (B, 209).
Schopenhauer's Indian thoughts come to the fore suddenly: the
conception of the world as composed of separate individuals is Maya -
'i.e. illusion, deception, phantasm, mirage' (6, 209), while knowledge of
the deeper, more correct, non-individuating view is expressed in the
Sanskrit tot tvam as/: this art thou (6, 210).
At first sight this idea seems so extreme as to expunge the possibility of
compassion altogether. If I really believed that you were not distinct
from me, the attitude with which I regarded you could only be a strange
kind of egoism. Genuine compassion, on the other hand, surely
presupposes belief in distinctness as a minimum condition. An even
more graphic objection is that, if the world in itself is without
individuation, it does not even contain me: it certainly does not contain
me as this bodily, willing human being, nor does it contain the thinking 
5
'I'that I regard myself as being from a subjective point of view. It is hard ™
to see how the belief in the illusoriness of all individuals, including the 
|-
individual which I am, could support a compassionate attitude between £
the individual that I am and the individual beggar to whom I give 
I
money. 
S"
to*
But perhaps this is too simplistic a response. What Schopenhauer has
recognized is the possibility of an attitude to the world which does not
take one's existence as a particular individual to be of paramount
significance: a 'universal standpoint' as opposed to a particular one
(M/2, 599-600). In order to adopt this standpoint, one need not
abandon the belief in separate individuals altogether. Compassion is
supposed to motivate actions which one must carry out as an
individual, towards other individuals. What might ground such actions
is the idea that, though individuals are separate, there is nothing of any
fundamental importance about the individual which I am. If the beggar
and I are both equal portions of the same underlying reality, equal
manifestations of the same will to life, then from the point of view of
the world as a whole, it is a matter of indifference whether my ends are
101

promoted and the beggar's thwarted, or vice versa. This thought seems
genuinely capable of grounding a compassionate outlook. The belief
that I simply am not an individual separate from the rest of reality is not
what does the work here; rather it is that, though being an individual
(and naturally egoistic) thing in the world, my perspective does not
always have to be one of identification with the individual that I am. As
in Schopenhauer's account of aesthetic experience, I need not accept
the natural standpoint of individuality as the one from which I must
always regard things. In the next chapter we shall see that the
individual's renunciation of his or her individuality not only makes
aesthetic value and moral worth possible for Schopenhauer, but is the
only attitude which can compensate for his or her existing at all.
S
s.
102

Chapter 8
Existence and pessimism
Ineliminable suffering
Awakened to life out of the night of unconsciousness, the will finds itself
as an individual in an endless and boundless world, among innumerable
individuals, all striving, suffering, and erring; and, as if through a
troubled dream, it hurries back to the old unconsciousness. Yet till then
its desires are unlimited, its claims inexhaustible, and every satisfied
desire gives birth to a new one. No possible satisfaction in the world
could suffice to still its craving, set a final goal to its demands, and fill
the bottomless pit of its heart. In this connexion, let us now consider
what as a rule comes to man in satisfactions of any kind; it is often
nothing more than the bare maintenance of this very existence,
extorted daily with unremitting effort and constant care in conflict with
misery and want, and with death in prospect. Everything in life
proclaims that earthly happiness is destined to be frustrated, or
recognized as an illusion. The grounds for this lie deep in the very
nature of things. (W2, 573)
The Fourth Book of The World as Will and Representation is its austere
final movement. Schopenhauer's style matches the greater seriousness
of the discussion (Wi, 271), which, together with the topics in ethics we
have already looked at, addresses - to use a hackneyed phrase - the
human condition itself. Few writers have the insight and eloquence to
103

make a philosophically interesting contribution in this area, but
Schopenhauer is undoubtedly one of them.
Schopenhauer looks around the world and finds it full of suffering -
frustration, tedium, pain, and misery. It might be thought that this is
just a matter of personal propensity. Someone else might point out the
occurrence of good fortune, innocent joy, contentment, and reward for
honest toil - so is not Schopenhauer merely carrying out a highly
selective inventory? If so, his pessimism would be superficial and
gratuitous. But this is not the case. Whether we agree with him or not,
he has arguments for far-reaching conclusions about the value that can
attach to human existence. It must contain suffering, and cannot be
preferable to non-existence. It would even have been better for reality
not to have existed. These claims make Schopenhauer a pessimist in a
philosophically interesting sense.
| 
The first point is that suffering is ineliminably present in the existence of
£ any human individual. As material, living creatures, our ordinary
•I existence is such that we must strive towards ends. But, Schopenhauer
VI
argues, a being who strives, and who is conscious of his or her ends and
of whether they are fulfilled, is a being who suffers. Part of this can be
understood in terms of egoism. Among a multitude of individuals, each
of whom must strive in order to exist, conflicts of ends will occur, and,
barring the mysterious intervention of compassion, suffering will result.
Since compassion is not ubiquitous, nor even widespread, one's life as a
human individual among others will be very likely to contain episodes in
which one suffers, and episodes in which one brings about suffering.
However, willing itself is closely intertwined with suffering in another
way. First, willing could not spring from a state of total sufficiency and
contentment. A being strives only if it experiences a lack or deficiency,
and experiencing a lack is already a form of suffering. Secondly, in the
course of events one does not attain some of the ends for which one
strives. If one does not achieve an end, one's original lack is prolonged,
104

which, together with the consciousness of not achieving one's end, is
further suffering. Perhaps we can imagine a being that was always
successful in its striving - but that is of little help to Schopenhauer. For
what happens when we achieve an end towards which our striving has
been directed? The resulting state is called satisfaction or happiness;
but, he claims, this state is of value only relative to the deficiency which
it removes. Satisfaction can occur only in a being that has suffered, and
it has any value only relative to some particular episode of suffering.
Schopenhauer puts the point by saying that satisfaction is negative, and
pain positive. Pain is something which we feel, but satisfaction is an
absence; to be satisfied is simply to return to neutral by wiping out a felt
deficiency. And the mere state of feeling no deficiencies, and so having
nothing to strive for, has no positive value in its own terms. If it
continues for any length of time it is simply boredom, which
Schopenhauer often mentions as one of the pervasive features of life.
Finally, the attainment of ends never makes striving cease altogether. 
g
'Every satisfied desire gives birth to a new one': whatever striving of 
g
ai
ours is successful, we shall soon continue to strive for further ends, and 
i.
hence to suffer further. Therefore, striving cannot eliminate suffering as »
such. While we exist, nothing we can undertake to do will stop us from a-
willing, or, therefore, from having to suffer.
It is important for Schopenhauer that life's containing suffering is not
redeemed by suffering's having any positive point. Many lives, as a
matter of fact, strike a balance between suffering and contentment
which suffices to make them bearable:
This is the life of almost all men; they will, they know what they will, and
they strive after this with enough success to protect them from despair,
and enough failure to preserve them from boredom and its
consequences. (Wi, 327)
But if we consider simply that there is suffering, and ask whether
existence containing suffering is something good, we cannot say that
105

suffering is redeemed by some good over and above existence itself. If
suffering in general is to be redeemed, it must be by its being simply
good to exist as a human individual, come what may. And, as we shall
see, that is something which Schopenhauer denies outright. But so far, if
we accept Schopenhauer's argument, we can at least conclude that the
happiness attainable by any human being must be bound up with
suffering. To imagine an existence free of suffering is to imagine an
existence that is not that of a human individual.
Death
What attitude should any of us take towards the most obvious fact
about our existence - that it will cease? We do tend to fear death, not on
any good rational ground, according to Schopenhauer, but because we
are manifestations of will to life: a 'boundless attachment to life' is
inborn in us as much as it is in all animals (M/2, 465). We might be right
= to fear dying, if that process involved pain, but then the object of fear
§ would be pain, rather than being dead. Schopenhauer presents a couple
^ 
of familiar arguments for the view that fear of being dead is irrational.
One is the argument from symmetry: we did not exist for an infinite
time before birth, and that is a matter of indifference to us, so we ought
to regard similarly our not existing again. The other is Epicurus'
argument that precisely because it involves our non-existence, death
should not be feared: to something that does not exist, it cannot matter
that it does not exist.
Schopenhauer does, however, offer a more positive consolation. He
accepts that death is the cessation of the individual human being, but
maintains that this is not the only way in which it should be regarded.
The opinion of many in contemporary Europe vacillates between the
view of death as absolute annihilation and the notion of immortality.
But both opinions are 'equally false' (1/1/2,464). This becomes apparent
from a 'higher standpoint' which once again exploits the distinction
between thing in itself and phenomenon. The individual that I am is
106

merely part of the world of phenomena. It occupies certain portions of
space for a certain time, after which it ceases to exist. From the point of
view of the individual, death is annihilation, and it would be absolute
annihilation of me, if this particular phenomenal individual were all that
I am. However, if I am also something in myself, outside all time and
change, then death cannot be my end:
the greatest equivocation really lies in the word 'I' . . . According as I
understand this word, I can say: 'Death is my entire end'; or else: This my
personal phenomenal appearance is just as infinitely small a part of my
true inner nature as I am of the world.' (W2,491)
'My true inner nature' here must refer to the same thing as 'the world',
because reality in itself is not subject to any individuation. The 'higher
standpoint' thus yields the thought that I am the world; and, thinking
this, one can take the supposedly consoling view that the ephemeral 
»
individual to which T usually refers is really not worth worrying about, 
s
I
Once again Schopenhauer is trying to loosen the hold of the usual 
«
identification which we make of ourselves with an individual. The world a-
manifests itself as me here and now, but after I cease to exist, the same
world will manifest itself in the same way as other individuals of the
same species, each of which will find itself as the subject of
consciousness, refer to itself as 'I', pursue its ends, experience suffering
and satisfaction, and cease to exist in turn. Reality in itself, I am
supposed to think, is indifferent between one such manifestation of will
and another. Nature itself does not grieve over the destruction of any
particular part of itself, and will carry on existing without me. If I share
with all other phenomena the same 'inner nature', then the very core of
what I am carries on, regardless of the passing of phenomena. Indeed,
'carries on' is a misleading way to put Schopenhauer's point. Reality in
itself is eternal in the sense of timelessness. I have my 'now', and every
other phenomenon that was or will be has its time, which for it is equally
a 'now'. But from the point of view of reality in itself, time is an illusion.
107

Hence the phenomenal fact that some particular thing will not exist
later than now is not a fact about reality in itself.
Two concerns arise here: that this may not be convincing as an exercise
in metaphysics, and that it might fail to be consoling even if it were thus
convincing. The notion that the thing in itself is undifferentiated and
timeless stems from Schopenhauer's idealist doctrine of space and
time, and may well be questioned if we have doubts about that
doctrine. The really troublesome point, however, is the idea that / am
somehow present in the timeless, undifferentiated world.
Schopenhauer has previously told us that 'I' refers to the material,
striving, human being, and to the pure subject of consciousness which
we find ourselves as, and which would not exist were it not for the
human being with his or her bodily organs. But how could anything to
which 'I' refers remain if the human being ceased to exist, taking with it
the subject's consciousness? What we said when discussing the
| 
compassionate person's non-egoistic world-view applies again to the
higher perspective on death: it is impossible to find myself in the picture
•g of ultimate reality that it requires.
The question whether Schopenhauer's higher view of death could be
consoling is a difficult one. He tries to inculcate the thought that one's
own death has no great significance in the order of things. But if one
accepted his reasons for taking this attitude, ought one not to think that
one's life has just as little significance? And is that a consoling thought?
Schopenhauer appears to think so:
death is the great opportunity no longer to be I . . . Dying is the moment
of that liberation from the one-sidedness of an individuality which does
not constitute the innermost kernel of our true being, but is rather to be
thought of as a kind of aberration thereof. (W2, 507-8)
In fact, Schopenhauer recognizes two distinct outlooks for which his
view of death might be a consolation. The first, the affirmation of the will
108

to life, is the outlook of someone who would, as it were, stand on the
earth with 'firm, strong bones':
A man . . . who found satisfaction in life and took perfect delight in it;
who desired, in spite of calm deliberation, that the course of his life as he
had hitherto experienced it should be of endless duration or of constant
recurrence; and whose courage to face life was so great that, in return for
life's pleasures, he would willingly and gladly put up with all the
hardships and miseries to which it is subject. (Wi, 283-4)
This person could be consoled by Schopenhauer's doctrine of our
indestructibility by death: 'Armed with the knowledge we confer on
him, he would look with indifference at death hastening towards him on
the wings of time. He would consider it as a false illusion' (Wi, 284).
Such a person would think that living as an individual is fine, but that the
cessation of this life is powerless to detract from that. 
a
Schopenhauer suggests that suicide stems from this same attitude of 
3.
affirmation towards life. The explanation of this (which seems at first 
»
bizarre) is as follows: if I regard the pleasures of life as of positive value, 
y
despite its pains, I always run the risk that life's pains will come to
outweigh its pleasures. If I continue to want life for its potential positive
side, but come to believe that only suffering is available, the solution is
to stop living. However:
Far from being denial of the will, suicide is a phenomenon of the will's
strong affirmation. For denial has its essential nature in the fact that the
pleasures of life, not its sorrows, are shunned. The suicide wills life, and is
dissatisfied merely with the conditions on which it has come to him.
Therefore he gives up by no means the will to life, but merely life, since
he destroys the individual phenomenon. (Wi, 398)
Thus the character who wills the endless recurrence of his or her life
(from whom, again, Nietzsche seems to have learned something), and
109

the character who ends his or her life when suffering becomes too
great, really take one and the same stance of affirmation. Both, though,
would be missing something else: they would not have come to know
the truth as Schopenhauer sees it, that 'constant suffering is essential to
all life' (1/1/7, 283). The alternative outlook, which encompasses this
truth, consists in the denial of the will to life. Recognizing that suffering
pervades any existence as an individual manifestation of will to life, and
that achieving ends can never be divorced from suffering, this attitude
ceases to look for any positive value in the life of the individual human
being, even from its passing moments of satisfaction. This provides a
unique attitude to death:
to die willingly, to die gladly, to die cheerfully, is the prerogative of the
resigned, of him who gives up and denies the will to life.... He willingly
gives up the existence that we know; what comes to him instead of it is in
our eyes nothing, because our existence in reference to that one is
3 
nothing. The Buddhist faith calls that existence Nirvana, that is to say,
£ 
extinction. (1/1/2, 508)
1
X
Denial of the will
The will to life must be denied - 'if salvation is to be attained from an
existence like ours' (Wt, 405). Salvation is a religious doctrine, and
Schopenhauer is keen to link his philosophical discussion with
Christianity, Brahmanism, and Buddhism, claiming that the core of all
these religions, leaving aside mythical trappings and recent doctrinal
accretions, is really the same. Even Cod is not to the point: the
philosophical import is available to an atheist quite as much as to a
theist (l/l/i, 385), and is that we must renounce, or say No to, our nature
as human beings, if we are to find true value in existing. The real self is
the will to life (M/2, 606), and since this is also what must be denied,
salvation lies in self-denial or self-renunciation. 'In fact', he says,
'nothing else can be stated as the aim of our existence except the
knowledge that it would be better for us not to exist' (1/1/2, 605).
110

In 'denial of the will to life', one turns against the particular
manifestation of will to life found in oneself, which means turning
against the body, and against one's own individuality. Thus one ceases,
as much as possible, to strive for one's own egoistic ends, ceases to
avoid suffering or to seek pleasure, ceases to desire propagation of the
species, or any sexual gratification - in short, one looks down on that
willing part of nature which one is, and withdraws from one's
identification with it. Such an apparently unpalatable state is made to
seem worthy of attainment by Schopenhauer's elevated prose:
we can infer how blessed must be the life of a man whose will is silenced
not for a few moments, as in the enjoyment of the beautiful, but for ever,
indeed completely extinguished, except for the last glimmering spark
that maintains the body and is extinguished with it. Such a man who,
after many bitter struggles with his own nature, has at last completely
conquered, is then left only as pure knowing being, as the undimmed
mirror of the world. Nothing can distress or alarm him any more; nothing
can any longer move him; for he has cut all the thousand threads of
willing which hold us bound to the world, and which as craving, fear,
envy, and anger drag us here and there in constant pain. (Wi, 390)
Then, instead of the restless pressure and effort; instead of the constant
transition from desire to apprehension and from joy to sorrow; instead of
the never-satisfied and never-dying hope that constitutes the life-dream
of the man who wills, we see that peace that is higher than all reason,
that ocean-like calmness of the spirit, that deep tranquillity, that
unshakable confidence and serenity, whose mere reflection in the
countenance, as depicted by Raphael and Correggio, is a complete and
certain gospel. Only knowledge remains; the will has vanished. (Wi, 411)
Despite its kinship with the tranquil contemplation of the beautiful, the
denial of the will is not to be reached by an aesthetic route. It is reached
first by a saintly life, one whose justice and philanthropy arise from the
insight that egoism, individuation, and the whole phenomenal world
ill

are a kind of delusion. The supposed knowledge that all things are
identical at the level of the 'in itself leads to the total surrender of
egoism, and to the embracing of all suffering as one's own. This
'knowledge of the whole' then becomes the 'quieter of all and every
willing' (Wi, 379), and turns the will against its natural state of self-
affirmation. Another, secondary route to the same state is through
suffering itself. This is more common, according to Schopenhauer, since
the saintly life is not only rare, but extremely hard to sustain in the face
of the allurements of the will (Wi, 392). There are those, however, in real
life or in tragic art, whose own individual pain is of such duration or
intensity that their will to life is broken. Then, as a 'gleam of silver that
suddenly appears from the purifying flame of suffering', the state of
salvation may arrive in which they renounce all their desires, rise above
themselves and above suffering in a state of 'inviolable peace, bliss and
sublimity' (Wi, 392-3).
| 
Schopenhauer points to numerous practices and experiences which he
a thinks bear out his descriptions of self-renunciation:
Quietism, i.e. the giving up of all willing, asceticism, i.e. intentional
mortification of one's own will, and mysticism, i.e. consciousness of the
identity of one's own inner being with that of all things, or with the
kernel of the world, stand in the closest connexion, so that whoever
professes one of them is gradually led to the acceptance of the others,
even against his intention. Nothing can be more surprising than the
agreement among the writers who express those teachings, in spite of
the greatest difference of their age, country, and religion. (IV2, 613)
The ascetic, not content with willing the well-being of others, actively
seeks to counter the ends of the will as it expresses itself in the body.
('One's own woe' is thus a fourth incentive to action, to be set alongside
those of egoism, malice, and compassion [M/2, 607].} Schopenhauer
describes the ascetic thus: 'His body, healthy and strong, expresses the
sexual impulse through the genitals, but he denies the will, and gives
112

the lie to the body' (Wi, 380). Voluntary abstention from sexual
activity - that most powerful manifestation of will to life - is
accompanied by intentional poverty, non-avoidance of injury or
ignominy from others, fasting, self-castigation, and self-torture.
Since all these occurrences are pursued as deliberate ends, asceticism
cannot be identical with total will-lessness. The latter must occur
unpredictably as the 'sudden gleam of silver' arising out of suffering;
one can deliberately engineer suffering, but true salvation does not
come about by intention or design.
Mysticism, meanwhile, is simply 'consciousness of the identity of one's
own inner being with that of all things'. Schopenhauer claims to have
arrived at a philosophical delineation of the state which mystics achieve
in subjective experience. But since this experience cannot be
communicated, he arrives at the limits of philosophy:
when my teaching reaches its highest point, it assumes a negative
character, and so ends with a negation. Thus it can speak here only of
what is denied or given up. . . . Now it is precisely here that the mystic
proceeds positively, and therefore, from this point, nothing is left but
mysticism. (W2, 612)
Schopenhauer's book, having begun with the words The world ...',
does indeed end with ' - Nothing'. The phenomenal world is negated by
those whose will has turned against it, and they embrace sheer
nothingness in return; but then, from their altered point of view, the
whole of this world can be set at nought. Having given up placing any
positive value in the human round of happiness and suffering, the will-
less subject finds a new value in the very rejection of what has ordinary
human value.
However sympathetic or unsympathetic we may be to Schopenhauer's
final doctrine, we must surely worry whether it is really coherent at all.
We have often enough questioned whether I can think of myself as
113

existing in a world deprived of all differentiation between individuals.
But, even setting that aside, someone might ask: how can I acquiesce
in a tranquil vision of my identity with the kernel of the world, if that
kernel is the detested will to life, the very thing which it is so desirable
for me to escape? There is, however, a reply to this worry. We must not
forget Schopenhauer's distinction between knowing and willing. To
fcnowthe whole world as an all-pervading, purposeless will to life is not
the same as colluding with that will as it expresses itself in one's own
body - it is not the same as willing on behalf of this particular individual.
Salvation is achieved by knowledge for Schopenhauer, but not by
knowledge that any good state of affairs obtains. To see the world as a
whole from which I am not distinct is of value because it liberates me
from the treadmill of striving, happiness, and suffering - but not
because I come to understand the world as a good thing. The world is
not a good thing, and nor am I, for Schopenhauer. But some value can
be salvaged if I stand back and know the terrible place from a universal
standpoint, rather than carrying on willing in unquestioning
identification with one small part of it.
A final concern about the denial of the will is whether it is always
bound to be an act of will. If I have a choice whether to affirm or deny
my will to life, then, at some higher level, I must be willing to deny the
will. This would not be a contradiction if the 'higher' willing, which
discriminates between affirmation and denial, was of a kind not
subordinate to the will to life: I could then decide at will to deny my
will to life. But if Schopenhauer were to think that all willing is a form
of will to life, and that the denial of will to life is something I undertake
at will, then his position would be quite incoherent. The best resolution
of this problem is to say that denial of the will simply occurs in a
subject, and is not a consciously undertaken act. One's natural
compassion for every being, or the degree of one's suffering,
overcome one's egoism to such an extent that it becomes impossible
to strive any longer for the ends that arise out of one's own parochial
existence. His other description of this is 'the will to life turning against
114

itself. At the end of The World as Will and Representation he writes not
of 'those who have denied the will', but of 'those in whom the will has
turned and denied itself (Wi, 412). It is important that the agency here
is not straightforwardly mine. Just as it is not I who originally throw
myself into life, so it is not I who turn against the will to life. The
'agent' here is the will to life, which turns against itself. So denial of the
will really is not an act of will of the person in whom it happens.
However, Schopenhauer sometimes writes as if it were. Those in whom
the will has turned must constantly 'struggle' against affirmation of
the will, which is the body's natural state; they must 'strive with all
their might to keep to this path by self-imposed renunciations of every
kind' (Wi, 391). The will to life within in me is recalcitrant, and reverts
to affirming itself, even if it has previously been broken by saintliness or
intense suffering, so here is a case where / must continue to will its
denial after all.
Pessimism 
»
D,
Schopenhauer's philosophical pessimism resides in two connected 
$
theses: that for each individual it would have been better not to have 
sr
been born, and that the world as a whole is the worst of all possible
worlds. The argument for the first starts from the point that, for the
ordinary, striving human being, life must contain suffering, and from
the claim that all satisfaction is purely of negative value, being the
cessation of suffering. Schopenhauer moves from here to the idea that
no satisfaction achievable within human existence can compensate for
the suffering that it must also contain. It is as if, in the balance, no
satisfaction can weigh anything at all by comparison with any suffering,
however small. The mere existence of evil in the world makes it
something whose non-existence is preferable to its existence - we
should wish not only not to have come into existence ourselves, but that
this world in which we must suffer had not come about (I/I/2, 576). All
in all, our condition is 'something that it were better should not be'
(W2, 577).
115

Now this argument is not one that we have to accept. It is quite
plausible that our life has no purpose, that it must contain suffering, and
that no satisfactions can ever expunge the evil of any single pain; in this
sense the line Schopenhauer quotes from Petrarch, 'mille placer' non
vagliono un tormento' - 'a thousand pleasures do not compensate for
one pain' (1/1/2, 576), is correct. Also, it may be true that existence is not
guaranteed to be better than non-existence. And if, as Schopenhauer
claims - again with some plausibility - 'nine-tenths of mankind live in
constant conflict with want, always balancing themselves with difficulty
and effort on the brink of destruction' (1/1/2, 584), then the total of
individual lives that are better than non-existence may be much smaller
than we like to think. Still it does not follow that everyone should
consider their actual existence worse than non-existence. The crucial
premiss needed for this is that any suffering contained in a life makes
non-existence preferable to it. But this step commits us to thinking that
seventy years of contentment are rendered worthless by a single
| 
episode of pain - and that is surely incredible. We should question more
| 
strenuously the idea that all satisfaction is negative - the idea that while
•= pain is felt, satisfaction is a mere restitution of neutrality. It is true that
however many parts of one's life are happy, they do not take away the
pain of the parts in which one suffers. But it should be equally true that
the mere fact of suffering does not take away the value of the parts in
which one does not suffer, which may happen to be quite numerous.
Schopenhauer is scathing about optimism, the view that this is the best
of all possible worlds - 'The absurdity is glaring!' (M/2, 581). His
strongest attack is the argument that this is rather the worst of all
possible worlds, which goes as follows: Take "possible" to mean "what
can actually exist and last". Then, since "this world is arranged as it had
to be if it were to be capable of continuing with great difficulty to exist"
(1/1/2, 583), we can see that a worse world than this could not continue to
exist. Therefore, this is the worst world that is possible.' This is a curious
argument. Schopenhauer cites a number of pieces of evidence for the
claim that the world is continuing to exist only with great difficulty.
116

Nine-tenths of the human race live on the margins of extinction, many
species have entirely disappeared, a very small change in temperature
or the composition of the atmosphere would extinguish life altogether,
the planet could easily be destroyed by collisions within the solar
system, or by the forces beneath its own crust. So perhaps there are
many possible worlds that are more remote from catastrophe than the
present one - and if so, it may be salutary to be informed of that. But we
can clearly imagine many changes distinctly for the worse in this world
which would fall short of destroying it or its inhabitants. Many people
nowadays believe the environment is becoming gradually less and less
favourable for life. But if Schopenhauer were right, this view would be
untenable: the end of the world would have to be as nigh now as it ever
could be - and there appears no reason to accept this extreme view.
Schopenhauer's arguments for these extreme pessimist doctrines
K"
therefore fail to convince. However, his pessimism succeeds in 
£
advancing something less extreme and wholly believable, which is this: 
s
Bl
to think that we are meant not to suffer, that we somehow deserve 
i.
happiness, or that the world owes us the fulfilment of our purposes, is a j»
mistake - as is also the belief that being alive is simply a good a thing, 
I
whatever it brings. His protracted, moving discussions of the vanity or
worthlessness (Nichtigkeit) of life enable us to escape from these
optimistic delusions into a view which is harder, but arguably more
humane: that life itself has no purpose, that suffering is always part of it,
and that its end may sometimes be welcomed.
Despite this, it is sometimes suggested that Schopenhauer is not in the
end a genuine pessimist at all. For it is not as if he really thinks that no
value is ever attainable in life. Aesthetic contemplation, artistic genius, a
life of philanthropy and justice, asceticism, and renunciation of the will,
all are supreme values awaiting some human individuals, at least. The
individual who escapes from the will achieves nothing less than
'salvation', which seems to be a state whose value is unassailable. All of
this is true; but it conflicts with 'pessimism' only if you think pessimism
117

is the view that nothing is of any value at all. It does not conflict with
Schopenhauer's views that non-existence would have been preferable
and that the world is the worst possible world. The values of will-
lessness are genuine, but only by being, according to Schopenhauer,
some amelioration of the worst situation possible. Someone might
object that a worse world still would be one in which even the salvation
of will-less resignation was not open to us. But Schopenhauer's reply
would be that in that case existence would be so intolerable that no one
who really understood its nature would be able to endure it. It would, in
that sense, not be a possible existence.
Finally, even Schopenhauer's notion of salvation must itself be called
pessimistic in a definite sense, if we consider that the only value worthy
of the name in his scheme of things depends upon self-renunciation.
Resignation and aesthetic tranquillity are achieved by an attitude of
detachment from the human individual that strives for life, and from the
| 
whole tapestry of ends that are woven into life. If this living individual
f 
remains what I am in the world of representation, and will to life what I
., am in myself - no immaterial soul, no rational essence, no part of any
divine plan - then what I am is not only worthless, but is the very
obstacle that must be broken down before true value is glimpsed. To
feel the full weight of Schopenhauer's solution to the problem of
existence is thus to encounter a kind of self-loathing in which dwells the
deepest pessimism of all.
118

Chapter 9
Schopenhauer's influence
Schopenhauer regarded himself as building a philosophical system
which unfolded a 'single thought' (VVi, xii). But the system, which is
vulnerable to many criticisms, has not usually been the basis of his
appeal. His lasting importance as a philosopher rests more on his
manner of unfettered probing and blunt questioning, on his demolition
of traditional certainties and on the new insecurities he confronts. The
old ideas of the immortal soul, the divine purpose, and the dignity of
man have died for Schopenhauer, and should not be revived. The
human species is a part of nature, and rationality gives it no especially
elevated status. The human individual is embodied and restlessly
active, an animal who strives and suffers, whose core is sexuality and
egoism. The identity of the individual becomes problematic through
and through. Our mind is that of an organism adapted to the ends of
living, and is split between the conscious, knowing, and seemingly
unworldly self with which we try to identify, and the unconscious,
natural will which seems alien but is truly what drives us on. Life has
no purpose. Being ourselves is not something which has any positive
value. Schopenhauer argues himself into a predicament in which
existence itself is a problem, and then presents the exceptions of
genius and saintliness, aesthetic experience and the submergence
of individuality, as the only ways of salvaging value. Such
uncomfortable, challenging thoughts represent his distinctive
contribution to modern culture.
119

Although there has never really been a Schopenhauerian school of
philosophy, his influence on the history of thought has been both great
and varied. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries he was
at the forefront of European culture: his books were widely read,
provided the material for many academic dissertations and published
treatises, and were seized upon with enthusiasm by intellectuals and
artists. He had some philosophical followers, but was perhaps more
notable for attracting people who fell in love with his writing, turned
over or wrestled with his thoughts, and then put them to their own
creative use. In the 18505 Wagner fell under the Schopenhauerian spell,
which became a major stimulant in the writing of Tristan and Isolde in
particular. In the i86os something similar happened to Nietzsche and to
Tolstoy; in the 18805 and 18905 he was read by Thomas Hardy, Thomas
Mann, and Marcel Proust, and in the igoos by the young Wittgenstein.
We find characters in Buddenbrooks and A la Recherche du temps perdu
who read Schopenhauer, or discuss reading him; and he is mentioned in
| 
Tess of the d'Urbervilles. In all, there are many more notable artworks
v than can be catalogued here which bear the stamp of Schopenhauer's
•g thinking, some directly, some more obliquely. The list of artists who
became involved with his philosophy could continue for example, with
Mahler, Richard Strauss, Turgenev, Lawrence, Beckett, and Borges.
Schopenhauer's appeal cannot be divorced from his own stature as a
literary writer. His beautiful prose and his grasp of structure and
drama - every step in the narrative marked by a powerful image and
timed for maximum effect - make the transition from philosophical
system to novel or opera stage almost as smooth as it could be. No
single doctrine occupied all these writers and musicians equally, but the
strongest impressions were undoubtedly made by his aesthetic theory,
his philosophy of music, his recognition of the unconscious, his
treatment of the overpowering sexual drive, his pessimism, and his
questioning of the value of human existence. In some ways, it is strange
that the period of Schopenhauer's most intense influence does not
stretch much beyond the 19205, into the decades when many of those
120

we have mentioned had themselves become well-established cultural
figures. This time of frustrated strivings in the economic sphere, when
the futility of the First World War was compounded by yet more
agonies, and widespread interest in psychoanalysis was changing
people's views about the human personality - was this not
Schopenhauer's true era? Yet by the middle of this century he was not
such a well-known writer, one main reason being that none of the main
streams of contemporary philosophy paid him any real attention.
Of those who succumbed to Schopenhauer, the earliest, Wagner and
Nietzsche, seem to have been the most deeply affected, and it is in the
understanding of these two that an exploration of the link with
Schopenhauer is of most help. Wagner was no philosopher, and he
sometimes confessed that, despite his constant re-readings, he was
struggling to make out what was going on in Schopenhauer's work. 
^
Clearly the idea of music as the direct expression of the strivings of the 
?
will was one that spoke to him, but so did the idea of the denial of the 
|.
will. He wrote in a letter to Liszt 'I have . . . found a sedative which has 
|
t/i*
finally helped me to sleep at night; it is the sincere and heartfelt 
?
yearning for death: total unconsciousness, complete annihilation, the 
3
ffi
end of all dreams - the only ultimate redemption.' Wagner clearly felt
that Schopenhauer's doctrine crystallized some of his own insights, and
gave him a fresh outlook on his own existing work: 'Now at last I could
understand my Wotan.' He comes closest to Schopenhauer's actual
philosophy in his operas when the characters Tristan and Isolde express
their deep longing to cease existing as individuals. The capacity of erotic
love to overpower the individual is also one of Schopenhauer's themes,
of course. Wagner, however, contrives to make the longing for non-
existence turn into the climax of erotic love, instead of the complete
negation of it which Schopenhauer calls for - in other words, even at his
moment of supreme debt to the philosopher, he does not exactly follow
him.
One of the things that brought Wagner together with the young
121

Nietzsche was their devotion to Schopenhauer, whom they had
discovered independently. Even though Nietzsche had also experienced
a kind of emotional 'conversion' to Schopenhauer's philosophy, his
relationship with it was to be quite different. In his first publication, The
Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche uses the pair of symbolic deities Apollo and
Dionysus to account for the awesome artistic achievement of Greek
tragedy. Apollo stands for the beautiful dream-like image of the
individual hero, Dionysus for the terrifying but intoxicating glimpse into
the cruel world underlying individuation, which will destroy the hero. In
attempting to explain this pair of symbols, he calls on Schopenhauer's
distinction between representation and will. Although the book is a
unique outpouring, much of which has little directly to do with
Schopenhauer (as Nietzsche himself later commented), his reading of
Schopenhauer was decisive in providing the shape and the impulse of it.
However, it is what happened later that gives Schopenhauer a greater
| 
significance for Nietzsche. He turned away from his former 'master', to
S the extent of saying that he 'went wrong everywhere'. As Nietzsche's
•g own philosophy developed, Schopenhauer continued to be a guiding
star of a special kind - the one to steer away from. In On the Genealogy
of Morality he diagnoses Schopenhauer's doctrines as outlets for his
own personality, saying in particular that the elevation of aesthetic
tranquillity shows Schopenhauer's relief at escaping from his own
abhorred sexual impulses; moreover 'he would have become ill, become
a pessimist (for he was not one, however much he desired it), if deprived
of his enemies, of Hegel, of woman, of sensuality and the whole will to
existence, to persistence.' Perhaps - but what would Nietzsche have
become without his Schopenhauer, his convenient summation of
errors? He has already told us in the Preface: 'What was at stake was the
value of morality - and over this I had to come to terms almost
exclusively with my great teacher Schopenhauer.'
Nietzsche is very much concerned with the loss of value. He agrees with
Schopenhauer that existence must contain suffering, and is basically
122

without a point. But he revolts against the idea of renunciation and
asceticism as a way to salvation. Plumbing the depths of the
Schopenhauerian vision is a necessary step, but there must be an
alternative to the 'life-denying' attitude of seeking to escape from the
will and despising the individual material being that one is. Nietzsche's
proposed solution is that of a creative self-affirmation ('Become who
you are!'), embracing one's pain and even one's cruelty as true parts of
oneself. His notion of the will to power, based more than verbally on
Schopenhauer's 'will to life', attempts to supplant the latter as a
description of the fundamental drive that organizes human behaviour,
and, in some way, the whole universe. Will to power is not primarily a
political doctrine, but an attempt to find an explanation of human
behaviour, cognition, and cultural beliefs by positing an underlying
tendency towards increase and mastery, both over the world and over
oneself. Though he repudiates Schopenhauer's metaphysical doctrine 
w
of the thing in itself, and seeks to discredit philosophical metaphysics 
Z
altogether, Nietzsche's notion of will to power shows striking parallels 
5-
with Schopenhauer's conception of the will. In particular, the idea that 
|
Vl"
will to power can be both conscious and unconscious, that it has an 
|
organic basis in the individual and that it is omnipresent, make it 
3
8
appropriate to call it a successor to Schopenhauer's doctrine.
While Schopenhauer is in the forefront of Nietzsche's critique of
philosophers, many of the methods for that critique have also been
suggested by Schopenhauer. For example, Nietzsche's view that
metaphysical doctrines and beliefs about ethical values do not derive
from 'pure' reasoning, but are always informed, covertly, by the need to
come to terms with suffering and the will to master oneself or one's
surroundings, clearly has its origins in Schopenhauer's doctrine that the
will shapes our intellectual processes. Schopenhauer's idea that the
world is structured by the mind of a particular species of living organism
is reflected in Nietzsche's conviction that there are no absolute truths or
values, only perspectives and fabrications that help us to cope with life.
Schopenhauer also, of course, provides the most naked instance of the
123

ascetic ideal which Nietzsche sees as underlying so much of Western
culture - 'Man would rather will nothingness than not will.' Aside from
such doctrinal influences, Nietzsche's writing displays its involvement
with Schopenhauer often in fine-grained detail. He will appropriate
Schopenhauer's nuances of voice and terminology even at the
moment of greatest divergence from his doctrines. To read Nietzsche
without a knowledge of Schopenhauer is to lose a recurring subtext
and one of the key points of orientation in his often bewildering
progress.
Among Nietzsche's contemporaries, philosophical interest in
Schopenhauer was widespread. He was commonly studied as an
important successor to Kant, and philosophers who were significant in
their day, such as Hans Vaihinger and Nietzsche's friend the orientalist
and metaphysician Paul Deussen, produced new systems which took off
from Schopenhauer's. In the twentieth century he was highly thought
| 
of by members of the Frankfurt School who were dissatisfied with the
| 
optimism of orthodox Marxism, in particular Max Horkheimer.
I 
However, it is fair to say that to date the only major philosopher apart
from Nietzsche to be influenced by Schopenhauer has been
Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein, like Nietzsche, did not come across
Schopenhauer's works in an academic setting. He read them as part of
the stock of ideas with which Viennese high society was furnished (an
illustrative little detail is that Gustav Mahler, another 'disciple', while
staying at the Wittgenstein family house a few years earlier, had given
Bruno Walter Schopenhauer's complete works as a present). In fact, not
to have read Schopenhauer would have been the odd thing for a young
person from a cultured family such as Wittgenstein's.
Wittgenstein's earliest philosophical work, leading up to the Iroctotus,
seems at first sight to have little in common with Schopenhauer. He had
worked with Frege and Russell in the new methods of formal logic,
which became the basis of a movement that attempted to repudiate
idealism and the supposed excesses of German metaphysics. It used to
124

be common to apologize for Wittgenstein's interest in Schopenhauer as
a youthful aberration. But it was certainly more than that. In the
Tractatus Wittgenstein uses Schopenhauer's images when talking about
the T: it is an extensionless point, like an eye that cannot see itself, a
limit - not a part - of the world. The T is not among the facts that make
up the world. Nor is there any value in the world. Value, whether ethical
or aesthetic, seems to come from an attitude to the world as whole, not
to any particular facts within it. To view the world sub specie aeterni
(under the aspect of eternity)' - another of Schopenhauer's ideas - 'is to
view it as a whole', and this is a mystical feeling, says Wittgenstein. The
well-known image of philosophy as the ladder which one discards after
climbing it is also reminiscent of Schopenhauer's view of the
relationship between philosophy and mysticism.
There hangs over the Tractatus the sense that it is about something that 
^
n
appears only obliquely in the text. Its author said that the meaning of 
o
the book was an 'ethical' one, and in the book it transpires that ethics 
§•
cannot be put into propositions, but must show itself. Wittgenstein was 
|
clearly troubled by the thought that once the world had been described 
|
in language, the really big questions, such as what the T was, how it 
3
related to the world, what the point of the world was, and where good
and evil came from, were left entirely untouched. As he struggled with
these issues, the map on which he attempted to plot them was provided
to a large extent by Schopenhauer's philosophy. This is particularly clear
from his early notebooks, where the repeated vocabulary of 'subject'
and 'object', 'will' and 'representation', 'world' and T acquires any
semblance of intelligibility only when viewed as an attempt to think
things through with Schopenhauer's help.
Another area where Wittgenstein was clearly influenced by
Schopenhauer is the theory of action. From his earliest writings through
to his mature works, Wittgenstein worried about whether there is a
mental act of will that is separate from bodily movement. The problem
became central to his examination of whether the mental was in any
125

sense 'hidden', and had a big influence on action-theory in analytical
philosophy. The basic idea that Wittgenstein often seems drawn to is
that willing is identical with acting, rather than being some purely
'inner' mental process. It is easy to see that this idea is essentially
Schopenhauer's, and, although he does not mention his predecessor's
name very often in this connection, the terms in which he discusses it
reflect its ancestry.
Apart from the arts and philosophy, Schopenhauer's influence also
extends into psychology, through his conception of the unconscious
and his idea that sexuality is at the basis of personality. A very popular
work in its day, now more or less forgotten, was Eduard von Hartmann's
Philosophy of the Unconscious of 1869. This was a strange hybrid in which
the author tried to combine some of Schopenhauer's ideas with some of
Hegel's, and attempted a kind of rapprochement between optimism and
pessimism. His chief modification of Schopenhauer's notion of the
=j unconscious was to suggest that it must comprise not only will but also
£ Idea, and somehow be in pursuit of rational ends. This work made the
•g unconscious a theme for widespread study in the latter part of the
nineteenth century, and served at the same time as a kind of channel for
interest in Schopenhauer. Although Schopenhauer was not the first or
only philosopher to discuss the unconscious, he probably made the
greatest contribution before Freud.
Freud himself certainly consulted Hartmann's work and does make
reference to it. It has often been pointed out, too, that he must have
been familiar with Schopenhauer's ideas from the academic
environment in which he moved. Nevertheless, Freud tried to distance
himself from Schopenhauer, saying, in a well-known passage,
I have carefully avoided any contact with philosophy proper. The large
extent to which psycho-analysis coincides with the philosophy of
Schopenhauer - not only did he assert the dominance of the emotions
and the supreme importance of sexuality but he was even aware of the
126

mechanism of repression - is not to be traced to my acquaintance with
his teaching. I read Schopenhauer very late in my life.
One almost hesitates to point out that Freud must have known at some
level what to avoid reading, in order to preserve this title to originality.
In any case, it is pretty certain that the great attention paid to
Schopenhauer in academic and cultural life during this period was an
important factor in making Freud's work possible, whether he was
aware of it or not.
C. C. Jung is another influential psychologist who was impressed by
Schopenhauer. He reports that he read Schopenhauer from his
seventeenth year on (putting us, again, in the 18905), and agreed with
his picture of the world as full of confusion, passion, and evil: 'Here at
last was someone who had courage for the insight that somehow the
foundation of the world was not in the best of ways.' 
J"
I
Though Schopenhauer's metaphysics is not credible as a system, his 
?
vT
questions about the self and the unconscious, action, striving, suffering, 
|
renunciation, aesthetic elevation, and the value of existence - the 
3
8
troubling or consoling thoughts that have excited so many influential
thinkers - remain alive and challenging. As we debate the same issues
with, perhaps, Nietzsche or Freud more prominently in the foreground,
Schopenhauer's is a unique and powerful philosophical voice that still
deserves to be heard.
127


Further reading
In addition to the standard translations of Schopenhauer's works listed
in the 'Abbreviations and works cited' section at the beginning of the
book, the following recent translations of Schopenhauer's works are
also worth consulting:
Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will, tr. E. F. J. Payne, ed. Ciinter Zoller
(Cambridge University Press, 1999). For most purposes this would
now supersede the Kolenda translation.
On Vision and Colors, tr. E. F. J. Payne, ed. David Cartwright (Berg
Publishers, 1994)
Schopenhauer's Early Fourfold Root, translation and commentary F. C.
White (Avebury, 1997). The less common but more accessible first
edition of The Fourfold Root.
The World as Will and Idea (abridged in one volume), tr. Jill Berman, ed.
David Berman (Dent, 1995). A much shortened version, which is more
accessible than the standard Payne translation, but loses the larger
architecture of Schopenhauer's main work.
And, in a new edition:
On the Basis of Morality, tr. E. F. j . Payne, with an introduction by David E.
Cartwright (Berghahn Books, 1995)
129

A classical philosophical account of Schopenhauer, recently reprinted:
Patrick Gardiner, Schopenhauer (Penguin Books, 1967; repr. Thoemmes
Press, 1997)
Other general accounts of Schopenhauer's philosophy:
D. W. Hamlyn, Schopenhauer (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980)
Julian Young, Willing and Unwilling: A Study in the Philosophy of Arthur
Schopenhauer (Martinus Nijhoff, 1987)
A collection of scholarly articles on different aspects of Schopenhauer's
philosophy:
Christopher Janaway (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer
(Cambridge University Press, 1999)
§ Books and collections with more specialized focus:
jj- John E. Atwell, Schopenhauer: The Human Character (Temple University
i! 
Press, 1990)
John E. Atwell, Schopenhauer on the Character of the World: The
Metaphysics of Will (University of California Press, 1995)
Dale Jacquette (ed.), Schopenhauer, Philosophy and the Arts (Cambridge
University Press, 1996)
Christopher Janaway, Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy
(Clarendon Press, 1989)
Christopher Janaway (ed.), Willing and Nothingness: Schopenhauer as
Nietzsche's Educator (Clarendon Press, 1998)
F. C. White, On Schopenhauer's Fourfold Root of the Principle of
Sufficient Reason (E. J. Brill, 1992)
Three different accounts of Schopenhauer's life, work, and place in
intellectual history:
Arthur Hiibscher, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer in its Intellectual
130

Further reading
L±J 
O
1 
=
> 
01
ro 
c
ro 
H
CO 
- O
^ 
s
s 
-y
CTl
00
01
iS g - 
b «
«j °-
3 
00
X 
D 
Ol
lit I i
•| 5 5 
o -g
11 i 5 |
>- 
5 
n, 
._- 
Z
" ^ 
-C 
s^ 
•,
; C 
• " 
OJ 
t 
!? 
Tu
h- -£, 01 01 it ifl!
ti -i1 g1 ? ^ £
| 
3 ^ 
s- sj 
^
S fe 
c 
S 01 ^
60 ?, ct ^ 
§.


Index
A
action 32-7,39-40, 46, 49, 65,
125-6; and freedom 92-6
aesthetic experience 41,70-4,
75-7, 78-80,117-18,122
animals 22, 32, 44, 45-7, 92, 97;
in art 80-1
appearance 14-16, 28,100
architecture 79-80
arithmetic 25
art 76-87
artist 6,17-18,74
asceticism 112-13,117-18,123,124
atheism 6, 9, 89,110
B
beauty 76, 81
Beckett, Samuel 120
Berkeley, George 29,30,31
better consciousness 6,16-17,18,
27
body 33-5,39-40, 48-9, 51-2,11,
112-13; organs of 45-6,48-9
boredom 8,105
Borges, Jorge Luis 120
Brahmanismno
brain 48-9, 52-3, 55
Buddhism 19,110
c
causality 17, 20-1, 29,37-9, 48,
53 ; principle of 20-1, 22, 25
cause and effect 15, 34, 44-4,
70; in motivation 26, 44-5,
94
character 64-9, 81, 92; empirical
and intelligible 95-6
Christianity 110
compassion 89, 96-9, 99-102,
104,108,114
concepts 22-4,32,75,77-8, 82,
88
D
Darwinism 46
death 68,106-10
determinism 10, 92-5
Deussen, Paul 124
drama 83
dualism 34, 52
egoism 88, go, 98-102,111,
112,114
emotions 43, 58-9, 62-3; in
music 84-7
Epicurus 106
ethics 88-102
evil 115
Fichte, johann Gottlieb 4,12,
16,53
Frankfurt School 124
freedom 10, 66, 92-6
Frege, Gottlob 124
Freud, Sigmund 59,126-7
133

G
gender 60, 62-4
genius 18,73-8, 81, 82, 88,117
geometry 25
Cod 14, 89,110
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang 3, 5-6
H
Hardy, Thomas 120
Hartmann, Eduard von 126
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
8-9,12, 82,126
Hindu writings 18-19,101; see
also Brahmanism, Maya,
Upanishads
history 81-2
5 homosexuality 62
2 
Horkheimer, Max 124
ji horticulture 80
y, Hume, David 9
64,76-7; relation to will 41,
48-50, 55-60, 64-5,70-1,76
J
judgement 24, 32, 42
Jung, Carl Gustav 127
justice 97,111,117
K
Kant, Immanuel 4, 5, 6, 9-10,18,
25, 28-9; aesthetics 71, 83;
appearance and thing in itself
14-17, 21,39, 75; ethics 12,
15-16, 88-92, 95, 97; space
and time 15, 25; the self 15-16,
51
knowledge 14, 24,30-1, 39-40,
48-50,112,114; and thing in
itself 17, 39-40, 47; of Ideas 17,
47,74-7.78-83,79
'I' 50-4, 1OO-2, 1O6-8, 125
idealism 21, 29-32,108
Ideas 16-18, 27, 47; and aesthetic
experience 74-8; in the arts
79-83, 84
immortality 106
individuality 68-g, 108-9; loss of
18-19, 76, 99-102,106-7,111.
114-15,121
individuation, principle of 29, 37,
100
instinct 46, 58, 60
intellect 21-2,32, 35,42, 62-3,
Lawrence, D. H. 120
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 19
love 61-2,121
M
madness 59-60, 78
Mahler, Gustav 120,124
Majer, Friedrich 3, 4
malice g8
Mann, Thomas 8,120
materialism 48-g, 52-3
matter 20-1, 29
Maya 18,101
134

metaphysics 14,39-40, 99-102,
107-8
moral imperative 89-90
morality 66, 88-92; basis of
96-102
motive 26, 35, 44, 65-6, 92-4
music 41, 84-7,121
mysticism 112-13,125
N
nature, forces of 7, 35-7
necessity 20, 21
Nietzsche, Friedrich 1, 67,109,
121,122-4,127
Nirvana no
non-existence 104,106-7,11°.
115,121
nourishment 35, 47
0
object 21,31-2, 33-4, 50-4
objectification 39, 84
objectivity, aesthetic 73-8
optimism 116-17
P
painting 80-2
pantheists 46
perception 21-2, 32, 42, 46, 48,
75-7
pessimism 6, 92,104-6,115-18
Petrarch 116
philanthropy 97, m, 117
plants 44, 80
Plato 4, 6,16-17, 26, 60, 74-5
Platonic Ideas, see Ideas
pleasure 71-3,m
poetry 82-3
Proust, Marcel 120
R
rationality 46, 90-2
realism 30-1
reason 32, 42, 48-9, 89-92
reason, sufficient, see sufficient
reason, principle of
representation 6, 28-32, 42-3,
49- 74~5.125: world as 28-32,
37, 48,100
repression 59-60,126-7
reproduction 7, 35, 48, 60-2,
m
responsibility 10, 66, 95-6
Richter, Caroline 9
Russell, Bertrand 124
saint 6,18,111-12,115
salvation 6, 8,110,112,113,
117-18
satisfaction 71-3,105,115-16
scepticism 30, 31
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst
Daniel 4
Schopenhauer, Heinrich Floris
(father) 2-3
Schopenhauer, Johanna (mother)
2-3, 64
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst 4,16
sculpture 80-1
135

self 50-4, 55-7, 65, 68, no
self-consciousness 49, 52-3, 57,
93-4
self-renunciation 41,110-13,
117-18,123
sexuality 41, 55, 60-2, 63,126;
abstention from m, 112-13,
122-3
soul 14, 49, 52
space and time 15,17-18, 20-1,
37, 48, 53, 70,107-8; and
individuation 29, 37,100
Spinozists 46
state (political) 9, 99
Sterne, Lawrence 9
stimulus 44
Strauss, Richard 120
| 
subject 21,31-2, 33-4,49, 50-4,
•g 
108,125; of aesthetic
§• 
experience 76-7; of will 26,
* 
32-4.51-2
sublime 83-4
suffering 2, 6-8,72-3,103-6, no,
114-17,122-3; a nd compassion
99-100; in tragedy 83;
salvation through 112-13,
114-15
sufficient reason, principle of 5,
19-26,74, 94
suicide 109-10
survival 7,35, 48
T
thing in itself 14-17, 26-7, 28,
37-41, 68,100-1,108; relation
to Ideas 16-17, 27,47, 74-5
Tolstoy, Leo N. 120
tragedy 83-4,122
transcendental idealism
29
truth 24
Turgenev, Ivan S. 120
u
unconscious 41, 55, 58-60,
126
university philosophy 9,
13
Upon/shads 4,18, 51
V
Vaihinger, Hans 124
w
Wagner, Richard 13, 85,120-1
Walter, Bruno 124
will 6-7,16, 27, 28,32-41,
71-2, 84-7,125; acts of 32-5,
36-7,39-40, 42, 51; and
freedom 92-6; and suffering
103,105-6; blind 7,35, 44-6;
body as 34-5, 42-3; denial
of 109,110-15,117-18; grades
of objectification 47,79,
83; primacy over intellect
55-60, 63, 64-5; self as 16, 27,
50, 52-4, 65-6, 68, 95-6;
world as 16, 27, 35-41, 53-4,
84
will to life 35, 40, 45-8, 52, 61,
106,118,123; and
reproduction 45, 60-2;
136

affirmation of 108-9,112: 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 51,8g, 120,
denial of 110-15 
124-6
will-less states 70-1, 72-3,76, 
Wolff, Christian 19
78-9,113,117-18 
women 63-4, 78
137


Expand your collection of
VERY SHORT INTRODUCTIONS
Available now
1. Classics
2. Music
3. Buddhism
4. Literary Theory
5. Hinduism
6. Psychology
7. Islam
8. Politics
9. Theology
10. Archaeology
11. Judaism
12. Sociology
13. The Koran
14. The Bible
15. Social and Cultural
Anthropology
16. History
17. Roman Britain
18. The Anglo-Saxon Age
19. Medieval Britain
20. TheTudors
21. Stuart Britain
22. Eighteenth-Century Britain
23. Nineteenth-Century Britain
24. Twentieth-Century Britain
25. Heidegger
26. Ancient Philosophy
27. Socrates
28. Marx
29. Logic
30. Descartes
31. Machiavelli
32. Aristotle
33. Hume
34. Nietzsche
35. Darwin
36. The European Union
37. Gandhi
38. Augustine
39. Intelligence
40. Jung
41. Buddha
42. Paul
43. Continental Philosophy
44. Galileo
45. Freud
46. Wittgenstein
47. Indian Philosophy
48. Rousseau
49. Hegel
50. Kant
51. Cosmology
52. Drugs
53. Russian Literature
54. The French Revolution
55. 
Philosophy
56. Barthes
57. Animal Rights
58. 
Kierkegaard
59. Russell
60. Shakespeare
61. Clausewitz
62. Schopenhauer
63. The Russian Revolution
64. Hobbes

