Teaching three-and-a-half-year-olds
to reason about ambiguous evidence
The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please share 
how this access benefits you. Your story matters.
Citation
Bonawitz, Elizabeth, Adina Fischer, and Laura Schulz. “Teaching
3.5-Year-Olds to Revise Their Beliefs Given Ambiguous Evidence.”
Journal of Cognition and Development 13.2 (2012): 266–280.
As Published
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2011.577701
Publisher
Psychology Press
Version
Author's final manuscript
Citable link
http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/60991
Terms of Use
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
Detailed Terms
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching three-and-a-half-year-olds to reason about ambiguous evidence 
 
Elizabeth Bonawitz1, Adina Fischer2, & Laura Schulz3 
 
 
 
In Press, Journal of Cognition and Development 
 
 
 
1 Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA 
2 Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755 USA  
3 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 
02139 USA 
4 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA  
5 Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138 USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
2 
 
Abstract 
Previous research suggests that three-year-olds fail to learn from statistical data when their prior 
beliefs conflict with the evidence.  Are young children’s causal beliefs are entrenched in their folk 
theories or can young preschoolers rationally update their beliefs with evidence?  Motivated by 
Bayesian accounts of rational inference suggesting that both statistical evidence and children’s prior 
beliefs should affect learning, we conducted a training study to investigate this question. Children 
(mean: 45 months) were included in the study if they failed to endorse the statistically more probable 
cause given ambiguous evidence (evidence in the form ABE, CAE, ADE, etc.) where the 
recurring cause, A, violated children’s prior beliefs.  (A was a psychological cause; the remaining 
variables were biological.) The children were assigned to a Statistical Reasoning training condition, 
one of two Prior Belief training conditions (Baserates or Mechanisms), or a Control condition. 
Relative to the Control condition, children in the test conditions were more likely to endorse the a 
priori unlikely variable on a free-explanation task.  Critically, children in the Statistical Reasoning 
condition passed the free-explanation task, even though their only information about the belief-
violating variable came from the ambiguous evidence.  This suggests that teaching children statistical 
reasoning improves their ability to learn even from data inconsistent with their prior beliefs. 
 
Keywords: Causal learning; Ambiguous evidence; Training study, psychosomatic illness. 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
3 
The view that children’s causal commitments take the form of naïve theories has been influential 
in developmental psychology for several decades (Carey, 1985; Harris, German, & Mills, 1996; 
Hickling & Wellman, 2001; Gopnik, 1988; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Keil, 1989; Perner, 1991; Sobel, 
2004; Wellman, 1990; Wellman, Hickling, & Schult, 1997).   This view, the theory theory, maintains 
that there is a dynamic relationship between children’s naive theories and evidence such that children’s 
causal beliefs affect their interpretation of evidence and evidence enables children to revise their beliefs 
(e.g., Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997).  However, previous studies looking at the relationship between patterns 
of evidence and children’s folk theories have generated contradictory results, with some studies 
suggesting that children privilege plausible causal mechanisms over statistical evidence (e.g., Shultz, 
1982) and others suggesting that children learn theory-violating causal relations as readily as theory-
consistent ones (Kushnir & Gopnik, 2006; Schulz & Gopnik, 2004).  To the extent that children’s causal 
judgments reflect an interaction between their naïve theories and patterns of evidence, such conflicting 
findings are perhaps not surprising: on any given task, children’s inferences could depend on the 
strength of their initial beliefs, the strength of the data, and their ability to integrate the two.  
Recently, Bayesian analyses have offered a formal account of how learners might integrate 
statistical evidence with constraints from naïve theories (Tenenbaum, Griffiths, & Kemp, 2006; Kemp, 
Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007). To our knowledge however, only one previous study has directly tested 
whether, consistent with the predictions of a Bayesian inference model, children’s learning reflects a 
graded interaction between their domain-specific prior beliefs and the evidence they observe (Schulz, 
Bonawitz, & Griffiths, 2007).  In that study, children were provided with ambiguous data both in 
contexts where they had strong prior beliefs and ones where they did not. Specifically, preschoolers 
were read two books in which two candidate causes co-occurred with an effect. Evidence was presented 
in the form ABE; CAE; ADE, etc. After receiving this evidence, children were asked to identify 
the cause of the effect on a new trial.  While it was possible that B, C, D, etc. were each independent 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
4 
causes of the effect, it was more probable that the recurring cause, A, was the actual cause.  In one book 
(the Within Domain book), all the causes and the effect were from a single domain; in the other book 
(the Cross Domains book) the recurring cause, A, came from a different domain (A was a psychological 
cause of a bodily effect).  Thus in the Cross Domains book, there was a conflict between the statistical 
evidence and children’s prior beliefs. 
 
Consistent with the prescriptions of Bayesian inference, kindergartners and older preschoolers 
(50-70 months; mean: 60 months) correctly inferred that A was the cause in both cases but were more 
likely to identify A as the cause in the Within Domain book than the Cross Domains book.  Critically 
however, younger preschoolers (42-48 months; mean: 45 months) did not.  Although the three-and-a-
half-year-olds readily identified cause A as the target cause in the Within Domain book (indeed, they 
were indistinguishable from the older children), they failed to learn at all in the Cross Domains book: 
they consistently chose the within-domain cause.  
 
The dramatic contrast between the three-and-a-half-year-olds’ impressive reasoning about 
statistical evidence in neutral contexts (near ceiling) and their poor reasoning (near floor) in belief-
violating contexts leaves open the possibility that very young children might be able to use the relative 
probabilities of events to distinguish candidate causes, but that children’s prior beliefs about plausible 
causal relations restrict the kinds of evidence they are willing to consider in the first place.  
Note that the majority of previous work showing that children can use statistical data to revise 
their prior beliefs has looked at older children (four to six-year-olds) and used unambiguous 
deterministic evidence (e.g., Legare, Wellman, & Gelman, in press; Schulz & Gopnik, 2004; though see 
Kushnir & Gopnik, 2006 for other work suggesting that four to six-year-olds can use probabilistic, 
ambiguous evidence to revise their beliefs).  The few studies that have demonstrated belief-revision in 
younger children (three-year-olds) have used only unambiguous evidence (Kushnir & Gopnik, 2006; 
Sobel, 2006). Here we look at whether evidence-based teaching is effective in helping young 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
5 
preschoolers revise their causal beliefs given ambiguous data. Inspired by rational Bayesian inference 
accounts, we introduce three training conditions intended to independently affect children’s statistical 
reasoning and their prior beliefs.    
 
In one training condition (the Statistical Reasoning condition) we teach children to draw accurate 
inference when multiple causal relations are possible but one is more probable than the others (i.e., we 
read children stories in which evidence is presented in the form ABE; CAE; ADE, etc. and teach 
children that A is the most likely cause of the effect, E). This condition was motivated in part by the 
finding (Schulz et al., 2007) that young three-year-olds (3;0 - 3;5) fail to learn from such evidence even 
in a theory-neutral (Within Domain) condition. Given that even the neutral task was challenging for 
three-year-olds, three-and-a-half-year-olds might not have been able to handle the increased difficulty 
posed by a conflict with prior beliefs.  If giving three-and-a-half-year-olds practice reasoning from 
evidence in theory-neutral contexts improves their ability to draw accurate inferences from theory-
violating evidence, this would suggest that even young preschoolers can use formal properties of 
evidence, not merely to distinguish plausible causes, but also to draw inferences at a more abstract level: 
inferring the causal status of previously unrecognized causal variables.  
 
As noted however, the Bayesian analysis suggests that children’s causal judgments depend not 
only on the strength of the evidence but also on their prior beliefs.  Thus in the other two training 
conditions, we intervene on children’s causal beliefs.  While adults accept that psychosomatic 
phenomena can cross domain boundaries, preschoolers typically deny that psychological events can 
cause physical/bodily events (e.g., that feeling embarrassed can make your face to turn red; Notaro, 
Gelman, & Zimmerman, 2001).   How might evidence-based teaching help children revise their prior 
beliefs about psychosomatic causality?  Arguably, young children have relatively limited exposure to 
psychosomatic events.  If children believe the base rate of psychosomatic causality is low, then they 
might (rationally) resist accepting a psychological cause as the most probable explanation of a bodily 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
6 
effect. Thus, one approach to intervening on children’s prior beliefs is to manipulate their perception 
of the frequency of psychosomatic events.  We will call this the Prior Beliefs Base Rate condition. 
 
Another reason children might resist psychosomatic causality is because they do not understand 
how psychological states affect bodily states.  Research suggests that both adults and children are more 
willing to accept causal relations for which they can imagine plausible mechanisms (e.g. Ahn, Kalish, 
Medin, & Gelman, 1995; Shultz, 1982).  Thus, we might increase children’s acceptance of 
psychosomatic causality by offering an explanation of how emotional states might cause bodily 
outcomes.  We will call this the Prior Beliefs Mechanism condition. 
 
If children who initially fail to endorse psychosomatic causality succeed after any or all of the 
three training conditions, this would suggest that well before children begin formal education, rational 
inductive inference mechanisms support children’s ability, not only to reason about theory-neutral 
causal relations, but also their ability to reason about a priori unlikely events.  Note that children might 
succeed in some of the training conditions and not others (e.g., intervening on children’s prior beliefs 
might be helpful but intervening on their statistical reasoning ability might not).  However, given that 
the Bayesian analysis suggests that both factors play a role, we predict that all three manipulations 
should independently improve children’s performance.  By contrast, if three-year-olds’ causal beliefs are 
relatively entrenched (e.g., because they are constrained by core knowledge in domains like naïve 
physics and naïve psychology) then we would expect children to be resistant to belief revision and 
perform no better than children in a control condition. 
Training Study 
 
We designed a two-week training study to investigate these accounts. Because we were interested 
in children’s ability to reason about theory-violating evidence, children were included in the study only 
if they initially endorsed the plausible within-domain cause rather than the statistically likely but theory-
violating cause in a pretest book (identical to the Cross Domains book used in Schulz et al., 2007).   

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
7 
Eighty children were assigned to one of four conditions: a Statistical Reasoning training, a Prior Belief 
Baserates training, a Prior Belief Mechanisms training, and a Control condition. At the final session, 
children were again read a Cross Domains storybook (formally identical to the initial book but with 
different specific stimuli). However, given that previous research suggests that preschoolers tend to vary 
their responses when asked versions of the same question twice (e.g. Memon, Cronin, Eaves, & Bull, 
1993; Poole & White, 1991), we believed that this measure might not be a very sensitive index of 
children’s learning.  Thus our dependent measure of interest was a free explanation task, adapted from 
Schulz et al., 2007 (originally given to four and five-year-olds).  The free explanation measure provides 
a strong test of children’s learning in that children have to transfer their knowledge to a novel task. 
 
In the free explanation task children were told about a puppy dog who was scared about the first 
day of school and had a tummy ache; children were asked to explain why the puppy had a tummy ache. 
Researchers in the earlier study found that at baseline, four and five-year-olds ignored the only variable 
mentioned in the story (being scared) and strikingly, invented their own domain-appropriate 
explanations instead (e.g., “because he fell on his stomach”; “because he ate too much food”); children 
who had first been exposed to the evidence in the Cross Domains book adopted the psychosomatic 
explanation. If the training conditions support three-and-a-half-year-olds’ ability to learn the target 
causal relation, they should be able to transfer their learning and explain the bodily event using the 
psychological explanation. 
Methods and Design 
Participants.  
Eighty children (mean age: 45 months; range: 39-48 months; 54% girls) were recruited from 
preschools in a metropolitan area.  An experimenter met individually with each child for four 20-minute 
sessions over a period of two weeks.  No two sessions were on consecutive days.  Most of the children 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
8 
were white and middle class but a range of ethnicities resembling the diversity of the population was 
represented. 
To ensure that participants entering the training did not already endorse psychosomatic events, 
children were given an initial Cross Domains test book; those who passed were dropped from the study 
and replaced.  Replicating Schulz et al., 2007, 82% of the three-and-a-half-year-olds tested on the initial 
Cross Domains storybook failed the task (i.e., chose the theory-consistent rather than the statistically 
probable cause) and thus met the inclusion criteria for the study.  Children were randomly assigned to a 
Statistical Reasoning Training condition, Prior Belief Baserates Training condition, a Prior Belief 
Mechanisms Training condition, or a Control condition (20 children per condition).  There were no age 
differences among the four conditions (F(3, 76) = 1.48, p = ns). 
Materials.  
Two Cross Domains books and a Free Explanation test book were used.  Additionally, five 
different training books were used in each of the four conditions (Statistical Reasoning, Prior Belief 
Baserate, Prior Belief Mechanisms, and Control), for a total of 20 training books.  The training books 
were each approximately 20 pages long and had approximately 9 words per page. (See Figure 1.) 
Cross Domains books: One book was used to see if children met the initial inclusion criteria and 
one was used on the final day, preceding the Free Explanation Test book.  The books were identical 
except for details of the stimuli.  In each book, a character (Bunny or Beaver) ate a different food, 
experienced a recurring psychological cause (feeling worried; feeling scared), and a recurring biological 
effect (belly ache; tummy hurting) each morning of a seven-day week. Each afternoon, the character ate 
two different foods and felt fine. At the end of the story, children were asked a forced choice question 
about the events of that morning: “Why does (Bunny’s, Beaver’s) (belly ache? tummy hurt)? Is it 
because of (feeling worried, feeling scared) or because of eating (the cornbread, the sandwich)?” The 
order of events (psychological or food) was counterbalanced throughout.  

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
9 
 
Training books: Five books, each involving unique characters and candidate relations, were used 
in each training condition. 
 
Statistical Reasoning Training:  In each book, a character experienced a pair of candidate causes 
(one recurring and one varying each day) and a consistent effect in a format identical to the Cross 
Domains books (ABE; CAE; ADE, etc.).  In each book all the variables were drawn from a 
single domain; no domains were psychological. At the end of each story, children were given a forced 
choice between causal variables (e.g.: “Why does Bambi have itchy spots? Is it because of running in 
the cattails or running in the garden?”)   
 
Prior Belief Baserate Training: Each book showed ten characters in a classroom.  All ten 
characters experienced the same emotion (e.g. boredom waiting for a hamster to do a trick).  Eight of the 
ten characters had a bodily reaction (e.g. Sue gets sleepy; Charles gets sleepy; Josh does not get sleepy). 
At the end of the book children were given a forced choice question asking whether the bodily reaction 
to the psychological emotion happened to very many or very few characters in the story (e.g., “Can you 
remind me: did very many students get sleepy or did very few students get sleepy?”).  
 
Prior Belief Mechanisms Training: Each book explained that a particular psychological state 
could generate bodily effects and offered a brief account of how this might happen (e.g. “When Peter 
feels embarrassed, his brain makes different things happen to his body…his cheeks turn pink and he 
starts to blush. That’s because Peter’s brain changes the way energy moves through his body and can 
send energy to his cheeks.”) At the end of each book, children were asked to repeat the explanation for 
the bodily outcomes in the books (e.g., “Can you explain to me: what made Peter blush?) 
 
Control: The control books told a story about a character who experienced a recurring 
psychological state throughout the day (e.g. “Tom is excited because today is his birthday.  In the 
morning, Tom’s mom gives him a present.  Tom is very excited to open his first present.”). To match the 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
10 
level of engagement in the other training conditions, children were asked memory questions at the end 
of each story.  
 
Free Explanation test book: This book read in its entirety: “This is Puppy. Puppy is nervous 
because it’s his first day of school. Oh, oh! Puppy’s stomach hurts!” Children were asked: “Why does 
Puppy’s stomach hurt?” 
Procedure.  
Children were tested individually in a quiet room at their daycare. Participants were first tested 
on one of the two Cross Domains books (particular book counterbalanced between children; the other 
book was then used on the final day).  
 
Children who met the criteria for the training study were read the first book from their assigned 
condition (see Figure 1). The experimenter then met with the child three more times over the course of 
two weeks. On each of the second and third visits, children were read the two books appropriate to their 
training condition (Books 2 & 3 on Day 2; and Books 4 & 5 on Day 3).   The experimenter gave 
feedback if the child answered incorrectly during the training sessions (i.e., in the Statistical Reasoning 
training, the experimenter pointed to the recurring variable and showed the child how it occurred each 
day along with the effect; in the Prior Beliefs Base Rates training, the experimenter pointed to the 
number of children with the bodily response and observed that it was “very many” rather than “very 
few”; in the Prior Beliefs Mechanism training, the experimenter repeated the explanation for the bodily 
effect; in the Control condition, the children were reminded of the correct information).  On the final 
day (Day 4) the children were read the Cross Domains storybook and then tested on the Free 
Explanation book (the order was fixed so that if children learned from the Cross Domains book, they 
could use the evidence and transfer their knowledge for the Free Explanation question).   No feedback 
was given on the final day. 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
11 
Preliminary analyses. 
 
Training Books: Across the training period, children’s performance on the training books 
improved.  In all three training conditions, children were more likely to answer the prompts at the end of 
the training books correctly on the last day’s training book than on the first day’s (first book 45%, last 
book 75% in Statistical Reasoning: McNemar (n = 20), p < .05; first book 50%, last book 75% in Prior 
Belief Baserates: (n = 20), p = .06); first book 35%, last book 85% in Prior Belief Mechanism: (n = 20), 
p < .01).  This suggests that the training itself was implemented successfully. 
 
Cross Domains Book (Final Day): Responses on the final Cross Domains book were coded as 
appealing to the recurring psychosomatic cause or to the alternative domain-appropriate cause (i.e., the 
particular food). Compared to their responses on the original test book (at floor due to the inclusion 
criteria), children were more likely to appeal to psychosomatic causes in all conditions (Statistical 
Reasoning: McNemar (n = 20) = 35%, p < .01; Prior Belief Baserates: (n = 20) = 45%, p < .01; Prior 
Belief Mechanism:  (n = 20) = 45%, p < .01; Control: (n = 20) = 30%, p < .05).  There were no 
significant differences between conditions.   As noted however, performance on the second Cross 
Domains book is both a relatively insensitive and relatively weak, measure of learning: insensitive 
because preschoolers are vulnerable to varying their responses in response to repeated questioning 
(Memon et al., 1993; Poole & White, 1991); weak because learning from one Cross Domains book to 
another does not require any degree of generalization. Children’s ability to transfer their learning to the 
open-ended explanation task is thus both a more reliable and more stringent assessment of whether the 
training affected children’s beliefs about the plausibility of psychological variables as potential causal 
explanations of bodily effects.  
Results: 
 
Children’s responses on the Free Explanation book were coded as appealing to the target 
psychological cause in the story (e.g. feeling nervous; thinking about school), to external domain-

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
12 
appropriate bodily causes not mentioned in the story (e.g., “eating too much food”, “bumping his belly”) 
or other.  Two children (one in the Prior Belief Baserates Training and one in the Control condition) 
responded, “I don’t know”. Otherwise, children’s responses fell uniquely into the psychogenic or bodily 
category.    
There were no significant differences between the three training conditions (χ2 (2, n = 60) = .93, 
p = ns).  As predicted however, children were significantly more likely to appeal to psychological 
explanations across all three training conditions than the Control condition (χ2 (2, n = 80) = 6.94, p < 
.01): 50% of the children appealed to the psychological cause in the Statistical Reasoning condition; 
40% in the Prior Belief Base Rate condition, and 55% in the Prior Belief Mechanism training, but only 
15% of children did so in the Control condition (see Figure 2).  Note that few children in the Control 
condition invoked the psychological variable on the free explanation task despite the fact that they read 
stories that repeatedly referred to a character experiencing psychological states (Tom is excited, Lisa is 
angry, Erin is sleepy, etc.).  
Comparing individual training conditions with the Control condition, significantly more children 
appealed to psychological explanations in the Statistical Reasoning condition, (χ2 (1, n = 40) = 5.58, p = 
.02) and the Prior Belief Mechanism condition (χ2 (1, n = 40) = 7.03, p < .01) than the Control condition 
and marginally more children did so in the Prior Belief Baserates condition, (χ2 (1, n = 40) = 3.14, p = 
.08).  Interestingly, the results in the Mechanism condition were more robust than those in the Base 
Rates condition, consistent with the claim that children’s prior beliefs may be particularly sensitive to 
information about plausible causal mechanisms (Ahn et al. 1995; Shultz, 1982).  Note however, that the 
fact that children also robustly succeeded in the Statistical Reasoning training suggests that, consistent 
with the Bayesian analysis, both prior beliefs and the strength of the evidence independently affect 
children’s causal inferences. 
Discussion 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
13 
 
These results suggest that children as young as three-and-a-half are not unduly entrenched in 
their prior causal commitments; very young preschoolers rationally update their beliefs from evidence.  
Following a brief training, involving only five storybooks, children were able to invoke previously 
unrecognized causal variables as explanations for events.   
 
What can our training study tell us about the role of statistical inference and prior beliefs in 
children’s reasoning about theory-violating evidence? First, consider the implications of the Statistical 
Reasoning training.  The children in this condition were given no more information about 
psychosomatic events than children in the Control condition -- and indeed, were given less exposure 
than children in the Control condition to psychological variables in general (psychological variables 
were never mentioned during their training). Nonetheless, children in the Statistical Reasoning training 
were more likely than children in the Control condition to adopt psychosomatic explanations. Thus 
critically, although all children saw identical data in the two Cross Domains books, the children taught 
to reason about statistical evidence were better able than children in the Control condition to bring this 
evidence to bear on the explanation task. This suggests that children as young as three-and-a-half can use 
ambiguous statistical data, not only to draw accurate inferences about plausible causal variables, but to 
attribute causal power to theory-violating causal variables.   
 
The success of the Prior Belief conditions suggests that either increasing children’s perception of 
the base rate of a target causal relation or increasing their understanding of the target causal mechanism 
may increase children’s willingness to appeal to causal relations that they previously dismissed.  
Although the explanations given to children in the Mechanism training were very shallow, akin to what 
researchers have called “coarse sketches” (Keil, 2003; p. 371), they dramatically improved children’s 
willingness to invoke psychological variables as causes of bodily events, whereas simple repeated 
exposure to psychological variables (as in the Control condition) was ineffective.  Consistent with other 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
14 
research, this suggests that even lean representations of causal mechanisms can support accurate causal 
judgments (see Keil, 2003; Rosenblit & Keil, 2002). 
 
However, these results fall short of demonstrating that manipulating children’s prior beliefs 
improves their ability to learn from (erstwhile) implausible data.  Children in the Prior Belief conditions 
may have been better able to learn from the statistical evidence in the Cross Domains books and bring 
this evidence to bear on the free explanation task, but it is also possible that these training conditions 
directly increased the children’s willingness to appeal to psychosomatic causes. Further research is 
needed to isolate the effect of rational constraints from the effects of other task demands to see whether 
changing prior knowledge can change the statistical inferences of even very young children. 
 
Finally, although this study suggests that three-and-a-half-year-olds can use rational inductive 
inference to revise their beliefs, we do not know at what level of abstraction such revision occurred.  
Previous work (Schulz et al., 2007) suggested that four and five-year-olds changed their inferences only 
at a quite specific level (e.g., entertaining the possibility that worrying could cause tummy aches) rather 
than at the level of more abstract theories (revising their beliefs about psychogenic causality generally).  
In light of that, it is noteworthy that three-and-a-half-year-olds in the Prior Beliefs training conditions in 
the current study were able to generalize from other instances of psychosomatic causation to the test 
exemplar.  This suggests that at least some abstract inferences were enabled by those training conditions. 
Further research might establish the degree to which different interventions transform children’s ability 
to reason about theory-violating evidence at different levels of abstraction.  
 
Collectively however, these results suggest that the importance of rational constraints on causal 
learning in early childhood.  More importantly, these results suggest the malleability of such constraints. 
If we can effectively teach three-and-a-half-year-olds to revise their beliefs with evidence, we may all 
have something to learn. 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
15 
References 
Ahn, W., Kalish, C.W., Medin, D.L., & Gelman, S.A. (1995). The role of covariation versus mechanism 
information in causal attribution. Cognition, 54, 299–352.  
Bonawitz, E.B., Lim, S., & Schulz, L.E. (2007). Weighing the Evidence: Children's theories of Balance 
affect play. Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. 
Nashville, Tennessee. 
Keil, F.C. (1995). The growth of causal understandings of natural kinds. In D. Sperber & D. Premack 
(Eds.), Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate. (pp. 234-267). New York: Clarendon 
Press/Oxford University Press. 
Keil, F.C. (2003). Folk Science: Coarse interpretations of a complex reality. Trends in Cognitive 
Science. 7(8), 368-373. 
Keil, F.C. (2006). Explanation and Understanding. Annual Review of Psychology. 57, 227-254. 
Kemp, C., Perfors, A. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian 
models. Developmental Science, 10(3), 307-321. 
Klahr, D., Fay, A.L., & Dunbar, K. (1993).  Developmental differences in experimental heuristics. 
Cognitive Psychology, 25, 111-146 
Koslowski, B. (1996). Theory and Evidence: The Development of Scientific Reasoning. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists. Psychological Review, 96(4), 674-689. 
Kuhn, D., Amsel, E., & O'Laughlin, M. (1988). The development of scientific thinking skills. Orlando, 
FL: Academic Press. 
Kuhn, D. & Dean, D. (2004) Connecting Scientific Reasoning and Causal Inference. Journal of 
Cognition and Development, 5(2) 261-288. 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
16 
Kuhn, D., Garcia0Mila, M., Zohar, A., & Andersen, C. (!995) Strategies of knowledge acquisition. 
Society for Research in Child Development Monographs, 60(4, Serial No. 245). 
Kuhn, D., & Phelps, E. (1982) The development of problem-solving strategies.  In H. Reese (Ed.), 
Advances in child development and behavior (Vol. 17, pp. 1-44). New York: Academic Press. 
Kushnir & Gopnik (2006). Conditional probability versus spatial contiguity in causal learning: 
Preschoolers use new contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial assumptions. Developmental 
Psychology. 
Legare, C., Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (in press). Evidence for an explanation advantage in naïve 
biological reasoning.  Cognitive Psychology.  
Masnick, A. M., & Klahr, D. (2003). Error Matters: An initial exploration of elementary school 
children's understanding of experimental error. Journal of Cognition and Development, 4(1), 67-98. 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman. 
Memon, A., Cronin, O., Eaves, R., & Bull, R. (1993) The cognitive interview and child witnesses.  In 
G.M. Stephenson & N.K. Clark (Eds), Children, Evidence, and Procedure.  Issues in Criminological 
and Legal Psychology. No. 20. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society. 
Notaro, P.C., Gelman, S., & Zimmerman, M.A.  (2001) Children’s Understanding of Psychogenic 
Bodily Reactions. Child Development 72(2), 444-459. 
Poole, D.A. & White, L.T. (1991) Effects of question repetition on the eyewitness testimony of children 
and adults. Developmental Psychology, 27, 975-986. 
Rozenblit, L.R. and Keil, F.C. (2002). The misunderstood limits of folk science: an illusion of 
explanatory depth. Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562. 
Schauble, L. (1990). Belief Revision in Children: The Role of Prior Knowledge and Strategies for 
Generating Evidence. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 49, 31-57. 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
17 
Schulz, L.E., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Causal Learning Across Domains, Developmental Psychology, 
40(2), 162-176. 
Schulz, L., Bonawitz, E.B., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Can being scared make your tummy ache? Naïve 
theories, ambiguous evidence, and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Developmental Psychology, Sep 
Vol 43(5) 1124-1139. 
Shultz, T. (1982). Rules of causal attribution. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 47.  
Sobel, D. (2006). When Mr. Blicket Wants It, Children Are Bayesian. Proceedings of the Cognitive 
Science Society. 810-816. 
Tenenbaum, J. B., Griffiths, T. L., & Kemp, C. (2006). Theory-based Bayesian models of inductive 
learning 
and 
reasoning. 
Trends 
in 
Cognitive 
Science, 
10, 
309-318.

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
18 
Figure 1:  Study design and sample pages from the training books 
 
 

Teaching Ambiguous Evidence 
19 
 
Figure 2: Percentage of psychosomatic explanations generated by three-and-a-half-year-olds in each of 
the four conditions. 
 
 
 
 

