Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
1 of 19
P HYSICS
Axion dark matter: What is it and why now?
Francesca Chadha-Day1*, John Ellis2,3,4*, David J. E. Marsh2*
The axion has emerged in recent years as a leading particle candidate to provide the mysterious dark matter in the 
cosmos, as we review here for a general scientific audience. We describe first the historical roots of the axion in the 
Standard Model of particle physics and the problem of charge-parity invariance of the strong nuclear force. We 
then discuss how the axion emerges as a dark matter candidate and how it is produced in the early universe. The 
symmetry properties of the axion dictate the form of its interactions with ordinary matter. Astrophysical consider-
ations restrict the particle mass and interaction strengths to a limited range, which facilitates the planning of 
experiments to detect the axion. A companion review discusses the exciting prospect that the axion could be 
detected in the near term in the laboratory.
INTRODUCTION
The Standard Model of particle physics provides a successful 
description of the visible matter in the universe, from stars to the 
inner workings of atoms and nuclei. It categorizes the fundamental 
constituents of matter, the quarks and leptons, and the electromag-
netic, weak and strong nuclear forces between them. The Standard 
Model is a mathematically consistent quantum field theory that 
allows theorists to calculate accurate predictions, which have, in 
many cases, been verified experimentally with a precision below the 
per mil level at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and other particle 
accelerators. The crowning success of the Standard Model was the 
discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012 (1, 2), a particle of a previously 
unknown type whose existence was predicted in 1964 (3) to solve 
theoretical problems associated with the masses of vector bosons 
[see also (4)]. Precise experimental measurements in the decades 
preceding 2010 verified many other predictions of the Standard 
Model, including the existence and mass of the top quark. They also 
confirmed the necessity of the Higgs boson and enabled its mass 
to be estimated numerically. Following its discovery, experiments 
have confirmed that it has zero spin, unlike any fundamental 
particle known previously, and interactions with other particles 
that are proportional to their masses, as predicted by the Standard  
Model.
Despite these manifold successes, particle physicists are restless 
and dissatisfied with the Standard Model because it has many 
theoretical shortcomings and leaves many pressing experimental 
questions unanswered. Here, we review the axion (5–7), a hypothet-
ical particle beyond the Standard Model that addresses some of 
these unresolved issues and is the focus of growing experi-
mental interest.
One of these issues is how matter and antimatter are (and are 
not) distinguished at the level of fundamental particles. For each 
matter particle in the Standard Model, special relativity and quantum 
mechanics require (8) the existence of a corresponding antimatter 
particle with identical mass and spin but opposite charge. Uncharged 
particles such as photons may be their own antiparticles. The existence 
of every antiparticle in the Standard Model has been confirmed 
experimentally by observing their production in the collisions of or-
dinary particles. However, astrophysical and cosmological obser-
vations tell us that most of the visible material in the universe is 
composed of the same matter particles as us on Earth and that there 
are no large concentrations of antimatter. This cosmological matter-​
antimatter asymmetry is thought to be because of differences in 
the interactions of elementary particles and antiparticles (9), 
which violate certain symmetries that distinguish particle from 
antiparticle. These are charge conjugation (denoted by C) and its 
combination with parity reversal (denoted by P; also known as 
spatial inversion symmetry). A form of CP violation was found in 
the laboratory over 50 years ago (10), and by now, it has been 
observed in many decays via the weak interactions. These observa-
tions can be accommodated within the Standard Model with six 
quarks (11), albeit without a profound explanation. However, this 
Standard Model mechanism is insufficient to explain the cosmological 
matter-antimatter asymmetry, and, moreover, it is a puzzle that CP 
violation does not appear also in the strong nuclear interaction: 
This is known as the “strong CP problem.” As we discuss below, this 
puzzle could be resolved via the hypothetical axion particle. In this 
review, we reserve the term “axion” for the particle arising from the 
solution to the strong CP problem described below, also known as 
the “QCD axion” (quantum chromodynamics axion). This will 
be the main topic of this review. We will also touch briefly on 
“axion-like particles” (ALPs), which do not solve the strong CP 
problem. As a result, the properties of ALPs are less theoretically 
constrained.
The failure to explain the cosmological matter-antimatter asym-
metry and the CP symmetry of the strong force are just two of the 
Standard Model’s failures to describe the universe. Some might 
regard them as “cosmetic” problems since they could be solved by 
fiat within the context of the Standard Model. There is, however, a 
much more pressing existential problem.
Multiple astronomical observations tell us that the visible matter 
described by the Standard Model provides just a small part of the 
total density of the universe. There is much more invisible “dark 
matter” (DM) out there (12) that remains to be explained. This is 
gross inadequacy of the Standard Model since the DM cannot be 
explained without appealing to substantial amounts of new physics. 
1Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology, Department of Physics, Durham 
University, Durham DH1 3LE, UK. 2Theoretical Physics and Cosmology Group, 
Department of Physics, Kings College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK. 
3Theoretical Physics Department, CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland. 4Na-
tional Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, Rävala 10, 10143 Tallinn, 
Estonia.
*Corresponding author. Email: francesca.chadha-day@durham.ac.uk (F.C.-D.); john.
ellis@cern.ch (J.E.); david.j.marsh@kcl.ac.uk (D.J.E.M.)
Copyright © 2022 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
2 of 19
The existence of DM is inferred from its gravitational effects, and 
astrophysical observations suggest that it is “cold,” i.e., it has been 
moving very slowly for much of the history of the universe, and 
there are experimental upper limits on how strongly it interacts with 
the visible matter. Moreover, the agreement between independent 
cosmological observations [including galaxy clustering and the tem-
perature anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) 
radiation (13)] and the corresponding theory of structure forma-
tion also tells us that DM must have been present since early in the 
history of the universe, a year or so after the Big Bang or even earlier. 
Jim Peebles’ share of the 2019 Nobel Prize in Physics was for the 
theory of cosmological structure formation behind this under-
standing and the evidence it provides for the existence of cold DM 
(14). Beyond these basic facts relating to the temperature and 
longevity of the DM, we have very little information about its nature 
and properties.
It may well consist of one or more types of fundamental particle, 
although part or all of it might consist of macroscopic lumps of 
some invisible form of matter such as black holes. The axion has 
become one of the prime particle candidates for providing DM.
Historically, the first type of particle DM that was suggested was 
some sort of weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP) such as a 
massive neutrino. Minimal versions of this hypothesis within the 
Standard Model were excluded experimentally, leading particle 
theorists to consider possible candidates in extensions of the 
Standard Model, e.g., based on supersymmetry (15). However, this 
is not the only possibility. If the DM particle is a low-mass boson, 
then it may populate the universe in a coherent wave-like state that 
is also slow-moving and, hence, cold. The axion is the prototype for 
such wave-like DM.
For many years following the proposals of the axion and WIMP 
in the late 1970s, axion DM was a minority interest among particle 
physicists, who were mainly focused on high-energy collider physics. 
Their primary motivation was the search for the Higgs boson, but 
WIMP searches were also an important consideration that could 
often be pursued in parallel with the Higgs search. The search for 
the Higgs boson culminated in its discovery at the LHC in 2012, but 
WIMP searches at the LHC and elsewhere (16) have proved fruit-
less so far. These two developments have contributed to growing 
theoretical and experimental interest in the axion. On the one hand, the 
Higgs is an existence proof for an apparently elementary spin-zero 
boson undergoing spontaneous symmetry breaking, something that 
was somewhat controversial and unknown previously. This proof 
of principle invalidated one possible theoretical prejudice against 
the existence of the axion, which shares these properties with the 
Higgs. Perhaps, the nonappearance of any WIMP at the LHC and in 
other direct searches has diminished enthusiasm for that candidate 
for particle DM, although some hope still springs eternal. In parallel, 
there has been growing realization that ALPs appear quite generi-
cally in extensions of the Standard Model, e.g., those with their 
roots in string theory (see Fig. 1). For these reasons, the axion has 
now become a favored theoretical candidate for DM, motivating 
this review.
A companion article reviews the prospects for axion and ALP 
searches driven by experimental and technological advances at the 
so-called “precision frontier” of particle physics. These advances 
make axion DM a viable candidate for discovery, which until 
recently appeared impossible, and are important factors driving the 
growing interest in the field.
Fig. 1. Many extensions of the Standard Model predict additional massive 
bosons, beyond the W, Z, and Higgs bosons of the Standard Model. They 
might be scalar (even under both P and CP transformations), pseudo-scalar (odd 
under both P and CP), or vector particles. The prototype for a pseudo-scalar boson 
is the axion, which is “ultralight” with mass m ≪ 1 eV. Other proposals include 
pseudo-scalar ALPs, hidden photons, and scalar particles such as moduli and 
dilatons. Any of these might provide the astrophysical DM.
What is known about DM?
• Cosmic density [strong evidence: CMB anisotropies (13)]. Expressed as a 
fraction of the total density of the universe, DM makes up 26% of the 
universe, compared to 6% in ordinary matter and 68% in vacuum energy.
• Local density (strong evidence: Milky Way stellar motions). The local den-
sity of DM is around 0.3 to 0.4 GeV cm−3, equivalent to one proton every 
few cubic centimeters or one solar mass per cubic lightyear. The density 
is measured, on average, over a relatively large fraction of the galaxy. The 
actual density at the precise location of Earth could be substantially dif-
ferent. This is particularly relevant to axions, as discussed below. The local 
density is around 105 times the average cosmic density.
• Local velocity dispersion (strong evidence: Milky Way stellar motions). 
The velocity dispersion of DM is around v = 200 km s−1, and our local 
motion with respect to the galactic rest frame is in the direction of the 
constellation Cygnus.
• No preferred galactic length scale (strong evidence: galaxy clustering 
and evolution). DM must be nonrelativistic (v ∼ c would allow DM to 
move significant distances during galaxy formation) and have negligible 
pressure (which would imprint sound waves during galaxy formation). 
This discounts standard model neutrinos and other “hot” or “warm” 
DM. For bosons, the de Broglie wavelength (which can be modeled as an 
effective pressure) must be small compared to the galaxy clustering 
scale.
• Early appearance of DM (strong evidence: galaxy clustering). DM had to 
be present, as well as gravitating, in the universe long before the CMB 
formed, and its gravitational influence began before the universe was 1 
year old. For light bosonic DM (such as the axion), this corresponds to the 
latest epoch of particle creation (tcold in Fig. 4).
• Lack of significant interactions [strong evidence: the “Bullet Cluster” (17)]. 
DM cannot interact with itself or ordinary matter too strongly.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
3 of 19
ENTER THE AXION
The strong CP problem
The strong CP problem may be posed simply as follows: Why have 
we observed no electric dipole moment (EDM) for the neutron? 
The neutron EDM is a quantity that would violate CP symmetry. 
This is in contrast to most of the laws of fundamental physics, which 
look the same after a CP transformation.
To understand the effect of a CP transformation on the neutron, 
we can instead think about how a neutron would behave under a 
time reversal transformation. This is because if quantum field theory 
is Lorentz invariant (i.e., if it is consistent with Einstein’s theory of 
special relativity), then all particles and processes must be invariant 
under the CPT combination of discrete transformations, where 
T reverses the arrow of time (this is known as the CPT theorem of 
quantum field theory). So, if we find something that violates T sym-
metry, then it must also violate CP symmetry in such a way that the 
combination CPT is not violated.
As an illustration, let us consider the effect of time reversal on 
the energy of a neutron with an EDM d in an electric field E. This 
energy is given by the Hamiltonian
	
​ℋ  =  − d · E​	
(1)
If the neutron has a permanent EDM, then this EDM must be 
aligned with the neutron’s spin. (This follows from the Wigner-Eckart 
theorem in quantum mechanics.) When we reverse the direction of 
time, the direction of the neutron’s spin is reversed, and therefore, 
the direction of the EDM must also be reversed under a time reversal 
transformation T. However, the electric field direction remains the 
same under a time reversal transformation. So we can see from 
Eq. 1 that if the neutron has a nonzero permanent EDM, then the 
energy of a neutron in an electric field will change under a T trans-
formation. Hence, a neutron EDM would violate T symmetry and 
therefore also CP symmetry.
Figure 2 shows the P and T transformations of a permanent 
electric or magnetic dipole moment (which must be aligned with a 
particle’s spin), of an electric field, and of a magnetic field. We 
see that an EDM violates both T and P symmetry, as the spin trans-
forms with the opposite sign to the electric field under both these 
transformations. Conversely, a magnetic dipole moment does not 
violate P or T symmetry as the spin transforms in the same way as 
the magnetic field.
Some experimentally observed processes within the Standard 
Model do violate CP symmetry, i.e., the process and the corre-
sponding CP transformed process occur at different rates. These 
CP-violating processes are generated by the weak interaction. How-
ever, CP violation has not been observed in any experiment on the 
strong interaction, which describes the forces that bind quarks 
together to form protons, neutrons, and other hadrons in the theory 
of QCD. This is very unexpected because the Standard Model 
predicts that the structure of the QCD vacuum itself should violate 
CP. The CP violation of the QCD vacuum can be parameterized by 
an angle denoted .
Furthermore, a neutron EDM should also receive a contribution 
from the effect of the weak interaction (the interaction responsible 
for radioactive decays) on the quarks. Thus, the total neutron EDM 
can be expressed using the total CP-violating angle ​​ ̄ ​
​ ̄ ​ =  strong interaction contribution + weak interaction contribution​	(2)
Within the Standard Model, the EDM of the neutron is propor-
tional to ​ ̄ ​, with ​∣d∣∼  3.6 × 1 ​0​ −16​ ​ ̄ ​ e cm​. The two contributions 
making up ​​ ̄ ​​ are entirely unrelated within the Standard Model and 
are simply set by hand. Note that, although ​ ̄ ​ is the sum of these two 
parameters, only the total ​​ ̄ ​​ is experimentally observable. There is 
no way to measure the strong interaction and weak interaction 
contributions to ​ ̄ ​ individually. Experiment tells us that ∣d∣ < 1.8 × 
10−26 e cm (18), implying that ​​ ̄ ​ <  5 × 1 ​0​ −11​. Thus, a very precise 
cancellation between unrelated parameters is required to explain 
the observations. This could merely be a coincidence, or it could be 
a first hint of new fundamental physics.
The axion solution
The axion is the most popular solution to the strong CP problem. It 
appeared first in a model proposed by Peccei and Quinn (5). Their 
idea was to promote ​​ ̄ ​​ to a dynamical quantity, rather than simply a 
constant parameter as in the Standard Model. In practice, this means 
adding a new field—the axion field—to the Standard Model that 
couples to the strong nuclear force in the same way as ​ ̄ ​. As we shall 
see, the axion field relaxes to a value such that ​​ ̄ ​​ is zero, and hence, 
the total neutron EDM vanishes.
The behavior of particles is determined by their symmetries. 
Emmy Noether showed that these symmetries correspond to 
conservation laws, such as conservation of energy or charge. In the 
Standard Model, symmetries lead to forces between particles: The 
force “communicates” the symmetry from place to place between 
particles. Forces are in turn mediated by bosonic particles: The 
Fig. 2. Effect of time and parity transformations on an electric or magnetic 
dipole (proportional to the spin shown by the red arrow), on an electric field 
and on a magnetic field. 
Strong CP problem and the axion
• The Standard Model contains a constant, ​ ̄ ​, which is known to be an an-
gle and thus take values between 0 and 2. Symmetry specifies no pre-
ferred angle.
• The value of this angle determines the neutron EDM, ​∣d∣= 3.6 × 1 ​0​ −16​ ​
 ̄ ​ e cm​. Measurements are consistent with ​ ̄ ​≲1​0​ −10​, which suggests some 
missing symmetry principle.
• The axion theory introduces a new field, a(t, x), such that ​ ̄ ​∝ a(t, x)​ and for 
which the value a = 0 is energetically favorable.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
4 of 19
force is a field, and quantum mechanics associates a particle with every 
field (e.g., the photon for the electromagnetic field and electromag-
netic gauge symmetry). Thus, to add the axion to the Standard 
Model, we introduce a new symmetry, called the Peccei-­Quinn 
(PQ) symmetry (5), which is a global axial U(1) symmetry. “Global” 
means that the symmetry transformation is the same everywhere 
and for all time—in contrast to the gauge symmetries associated 
with interactions in the Standard Model, whose transformations can 
be made independently at different points and at different times. 
“Axial” means that the symmetry transformation acts differently on 
left-handed and right-handed particles. Roughly speaking, a particle’s 
handedness tells us about the relative orientation of its spin and its 
velocity. Last, a U(1) symmetry transformation is one that is math-
ematically equivalent to a rotation about a single axis.
Introducing the PQ symmetry corresponds to introducing a new 
bosonic field beyond the single Higgs boson of the Standard Model. 
At high temperatures, such as in the early universe, the PQ symmetry 
is evident in all particle interactions. However, there is a phase 
transition that “hides” the PQ symmetry when the temperature falls 
low enough (the bosonic force carriers of the symmetry become 
heavy and cannot be thermally excited). Similar phenomena of 
“spontaneous symmetry breaking” are central to our understanding 
of many areas of macroscopic physics, such as superconductivity, 
and there are also examples in particle physics, such as the Higgs 
mechanism for generating particle masses.
To visualize spontaneous symmetry breaking, consider a ball 
rolling in the “sombrero” potential shown on the left of Fig. 3. If the 
ball has enough energy (as at high temperature), then it is able to 
roll over the hill in the center of the potential and occupies equally 
all areas of the circular valley in the “brim” of the potential. Now, 
imagine that the ball loses energy (as at low temperature), slows 
down, and comes to rest. It will choose at random to sit in one 
particular position in the potential well—although every position in 
the circular minimum of the potential well is exactly equivalent. 
This arbitrary choice (a “choice” made the random thermal state of 
the early universe) is spontaneous symmetry breaking. Notice now 
that, while it would take a lot of energy to get the ball over the 
potential hill again, we can push the ball around the circle of the 
potential well with the smallest of nudges. This is a generic feature 
of spontaneous symmetry breaking. In particle physics, it corre-
sponds to the appearance following spontaneous symmetry break-
ing of a massless particle, which is called a Nambu-Goldstone boson 
(19, 20). The Nambu-Goldstone boson of the spontaneously broken 
PQ symmetry is the axion (6, 7). It is represented by a field, a, which 
is proportional to the problematic ​​ ̄ ​​ angle of the strong CP problem, 
making the angle dynamical rather than a fixed and mysterious 
constant (achieving this remarkable theoretical sleight of hand to 
make ​a ∝  ​ ̄ ​ is described briefly in what follows and in more detail in 
the Supplemental Materials).
We have not yet solved the strong CP problem, as the massless 
axion field could a priori take any value. The next part of the story 
is the QCD phase transition (strictly speaking, a cross over) that 
occurs as the temperature falls. When the temperature is sufficiently 
low, QCD becomes strongly coupled and confines quarks and 
gluons into the bound-state protons, neutrons, and other hadrons 
that we see today. This phase transition breaks the PQ symmetry by 
distorting the sombrero potential as seen on the right in Fig. 3. The 
potential now has discrete minima, and the energy is minimized by 
the axion field, taking the value of one of these minima. Thus, after 
the QCD crossover, the axion field rolls to the newly created mini-
mum point, which is where the contribution of ​ ̄ ​ to the neutron 
EDM vanishes, setting the net neutron EDM to zero (the reason this 
minimum has the right CP properties is discussed in the Supple-
mentary Materials) Notice that now, to make the ball move around 
the sombrero potential, we would need to push it away and up from 
its minimum point. The energy required to move the classical axion 
field a small distance away from the minimum can be modeled as an 
effective potential ​V(a ) = ​m​a​ 2​ ​a​ 2​ / 2​. Upon quantization, we interpret 
the parameter ma in the classical potential as the mass of the axion 
particle.
The axion mass can be computed in terms of well-understood 
physics of the strong nuclear force by considering the axion mixing 
with the neutral pion—a bound state of quarks with the same quan-
tum numbers as the axion. The axion’s interactions with the neutral 
pion mean that the pion’s mass generates a small mass for the 
axion—this effect is only possible because the axion and the pion 
have the same quantum numbers. This leads to the following 
relation for the axion mass ma
	
​m​ a​ ​f​ a​  ∼  ​m​ ​ ​f​ ​	
(3)
where fa is proportional to the energy at which the PQ symmetry is 
spontaneously broken, m is the pion mass, and f is a constant that 
is known from the rate of decay of the pion via the weak interaction. 
(A deeper understanding of the origin of the axion mass relies on 
the theory of “instantons,” strong-interaction effects that are dis-
cussed briefly in the Supplementary Materials.) Using the experi-
mental measurements of these pion properties, we can calculate the 
axion mass. The axion mass, as most scales in particle physics, is 
typically given in electronvolts, where 1 eV ≈ 1.8 × 10−36 kg, which 
assumes ℏ = c = 1, but we restore units of ℏ and c in formulae for 
clarity. Another useful conversion is between mass in electronvolts 
and Compton frequency, such that 0.25 Hz ≈ 10−15 eV. The axion  
mass is
	
​m​ a​ =  (5.70 ± 0.007) µeV​(​
 ​ 1 ​0​ 12​ GeV 
─ 
​f​ a​ 
​)​ ​	
(4)
where the error includes experimental and theoretical contribu-
tions appearing in a detailed calculation of axion-pion mixing (21). 
The constant fa is related to the scale of spontaneous breaking of the 
PQ symmetry (see the Supplementary Materials) and is measured 
Fig. 3. Sombrero potential of the PQ field  shown schematically before and 
after the QCD phase transition. The axion corresponds to the angular direction 
of this potential, shown by the orange line. The state of the field is given by a point 
in the potential. Low-energy configurations are favored. For illustration, the potential 
on the right is shown for a scenario with a large amount of PQ symmetry breaking. 
More details are given in section SA.2.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
5 of 19
in gigaelectron volts. What values could this take? The electroweak 
scale, ≈250 GeV, was one natural choice but is excluded experi-
mentally. Other scales in particle physics include the grand unified 
scale, O(1016) GeV, and the Planck scale, ∼1019 GeV, which is the 
highest scale where ordinary quantum field theory could possibly 
remain valid before quantum gravity becomes important. These 
considerations give only very rough guidance as to the value of fa 
and the mass of the axion: Below, we narrow their possible ranges.
The axion mechanism may be implemented in a wide variety of 
extensions to the Standard Model, which are the subject of much 
current research (22). In any axion model, we must introduce a new 
complex field  = ei, which gains a nonzero vacuum expectation 
value that breaks the PQ symmetry spontaneously. After this spon-
taneous symmetry breaking, the axion is related to the phase of  
by a = Nfa, where N is an integer, the “color anomaly,” which varies 
depending on the detailed realization of the PQ mechanism. Figure 3 
is shown for N = 4.
For the axion to solve the strong CP problem, the model must 
also include quarks that are charged under the PQ symmetry, which 
in turn mediate an interaction between the axion and the gluon 
force carriers of the strong nuclear force. There are two ways of 
achieving this. In one class of axion models, the Standard Model 
quarks are charged under the PQ symmetry (23, 24): These models 
have N = 6. This means that we have to add an extra Higgs doublet 
to the model to allow all of the Standard Model interactions to obey 
the PQ symmetry. In another class of models, we instead add extra 
heavy, electrically neutral quarks to the theory (25, 26). Only these 
extra quarks are charged under the PQ symmetry: The canonical 
version of this model has N = 1. The precise values of the axion’s 
mass and interaction strengths depend on these details of the model 
(see the Supplementary Materials).
Interactions
The axion does interact not only with quarks and gluons but also 
with the other particles in the Standard Model. We know that these 
interactions must be very weak for the axion to have evaded detec-
tion so far.
Particle interactions are governed by their symmetries, and the 
axion’s interactions are set by its pseudo-scalar nature. A pseudo-­
scalar field changes sign under a parity transformation, i.e., when 
looking at the universe in a mirror. If we assume that the overall 
interaction is unchanged by a parity transformation, then we find 
that only certain interactions are allowed for a pseudo-scalar 
particle. These can be expressed (schematically) by the nonrelativistic 
Hamiltonian
​H =  ​√ 
_
 
​ ​​ 0​ 
─ 
​​ 0​ ​ ​ ​g​ a​∫ aE · BdV + ​g​ aff​ ℏc ∇  a · ​ˆ S​ + ​√ _ 
​​ 0​ ​(ℏc)​ 3​ ​ ​g​ EDM​ a​ˆ S​ · E​	 (5)
where a is the axion field measured in units energy; ga is the 
axion’s coupling to photons,  (i.e., to electromagnetism), measured 
in units of inverse energy; gaff is the axion’s coupling to matter 
particles, which are fermions, f (the coupling depends on the parti-
cle in question, we write just one case for simplicity); gEDM is the 
strength of a nuclear EDM induced by the axion; E and B are 
the electric and magnetic fields; and ​ˆ S​ is the direction of the spin of the 
matter particle in question. 0 and 0 are the permittivity and 
permeability of free space, respectively, constants associated with 
electromagnetism; ℏ is the reduced Planck’s constant, which param-
eterizes the size of quantum effects; and c is the speed of light.
These interactions are very different from the interactions of a 
scalar particle, which can couple directly E2 − B2 (the scalar Maxwell 
term) and to the masses of matter particles. This means that light 
scalar fields can mediate extra long-range forces, and their interactions 
with Standard Model particles are therefore very tightly constrained 
by the nonobservation of these extra forces. In contrast, the couplings 
of pseudo-scalar particles to E · B and to the spins of matter particles 
(27, 28) make them much harder to detect.
What would the axion’s interactions with photons and with 
matter particles look like experimentally? Via its interaction with 
E · B, axion DM would look like an additional electrical current or 
anomalous magnetic field (29). More generally, Maxwell’s equations 
of electromagnetism are modified by the addition of the axion field. 
Further details on how axions modify Maxwell’s equations of 
electromagnetism are discussed in the companion experimental 
review. Via its coupling to nuclear and electron spins, axion DM 
would cause these spins to precess, as they would in a magnetic 
field, but now with an anomalous magnetization caused by the 
invisible presence of the axion field (30, 31).
What are the strengths of the axion’s interaction with Standard 
Model particles? How large are the coupling constants gi in the 
Hamiltonian (Eq. 5)? We know that the interactions must be very 
weak, or we would have found axions already. We expect the axion’s 
couplings to be inversely proportional to the scale of symmetry 
breaking
	
​g​ i​ ∼  ​ 1 
─ 
​f​ a​ ​ ​	
(6)
This is a consequence of one of the most fundamental ideas in 
particle physics, namely, effective field theory (32), which tells us to 
expect the axion’s interactions to scale inversely with the energy 
scale at which the symmetry giving rise to it originates. As this 
energy fa could be very high, the axion’s interactions could be very 
weak, as required by the experimental constraints. Comparing 
Eqs. 3 and 6, we see that the axion’s couplings obey
	
​g​ i​ ∝  ​m​ a​	
(7)
This is true for most models of the QCD axion, whose couplings 
are generally proportional to its mass, although this relationship 
can be broken in some specific models of the QCD axion. In addi-
tion, as we will see later, the axion is just one particle in the broader 
class of ALPs discussed in more detail below. These ALPs need not, 
in general, solve the strong CP problem or couple to gluons. This 
means that their mass could take any value and need not be propor-
tional to their couplings, and the constants of proportionality differ 
wildly for different ALPs. ALPs could therefore be very weakly 
coupled and hence extremely difficult to detect experimentally. 
Alternatively, nature may provide us with more strongly coupled 
ALPs that can be detected more readily, as discussed below. By 
contrast, for a canonical QCD axion of a given mass, we can predict 
the approximate size of the couplings to Standard Model particles, 
providing a definite target for experimental searches. Further details 
are given in the Supplementary Materials.
The interaction between DM axions or ALPs with particles and 
forces in the Standard Model leads to a wide variety of ways to 
search for them. Initially, in the 1980s up to 2010 or so, experiments 
were few and far between. There was just one viable method, the 
microwave cavity haloscope, and the axion interactions are too 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
6 of 19
feeble to produce a signal measurable with technology of the time. 
Now, the landscape has changed. Microwave photon detection and 
cavity design have allowed the haloscope concept to break ground 
to exclude regions of the QCD axion parameter space and expand 
the search over a wider frequency range (33–35). In tandem, new 
methods to detect axions have been conceived of and developed, 
including magnetic resonance (31, 36–39), broadband antennas (40), 
dielectrics and metamaterials (41, 42), and lumped circuit technology 
(43, 44). These new technologies are at various stages of maturity, 
with some only existing on paper, others being prototyped, and 
others already making competitive measurements of axion param-
eter space and excluding theoretical models. Technologies now in 
development should be able to cover almost all of the viable axion 
parameter space in the coming decades: the fuel for the growth of 
interest in this field. The companion experimental review covers 
this topic in detail.
In addition to searching directly for axion DM in the experi-
ments described briefly above and in the companion experimental 
review, the effects of axions and ALPs may be seen indirectly in 
telescope observations of stars, galaxies, and galaxy clusters. These 
astrophysical systems offer extreme environments that would be 
impossible to replicate on Earth and are therefore ideal places to 
search for new physics.
The interaction aE · B means that axions or ALPs can intercon-
vert with photons in the presence of a background magnetic field. 
This process is mathematically similar to neutrino oscillations, with 
the crucial difference that the strength of the mixing depends on the 
size of the external magnetic field. The possibility of interconversion 
between ALPs and photons in space places the strongest current 
bounds on ga for very low mass ALPs (ma ≲ 10−8 eV).
One such bound arises from observations of distant point sources 
such as active galactic nuclei shining through foreground galaxy 
clusters. Galaxy clusters host strong magnetic fields over very large 
distances. If ALPs exist, then some of the photons from these point 
sources would convert into ALPs as they move through the galaxy 
cluster. From our point of view, some of the light from point sources 
shining through galaxy clusters would go missing. The nonobserva-
tion of this effect can be used to place bounds on the axion photon 
coupling [e.g., (45)], requiring ga ≲ 10−12 GeV−1 for ALP masses 
ma ≲ 10−11 eV. However, it should be noted that this method 
relies on the accuracy of our knowledge of the galaxy cluster mag-
netic field.
We can also bound ga using observations of SN 1987A, a super-
nova observed in 1987 in the nearby (astronomically speaking) 
large magellanic cloud. A supernova is an explosion at the end of a 
star’s life, which produces vast quantities of neutrinos and photons. 
If ALPs exist, then a supernova would also produce them copiously via 
nuclear interactions between ALPs and the supernova constituents. 
Some of the ALPs produced by SN 1987A would have been converted 
into -ray photons in the Milky Way’s magnetic field. No such extra 
-ray photons have been observed, which allows us to set a bound 
ga < 5.3 × 10−12 GeV−1 for ALP masses ma ≲ 4.4 × 10−10 eV 
[e.g., (46)]. As we will see below, SN 1987A can also be used to 
constrain the interactions of higher-mass axions.
The constraints outlined above apply only to rather low-mass 
ALPs. Photons traveling through the plasmas of galaxies and galaxy 
clusters acquire a low effective mass, but axions or ALPs with masses 
higher than this effective mass cannot mix efficiently with the pho-
ton. For this reason, astrophysical axion-photon mixing constrains 
the ALP parameter space, but not the standard QCD axion for 
which ga ∝ ma.
The coupling between axions and photons would also allow 
axions to be copiously produced in stars. This would create an 
additional cooling mechanism for the star and would therefore alter 
the course of stellar evolution. This effect can also be used to 
constrain ga, requiring ga < 6.6 × 10−11 GeV−1 over a very wide 
range of masses (47), thus constraining both the QCD axion and a 
more general ALP. Our nearest star, the Sun, would also copiously 
produce axions, which could be observed experimentally via con-
trolled axion-photon conversion in the laboratory. This is the aim of 
the CERN Axion Solar Telescope experiment (48), and other so-called 
“helioscopes,” discussed in the companion experimental review.
AXION DM WAVES
The advent of quantum mechanics in the early 20th century taught 
us that for every particle, there is a wave, and for every wave, there 
is a particle. The wavelength, , and frequency, f, of the wave are 
related to the particle mass m and velocity v (in the nonrelativistic  
limit) by
	
​ =  ​  h 
─ 
mv ​,  hf  =  E  =  m ​c​ 2​ + ​ 1 
─ 2 ​ m ​v​ 2​	
(8)
where h is Planck’s constant. When the particle is relatively heavy 
compared to the axion, as in the case of the electron, the wavelength 
is small, and so in our day-to-day lives, we do not notice the particle 
behaving as a wave. Electrons are also fermions (particles of half-­
integer spin). This means that they must obey the “exclusion principle,” 
more than one electron cannot occupy the same state, and so collec-
tive wave-like behavior does not occur (except when they bind to 
form pairs with integer spin, as in superconductors).
On the other hand, for light and massless particles, the wave-
length of the matter waves can be large, and their frequency can be low. 
If these particles are also bosons (particles of zero or integer spin; see 
Fig. 1), then many particles can occupy the same state. When the 
occupation number is macroscopic, the bosons can be described 
using classical, rather than quantum, field theory. This gives rise to 
macroscopic wave-like behavior. Historically, we were first aware of 
photons in their guise as the classical electromagnetic radio waves 
of H. Hertz. Our technology to observe electromagnetic waves be-
gins in this realm of wavelengths larger than 1 mm or so and fre-
quencies lower than around 1 THz.
The axion field, a, is just one massive bosonic field among many 
possibilities, as also is its parent PQ field, . The energy density of 
DM in the universe is one of the most macroscopic quantities 
imaginable, which in Einstein’s theory of general relativity affects 
the very geometry of space time and the expansion of the universe. 
The theory of axion DM is the theory of classical waves in the fields 
, a, and their dynamics under the influence of gravity. We begin 
this section by considering the origin of the energy density in these 
fields in the very early universe.
What is axion DM and how did it get here?
• Axion DM consists of the energy stored in spatial and temporal gradients, 
as well as potential energy, of the axion field, a(t, x).
• Initial fluctuations of the axion field arose from a phase transition involv-
ing spontaneous symmetry breaking that occurred in the early universe.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
7 of 19
Two roads to axion DM
Observations of the CMB tell us that to a very good first approxima-
tion, the early universe was homogeneous, isotropic, flat, and hot. 
Under these approximations, Einstein’s equations of general relativity 
reduce to a single ordinary differential equation, the Friedmann 
equation (see the Supplementary Materials). This equation relates 
the temperature of the plasma in the early universe to its expansion 
rate, expressed in terms of the Hubble parameter H(t).
The isotropy of the CMB on the largest scales also provides 
evidence that this hot, dense state of the early universe must have 
been preceded by a far more mysterious epoch that sets the large-
scale initial conditions of the universe. That such an epoch must 
have existed is the only relevant point at present: Which theory 
describes it (for example, inflation or a cyclic universe) has no bear-
ing on our story (although in the case of inflation, the axion could 
be used to test key predictions of the theory). After the initial condi-
tions of the universe were set, the well understood “hot Big Bang” 
phase began, at some finite time thot when the temperature of the 
universe was at its maximum, Thot.When cosmologists refer to the 
“age of the universe” or “time after the Big Bang,” this is in reference 
to the time since thot and not dependent on how much time there 
was, or was not, before this (for example, the universe could be 
infinitely old in its past). Thus, in the box “What is known about DM?,” 
the “creation of DM” refers to the amount of time t = t − thot. The 
key distinction for the origin of axion DM is whether the PQ phase 
transition occurs for TPQ > Thot or TPQ < Thot. This is summarized in 
Fig. 4. The fact that the oscillations of the axion field caused by 
spontaneous symmetry breaking leads to a viable DM candidate 
was first realized in 1983 by three separate groups working inde-
pendently (49–51). This happy accident, a DM candidate “for free” 
from a particle postulated only to solve the strong CP problem, is 
now a main virtue of the theory. There are two scenarios for sponta-
neous symmetry breaking that we must consider, shown schemati-
cally in Fig. 4.
In scenario A, (TPQ > Thot), the PQ phase transition occurs in the 
epoch during which the initial conditions were set, before the hot 
Big Bang. This is the simplest case to describe mathematically, as 
this epoch serves to smooth the universe on the largest scales, in 
accordance with observation. This removes all “memory” of the 
details of the phase transition (e.g., all the spatial gradients in the 
axion field) and replaces all that complexity with just two quantities: 
a single random number, the initial value of the axion field, (thot), 
and the axion mass, ma. With these two inputs, the evolution of the 
classical axion field, as well as the subsequent DM density, is deter-
mined by a simple wave equation in which the expansion of the 
universe acts as a friction term damping the waves (see the Supple-
mentary Materials).
In scenario B (TPQ < Thot), the PQ phase transition occurred 
during the hot Big Bang phase, after the initial conditions epoch 
ended. Thus, the axion field is not smoothed, leaving a messy field 
configuration. The physics involves the Kibble mechanism (52) for 
the formation and subsequent disposal of “topological defects” in 
the PQ field [the very same mechanism occurs in the superfluid 
phase transition of helium; (53)]. Topological defects are axion field 
configurations that occur between regions where the axion field 
takes different values, which may subsequently decay into axion 
DM. There is also more model dependence in this case, as different 
models of the axion lead to different kinds of topological defect. The 
dynamics in scenario B is highly nonlinear. However, in scenario B, 
the random number, (thot), of scenario A is averaged over in the 
initial distribution and is no longer a free parameter. In scenario B, 
large density variations in the initial state of the axion field lead to 
the formation of compact DM objects known as “miniclusters” (54). 
These objects not only offer new opportunities to find the axion 
by astrophysical means but also lead to an increased theoretical 
uncertainty in the local axion density for DM detection in the 
laboratory.
In both scenarios A and B, an important change happens to the 
axion field when the expansion rate of the universe (which is falling 
during cosmic time) drops below the natural frequency of axion 
oscillations, which is determined by its mass. At this time, tdyn, the 
axion field becomes highly dynamical (the wave equation becomes 
underdamped) and begins to oscillate. Before tdyn, there were no 
Fig. 4. Production of axion DM. The initial conditions epoch before the hot phase 
serves to smooth the universe on the largest scales. The axion dynamics and resulting 
DM density depends on when the PQ phase transition at the temperature TPQ takes 
place relative to the onset of the hot phase of the evolution of the universe at Thot, 
leading to two scenarios, A and B. Axion production occurs during the period 
between the two times tdyn and tcold and is complete in around 1 year at most. After 
tcold, axions are described by the cold DM model on length scales larger than their 
de Broglie wavelength. The axions then “free stream” up to the time of formation 
of the CMB and beyond into the epoch of galaxy formation and the present day. In 
scenario A, the axion mass is not fixed by the observed DM density, since there is 
an additional free parameter, (thot). In scenario B, there is no additional free 
parameter and the mass can, in principle, be predicted [some images are adapted 
from (81, 82)].
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
8 of 19
nonrelativistic axions: On the length and time scales of the expan-
sion of the universe, the axion field was effectively static. This is 
because the expansion of the universe is responsible for damping 
the axion field oscillations.
Thus, it is at tdyn that we think of axion DM as being produced. 
In scenario A, the axion field undergoes damped simple harmonic 
motion, while in scenario B, we think of axion field oscillations 
being emitted from the decaying topological defects. This epoch of 
particle production lasts only for a relatively short period, as the 
large scale energy density in the axion field, stored up from the 
phase transition, is converted into field oscillations, which, in quan-
tum theory, are equivalent to axion particles. From tdyn up to some 
later time tcold, the number of axion particles grows. Then, from tcold 
up to the present day, the number of axion particles in any suffi-
ciently large “comoving” volume (a volume that increases in 
proportion with the expansion of the universe) in the universe is 
conserved, i.e., the axion number density is simply diluted by the 
expansion of the universe just like any other particle would be. 
Axion cold DM is born and starts to form cosmic structures such 
as galaxies.
Cosmic structure formation
Because of the very large number of axions needed to supply the 
observed DM density, there are a large number of axions occupying 
each quantum state. This means that axion DM is described to a 
very good approximation by the classical scalar field a(t, x). Averaged 
over cosmic scales (distances of more than 10 megaparsecs), the 
axion field is very uniform, and its energy density is stored in 
harmonic oscillations: ​ =  ​1 _ 2​ [ ​a ̇ ​ 2​ / (ℏ ​c​ 3​ ) + ​m​a​ 2​ ​a​ 2​ / (​ℏ​ 3​ ​c​ 3​ ) ]​, with a = a0 
cos mac2t/ℏ, thus ​ =  ​m​a​ 2​ ​a​0​ 2​ / (2 ​ℏ​ 3​ ​c​ 3​)​. The value of a0 is determined 
by the early evolution of the axion field as described above. Crucially, 
for the axion to behave as cold DM with weak self-interactions, we 
require a0 ≪ fa, which permits the harmonic motion approximation 
for small displacements. The frequency of oscillation of the field 
is determined by the particle mass and is given by the Compton 
frequency.
On smaller scales, gravity causes the axion field to develop 
inhomogeneities, and it clusters into so-called “DM halos.” On larger 
scales, the halos are linked by filaments and sheets in the so-called 
“cosmic web.” The process of structure formation begins very early 
in the history of the universe: The gravitational potential wells of 
the DM halos began to form at very high temperatures, when ordi-
nary matter was still completely ionized (i.e., before the CMB 
formed). The development of inhomogeneities in the axion field is 
governed by gravity and the (small) axion self-interactions. The 
equations describing this evolution are known as the Gross-Pitaevski-­
Poisson equations, a form of nonlinear Schrödinger equation for 
the mean field occupation, where the potential is determined by the 
density of the field itself via the Poisson equation (see the Supple-
mentary Materials).
It is here that axion DM begins to take on some unique charac-
teristics compared to heavier particle DM such as WIMPs. These 
features are as follows:
1) The De Broglie wavelength. Gradient energy dominates 
over gravitational energy on small scales. The axion field is uniform 
on small scales, and there is a minimum mass for a DM halo (55).
2) Axion stars. At very high density, the axion forms a kind of 
soliton (a stable wavepacket-like field configuration) supported by 
an equilibrium between gravity and gradients (56, 57).
3) Wave turbulence and interference. In the structures of the 
cosmic web, axion waves have dynamic velocities. Where there are 
coherent flows, this leads to interference patterns in filaments. 
In thermalized/virialized environments (halos), the velocities are 
Maxwell-Boltzmann distributed and are described by wave turbu-
lence (58, 59).
A numerical simulation of axion structure formation is shown in 
Fig. 5, where the above mentioned effects can be seen. Similar 
phenomena showing the formation of solitons and “incoherent” 
turbulent solitons occur in certain nonlinear optics systems (60).
Inside the Milky Way, at the location of Earth, the axion field is 
in the turbulent regime. It is given as
	
​a =  ​ 1 
─ 2 ​( ​e​ −i​m​ a​c​ 2​t/ℏ​ + ​​ *​ ​e​ +i​m​ a​c​ 2​t/ℏ​) ​	
(9)
The amplitude field  is Rayleigh-distributed (up to small 
corrections) with a coherence length and time governed by the de 
Broglie wavelength at the local galactic orbital velocity and an 
amplitude fixed by the local DM density. The overall frequency f is 
determined by Eq. 8, with the velocity drawn from the Maxwell-­
Boltzmann distribution, leading to a frequency dispersion f/f ≈ 10−6. 
The frequency dispersion leads a natural linewidth for axion DM.
WHAT IS THE AXION MASS?
The QCD axion has a single free parameter in the low-energy theory, 
the decay constant fa, which in turn sets the axion particle mass 
(at zero temperature), ma, according to Eq. 3. To try to detect the 
axion in the laboratory, one would like to know the approximate 
mass scale, so that experiments can be appropriately targeted to the 
mean oscillation frequency, f = mac2/h, which in turn determines 
the frequency of any radiation or other associated phenomenon 
(as discussed elsewhere in this review and in the experimental 
companion review). Currently, astrophysical considerations provide 
Fig. 5. Zoom in to part of the cosmic web formed by gravitational interactions 
and the interference of axion waves. The dense, almost spherical nodes of the 
web are DM halos, which host galaxies such as our own. The inset shows a volume 
rendering of such a halo. Notice the interference of coherent waves outside of DM 
halos forming interference fringes. Inside halos, there are self-bound solitonic 
objects at high density (“axion stars”) and turbulent waves in the outer regions 
(“incoherent solitons”). To make the unique wave effects visible on cosmic scales 
(kiloparsecs), a very low-particle mass, ma ≈ 10−22 eV, is used in this simulation. The 
same physics operates, and the same effects occur, however, for all types of bosonic 
DM, with the length scale set by the particle de Broglie wavelength. Figure adapted 
from work presented in (61, 62).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
9 of 19
the best clues to the range of allowed values for the axion mass, 
summarized in Fig. 6, which we now elaborate on.
Beginning at the lightest end of the scale are bounds on so-called 
“fuzzy” DM. When the particle mass is very low, the de Broglie 
wavelength is cosmologically large and affects the formation and 
internal dynamics of galaxies. Galaxies cannot form below the 
de Broglie wavelength, which suppresses galaxy formation in the early 
universe (where low-mass galaxies form first). Conservative con-
straints on the axion mass in this scenario are m ≳ 10−22 eV, although 
the bounds can be tightened by up to three orders of magnitude 
including more data, and better knowledge of the structure forma-
tion process and galactic dynamics (61, 62). This limit also applies 
to other forms of bosonic DM (not just axions; see Fig. 1) and is the 
fundamental lower limit on DM particle mass. If DM is to be lighter 
than 10−22 eV, then, observationally, it can be only a subdominant 
fraction of the total DM density, with current bounds around the 
2% level (63).
The lack of a significant observed length scale in cosmic struc-
ture formation is one of the key facts known about DM, as described 
in the box “What is known about DM?.” Similarly, there is no 
evidence of a preferred time scale related to the formation of DM, 
and only a bound on when this must have been complete. Demanding 
that axions or other ultralight bosons (see next section) were formed 
early enough sets tcold ≳ 1 year and, similarly, bounds m ≳ 10−22 eV.
The next important constraint on the particle mass results from 
a property known as “black hole superradiance.” When the Compton 
wavelength of a boson is resonant with the radius of the “ergoregion” 
of a spinning (Kerr) black hole, the so-called “Penrose process” (64) 
operates, and vacuum fluctuations of the boson extract angular 
momentum from the black hole, reducing its rate of spin. (The 
ergoregion is a region close to a spinning black hole in which 
objects are necessarily forced to corotate with the black hole.) The 
radius of the ergoregion is fixed by the black hole mass and spin, 
while the spin of the black hole can be inferred, for example, from 
the Doppler shift in the emission of x-rays from its accretion disk. 
Rapidly spinning black holes would quickly spin down if a resonant 
boson existed, and so the observation of spinning and old black 
holes places exclusions on boson masses. The most robust, and also 
most important, range of these exclusions comes from stellar mass 
black holes with spins measured from x-ray images and, for spin-0 
bosons, excludes the range of 1 × 10−13 eV ≤ m ≤ 2 × 10−11 eV 
(65, 66), with a similar range excluded for massive spin-1 (vector) 
bosons. The importance of this bound is that it overlaps the range of 
the masses allowed for the QCD axion with spontaneous symmetry 
breaking scale below the Planck scale, 1019 GeV. Since it is widely 
believed that symmetry breaking above the Planck scale is forbidden 
in quantum gravity and string theory (67), superradiance leads to a 
solid lower bound to the mass range of the QCD axion.
An upper bound on the QCD axion mass can be derived using 
the relationship between the mass and the coupling strength to 
nuclear matter, gaNN, and is derived from observations of the super-
nova SN 1987A (68). The axion-nucleon coupling leads to emission 
of axions from neutrons and protons inside a collapsing supernova 
core in the Bremsstrahlung process N + N → N + N + a. The 
produced axions interact only very weakly with the surrounding 
nuclear matter and so can escape from the supernova core, leading 
to excess cooling compared to the case without axions. Neutrinos 
are also produced inside supernovae and provide a known cooling 
channel. If axions are also produced, then the supernova cools more 
quickly and thus has less time to emit neutrinos, leading to a lower 
neutrino flux. The neutrinos produced in SN 1987A were observed 
in neutrino detectors on Earth, and the duration and timing of the 
neutrino burst are known and are consistent with predictions of 
standard supernova models. Thus, the axion production rate must 
be low, leading to an upper bound on gaNN and thus an upper bound 
on ma (see Eq. 7), which is ma ≲ 2 × 10−2 eV.
The superradiance and SN 1987A bounds thus limit the QCD 
axion natural frequency, of critical importance for direct searches, 
to the range
	
​10 kHz ≲  f ≲  10 THz ​	
(10)
The QCD axion mass can be further narrowed down by appeal 
to the DM density, a, in the two cosmological scenarios discussed 
in the previous section. Observationally, we have the restriction that 
the axion density cannot be larger than the observed DM density 
(although it could be smaller, if the axions are not all of the DM).
The important difference between scenarios A and B is one of 
predictability. In both cases, the DM density depends inversely on the 
axion mass. In scenario A, there are two continuous free parameters 
Fig. 6. Constraints on the axion mass, measured in electronvolts. Red arrows and the shaded region indicate exclusions. The region outside that marked “The QCD 
axion” corresponds to more exotic ALPs. “Fuzzy dark matter” shows a simulation of cosmic structure formation with very low particle mass DM (adapted with permission 
from (83)], at the lower limit of what is acceptable observationally for the dominant DM component. “Black hole spins” shows the ergoregion and horizons of space time 
around a spinning black hole, the geometry of which allows very light bosonic particles to extract angular momentum from the black hole. These last two constraints 
apply under the assumption that axion self-interactions are negligible. The SN 1987A constraint applies only to the QCD axion, where the axion-nuclear coupling is 
proportional to the particle mass and not to ALPs [image is acomposite (84)].
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
10 of 19
i and ma. Thus, it is possible to reproduce the correct cosmic den-
sity of axions for (almost) any value of the mass ma, with smaller 
values of the mass having (thot) ≪ 1. Without a prediction for the 
axion mass, the experimental task of searching for the axion could 
be long and arduous. This scenario is probed by experiments 
operating in the 10-kHz to 10-GHz regime.
In scenario B, on the other hand, there is only one continuous 
parameter, ma, and the discrete parameter N. In principle, the 
observed cosmic DM density then predicts the value of ma. The 
problem with trying to make such a prediction is the computational 
complexity: The nonlinear dynamics of the axion field in scenario B 
cannot be solved exactly. Unfortunately, computational limitations 
even with modern supercomputers prevent a complete, end-to-end, 
ab initio simulation, and the resulting predictions for the mass vary 
considerably depending on the theoretical methods used.
Demanding that the axion is all the DM, the predicted value of 
the mass is in the range 0.025 meV ≲ ma ≲ 0.5 meV when N = 1 
[where the range covers approximately the predicted regions from 
the simulations of (69, 70), which span those also of other groups]. 
The case N > 1 predicts a slightly higher range 0.1 meV ≲ ma ≲ 
20 meV (the upper bound comes from SN 1987A) (71). Lower values 
of the axion mass are excluded in scenario B. The theoretical uncertainty 
is large, but, in general, these predictions provide motivation to search 
for axion DM using experiments in the 10-GHz to 10-THz frequency 
range. This promise to predict the axion mass uniquely in this sce-
nario is driving many theoretical investigations and is happening 
now due to advances in computer simulation techniques.
ALPs EVERYWHERE
It has been realized since the proposal of the axion that light spin-zero 
particles with properties resembling those of the axion may appear 
in a number of different theoretical contexts. These ALPs may 
either be pseudo-scalar bosons, whose couplings are odd under 
parity transformations (reversing spatial directions), or scalar bosons, 
whose couplings are even under parity. The latter are sometimes 
referred to loosely as dilatons or moduli and may be thought of as 
lower-mass siblings of the Higgs boson of the Standard Model. 
Generically, both classes of ALPs have, similar to axions, couplings 
with fermion-antifermion pairs and also with pairs of photons, 
gluons, and the other vector bosons via their field strengths, of the 
forms E · B for pseudo-scalars and ∣E∣2 + ∣B∣2 for scalars (where 
E and B are generalized for the other forces of the Standard Model). 
ALPs are distinguished from the QCD axion of our previous discus-
sion since ALPs do not solve the strong CP problem. ALPs do, 
however, still make excellent DM candidates.
There is a single scalar Higgs boson in the Standard Model asso-
ciated with the generation of particle masses via breaking of the 
underlying electroweak symmetry. However, including another 
symmetry-breaking Higgs field requires the appearance of an addi-
tional scalar particle and a pseudo-scalar partner particle. The 
original axion model is an example of this feature, but it can be 
generalized by including more Higgs fields of different types. This 
scenario occurs in many theories, including supersymmetry, and 
grand unified theories.
Another theoretical framework where ALPs appear is provided 
by string theory (72). Generic four-dimensional particle physics 
models obtained from string theory, by the compactification of 
extra dimensions of space on small manifolds, contain many additional 
pseudo-scalar and scalar fields, which may have (very) small masses. 
A useful and famous analogy for compact dimensions of space is to 
imagine our world as a tightrope. From the perspective of large 
humans, the rope is one-dimensional, and one can only move along 
its length. However, a small creature such as an ant can circle the 
“extra dimension” of the rope’s circumference. In quantum me-
chanics, length is inversely proportional to energy, and thus, the 
small length scales of extra dimensions of space tend to be associated 
to large energy scales, possibly even the Planck scale of quantum 
gravity. The sizes and shapes of the compact spaces are unspecified 
a priori, since general relativity and quantum mechanics tell us that 
the compact dimensions must vary in size and shape at different 
places. These changes in size and shape can be described, from a 
four-dimensional perspective, by a collection of new fields, analo-
gous to the Newtonian gravitational field, which, in general relativity, 
describes the curvature of space time. Futhermore, there must be 
some dynamical energy principle that fixes the average size and 
shape of the compact dimensions; as the potential in Fig. 3 fixes the 
axion angle and also gives it a mass, so these dynamics give masses 
to the ALPs. This new dynamics is by nature extremely speculative, 
and (due to the vast array of possibilities for the topology of the 
compact space) even the most predictive approaches to this 
problem currently make only statistical statements about the masses 
of the resulting ALPs. However, the existence of extra dimensions 
of space is one of the central predictions of string theory and, since 
it leads to the existence of ALPs, they can also be considered a pre-
diction of the theory.
Although the forms of ALP couplings are similar to those of the 
original axion, their strengths are quite model dependent, and even 
less is known about them than about the ALP masses. For this 
reason, there is great interest in designing experimental searches for 
axions that are sufficiently general to also be sensitive to wide ranges 
of the parameter spaces of ALP couplings to both fermions and 
gauge bosons.
We also mention the growing interest in the possible existence of 
light vector (spin 1) bosons. In the Standard Model, there is, on the 
one hand, the photon whose mass is thought to be exactly zero and 
is very tightly constrained by experimental observations, and, on 
the other hand, there are massive vector bosons responsible for 
the weak interactions, with no vector bosons of intermediate mass. 
However, it is possible that there might be additional light vector 
bosons that are very weakly coupled to the particles of the Standard 
Model, so-called “dark” or “hidden” vector bosons, as also appear in 
some string theory models, for example. Their couplings to Standard 
Model particles would take different forms from those of ALPs. For 
example, couplings to pairs of photons or gluons would be forbidden, 
and their couplings to fermion-antifermion pairs would be vector- or 
axial-vector–like. For this reason, different types of experimental 
strategies are required to search for them, and we do not discuss 
them further in this review.
Last, we discuss the possibility of axion-like quasiparticles appear-
ing in certain exotic materials in solid-state physics. Quasiparticles 
such as phonons (quanta of vibrational modes of solids) and 
magnons (quanta of magnetization) have been staples of condensed 
matter theory since the earliest days of quantum mechanics. For a 
quasiparticle to behave as an axion, it must be a pseudo-scalar, 
which requires the parent solid to have certain specific symmetry 
properties under parity and time reversal. The would-be axion 
quasiparicle should also have the trademark axion-like couplings, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
11 of 19
particularly to E · B, giving rise to axion electrodyanmics. The 
possibility of axion electrodynamics in solids was identified already 
by Wilczek (73), one of the fathers of the axion theory, in the 1980s, 
but only recently has the quest to realize this idea in the laboratory 
picked up pace.
Mixing of parallel electric and magnetic fields occurs, in general, 
in magnetoelectric materials, and particularly in topological insula-
tors. The existence of the axion quasiparticle requires the breaking 
of time reversal symmetry and is provided by magnetic ions and 
antiferromagnetic order. Candidate materials to host the axion 
quasiparticle include Bi(Fe)2Se3 and Mn2Bi2Te5 (74, 75). The axion 
quasiparticle has yet to be observed in the laboratory, although 
various experiments have been designed to hunt for it, and there is 
growing interest in these candidate materials with possible applica-
tions to high-speed computer memory (76). Furthermore, as discussed 
in the experimental companion to this review, axion quasiparticles 
could also prove useful in the detection of axion DM.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The DM zeitgeist is in flux. For many years, experimental and theo-
retical efforts were directed at WIMPs and similar particle candi-
dates. The technology to detect WIMPs was readily available in the 
form of the LHC, and the experimental programme of direct WIMP 
searches also developed rapidly (15, 16). Theories attempting to 
explain the origin of the Higgs mass seemed to predict naturally the 
existence of WIMP DM, with mass comparable to that of the Higgs 
itself, providing a very tantalizing prospect. The experimental 
searches for WIMPs performed excellently yet, to date, have found 
nothing. While there are still important parts of the parameter 
space left to explore, initial optimism has been dampened by experi-
mental cold water.
Almost in parallel to the WIMP story, there was, somewhat 
behind the scenes, the ever-present and developing story of the axion. 
Supersymmetric WIMPs were also proposed in the 1970s as a stick-
ing plaster for problems in the Standard Model (5–7), and with a 
DM candidate for free (49–51), but that is where the shared story of 
axions and WIMPs ends. The axion is far lighter and more weakly 
coupled than the WIMP, and initially experimental searches for the 
axion made slow and painful progress toward the theoretically de-
fined goals. All of this is changing at present and the axion’s star is 
in ascendance. Theorists are working hard trying to hem in the pre-
dictions of the axion model, while new technological advances of-
fer prospects for detection in the near future (see the companion 
experimental review).
Axion DM is an ultralight bosonic field, which manifests itself 
on Earth primarily as exotic oscillating phenomena violating CP 
symmetry. The primary and defining oscillation is in EDMs, the 
neutron EDM being of particular interest. The axion also acts as an 
oscillating source in Maxwell’s equations and can be detected as an 
anomalous electric or magnetic field. The oscillations in the axion 
field were set up in the early universe by a process of symmetry 
breaking and phase transition, and the discovery of the axion could 
shed light on those extremely high-energy processes in the most 
distant cosmic past.
The parameter space of axion models is relatively well defined. 
Astrophysical considerations hem in the oscillation frequency (and 
thus the particle mass) to a range between kilohertz and terahertz, 
tightening to gigahertz to terahertz given some assumptions about 
the phase transition (see Fig. 4). Intense theoretical efforts are being 
made at present to try and tighten this range still further, limited by 
computational resources. Experimental searches for the axion often 
rely on resonant effects (29), and it is the task of tuning these experi-
mental “radios” over the wide range of available frequencies that 
makes axion searches so long and laborious. If the theorists could 
predict the axion mass accurately, which might be within reach, 
then the experimental search could be tuned and accomplished 
within a very short period. However, we should temper our optimism. 
The theoretical predictions rely on a large number of assumptions, 
which could be violated in nature.
Axion theorists are also intensely engaged in thinking about the 
axion couplings, g, to ordinary matter (22). Astrophysical constraints, 
for example, from stellar evolution, often provide a good guide for 
how large these couplings can be, in general, without theoretical 
bias. The axion theory predicts g ∝ ma, but the constant of propor-
tionality varies for different models. A given experiment or obser-
vation constrains the value of the constant of proportionality, and it 
is for theorists to interpret which, if any, of the available axion models 
has been excluded. Again, efforts to pin down the range of allowed 
couplings are starting to reach some degree of consensus, just in time 
for the data onslaught that is coming our way from new experiments.
As described in the companion experimental review, this onslaught 
of data is already beginning and should reach a conclusion in the 
next decade or so. Experiments with resonant circuits and nuclear 
magnetic resonance operate in the kilohertz range and below, 
microwave cavities in the gigahertz range, and the use of dielectrics 
and novel materials can push into near terahertz and above. If these 
experiments succeed, then the next task will be to identify the axion 
precisely. One would like to measure the axion via all its interac-
tions (Eq. 5). Fortunately, once one experiment succeeds and finds 
the right axion “radio station” (i.e., the value of the axion mass), all 
the others will quickly be able to tune in and measure the different 
couplings of the axion. For example, with the axion photon and 
electron couplings in hand, it should be possible to determine whether 
the axion speaks to the Standard Model via new heavy quarks (25, 26) 
or via the Higgs boson (23, 24) (see the Supplementary Materials).
An axion DM experiment in reality measures a combination of 
the axion coupling and the DM density, so another key task will be 
to use overlapping experiments that do not rely on the DM density 
to break this degeneracy. Fortunately, ideas are available using 
nuclear magnetic resonance, electric dipole measurements, searches 
for new forces, and combinations of searches for axions from the 
Sun and other astrophysical sources (see the experimental companion 
to this review). Axion searches also offer a wealth of information 
about the frequency structure of the DM, which would provide a 
detailed view of DM in our galactic neighborhood, and open a new 
field of DM astronomy (77). This combination of astrophysics and 
particle physics could eventually determine not only whether the 
axion is the DM but also what fraction of the DM it is and how it is 
distributed. If the axion is just one part of the DM, then a new series 
of more challenging problems arise since all DM searches are harder 
when aimed at subcomponents.
Fortunately, theorists are prepared for such an eventuality. Many 
theories having the axion also have a zoo of related ALPs, all or 
none of which could also contribute to the DM, and some of which 
could even be related to hidden dimensions of space time (72). If the 
axion is found, then it will open up the doors to experimentally 
testing these far reaching theories. The interest in these related 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
12 of 19
particles, as well as experimental searches for them, is also reaching 
new heights, but that is a story too varied for this review.
The story of the axion, like much of modern particle physics, 
began in the 1970s, rooted in ideas of symmetry. The Standard 
Model is a symmetry success story, but other theories based on 
symmetry have failed. Does nature really play by these rules? The 
popularity of the axion has risen as a prime candidate to explain 
DM, the cosmic glue that, in many ways, is responsible for our own 
existence. What composes this mysterious substance? And how did 
it get here? The discovery of the axion seems tantalizingly close, 
promising answers to these deepest of questions.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abj3618
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 G. Aad, T. Abajyan, B. Abbott, J. Abdallah, S. Abdel Khalek, A. A. Abdelalim, O. Abdinov, 
R. Aben, B. Abi, M. Abolins, O. S. AbouZeid, H. Abramowicz, H. Abreu, B. S. Acharya, 
L. Adamczyk, D. L. Adams, T. N. Addy, J. Adelman, S. Adomeit, P. Adragna, T. Adye, 
S. Aefsky, J. A. Aguilar-Saavedra, M. Agustoni, M. Aharrouche, S. P. Ahlen, F. Ahles, 
A. Ahmad, M. Ahsan, G. Aielli, T. Akdogan, T. P. A. Åkesson, G. Akimoto, A. V. Akimov, 
M. S. Alam, M. A. Alam, J. Albert, S. Albrand, M. Aleksa, I. N. Aleksandrov, F. Alessandria, 
C. Alexa, G. Alexander, G. Alexandre, T. Alexopoulos, M. Alhroob, M. Aliev, G. Alimonti, 
J. Alison, B. M. M. Allbrooke, P. P. Allport, S. E. Allwood-Spiers, J. Almond, A. Aloisio, 
R. Alon, A. Alonso, F. Alonso, A. Altheimer, B. Alvarez Gonzalez, M. G. Alviggi, K. Amako, 
C. Amelung, V. V. Ammosov, S. P. Amor Dos Santos, A. Amorim, N. Amram, 
C. Anastopoulos, L. S. Ancu, N. Andari, T. Andeen, C. F. Anders, G. Anders, K. J. Anderson, 
A. Andreazza, V. Andrei, M. L. Andrieux, X. S. Anduaga, S. Angelidakis, P. Anger, 
A. Angerami, F. Anghinolfi, A. Anisenkov, N. Anjos, A. Annovi, A. Antonaki, M. Antonelli, 
A. Antonov, J. Antos, F. Anulli, M. Aoki, S. Aoun, L. Aperio Bella, R. Apolle, G. Arabidze, 
I. Aracena, Y. Arai, A. T. H. Arce, S. Arfaoui, J. F. Arguin, E. Arik, M. Arik, A. J. Armbruster, 
O. Arnaez, V. Arnal, C. Arnault, A. Artamonov, G. Artoni, D. Arutinov, S. Asai, S. Ask, 
B. Åsman, L. Asquith, K. Assamagan, A. Astbury, M. Atkinson, B. Aubert, E. Auge, 
K. Augsten, M. Aurousseau, G. Avolio, R. Avramidou, D. Axen, G. Azuelos, Y. Azuma, 
M. A. Baak, G. Baccaglioni, C. Bacci, A. M. Bach, H. Bachacou, K. Bachas, M. Backes, 
M. Backhaus, J. Backus Mayes, E. Badescu, P. Bagnaia, S. Bahinipati, Y. Bai, D. C. Bailey, 
T. Bain, J. T. Baines, O. K. Baker, M. D. Baker, S. Baker, P. Balek, E. Banas, P. Banerjee, 
S. Banerjee, D. Banfi, A. Bangert, V. Bansal, H. S. Bansil, L. Barak, S. P. Baranov, 
A. Barbaro Galtieri, T. Barber, E. L. Barberio, D. Barberis, M. Barbero, D. Y. Bardin, T. Barillari, 
M. Barisonzi, T. Barklow, N. Barlow, B. M. Barnett, R. M. Barnett, A. Baroncelli, G. Barone, 
A. J. Barr, F. Barreiro, J. Barreiro Guimarães da Costa, P. Barrillon, R. Bartoldus, A. E. Barton, 
V. Bartsch, A. Basye, R. L. Bates, L. Batkova, J. R. Batley, A. Battaglia, M. Battistin, F. Bauer, 
H. S. Bawa, S. Beale, T. Beau, P. H. Beauchemin, R. Beccherle, P. Bechtle, H. P. Beck, 
A. K. Becker, S. Becker, M. Beckingham, K. H. Becks, A. J. Beddall, A. Beddall, S. Bedikian, 
V. A. Bednyakov, C. P. Bee, L. J. Beemster, M. Begel, S. Behar Harpaz, P. K. Behera, 
M. Beimforde, C. Belanger-Champagne, P. J. Bell, W. H. Bell, G. Bella, L. Bellagamba, 
M. Bellomo, A. Belloni, O. Beloborodova, K. Belotskiy, O. Beltramello, O. Benary, 
D. Benchekroun, K. Bendtz, N. Benekos, Y. Benhammou, E. Benhar Noccioli, 
J. A. Benitez Garcia, D. P. Benjamin, M. Benoit, J. R. Bensinger, K. Benslama, S. Bentvelsen, 
D. Berge, E. Bergeaas Kuutmann, N. Berger, F. Berghaus, E. Berglund, J. Beringer, P. Bernat, 
R. Bernhard, C. Bernius, F. U. Bernlochner, T. Berry, C. Bertella, A. Bertin, F. Bertolucci, 
M. I. Besana, G. J. Besjes, N. Besson, S. Bethke, W. Bhimji, R. M. Bianchi, M. Bianco, 
O. Biebel, S. P. Bieniek, K. Bierwagen, J. Biesiada, M. Biglietti, H. Bilokon, M. Bindi, S. Binet, 
A. Bingul, C. Bini, C. Biscarat, B. Bittner, K. M. Black, R. E. Blair, J. B. Blanchard, G. Blanchot, 
T. Blazek, I. Bloch, C. Blocker, J. Blocki, A. Blondel, W. Blum, U. Blumenschein, G. J. Bobbink, 
V. B. Bobrovnikov, S. S. Bocchetta, A. Bocci, C. R. Boddy, M. Boehler, J. Boek, N. Boelaert, 
J. A. Bogaerts, A. Bogdanchikov, A. Bogouch, C. Bohm, J. Bohm, V. Boisvert, T. Bold, 
V. Boldea, N. M. Bolnet, M. Bomben, M. Bona, M. Boonekamp, S. Bordoni, C. Borer, 
A. Borisov, G. Borissov, I. Borjanovic, M. Borri, S. Borroni, V. Bortolotto, K. Bos, D. Boscherini, 
M. Bosman, H. Boterenbrood, J. Bouchami, J. Boudreau, E. V. Bouhova-Thacker, 
D. Boumediene, C. Bourdarios, N. Bousson, A. Boveia, J. Boyd, I. R. Boyko, I. Bozovic-Jelisavcic, 
J. Bracinik, P. Branchini, G. W. Brandenburg, A. Brandt, G. Brandt, O. Brandt, U. Bratzler, 
B. Brau, J. E. Brau, H. M. Braun, S. F. Brazzale, B. Brelier, J. Bremer, K. Brendlinger, 
R. Brenner, S. Bressler, D. Britton, F. M. Brochu, I. Brock, R. Brock, F. Broggi, C. Bromberg, 
J. Bronner, G. Brooijmans, T. Brooks, W. K. Brooks, G. Brown, H. Brown, 
P. A. Bruckman de Renstrom, D. Bruncko, R. Bruneliere, S. Brunet, A. Bruni, G. Bruni, 
M. Bruschi, T. Buanes, Q. Buat, F. Bucci, J. Buchanan, P. Buchholz, R. M. Buckingham, 
A. G. Buckley, S. I. Buda, I. A. Budagov, B. Budick, V. Büscher, L. Bugge, O. Bulekov, 
A. C. Bundock, M. Bunse, T. Buran, H. Burckhart, S. Burdin, T. Burgess, S. Burke, E. Busato, 
P. Bussey, C. P. Buszello, B. Butler, J. M. Butler, C. M. Buttar, J. M. Butterworth, W. Buttinger, 
S. Cabrera Urbán, D. Caforio, O. Cakir, P. Calafiura, G. Calderini, P. Calfayan, R. Calkins, 
L. P. Caloba, R. Caloi, D. Calvet, S. Calvet, R. Camacho Toro, P. Camarri, D. Cameron, 
L. M. Caminada, R. Caminal Armadans, S. Campana, M. Campanelli, V. Canale, F. Canelli, 
A. Canepa, J. Cantero, R. Cantrill, L. Capasso, M. D. M. Capeans Garrido, I. Caprini, 
M. Caprini, D. Capriotti, M. Capua, R. Caputo, R. Cardarelli, T. Carli, G. Carlino, L. Carminati, 
B. Caron, S. Caron, E. Carquin, G. D. Carrillo-Montoya, A. A. Carter, J. R. Carter, J. Carvalho, 
D. Casadei, M. P. Casado, M. Cascella, C. Caso, A. M. Castaneda Hernandez, 
E. Castaneda-Miranda, V. Castillo Gimenez, N. F. Castro, G. Cataldi, P. Catastini, 
A. Catinaccio, J. R. Catmore, A. Cattai, G. Cattani, S. Caughron, V. Cavaliere, P. Cavalleri, 
D. Cavalli, M. Cavalli-Sforza, V. Cavasinni, F. Ceradini, A. S. Cerqueira, A. Cerri, L. Cerrito, 
F. Cerutti, S. A. Cetin, A. Chafaq, D. Chakraborty, I. Chalupkova, K. Chan, P. Chang, 
B. Chapleau, J. D. Chapman, J. W. Chapman, E. Chareyre, D. G. Charlton, V. Chavda, 
C. A. Chavez Barajas, S. Cheatham, S. Chekanov, S. V. Chekulaev, G. A. Chelkov, 
M. A. Chelstowska, C. Chen, H. Chen, S. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Cheng, A. Cheplakov, 
R. Cherkaoui el Moursli, V. Chernyatin, E. Cheu, S. L. Cheung, L. Chevalier, G. Chiefari, 
L. Chikovani, J. T. Childers, A. Chilingarov, G. Chiodini, A. S. Chisholm, R. T. Chislett, 
A. Chitan, M. V. Chizhov, G. Choudalakis, S. Chouridou, I. A. Christidi, A. Christov, 
D. Chromek-Burckhart, M. L. Chu, J. Chudoba, G. Ciapetti, A. K. Ciftci, R. Ciftci, D. Cinca, 
V. Cindro, C. Ciocca, A. Ciocio, M. Cirilli, P. Cirkovic, Z. H. Citron, M. Citterio, M. Ciubancan, 
A. Clark, P. J. Clark, R. N. Clarke, W. Cleland, J. C. Clemens, B. Clement, C. Clement, 
Y. Coadou, M. Cobal, A. Coccaro, J. Cochran, L. Coffey, J. G. Cogan, J. Coggeshall, 
E. Cogneras, J. Colas, S. Cole, A. P. Colijn, N. J. Collins, C. Collins-Tooth, J. Collot, 
T. Colombo, G. Colon, G. Compostella, P. Conde Muiño, E. Coniavitis, M. C. Conidi, 
S. M. Consonni, V. Consorti, S. Constantinescu, C. Conta, G. Conti, F. Conventi, M. Cooke, 
B. D. Cooper, A. M. Cooper-Sarkar, N. J. Cooper-Smith, K. Copic, T. Cornelissen, M. Corradi, 
F. Corriveau, A. Cortes-Gonzalez, G. Cortiana, G. Costa, M. J. Costa, D. Costanzo, D. Côté, 
L. Courneyea, G. Cowan, C. Cowden, B. E. Cox, K. Cranmer, F. Crescioli, M. Cristinziani, 
G. Crosetti, S. Crépé-Renaudin, C. M. Cuciuc, C. Cuenca Almenar, 
T. Cuhadar Donszelmann, M. Curatolo, C. J. Curtis, C. Cuthbert, P. Cwetanski,  
H. Czirr, P. Czodrowski, Z. Czyczula, S. DʼAuria, M. DʼOnofrio, A. DʼOrazio, 
M. J. da Cunha Sargedas de Sousa, C. da Via, W. Dabrowski, A. Dafinca, T. Dai, 
C. Dallapiccola, M. Dam, M. Dameri, D. S. Damiani, H. O. Danielsson, V. Dao, G. Darbo, 
G. L. Darlea, J. A. Dassoulas, W. Davey, T. Davidek, N. Davidson, R. Davidson, 
E. Davies, M. Davies, O. Davignon, A. R. Davison, Y. Davygora, E. Dawe, I. Dawson, 
R. K. Daya-Ishmukhametova, K. de, R. de Asmundis, S. de Castro, S. de Cecco, J. de Graat, 
N. de Groot, P. de Jong, C. de la Taille, H. de la Torre, F. de Lorenzi, L. de Mora, L. de Nooij, 
D. de Pedis, A. de Salvo, U. de Sanctis, A. de Santo, J. B. de Vivie de Regie, G. de Zorzi, 
W. J. Dearnaley, R. Debbe, C. Debenedetti, B. Dechenaux, D. V. Dedovich, J. Degenhardt, 
C. del Papa, J. del Peso, T. del Prete, T. Delemontex, M. Deliyergiyev, A. DellʼAcqua, 
L. DellʼAsta, M. Della Pietra, D. della Volpe, M. Delmastro, P. Delpierre, P. A. Delsart, 
C. Deluca, S. Demers, M. Demichev, B. Demirkoz, J. Deng, S. P. Denisov, D. Derendarz, 
J. E. Derkaoui, F. Derue, P. Dervan, K. Desch, E. Devetak, P. O. Deviveiros, A. Dewhurst, 
B. DeWilde, S. Dhaliwal, R. Dhullipudi, A. di Ciaccio, L. di Ciaccio, C. di Donato, 
A. di Girolamo, B. di Girolamo, S. di Luise, A. di Mattia, B. di Micco, R. di Nardo, 
A. di Simone, R. di Sipio, M. A. Diaz, E. B. Diehl, J. Dietrich, T. A. Dietzsch, S. Diglio, 
K. Dindar Yagci, J. Dingfelder, F. Dinut, C. Dionisi, P. Dita, S. Dita, F. Dittus, F. Djama, 
T. Djobava, M. A. B. do Vale, A. Do Valle Wemans, T. K. O. Doan, M. Dobbs, R. Dobinson, 
D. Dobos, E. Dobson, J. Dodd, C. Doglioni, T. Doherty, Y. Doi, J. Dolejsi, I. Dolenc, 
Z. Dolezal, B. A. Dolgoshein, T. Dohmae, M. Donadelli, J. Donini, J. Dopke, A. Doria, 
A. Dos Anjos, A. Dotti, M. T. Dova, J. D. Dowell, A. D. Doxiadis, A. T. Doyle, N. Dressnandt, 
M. Dris, J. Dubbert, S. Dube, E. Duchovni, G. Duckeck, D. Duda, A. Dudarev, F. Dudziak, 
M. Dührssen, I. P. Duerdoth, L. Duflot, M. A. Dufour, L. Duguid, M. Dunford, 
H. Duran Yildiz, R. Duxfield, M. Dwuznik, F. Dydak, M. Düren, W. L. Ebenstein, J. Ebke, 
S. Eckweiler, K. Edmonds, W. Edson, C. A. Edwards, N. C. Edwards, W. Ehrenfeld, T. Eifert, 
G. Eigen, K. Einsweiler, E. Eisenhandler, T. Ekelof, M. el Kacimi, M. Ellert, S. Elles, 
F. Ellinghaus, K. Ellis, N. Ellis, J. Elmsheuser, M. Elsing, D. Emeliyanov, R. Engelmann, 
A. Engl, B. Epp, J. Erdmann, A. Ereditato, D. Eriksson, J. Ernst, M. Ernst, J. Ernwein, 
D. Errede, S. Errede, E. Ertel, M. Escalier, H. Esch, C. Escobar, X. Espinal Curull, B. Esposito, 
F. Etienne, A. I. Etienvre, E. Etzion, D. Evangelakou, H. Evans, L. Fabbri, C. Fabre, 
R. M. Fakhrutdinov, S. Falciano, Y. Fang, M. Fanti, A. Farbin, A. Farilla, J. Farley, 
T. Farooque, S. Farrell, S. M. Farrington, P. Farthouat, F. Fassi, P. Fassnacht, D. Fassouliotis, 
B. Fatholahzadeh, A. Favareto, L. Fayard, S. Fazio, R. Febbraro, P. Federic, O. L. Fedin, 
W. Fedorko, M. Fehling-Kaschek, L. Feligioni, D. Fellmann, C. Feng, E. J. Feng, A. B. Fenyuk, 
J. Ferencei, W. Fernando, S. Ferrag, J. Ferrando, V. Ferrara, A. Ferrari, P. Ferrari, R. Ferrari, 
D. E. Ferreira de Lima, A. Ferrer, D. Ferrere, C. Ferretti, A. Ferretto Parodi, M. Fiascaris, 
F. Fiedler, A. Filipčič, F. Filthaut, M. Fincke-Keeler, M. C. N. Fiolhais, L. Fiorini, A. Firan, 
G. Fischer, M. J. Fisher, M. Flechl, I. Fleck, J. Fleckner, P. Fleischmann, S. Fleischmann, 
T. Flick, A. Floderus, L. R. Flores Castillo, M. J. Flowerdew, T. Fonseca Martin, A. Formica, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
13 of 19
A. Forti, D. Fortin, D. Fournier, A. J. Fowler, H. Fox, P. Francavilla, M. Franchini, 
S. Franchino, D. Francis, T. Frank, M. Franklin, S. Franz, M. Fraternali, S. Fratina, S. T. French, 
C. Friedrich, F. Friedrich, R. Froeschl, D. Froidevaux, J. A. Frost, C. Fukunaga, 
E. Fullana Torregrosa, B. G. Fulsom, J. Fuster, C. Gabaldon, O. Gabizon, S. Gadatsch, 
T. Gadfort, S. Gadomski, G. Gagliardi, P. Gagnon, C. Galea, B. Galhardo, E. J. Gallas, V. Gallo, 
B. J. Gallop, P. Gallus, K. K. Gan, Y. S. Gao, A. Gaponenko, F. Garberson, M. Garcia-Sciveres, 
C. García, J. E. García Navarro, R. W. Gardner, N. Garelli, H. Garitaonandia, V. Garonne, 
C. Gatti, G. Gaudio, B. Gaur, L. Gauthier, P. Gauzzi, I. L. Gavrilenko, C. Gay, G. Gaycken, 
E. N. Gazis, P. Ge, Z. Gecse, C. N. P. Gee, D. A. A. Geerts, C. Geich-Gimbel, K. Gellerstedt, 
C. Gemme, A. Gemmell, M. H. Genest, S. Gentile, M. George, S. George, P. Gerlach, 
A. Gershon, C. Geweniger, H. Ghazlane, N. Ghodbane, B. Giacobbe, S. Giagu, 
V. Giakoumopoulou, V. Giangiobbe, F. Gianotti, B. Gibbard, A. Gibson, S. M. Gibson, 
M. Gilchriese, O. Gildemeister, D. Gillberg, A. R. Gillman, D. M. Gingrich, J. Ginzburg, 
N. Giokaris, M. P. Giordani, R. Giordano, F. M. Giorgi, P. Giovannini, P. F. Giraud, D. Giugni, 
M. Giunta, P. Giusti, B. K. Gjelsten, L. K. Gladilin, C. Glasman, J. Glatzer, A. Glazov, 
K. W. Glitza, G. L. Glonti, J. R. Goddard, J. Godfrey, J. Godlewski, M. Goebel, T. Göpfert, 
C. Goeringer, C. Gössling, S. Goldfarb, T. Golling, A. Gomes, L. S. Gomez Fajardo, 
R. Gonçalo, J. Goncalves Pinto Firmino da Costa, L. Gonella, S. González de la Hoz, 
G. Gonzalez Parra, M. L. Gonzalez Silva, S. Gonzalez-Sevilla, J. J. Goodson, L. Goossens, 
P. A. Gorbounov, H. A. Gordon, I. Gorelov, G. Gorfine, B. Gorini, E. Gorini, A. Gorišek, 
E. Gornicki, B. Gosdzik, A. T. Goshaw, M. Gosselink, M. I. Gostkin, I. Gough Eschrich, 
M. Gouighri, D. Goujdami, M. P. Goulette, A. G. Goussiou, C. Goy, S. Gozpinar, 
I. Grabowska-Bold, P. Grafström, K. J. Grahn, E. Gramstad, F. Grancagnolo, S. Grancagnolo, 
V. Grassi, V. Gratchev, N. Grau, H. M. Gray, J. A. Gray, E. Graziani, O. G. Grebenyuk, 
T. Greenshaw, Z. D. Greenwood, K. Gregersen, I. M. Gregor, P. Grenier, J. Griffiths, 
N. Grigalashvili, A. A. Grillo, S. Grinstein, P. Gris, Y. V. Grishkevich, J. F. Grivaz, E. Gross, 
J. Grosse-Knetter, J. Groth-Jensen, K. Grybel, D. Guest, C. Guicheney, T. Guillemin, 
S. Guindon, U. Gul, J. Gunther, B. Guo, J. Guo, P. Gutierrez, N. Guttman, O. Gutzwiller, 
C. Guyot, C. Gwenlan, C. B. Gwilliam, A. Haas, S. Haas, C. Haber, H. K. Hadavand, 
D. R. Hadley, P. Haefner, F. Hahn, S. Haider, Z. Hajduk, H. Hakobyan, D. Hall, J. Haller, 
K. Hamacher, P. Hamal, K. Hamano, M. Hamer, A. Hamilton, S. Hamilton, L. Han, 
K. Hanagaki, K. Hanawa, M. Hance, C. Handel, P. Hanke, J. R. Hansen, J. B. Hansen, 
J. D. Hansen, P. H. Hansen, P. Hansson, K. Hara, A. S. Hard, G. A. Hare, T. Harenberg, 
S. Harkusha, D. Harper, R. D. Harrington, O. M. Harris, J. Hartert, F. Hartjes, T. Haruyama, 
A. Harvey, S. Hasegawa, Y. Hasegawa, S. Hassani, S. Haug, M. Hauschild, R. Hauser, 
M. Havranek, C. M. Hawkes, R. J. Hawkings, A. D. Hawkins, T. Hayakawa, T. Hayashi, 
D. Hayden, C. P. Hays, H. S. Hayward, S. J. Haywood, S. J. Head, V. Hedberg, L. Heelan, 
S. Heim, B. Heinemann, S. Heisterkamp, L. Helary, C. Heller, M. Heller, S. Hellman, 
D. Hellmich, C. Helsens, R. C. W. Henderson, M. Henke, A. Henrichs, 
A. M. Henriques Correia, S. Henrot-Versille, C. Hensel, T. Henß, C. M. Hernandez, 
Y. Hernández Jiménez, R. Herrberg, G. Herten, R. Hertenberger, L. Hervas, G. G. Hesketh, 
N. P. Hessey, E. Higón-Rodriguez, J. C. Hill, K. H. Hiller, S. Hillert, S. J. Hillier, I. Hinchliffe, 
E. Hines, M. Hirose, F. Hirsch, D. Hirschbuehl, J. Hobbs, N. Hod, M. C. Hodgkinson, 
P. Hodgson, A. Hoecker, M. R. Hoeferkamp, J. Hoffman, D. Hoffmann, M. Hohlfeld, 
M. Holder, S. O. Holmgren, T. Holy, J. L. Holzbauer, T. M. Hong, L. Hooft van Huysduynen, 
S. Horner, J. Y. Hostachy, S. Hou, A. Hoummada, J. Howard, J. Howarth, I. Hristova, 
J. Hrivnac, T. Hrynʼova, P. J. Hsu, S. C. Hsu, D. Hu, Z. Hubacek, F. Hubaut, F. Huegging, 
A. Huettmann, T. B. Huffman, E. W. Hughes, G. Hughes, M. Huhtinen, M. Hurwitz, 
N. Huseynov, J. Huston, J. Huth, G. Iacobucci, G. Iakovidis, M. Ibbotson, I. Ibragimov, 
L. Iconomidou-Fayard, J. Idarraga, P. Iengo, O. Igonkina, Y. Ikegami, M. Ikeno, D. Iliadis, 
N. Ilic, T. Ince, J. Inigo-Golfin, P. Ioannou, M. Iodice, K. Iordanidou, V. Ippolito, 
A. Irles Quiles, C. Isaksson, M. Ishino, M. Ishitsuka, R. Ishmukhametov, C. Issever, S. Istin, 
A. V. Ivashin, W. Iwanski, H. Iwasaki, J. M. Izen, V. Izzo, B. Jackson, J. N. Jackson, P. Jackson, 
M. R. Jaekel, V. Jain, K. Jakobs, S. Jakobsen, T. Jakoubek, J. Jakubek, D. O. Jamin, D. K. Jana, 
E. Jansen, H. Jansen, A. Jantsch, M. Janus, G. Jarlskog, L. Jeanty, I. Jen-la Plante, 
D. Jennens, P. Jenni, A. E. Loevschall-Jensen, P. Jež, S. Jézéquel, M. K. Jha, H. Ji, W. Ji, J. Jia, 
Y. Jiang, M. Jimenez Belenguer, S. Jin, O. Jinnouchi, M. D. Joergensen, D. Joffe, 
M. Johansen, K. E. Johansson, P. Johansson, S. Johnert, K. A. Johns, K. Jon-And, G. Jones, 
R. W. L. Jones, T. J. Jones, C. Joram, P. M. Jorge, K. D. Joshi, J. Jovicevic, T. Jovin, X. Ju, 
C. A. Jung, R. M. Jungst, V. Juranek, P. Jussel, A. Juste Rozas, S. Kabana, M. Kaci, 
A. Kaczmarska, P. Kadlecik, M. Kado, H. Kagan, M. Kagan, E. Kajomovitz, S. Kalinin, 
L. V. Kalinovskaya, S. Kama, N. Kanaya, M. Kaneda, S. Kaneti, T. Kanno, V. A. Kantserov, 
J. Kanzaki, B. Kaplan, A. Kapliy, J. Kaplon, D. Kar, M. Karagounis, K. Karakostas, 
M. Karnevskiy, V. Kartvelishvili, A. N. Karyukhin, L. Kashif, G. Kasieczka, R. D. Kass, 
A. Kastanas, M. Kataoka, Y. Kataoka, E. Katsoufis, J. Katzy, V. Kaushik, K. Kawagoe, 
T. Kawamoto, G. Kawamura, M. S. Kayl, S. Kazama, V. A. Kazanin, M. Y. Kazarinov, R. Keeler, 
P. T. Keener, R. Kehoe, M. Keil, G. D. Kekelidze, J. S. Keller, M. Kenyon, O. Kepka, 
N. Kerschen, B. P. Kerševan, S. Kersten, K. Kessoku, J. Keung, F. Khalil-zada, H. Khandanyan, 
A. Khanov, D. Kharchenko, A. Khodinov, A. Khomich, T. J. Khoo, G. Khoriauli, 
A. Khoroshilov, V. Khovanskiy, E. Khramov, J. Khubua, H. Kim, S. H. Kim, N. Kimura, O. Kind, 
B. T. King, M. King, R. S. B. King, J. Kirk, A. E. Kiryunin, T. Kishimoto, D. Kisielewska, 
T. Kitamura, T. Kittelmann, K. Kiuchi, E. Kladiva, M. Klein, U. Klein, K. Kleinknecht, 
M. Klemetti, A. Klier, P. Klimek, A. Klimentov, R. Klingenberg, J. A. Klinger, E. B. Klinkby, 
T. Klioutchnikova, P. F. Klok, S. Klous, E. E. Kluge, T. Kluge, P. Kluit, S. Kluth, E. Kneringer, 
E. B. F. G. Knoops, A. Knue, B. R. Ko, T. Kobayashi, M. Kobel, M. Kocian, P. Kodys, K. Köneke, 
A. C. König, S. Koenig, L. Köpke, F. Koetsveld, P. Koevesarki, T. Koffas, E. Koffeman, 
L. A. Kogan, S. Kohlmann, F. Kohn, Z. Kohout, T. Kohriki, T. Koi, G. M. Kolachev, 
H. Kolanoski, V. Kolesnikov, I. Koletsou, J. Koll, A. A. Komar, Y. Komori, T. Kondo, T. Kono, 
A. I. Kononov, R. Konoplich, N. Konstantinidis, R. Kopeliansky, S. Koperny, K. Korcyl, 
K. Kordas, A. Korn, A. Korol, I. Korolkov, E. V. Korolkova, V. A. Korotkov, O. Kortner, 
S. Kortner, V. V. Kostyukhin, S. Kotov, V. M. Kotov, A. Kotwal, C. Kourkoumelis, 
V. Kouskoura, A. Koutsman, R. Kowalewski, T. Z. Kowalski, W. Kozanecki, A. S. Kozhin, 
V. Kral, V. A. Kramarenko, G. Kramberger, M. W. Krasny, A. Krasznahorkay, J. K. Kraus, 
S. Kreiss, F. Krejci, J. Kretzschmar, N. Krieger, P. Krieger, K. Kroeninger, H. Kroha, J. Kroll, 
J. Kroseberg, J. Krstic, U. Kruchonak, H. Krüger, T. Kruker, N. Krumnack, Z. V. Krumshteyn, 
A. Kruse, T. Kubota, S. Kuday, S. Kuehn, A. Kugel, T. Kuhl, D. Kuhn, V. Kukhtin, Y. Kulchitsky, 
S. Kuleshov, C. Kummer, M. Kuna, J. Kunkle, A. Kupco, H. Kurashige, M. Kurata, 
Y. A. Kurochkin, V. Kus, E. S. Kuwertz, M. Kuze, J. Kvita, R. Kwee, A. la Rosa, L. la Rotonda, 
L. Labarga, J. Labbe, S. Lablak, C. Lacasta, F. Lacava, J. Lacey, H. Lacker, D. Lacour, 
V. R. Lacuesta, E. Ladygin, R. Lafaye, B. Laforge, T. Lagouri, S. Lai, E. Laisne, M. Lamanna, 
L. Lambourne, C. L. Lampen, W. Lampl, E. Lancon, U. Landgraf, M. P. J. Landon, V. S. Lang, 
C. Lange, A. J. Lankford, F. Lanni, K. Lantzsch, S. Laplace, C. Lapoire, J. F. Laporte, T. Lari, 
A. Larner, M. Lassnig, P. Laurelli, V. Lavorini, W. Lavrijsen, P. Laycock, T. Lazovich, 
O. le Dortz, E. le Guirriec, E. le Menedeu, T. LeCompte, F. Ledroit-Guillon, H. Lee, 
J. S. H. Lee, S. C. Lee, L. Lee, M. Lefebvre, M. Legendre, F. Legger, C. Leggett, 
M. Lehmacher, G. Lehmann Miotto, X. Lei, M. A. L. Leite, R. Leitner, D. Lellouch, B. Lemmer, 
V. Lendermann, K. J. C. Leney, T. Lenz, G. Lenzen, B. Lenzi, K. Leonhardt, S. Leontsinis, 
F. Lepold, C. Leroy, J. R. Lessard, C. G. Lester, C. M. Lester, J. Levêque, D. Levin, 
L. J. Levinson, A. Lewis, G. H. Lewis, A. M. Leyko, M. Leyton, B. Li, H. Li, H. L. Li, S. Li, X. Li, 
Z. Liang, H. Liao, B. Liberti, P. Lichard, M. Lichtnecker, K. Lie, W. Liebig, C. Limbach, 
A. Limosani, M. Limper, S. C. Lin, F. Linde, J. T. Linnemann, E. Lipeles, A. Lipniacka, 
T. M. Liss, D. Lissauer, A. Lister, A. M. Litke, C. Liu, D. Liu, H. Liu, J. B. Liu, K. Liu, L. Liu, M. Liu, 
Y. Liu, M. Livan, S. S. A. Livermore, A. Lleres, J. Llorente Merino, S. L. Lloyd, E. Lobodzinska, 
P. Loch, W. S. Lockman, T. Loddenkoetter, F. K. Loebinger, A. Loginov, C. W. Loh, T. Lohse, 
K. Lohwasser, M. Lokajicek, V. P. Lombardo, J. D. Long, R. E. Long, L. Lopes, 
D. Lopez Mateos, J. Lorenz, N. Lorenzo Martinez, M. Losada, P. Loscutoff, F. Lo Sterzo, 
M. J. Losty, X. Lou, A. Lounis, K. F. Loureiro, J. Love, P. A. Love, A. J. Lowe, F. Lu, 
H. J. Lubatti, C. Luci, A. Lucotte, A. Ludwig, D. Ludwig, I. Ludwig, J. Ludwig, F. Luehring, 
G. Luijckx, W. Lukas, L. Luminari, E. Lund, B. Lund-Jensen, B. Lundberg, J. Lundberg, 
O. Lundberg, J. Lundquist, M. Lungwitz, D. Lynn, E. Lytken, H. Ma, L. L. Ma, G. Maccarrone, 
A. Macchiolo, B. Maček, J. Machado Miguens, R. Mackeprang, R. J. Madaras, 
H. J. Maddocks, W. F. Mader, R. Maenner, T. Maeno, P. Mättig, S. Mättig, L. Magnoni, 
E. Magradze, K. Mahboubi, J. Mahlstedt, S. Mahmoud, G. Mahout, C. Maiani, 
C. Maidantchik, A. Maio, S. Majewski, Y. Makida, N. Makovec, P. Mal, B. Malaescu, 
P. Malecki, P. Malecki, V. P. Maleev, F. Malek, U. Mallik, D. Malon, C. Malone, S. Maltezos, 
V. Malyshev, S. Malyukov, R. Mameghani, J. Mamuzic, A. Manabe, L. Mandelli, I. Mandić, 
R. Mandrysch, J. Maneira, A. Manfredini, P. S. Mangeard, L. Manhaes de Andrade Filho, 
J. A. Manjarres Ramos, A. Mann, P. M. Manning, A. Manousakis-Katsikakis, B. Mansoulie, 
A. Mapelli, L. Mapelli, L. March, J. F. Marchand, F. Marchese, G. Marchiori, M. Marcisovsky, 
C. P. Marino, F. Marroquim, Z. Marshall, F. K. Martens, L. F. Marti, S. Marti-Garcia, B. Martin, 
B. Martin, J. P. Martin, T. A. Martin, V. J. Martin, B. Martin dit Latour, S. Martin-Haugh, 
M. Martinez, V. Martinez Outschoorn, A. C. Martyniuk, M. Marx, F. Marzano, A. Marzin, 
L. Masetti, T. Mashimo, R. Mashinistov, J. Masik, A. L. Maslennikov, I. Massa, G. Massaro, 
N. Massol, P. Mastrandrea, A. Mastroberardino, T. Masubuchi, P. Matricon, H. Matsunaga, 
T. Matsushita, C. Mattravers, J. Maurer, S. J. Maxfield, A. Mayne, R. Mazini, M. Mazur, 
L. Mazzaferro, M. Mazzanti, J. Mc Donald, S. P. Mc Kee, A. McCarn, R. L. McCarthy, 
T. G. McCarthy, N. A. McCubbin, K. W. McFarlane, J. A. Mcfayden, G. Mchedlidze, 
T. Mclaughlan, S. J. McMahon, R. A. McPherson, A. Meade, J. Mechnich, M. Mechtel, 
M. Medinnis, R. Meera-Lebbai, T. Meguro, R. Mehdiyev, S. Mehlhase, A. Mehta, K. Meier, 
B. Meirose, C. Melachrinos, B. R. Mellado Garcia, F. Meloni, L. Mendoza Navas, Z. Meng, 
A. Mengarelli, S. Menke, E. Meoni, K. M. Mercurio, P. Mermod, L. Merola, C. Meroni, 
F. S. Merritt, H. Merritt, A. Messina, J. Metcalfe, A. S. Mete, C. Meyer, C. Meyer, J. P. Meyer, 
J. Meyer, J. Meyer, T. C. Meyer, S. Michal, L. Micu, R. P. Middleton, S. Migas, L. Mijović, 
G. Mikenberg, M. Mikestikova, M. Mikuž, D. W. Miller, R. J. Miller, W. J. Mills, C. Mills, 
A. Milov, D. A. Milstead, D. Milstein, A. A. Minaenko, M. Miñano Moya, I. A. Minashvili, 
A. I. Mincer, B. Mindur, M. Mineev, Y. Ming, L. M. Mir, G. Mirabelli, J. Mitrevski, V. A. Mitsou, 
S. Mitsui, P. S. Miyagawa, J. U. Mjörnmark, T. Moa, V. Moeller, K. Mönig, N. Möser, 
S. Mohapatra, W. Mohr, R. Moles-Valls, A. Molfetas, J. Monk, E. Monnier, 
J. Montejo Berlingen, F. Monticelli, S. Monzani, R. W. Moore, G. F. Moorhead, 
C. Mora Herrera, A. Moraes, N. Morange, J. Morel, G. Morello, D. Moreno, 
M. Moreno Llácer, P. Morettini, M. Morgenstern, M. Morii, A. K. Morley, G. Mornacchi, 
J. D. Morris, L. Morvaj, H. G. Moser, M. Mosidze, J. Moss, R. Mount, E. Mountricha, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
14 of 19
S. V. Mouraviev, E. J. W. Moyse, F. Mueller, J. Mueller, K. Mueller, T. A. Müller, T. Mueller, 
D. Muenstermann, Y. Munwes, W. J. Murray, I. Mussche, E. Musto, A. G. Myagkov, 
M. Myska, O. Nackenhorst, J. Nadal, K. Nagai, R. Nagai, K. Nagano, A. Nagarkar, 
Y. Nagasaka, M. Nagel, A. M. Nairz, Y. Nakahama, K. Nakamura, T. Nakamura, I. Nakano, 
G. Nanava, A. Napier, R. Narayan, M. Nash, T. Nattermann, T. Naumann, G. Navarro, 
H. A. Neal, P. Y. Nechaeva, T. J. Neep, A. Negri, G. Negri, M. Negrini, S. Nektarijevic, 
A. Nelson, T. K. Nelson, S. Nemecek, P. Nemethy, A. A. Nepomuceno, M. Nessi, 
M. S. Neubauer, M. Neumann, A. Neusiedl, R. M. Neves, P. Nevski, F. M. Newcomer, 
P. R. Newman, V. Nguyen Thi Hong, R. B. Nickerson, R. Nicolaidou, B. Nicquevert, 
F. Niedercorn, J. Nielsen, N. Nikiforou, A. Nikiforov, V. Nikolaenko, I. Nikolic-Audit, 
K. Nikolics, K. Nikolopoulos, H. Nilsen, P. Nilsson, Y. Ninomiya, A. Nisati, R. Nisius, T. Nobe, 
L. Nodulman, M. Nomachi, I. Nomidis, S. Norberg, M. Nordberg, P. R. Norton, J. Novakova, 
M. Nozaki, L. Nozka, I. M. Nugent, A. E. Nuncio-Quiroz, G. Nunes Hanninger, 
T. Nunnemann, E. Nurse, B. J. OʼBrien, D. C. OʼNeil, V. OʼShea, L. B. Oakes, F. G. Oakham, 
H. Oberlack, J. Ocariz, A. Ochi, S. Oda, S. Odaka, J. Odier, H. Ogren, A. Oh, S. H. Oh, 
C. C. Ohm, T. Ohshima, W. Okamura, H. Okawa, Y. Okumura, T. Okuyama, A. Olariu, 
A. G. Olchevski, S. A. Olivares Pino, M. Oliveira, D. Oliveira Damazio, E. Oliver Garcia, 
D. Olivito, A. Olszewski, J. Olszowska, A. Onofre, P. U. E. Onyisi, C. J. Oram, M. J. Oreglia, 
Y. Oren, D. Orestano, N. Orlando, I. Orlov, C. Oropeza Barrera, R. S. Orr, B. Osculati, 
R. Ospanov, C. Osuna, G. Otero y Garzon, J. P. Ottersbach, M. Ouchrif, E. A. Ouellette, 
F. Ould-Saada, A. Ouraou, Q. Ouyang, A. Ovcharova, M. Owen, S. Owen, V. E. Ozcan, 
N. Ozturk, A. Pacheco Pages, C. Padilla Aranda, S. Pagan Griso, E. Paganis, C. Pahl, F. Paige, 
P. Pais, K. Pajchel, G. Palacino, C. P. Paleari, S. Palestini, D. Pallin, A. Palma, J. D. Palmer, 
Y. B. Pan, E. Panagiotopoulou, J. G. Panduro Vazquez, P. Pani, N. Panikashvili, S. Panitkin, 
D. Pantea, A. Papadelis, T. D. Papadopoulou, A. Paramonov, D. Paredes Hernandez, 
W. Park, M. A. Parker, F. Parodi, J. A. Parsons, U. Parzefall, S. Pashapour, E. Pasqualucci, 
S. Passaggio, A. Passeri, F. Pastore, F. Pastore, G. Pásztor, S. Pataraia, N. Patel, J. R. Pater, 
S. Patricelli, T. Pauly, M. Pecsy, S. Pedraza Lopez, M. I. Pedraza Morales, S. V. Peleganchuk, 
D. Pelikan, H. Peng, B. Penning, A. Penson, J. Penwell, M. Perantoni, K. Perez, 
T. Perez Cavalcanti, E. Perez Codina, M. T. Pérez García-Estañ, V. Perez Reale, L. Perini, 
H. Pernegger, R. Perrino, P. Perrodo, V. D. Peshekhonov, K. Peters, B. A. Petersen, 
J. Petersen, T. C. Petersen, E. Petit, A. Petridis, C. Petridou, E. Petrolo, F. Petrucci, 
D. Petschull, M. Petteni, R. Pezoa, A. Phan, P. W. Phillips, G. Piacquadio, A. Picazio, 
E. Piccaro, M. Piccinini, S. M. Piec, R. Piegaia, D. T. Pignotti, J. E. Pilcher, A. D. Pilkington, 
J. Pina, M. Pinamonti, A. Pinder, J. L. Pinfold, B. Pinto, C. Pizio, M. Plamondon, M. A. Pleier, 
E. Plotnikova, A. Poblaguev, S. Poddar, F. Podlyski, L. Poggioli, D. Pohl, M. Pohl, 
G. Polesello, A. Policicchio, R. Polifka, A. Polini, J. Poll, V. Polychronakos, D. Pomeroy, 
K. Pommès, L. Pontecorvo, B. G. Pope, G. A. Popeneciu, D. S. Popovic, A. Poppleton, 
X. Portell Bueso, G. E. Pospelov, S. Pospisil, I. N. Potrap, C. J. Potter, C. T. Potter, G. Poulard, 
J. Poveda, V. Pozdnyakov, R. Prabhu, P. Pralavorio, A. Pranko, S. Prasad, R. Pravahan, 
S. Prell, K. Pretzl, D. Price, J. Price, L. E. Price, D. Prieur, M. Primavera, K. Prokofiev, 
F. Prokoshin, S. Protopopescu, J. Proudfoot, X. Prudent, M. Przybycien, H. Przysiezniak, 
S. Psoroulas, E. Ptacek, E. Pueschel, J. Purdham, M. Purohit, P. Puzo, Y. Pylypchenko, 
J. Qian, A. Quadt, D. R. Quarrie, W. B. Quayle, F. Quinonez, M. Raas, S. Raddum, V. Radeka, 
V. Radescu, P. Radloff, T. Rador, F. Ragusa, G. Rahal, A. M. Rahimi, D. Rahm, S. Rajagopalan, 
M. Rammensee, M. Rammes, A. S. Randle-Conde, K. Randrianarivony, F. Rauscher, 
T. C. Rave, M. Raymond, A. L. Read, D. M. Rebuzzi, A. Redelbach, G. Redlinger, R. Reece, 
K. Reeves, E. Reinherz-Aronis, A. Reinsch, I. Reisinger, C. Rembser, Z. L. Ren, A. Renaud, 
M. Rescigno, S. Resconi, B. Resende, P. Reznicek, R. Rezvani, R. Richter, E. Richter-Was, 
M. Ridel, M. Rijpstra, M. Rijssenbeek, A. Rimoldi, L. Rinaldi, R. R. Rios, I. Riu, G. Rivoltella, 
F. Rizatdinova, E. Rizvi, S. H. Robertson, A. Robichaud-Veronneau, D. Robinson, 
J. E. M. Robinson, A. Robson, J. G. Rocha de Lima, C. Roda, D. Roda Dos Santos, A. Roe, 
S. Roe, O. Røhne, S. Rolli, A. Romaniouk, M. Romano, G. Romeo, E. Romero Adam, 
N. Rompotis, L. Roos, E. Ros, S. Rosati, K. Rosbach, A. Rose, M. Rose, G. A. Rosenbaum, 
E. I. Rosenberg, P. L. Rosendahl, O. Rosenthal, L. Rosselet, V. Rossetti, E. Rossi, L. P. Rossi, 
M. Rotaru, I. Roth, J. Rothberg, D. Rousseau, C. R. Royon, A. Rozanov, Y. Rozen, X. Ruan, 
F. Rubbo, I. Rubinskiy, N. Ruckstuhl, V. I. Rud, C. Rudolph, G. Rudolph, F. Rühr, 
A. Ruiz-Martinez, L. Rumyantsev, Z. Rurikova, N. A. Rusakovich, J. P. Rutherfoord, 
P. Ruzicka, Y. F. Ryabov, M. Rybar, G. Rybkin, N. C. Ryder, A. F. Saavedra, I. Sadeh, 
H. F. W. Sadrozinski, R. Sadykov, F. Safai Tehrani, H. Sakamoto, G. Salamanna, A. Salamon, 
M. Saleem, D. Salek, D. Salihagic, A. Salnikov, J. Salt, B. M. Salvachua Ferrando, 
D. Salvatore, F. Salvatore, A. Salvucci, A. Salzburger, D. Sampsonidis, B. H. Samset, 
A. Sanchez, V. Sanchez Martinez, H. Sandaker, H. G. Sander, M. P. Sanders, M. Sandhoff, 
T. Sandoval, C. Sandoval, R. Sandstroem, D. P. C. Sankey, A. Sansoni, C. Santamarina Rios, 
C. Santoni, R. Santonico, H. Santos, J. G. Saraiva, T. Sarangi, E. Sarkisyan-Grinbaum, F. Sarri, 
G. Sartisohn, O. Sasaki, Y. Sasaki, N. Sasao, I. Satsounkevitch, G. Sauvage, E. Sauvan, 
J. B. Sauvan, P. Savard, V. Savinov, D. O. Savu, L. Sawyer, D. H. Saxon, J. Saxon, C. Sbarra, 
A. Sbrizzi, D. A. Scannicchio, M. Scarcella, J. Schaarschmidt, P. Schacht, D. Schaefer, 
U. Schäfer, A. Schaelicke, S. Schaepe, S. Schaetzel, A. C. Schaffer, D. Schaile, 
R. D. Schamberger, A. G. Schamov, V. Scharf, V. A. Schegelsky, D. Scheirich, M. Schernau, 
M. I. Scherzer, C. Schiavi, J. Schieck, M. Schioppa, S. Schlenker, P. Schmid, E. Schmidt, 
K. Schmieden, C. Schmitt, S. Schmitt, M. Schmitz, B. Schneider, U. Schnoor, L. Schoeffel, 
A. Schoening, A. L. S. Schorlemmer, M. Schott, D. Schouten, J. Schovancova, M. Schram, 
C. Schroeder, N. Schroer, M. J. Schultens, J. Schultes, H. C. Schultz-Coulon, H. Schulz, 
M. Schumacher, B. A. Schumm, P. Schune, C. Schwanenberger, A. Schwartzman, 
P. Schwegler, P. Schwemling, R. Schwienhorst, R. Schwierz, J. Schwindling, T. Schwindt, 
M. Schwoerer, G. Sciolla, W. G. Scott, J. Searcy, G. Sedov, E. Sedykh, S. C. Seidel, A. Seiden, 
F. Seifert, J. M. Seixas, G. Sekhniaidze, S. J. Sekula, K. E. Selbach, D. M. Seliverstov, 
B. Sellden, G. Sellers, M. Seman, N. Semprini-Cesari, C. Serfon, L. Serin, L. Serkin, R. Seuster, 
H. Severini, A. Sfyrla, E. Shabalina, M. Shamim, L. Y. Shan, J. T. Shank, Q. T. Shao, 
M. Shapiro, P. B. Shatalov, K. Shaw, D. Sherman, P. Sherwood, S. Shimizu, M. Shimojima, 
T. Shin, M. Shiyakova, A. Shmeleva, M. J. Shochet, D. Short, S. Shrestha, E. Shulga, 
M. A. Shupe, P. Sicho, A. Sidoti, F. Siegert, D. Sijacki, O. Silbert, J. Silva, Y. Silver, 
D. Silverstein, S. B. Silverstein, V. Simak, O. Simard, L. Simic, S. Simion, E. Simioni, 
B. Simmons, R. Simoniello, M. Simonyan, P. Sinervo, N. B. Sinev, V. Sipica, G. Siragusa, 
A. Sircar, A. N. Sisakyan, S. Y. Sivoklokov, J. Sjölin, T. B. Sjursen, L. A. Skinnari, 
H. P. Skottowe, K. Skovpen, P. Skubic, M. Slater, T. Slavicek, K. Sliwa, V. Smakhtin, 
B. H. Smart, L. Smestad, S. Y. Smirnov, Y. Smirnov, L. N. Smirnova, O. Smirnova, B. C. Smith, 
D. Smith, K. M. Smith, M. Smizanska, K. Smolek, A. A. Snesarev, S. W. Snow, J. Snow, 
S. Snyder, R. Sobie, J. Sodomka, A. Soffer, C. A. Solans, M. Solar, J. Solc, E. Y. Soldatov, 
U. Soldevila, E. Solfaroli Camillocci, A. A. Solodkov, O. V. Solovyanov, V. Solovyev, N. Soni, 
V. Sopko, B. Sopko, M. Sosebee, R. Soualah, A. Soukharev, S. Spagnolo, F. Spanò, W. R. Spearman, 
R. Spighi, G. Spigo, R. Spiwoks, M. Spousta, T. Spreitzer, B. Spurlock, R. D. St. Denis, 
J. Stahlman, R. Stamen, E. Stanecka, R. W. Stanek, C. Stanescu, M. Stanescu-Bellu, 
M. M. Stanitzki, S. Stapnes, E. A. Starchenko, J. Stark, P. Staroba, P. Starovoitov, 
R. Staszewski, A. Staude, P. Stavina, G. Steele, P. Steinbach, P. Steinberg, I. Stekl, B. Stelzer, 
H. J. Stelzer, O. Stelzer-Chilton, H. Stenzel, S. Stern, G. A. Stewart, J. A. Stillings, 
M. C. Stockton, K. Stoerig, G. Stoicea, S. Stonjek, P. Strachota, A. R. Stradling, A. Straessner, 
J. Strandberg, S. Strandberg, A. Strandlie, M. Strang, E. Strauss, M. Strauss, P. Strizenec, 
R. Ströhmer, D. M. Strom, J. A. Strong, R. Stroynowski, B. Stugu, I. Stumer, J. Stupak, 
P. Sturm, N. A. Styles, D. A. Soh, D. Su, H. S. Subramania, R. Subramaniam, A. Succurro, 
Y. Sugaya, C. Suhr, M. Suk, V. V. Sulin, S. Sultansoy, T. Sumida, X. Sun, J. E. Sundermann, 
K. Suruliz, G. Susinno, M. R. Sutton, Y. Suzuki, Y. Suzuki, M. Svatos, S. Swedish, I. Sykora, 
T. Sykora, J. Sánchez, D. Ta, K. Tackmann, A. Taffard, R. Tafirout, N. Taiblum, Y. Takahashi, 
H. Takai, R. Takashima, H. Takeda, T. Takeshita, Y. Takubo, M. Talby, A. Talyshev, 
M. C. Tamsett, K. G. Tan, J. Tanaka, R. Tanaka, S. Tanaka, S. Tanaka, A. J. Tanasijczuk, 
K. Tani, N. Tannoury, S. Tapprogge, D. Tardif, S. Tarem, F. Tarrade, G. F. Tartarelli, P. Tas, 
M. Tasevsky, E. Tassi, M. Tatarkhanov, Y. Tayalati, C. Taylor, F. E. Taylor, G. N. Taylor, 
W. Taylor, M. Teinturier, F. A. Teischinger, M. Teixeira Dias Castanheira, P. Teixeira-Dias, 
K. K. Temming, H. ten Kate, P. K. Teng, S. Terada, K. Terashi, J. Terron, M. Testa, 
R. J. Teuscher, J. Therhaag, T. Theveneaux-Pelzer, S. Thoma, J. P. Thomas, E. N. Thompson, 
P. D. Thompson, P. D. Thompson, A. S. Thompson, L. A. Thomsen, E. Thomson, 
M. Thomson, W. M. Thong, R. P. Thun, F. Tian, M. J. Tibbetts, T. Tic, V. O. Tikhomirov, 
Y. A. Tikhonov, S. Timoshenko, E. Tiouchichine, P. Tipton, S. Tisserant, T. Todorov, 
S. Todorova-Nova, B. Toggerson, J. Tojo, S. Tokár, K. Tokushuku, K. Tollefson, M. Tomoto, 
L. Tompkins, K. Toms, A. Tonoyan, C. Topfel, N. D. Topilin, I. Torchiani, E. Torrence, 
H. Torres, E. Torró Pastor, J. Toth, F. Touchard, D. R. Tovey, T. Trefzger, L. Tremblet, 
A. Tricoli, I. M. Trigger, G. Trilling, S. Trincaz-Duvoid, M. F. Tripiana, N. Triplett, W. Trischuk, 
B. Trocmé, C. Troncon, M. Trottier-McDonald, M. Trzebinski, A. Trzupek, C. Tsarouchas, 
J. C. L. Tseng, M. Tsiakiris, P. V. Tsiareshka, D. Tsionou, G. Tsipolitis, S. Tsiskaridze, 
V. Tsiskaridze, E. G. Tskhadadze, I. I. Tsukerman, V. Tsulaia, J. W. Tsung, S. Tsuno, 
D. Tsybychev, A. Tua, A. Tudorache, V. Tudorache, J. M. Tuggle, M. Turala, D. Turecek, 
I. Turk Cakir, E. Turlay, R. Turra, P. M. Tuts, A. Tykhonov, M. Tylmad, M. Tyndel, G. Tzanakos, 
K. Uchida, I. Ueda, R. Ueno, M. Ugland, M. Uhlenbrock, M. Uhrmacher, F. Ukegawa, 
G. Unal, A. Undrus, G. Unel, Y. Unno, D. Urbaniec, P. Urquijo, G. Usai, M. Uslenghi, 
L. Vacavant, V. Vacek, B. Vachon, S. Vahsen, J. Valenta, S. Valentinetti, A. Valero, S. Valkar, 
E. Valladolid Gallego, S. Vallecorsa, J. A. Valls Ferrer, R. van Berg, P. C. van der Deijl, 
R. van der Geer, H. van der Graaf, R. van der Leeuw, E. van der Poel, D. van der Ster, 
N. van Eldik, P. van Gemmeren, I. van Vulpen, M. Vanadia, W. Vandelli, R. Vanguri, 
A. Vaniachine, P. Vankov, F. Vannucci, R. Vari, T. Varol, D. Varouchas, A. Vartapetian, 
K. E. Varvell, V. I. Vassilakopoulos, F. Vazeille, T. Vazquez Schroeder, G. Vegni, J. J. Veillet, 
F. Veloso, R. Veness, S. Veneziano, A. Ventura, D. Ventura, M. Venturi, N. Venturi, 
V. Vercesi, M. Verducci, W. Verkerke, J. C. Vermeulen, A. Vest, M. C. Vetterli, I. Vichou, 
T. Vickey, O. E. Vickey Boeriu, G. H. A. Viehhauser, S. Viel, M. Villa, M. Villaplana Perez, 
E. Vilucchi, M. G. Vincter, E. Vinek, V. B. Vinogradov, M. Virchaux, J. Virzi, O. Vitells, M. Viti, 
I. Vivarelli, F. Vives Vaque, S. Vlachos, D. Vladoiu, M. Vlasak, A. Vogel, P. Vokac, G. Volpi, 
M. Volpi, G. Volpini, H. von der Schmitt, H. von Radziewski, E. von Toerne, V. Vorobel, 
V. Vorwerk, M. Vos, R. Voss, T. T. Voss, J. H. Vossebeld, N. Vranjes, M. Vranjes Milosavljevic, 
V. Vrba, M. Vreeswijk, T. Vu Anh, R. Vuillermet, I. Vukotic, W. Wagner, P. Wagner, 
H. Wahlen, S. Wahrmund, J. Wakabayashi, S. Walch, J. Walder, R. Walker, W. Walkowiak, 
R. Wall, P. Waller, B. Walsh, C. Wang, F. Wang, H. Wang, H. Wang, J. Wang, J. Wang, 
R. Wang, S. M. Wang, T. Wang, A. Warburton, C. P. Ward, D. R. Wardrope, M. Warsinsky, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
15 of 19
A. Washbrook, C. Wasicki, I. Watanabe, P. M. Watkins, A. T. Watson, I. J. Watson, 
M. F. Watson, G. Watts, S. Watts, A. T. Waugh, B. M. Waugh, M. S. Weber, P. Weber, 
J. S. Webster, A. R. Weidberg, P. Weigell, J. Weingarten, C. Weiser, P. S. Wells, T. Wenaus, 
D. Wendland, Z. Weng, T. Wengler, S. Wenig, N. Wermes, M. Werner, P. Werner, M. Werth, 
M. Wessels, J. Wetter, C. Weydert, K. Whalen, S. J. Wheeler-Ellis, A. White, M. J. White, 
S. White, S. R. Whitehead, D. Whiteson, D. Whittington, F. Wicek, D. Wicke, F. J. Wickens, 
W. Wiedenmann, M. Wielers, P. Wienemann, C. Wiglesworth, L. A. M. Wiik-Fuchs, 
P. A. Wijeratne, A. Wildauer, M. A. Wildt, I. Wilhelm, H. G. Wilkens, J. Z. Will, E. Williams, 
H. H. Williams, W. Willis, S. Willocq, J. A. Wilson, M. G. Wilson, A. Wilson, I. Wingerter-Seez, 
S. Winkelmann, F. Winklmeier, M. Wittgen, S. J. Wollstadt, M. W. Wolter, H. Wolters, 
W. C. Wong, G. Wooden, B. K. Wosiek, J. Wotschack, M. J. Woudstra, K. W. Wozniak, 
K. Wraight, M. Wright, B. Wrona, S. L. Wu, X. Wu, Y. Wu, E. Wulf, B. M. Wynne, S. Xella, 
M. Xiao, S. Xie, C. Xu, D. Xu, B. Yabsley, S. Yacoob, M. Yamada, H. Yamaguchi, 
Y. Yamaguchi, A. Yamamoto, K. Yamamoto, S. Yamamoto, T. Yamamura, T. Yamanaka, 
T. Yamazaki, Y. Yamazaki, Z. Yan, H. Yang, H. Yang, U. K. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, S. Yanush, 
L. Yao, Y. Yao, Y. Yasu, G. V. Ybeles Smit, J. Ye, S. Ye, M. Yilmaz, R. Yoosoofmiya, K. Yorita, 
R. Yoshida, K. Yoshihara, C. Young, C. J. Young, S. Youssef, D. Yu, J. Yu, J. Yu, L. Yuan, 
A. Yurkewicz, M. Byszewski, B. Zabinski, R. Zaidan, A. M. Zaitsev, Z. Zajacova, L. Zanello, 
D. Zanzi, A. Zaytsev, C. Zeitnitz, M. Zeman, A. Zemla, C. Zendler, O. Zenin, T. Ženiš, 
Z. Zinonos, D. Zerwas, G. Zevi della Porta, D. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, 
Z. Zhang, L. Zhao, Z. Zhao, A. Zhemchugov, J. Zhong, B. Zhou, N. Zhou, Y. Zhou, C. G. Zhu, 
H. Zhu, J. Zhu, Y. Zhu, X. Zhuang, V. Zhuravlov, D. Zieminska, N. I. Zimin, R. Zimmermann, 
S. Zimmermann, S. Zimmermann, M. Ziolkowski, R. Zitoun, L. Živković, V. V. Zmouchko, 
G. Zobernig, A. Zoccoli, M. zur Nedden, V. Zutshi, L. Zwalinski, Observation of a new 
particle in the search for the Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at 
the LHC. Phys. Lett. B 716, 1–29 (2012).
	 2.	 S. Chatrchyan, V. Khachatryan, A. M. Sirunyan, A. Tumasyan, W. Adam, E. Aguilo, 
T. Bergauer, M. Dragicevic, J. Erö, C. Fabjan, M. Friedl, R. Frühwirth, V. M. Ghete, 
J. Hammer, M. Hoch, N. Hörmann, J. Hrubec, M. Jeitler, W. Kiesenhofer, V. Knünz, 
M. Krammer, I. Krätschmer, D. Liko, W. Majerotto, I. Mikulec, M. Pernicka, B. Rahbaran, 
C. Rohringer, H. Rohringer, R. Schöfbeck, J. Strauss, F. Szoncsó, A. Taurok, 
W. Waltenberger, G. Walzel, E. Widl, C. E. Wulz, V. Chekhovsky, I. Emeliantchik, A. Litomin, 
V. Makarenko, V. Mossolov, N. Shumeiko, A. Solin, R. Stefanovitch, J. Suarez Gonzalez, 
A. Fedorov, M. Korzhik, O. Missevitch, R. Zuyeuski, M. Bansal, S. Bansal, W. Beaumont, 
T. Cornelis, E. A. de Wolf, D. Druzhkin, X. Janssen, S. Luyckx, L. Mucibello, S. Ochesanu, 
B. Roland, R. Rougny, M. Selvaggi, Z. Staykova, H. van Haevermaet, P. van Mechelen, 
N. van Remortel, A. van Spilbeeck, F. Blekman, S. Blyweert, J. DʼHondt, O. Devroede, 
R. Gonzalez Suarez, R. Goorens, A. Kalogeropoulos, M. Maes, A. Olbrechts, S. Tavernier, 
W. van Doninck, L. van Lancker, P. van Mulders, G. P. van Onsem, I. Villella, B. Clerbaux, 
G. de Lentdecker, V. Dero, J. P. Dewulf, A. P. R. Gay, T. Hreus, A. Léonard, P. E. Marage, 
A. Mohammadi, T. Reis, S. Rugovac, L. Thomas, C. Vander Velde, P. Vanlaer, J. Wang, 
J. Wickens, V. Adler, K. Beernaert, A. Cimmino, S. Costantini, G. Garcia, M. Grunewald, 
B. Klein, J. Lellouch, A. Marinov, J. Mccartin, A. A. Ocampo Rios, D. Ryckbosch, N. Strobbe, 
F. Thyssen, M. Tytgat, S. Walsh, E. Yazgan, N. Zaganidis, S. Basegmez, G. Bruno, R. Castello, 
L. Ceard, J. de Favereau de Jeneret, C. Delaere, P. Demin, T. du Pree, D. Favart, 
L. Forthomme, A. Giammanco, G. Grégoire, J. Hollar, V. Lemaitre, J. Liao, O. Militaru, 
C. Nuttens, D. Pagano, A. Pin, K. Piotrzkowski, N. Schul, J. M. Vizan Garcia, N. Beliy, 
T. Caebergs, E. Daubie, G. H. Hammad, G. A. Alves, L. Brito, M. Correa Martin Junior, 
T. Martins, M. E. Pol, M. H. G. Souza, W. L. Aldá Júnior, W. Carvalho, A. Custódio, 
E. M. da Costa, D. de Jesus Damiao, C. de Oliveira Martins, S. Fonseca de Souza, 
D. Matos Figueiredo, L. Mundim, H. Nogima, V. Oguri, W. L. Prado da Silva, A. Santoro, 
A. Sznajder, A. Vilela Pereira, T. S. Anjos, C. A. Bernardes, F. A. Dias, 
T. R. Fernandez Perez Tomei, E. M. Gregores, R. L. Iope, C. Lagana, S. M. Lietti, F. Marinho, 
P. G. Mercadante, S. F. Novaes, S. S. Padula, L. Dimitrov, V. Genchev, P. Iaydjiev, S. Piperov, 
M. Rodozov, S. Stoykova, G. Sultanov, V. Tcholakov, R. Trayanov, I. Vankov, M. Vutova, 
C. Roumenin, D. Uzunova, R. Zahariev, A. Dimitrov, R. Hadjiiska, V. Kozhuharov, L. Litov, 
B. Pavlov, P. Petkov, J. G. Bian, G. M. Chen, H. S. Chen, K. L. He, C. H. Jiang, W. G. Li, 
D. Liang, S. Liang, X. Meng, G. Sun, H. S. Sun, J. Tao, J. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Xiao, 
M. Xu, M. Yang, J. Zang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. R. Zhao, Z. Zhu, 
C. Asawatangtrakuldee, Y. Ban, J. Cai, S. Guo, Y. Guo, W. Li, H. T. Liu, S. Liu, Y. Mao, 
S. J. Qian, H. Teng, D. Wang, Y. L. Ye, L. Zhang, B. Zhu, W. Zou, C. Avila, J. P. Gomez, 
B. Gomez Moreno, A. F. Osorio Oliveros, J. C. Sanabria, N. Godinovic, D. Lelas, R. Plestina, 
D. Polic, I. Puljak, Z. Antunovic, M. Kovac, V. Brigljevic, S. Duric, K. Kadija, J. Luetic, 
S. Morovic, A. Attikis, M. Galanti, G. Mavromanolakis, J. Mousa, C. Nicolaou, F. Ptochos, 
P. A. Razis, M. Finger, M. Finger Jr., A. Aly, Y. Assran, A. Awad, S. Elgammal, A. Ellithi Kamel, 
S. Khalil, M. A. Mahmoud, A. Mahrous, A. Radi, A. Hektor, M. Kadastik, K. Kannike, 
M. Müntel, M. Raidal, L. Rebane, A. Strumia, A. Tiko, P. Eerola, G. Fedi, M. Voutilainen, 
E. Anttila, J. Härkönen, A. Heikkinen, V. Karimäki, H. M. Katajisto, R. Kinnunen, 
M. J. Kortelainen, M. Kotamäki, T. Lampén, K. Lassila-Perini, S. Lehti, T. Lindén, P. Luukka, 
T. Mäenpää, T. Peltola, E. Tuominen, J. Tuominiemi, E. Tuovinen, D. Ungaro, T. P. Vanhala, 
L. Wendland, K. Banzuzi, A. Karjalainen, A. Korpela, T. Tuuva, M. Anfreville, M. Besancon, 
S. Choudhury, M. Dejardin, D. Denegri, B. Fabbro, J. L. Faure, F. Ferri, S. Ganjour, 
F. X. Gentit, A. Givernaud, P. Gras, G. Hamel de Monchenault, P. Jarry, F. Kircher, 
M. C. Lemaire, E. Locci, J. Malcles, I. Mandjavidze, A. Nayak, J. P. Pansart, J. Rander, 
J. M. Reymond, A. Rosowsky, I. Shreyber, M. Titov, P. Verrecchia, J. Badier, S. Baffioni, 
F. Beaudette, E. Becheva, L. Benhabib, L. Bianchini, M. Bluj, C. Broutin, P. Busson, 
M. Cerutti, D. Chamont, C. Charlot, N. Daci, T. Dahms, M. Dalchenko, L. Dobrzynski, 
Y. Geerebaert, R. Granier de Cassagnac, M. Haguenauer, P. Hennion, G. Milleret, P. Miné, 
C. Mironov, I. N. Naranjo, M. Nguyen, C. Ochando, P. Paganini, T. Romanteau, D. Sabes, 
R. Salerno, A. Sartirana, Y. Sirois, C. Thiebaux, C. Veelken, A. Zabi, J. L. Agram, J. Andrea, 
A. Besson, D. Bloch, D. Bodin, J. M. Brom, M. Cardaci, E. C. Chabert, C. Collard, E. Conte, 
F. Drouhin, C. Ferro, J. C. Fontaine, D. Gelé, U. Goerlach, C. Goetzmann, L. Gross, D. Huss, 
P. Juillot, E. Kieffer, A. C. le Bihan, J. Pansanel, Y. Patois, P. van Hove, D. Boutigny, 
D. Mercier, G. Baulieu, S. Beauceron, N. Beaupere, M. Bedjidian, O. Bondu, G. Boudoul, 
S. Brochet, J. Chasserat, R. Chierici, C. Combaret, D. Contardo, P. Depasse, H. el Mamouni, 
J. Fay, S. Gascon, N. Giraud, M. Gouzevitch, R. Haroutunian, B. Ille, T. Kurca, M. Lethuillier, 
N. Lumb, H. Mathez, L. Mirabito, S. Perries, L. Sgandurra, V. Sordini, Y. Tschudi, 
M. Vander Donckt, P. Verdier, S. Viret, V. Roinishvili, L. Rurua, N. Amaglobeli, I. Bagaturia, 
B. Chiladze, R. Kvatadze, D. Lomidze, R. Shanidze, Z. Tsamalaidze, R. Adolphi, 
G. Anagnostou, C. Autermann, S. Beranek, R. Brauer, W. Braunschweig, B. Calpas, 
M. Edelhoff, L. Feld, N. Heracleous, O. Hindrichs, R. Jussen, W. Karpinski, K. Klein, 
K. Lübelsmeyer, J. Merz, A. Ostapchuk, D. Pandoulas, A. Perieanu, F. Raupach, J. Sammet, 
S. Schael, D. Schmitz, A. Schultz von Dratzig, R. Siedling, D. Sprenger, H. Weber, 
B. Wittmer, M. Wlochal, V. Zhukov, M. Ata, P. Biallass, J. Caudron, E. Dietz-Laursonn, 
D. Duchardt, M. Erdmann, R. Fischer, A. Güth, T. Hebbeker, C. Heidemann, G. Hilgers, 
K. Hoepfner, C. Hof, T. Klimkovich, D. Klingebiel, P. Kreuzer, C. Magass, M. Merschmeyer, 
A. Meyer, M. Olschewski, P. Papacz, B. Philipps, H. Pieta, H. Reithler, S. A. Schmitz, 
L. Sonnenschein, M. Sowa, J. Steggemann, D. Teyssier, M. Weber, M. Bontenackels, 
V. Cherepanov, Y. Erdogan, G. Flügge, H. Geenen, M. Geisler, W. Haj Ahmad, F. Hoehle, 
B. Kargoll, T. Kress, Y. Kuessel, J. Lingemann, A. Nowack, L. Perchalla, O. Pooth, 
P. Sauerland, A. Stahl, M. H. Zoeller, M. Aldaya Martin, J. Behr, W. Behrenhoff, U. Behrens, 
M. Bergholz, A. Bethani, K. Borras, A. Burgmeier, A. Cakir, L. Calligaris, A. Campbell, 
E. Castro, F. Costanza, D. Dammann, C. Diez Pardos, G. Eckerlin, D. Eckstein, A. Flossdorf, 
G. Flucke, A. Geiser, I. Glushkov, P. Goettlicher, A. Grebenyuk, P. Gunnellini, S. Habib, 
J. Hauk, G. Hellwig, H. Jung, M. Kasemann, P. Katsas, C. Kleinwort, H. Kluge, A. Knutsson, 
M. Krämer, D. Krücker, E. Kuznetsova, W. Lange, B. Lewendel, W. Lohmann, B. Lutz, 
R. Mankel, I. Marfin, M. Marienfeld, I. A. Melzer-Pellmann, A. B. Meyer, J. Mnich, C. Muhl, 
A. Mussgiller, S. Naumann-Emme, O. Novgorodova, J. Olzem, A. Parenti, H. Perrey, 
A. Petrukhin, D. Pitzl, A. Raspereza, P. M. Ribeiro Cipriano, C. Riedl, E. Ron, C. Rosemann, 
M. Rosin, J. Salfeld-Nebgen, R. Schmidt, T. Schoerner-Sadenius, N. Sen, A. Spiridonov, 
M. Stein, J. Tomaszewska, D. Volyanskyy, R. Walsh, C. Wissing, C. Youngman, V. Blobel, 
J. Draeger, H. Enderle, J. Erfle, U. Gebbert, M. Görner, T. Hermanns, R. S. Höing, 
K. Kaschube, G. Kaussen, H. Kirschenmann, R. Klanner, J. Lange, B. Mura, F. Nowak, 
T. Peiffer, N. Pietsch, D. Rathjens, C. Sander, H. Schettler, P. Schleper, E. Schlieckau, 
A. Schmidt, M. Schröder, T. Schum, M. Seidel, J. Sibille, V. Sola, H. Stadie, G. Steinbrück, 
J. Thomsen, L. Vanelderen, C. Barth, J. Bauer, J. Berger, P. Blüm, C. Böser, V. Buege, 
Z. Y. Chen, S. Chowdhury, T. Chwalek, D. Daeuwel, W. de Boer, A. Descroix, A. Dierlamm, 
G. Dirkes, M. Fahrer, M. Feindt, U. Felzmann, M. Frey, A. Furgeri, I. Gebauer, A. Gessler, 
J. Gruschke, M. Guthoff, C. Hackstein, F. Hartmann, F. Hauler, T. Hauth, S. Heier, 
S. M. Heindl, M. Heinrich, A. Heiss, H. Held, K. H. Hoffmann, S. Honc, U. Husemann, 
M. Imhof, C. Jung, S. Junghans, I. Katkov, U. Kerzel, D. Knoblauch, J. R. Komaragiri, 
M. Kräber, T. Kuhr, T. Liamsuwan, P. Lobelle Pardo, D. Martschei, A. Menchikov, X. Mol, 
D. Mörmann, S. Mueller, T. Müller, D. Neuberger, M. B. Neuland, M. Niegel, A. Nürnberg, 
O. Oberst, A. Oehler, T. Ortega Gomez, J. Ott, C. Piasecki, A. Poschlad, G. Quast, 
K. Rabbertz, F. Ratnikov, N. Ratnikova, M. Renz, S. Röcker, F. Roederer, A. Sabellek, 
C. Saout, A. Scheurer, D. Schieferdecker, P. Schieferdecker, F. P. Schilling, M. Schmanau, 
G. Schott, W. Schwerdtfeger, H. J. Simonis, A. Skiba, F. M. Stober, A. Theel, W. H. Thümmel, 
D. Troendle, A. Trunov, R. Ulrich, J. Wagner-Kuhr, S. Wayand, M. Weber, T. Weiler, M. Zeise, 
E. B. Ziebarth, M. Zvada, G. Daskalakis, T. Geralis, S. Kesisoglou, A. Kyriakis, D. Loukas, 
I. Manolakos, A. Markou, C. Markou, C. Mavrommatis, E. Ntomari, L. Gouskos, 
A. Panagiotou, N. Saoulidou, I. Evangelou, C. Foudas, P. Kokkas, N. Manthos, 
I. Papadopoulos, V. Patras, F. A. Triantis, G. Bencze, C. Hajdu, P. Hidas, D. Horvath, F. Sikler, 
V. Veszpremi, G. Vesztergombi, P. Zalan, N. Beni, S. Czellar, A. Fenyvesi, J. Molnar, 
J. Palinkas, Z. Szillasi, J. Karancsi, P. Raics, Z. L. Trocsanyi, B. Ujvari, G. Zilizi, S. B. Beri, 
V. Bhandari, V. Bhatnagar, N. Dhingra, R. Gupta, M. Kaur, J. M. Kohli, M. Z. Mehta, N. Nishu, 
L. K. Saini, A. Sharma, J. B. Singh, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, S. Ahuja, A. Bhardwaj, S. Chatterji, 
B. C. Choudhary, P. Gupta, S. Malhotra, M. Naimuddin, K. Ranjan, V. Sharma, R. K. Shivpuri, 
S. Banerjee, S. Bhattacharya, S. Dutta, B. Gomber, S. Jain, S. Jain, R. Khurana, S. Sarkar, 
M. Sharan, A. Abdulsalam, R. K. Choudhury, D. Dutta, M. Ghodgaonkar, S. Kailas, 
S. K. Kataria, V. Kumar, P. Mehta, A. K. Mohanty, L. M. Pant, P. Shukla, A. Topkar, T. Aziz, 
S. Chendvankar, P. V. Deshpande, S. N. Ganguli, S. Ganguly, M. Guchait, A. Gurtu, 
M. Maity, K. Mazumdar, G. B. Mohanty, B. Parida, M. R. Patil, R. Raghavan, K. Sudhakar, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
16 of 19
N. Wickramage, B. S. Acharya, S. Banerjee, S. Bheesette, S. Dugad, S. D. Kalmani, 
M. R. Krishnaswamy, V. R. Lakkireddi, N. K. Mondal, V. S. Narasimham, N. Panyam, 
P. Verma, F. Ardalan, H. Arfaei, H. Bakhshiansohi, S. M. Etesami, A. Fahim, M. Hashemi, 
A. Jafari, M. Khakzad, M. Mohammadi Najafabadi, S. Paktinat Mehdiabadi, B. Safarzadeh, 
M. Zeinali, M. Abbrescia, L. Barbone, C. Calabria, S. S. Chhibra, A. Colaleo, D. Creanza, 
N. de Filippis, M. de Palma, G. de Robertis, G. Donvito, L. Fiore, G. Iaselli, F. Loddo, 
G. Maggi, M. Maggi, N. Manna, B. Marangelli, S. My, S. Natali, S. Nuzzo, N. Pacifico, 
A. Pompili, G. Pugliese, A. Ranieri, F. Romano, G. Selvaggi, L. Silvestris, G. Singh, 
V. Spinoso, R. Venditti, P. Verwilligen, G. Zito, G. Abbiendi, A. C. Benvenuti, D. Bonacorsi, 
S. Braibant-Giacomelli, L. Brigliadori, P. Capiluppi, A. Castro, F. R. Cavallo, M. Cuffiani, 
G. M. Dallavalle, F. Fabbri, A. Fanfani, D. Fasanella, P. Giacomelli, C. Grandi, L. Guiducci, 
S. Marcellini, G. Masetti, M. Meneghelli, A. Montanari, F. L. Navarria, F. Odorici, A. Perrotta, 
F. Primavera, A. M. Rossi, T. Rovelli, G. P. Siroli, R. Travaglini, S. Albergo, G. Cappello, 
M. Chiorboli, S. Costa, F. Noto, R. Potenza, M. A. Saizu, A. Tricomi, C. Tuve, G. Barbagli, 
V. Ciulli, C. Civinini, R. DʼAlessandro, E. Focardi, S. Frosali, E. Gallo, C. Genta, S. Gonzi, 
M. Meschini, S. Paoletti, G. Parrini, R. Ranieri, G. Sguazzoni, A. Tropiano, L. Benussi, 
S. Bianco, S. Colafranceschi, F. Fabbri, D. Piccolo, P. Fabbricatore, S. Farinon, M. Greco, 
R. Musenich, S. Tosi, A. Benaglia, L. Carbone, P. DʼAngelo, F. de Guio, L. di Matteo, P. Dini, 
F. M. Farina, S. Fiorendi, S. Gennai, A. Ghezzi, S. Malvezzi, R. A. Manzoni, A. Martelli, 
A. Massironi, D. Menasce, L. Moroni, P. Negri, M. Paganoni, D. Pedrini, A. Pullia, S. Ragazzi, 
N. Redaelli, S. Sala, T. Tabarelli de Fatis, S. Buontempo, C. A. Carrillo Montoya, N. Cavallo, 
A. de Cosa, O. Dogangun, F. Fabozzi, A. O. M. Iorio, L. Lista, S. Meola, M. Merola, 
P. Paolucci, P. Azzi, N. Bacchetta, M. Bellato, M. Benettoni, M. Biasotto, D. Bisello, 
A. Branca, R. Carlin, P. Checchia, T. Dorigo, U. Dosselli, F. Fanzago, F. Gasparini, 
U. Gasparini, P. Giubilato, F. Gonella, A. Gozzelino, M. Gulmini, K. Kanishchev, S. Lacaprara, 
I. Lazzizzera, M. Loreti, M. Margoni, G. Maron, M. Mazzucato, A. T. Meneguzzo, 
F. Montecassiano, M. Passaseo, J. Pazzini, M. Pegoraro, N. Pozzobon, P. Ronchese, 
F. Simonetto, E. Torassa, M. Tosi, S. Vanini, S. Ventura, P. Zotto, G. Zumerle, U. Berzano, 
M. Gabusi, S. P. Ratti, C. Riccardi, P. Torre, P. Vitulo, M. Biasini, G. M. Bilei, L. Fanò, 
P. Lariccia, A. Lucaroni, G. Mantovani, M. Menichelli, A. Nappi, D. Passeri, P. Placidi, 
F. Romeo, A. Saha, A. Santocchia, L. Servoli, A. Spiezia, S. Taroni, M. Valdata, F. Angelini, 
S. Arezzini, P. Azzurri, G. Bagliesi, A. Basti, R. Bellazzini, J. Bernardini, T. Boccali, F. Bosi, 
A. Brez, G. Broccolo, F. Calzolari, A. Carboni, R. Castaldi, C. Cerri, A. Ciampa, R. T. DʼAgnolo, 
R. DellʼOrso, F. Fiori, L. Foà, A. Giassi, S. Giusti, A. Kraan, L. Latronico, F. Ligabue, S. Linari, 
T. Lomtadze, L. Martini, M. Massa, M. M. Massai, E. Mazzoni, A. Messineo, A. Moggi, 
F. Palla, F. Raffaelli, A. Rizzi, G. Sanguinetti, G. Segneri, A. T. Serban, P. Spagnolo, 
G. Spandre, P. Squillacioti, R. Tenchini, G. Tonelli, A. Venturi, P. G. Verdini, S. Baccaro, 
L. Barone, A. Bartoloni, F. Cavallari, I. Dafinei, D. del Re, M. Diemoz, C. Fanelli, M. Grassi, 
E. Longo, P. Meridiani, F. Micheli, S. Nourbakhsh, G. Organtini, R. Paramatti, S. Rahatlou, 
M. Sigamani, L. Soffi, I. G. Talamo, N. Amapane, R. Arcidiacono, S. Argiro, M. Arneodo, 
C. Biino, N. Cartiglia, M. Costa, N. Demaria, C. Mariotti, S. Maselli, E. Migliore, V. Monaco, 
M. Musich, M. M. Obertino, N. Pastrone, M. Pelliccioni, C. Peroni, A. Potenza, A. Romero, 
M. Ruspa, R. Sacchi, A. Solano, A. Staiano, F. Ambroglini, S. Belforte, V. Candelise, 
M. Casarsa, F. Cossutti, G. Della Ricca, B. Gobbo, C. Kavka, M. Marone, D. Montanino, 
A. Penzo, A. Schizzi, T. Y. Kim, S. K. Nam, S. Chang, J. Chung, S. W. Ham, D. Han, J. Kang, 
D. H. Kim, G. N. Kim, J. E. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. J. Kong, M. W. Lee, Y. D. Oh, H. Park, S. R. Ro, 
D. Son, D. C. Son, J. S. Suh, J. Y. Kim, Z. J. Kim, S. Song, S. Choi, D. Gyun, B. Hong, M. Jo, 
Y. Jo, M. Kang, H. Kim, T. J. Kim, K. S. Lee, D. H. Moon, S. K. Park, K. S. Sim, M. Choi, G. Hahn, 
S. Kang, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, C. Park, I. C. Park, S. Park, G. Ryu, Y. Choi, Y. K. Choi, J. Goh, 
M. S. Kim, E. Kwon, B. Lee, J. Lee, S. Lee, H. Seo, I. Yu, M. Janulis, A. Juodagalvis, R. Naujikas, 
H. Castilla-Valdez, E. de la Cruz-Burelo, I. Heredia-de la Cruz, R. Lopez-Fernandez, 
R. Magaña Villalba, J. Martínez-Ortega, A. Sánchez-Hernández, L. M. Villasenor-Cendejas, 
S. Carrillo Moreno, F. Vazquez Valencia, H. A. Salazar Ibarguen, E. Casimiro Linares, 
A. Morelos Pineda, M. A. Reyes-Santos, P. Allfrey, D. Krofcheck, A. J. Bell, 
N. Bernardino Rodrigues, A. P. H. Butler, P. H. Butler, R. Doesburg, D. Pfeiffer, S. Reucroft, 
H. Silverwood, J. C. Williams, M. Ahmad, M. H. Ansari, M. I. Asghar, J. Butt, H. R. Hoorani, 
S. Khalid, W. A. Khan, T. Khurshid, S. Qazi, M. A. Shah, M. Shoaib, H. Bialkowska, 
B. Boimska, T. Frueboes, R. Gokieli, L. Goscilo, M. Górski, M. Kazana, I. M. Kudla, 
K. Nawrocki, K. Romanowska-Rybinska, M. Szleper, G. Wrochna, P. Zalewski, G. Brona, 
K. Bunkowski, M. Cwiok, H. Czyrkowski, R. Dabrowski, W. Dominik, K. Doroba, 
A. Kalinowski, M. Konecki, J. Krolikowski, W. Oklinski, K. Pozniak, W. Zabolotny, P. Zych, 
G. Kasprowicz, R. Romaniuk, R. Alemany-Fernandez, N. Almeida, P. Bargassa, A. David, 
P. Faccioli, P. G. Ferreira Parracho, M. Gallinaro, P. Q. Ribeiro, J. Seixas, J. Silva, J. Varela, 
P. Vischia, S. Afanasiev, I. Belotelov, P. Bunin, Y. Ershov, M. Gavrilenko, A. Golunov, 
I. Golutvin, N. Gorbounov, I. Gorbunov, I. Gramenitski, V. Kalagin, A. Kamenev, V. Karjavin, 
V. Konoplyanikov, V. Korenkov, G. Kozlov, A. Kurenkov, A. Lanev, A. Makankin, 
A. Malakhov, I. Melnitchenko, V. V. Mitsyn, P. Moisenz, D. Oleynik, A. Orlov, V. Palichik, 
V. Perelygin, A. Petrosyan, M. Savina, R. Semenov, S. Shmatov, S. Shulha, A. Skachkova, 
N. Skatchkov, V. Smetannikov, V. Smirnov, D. Smolin, E. Tikhonenko, S. Vasilʼev, 
A. Volodko, A. Zarubin, V. Zhiltsov, S. Evstyukhin, V. Golovtsov, Y. Ivanov, V. Kim, 
P. Levchenko, V. Murzin, V. Oreshkin, I. Smirnov, V. Sulimov, L. Uvarov, S. Vavilov, 
A. Vorobyev, A. Vorobyev, Y. Andreev, A. Anisimov, A. Dermenev, S. Gninenko, 
N. Golubev, D. Gorbunov, A. Karneyeu, M. Kirsanov, N. Krasnikov, V. Matveev, 
A. Pashenkov, G. Pivovarov, V. E. Postoev, V. Rubakov, V. Shirinyants, A. Solovey, D. Tlisov, 
A. Toropin, S. Troitsky, V. Epshteyn, M. Erofeeva, V. Gavrilov, V. Kaftanov, I. Kiselevich, 
V. Kolosov, A. Konoplyannikov, M. Kossov, Y. Kozlov, A. Krokhotin, D. Litvintsev, 
N. Lychkovskaya, A. Oulianov, V. Popov, G. Safronov, S. Semenov, N. Stepanov, V. Stolin, 
E. Vlasov, V. Zaytsev, A. Zhokin, A. Belyaev, E. Boos, V. Bunichev, A. Demiyanov, 
M. Dubinin, L. Dudko, A. Ershov, A. Gribushin, V. Ilyin, A. Kaminskiy, V. Klyukhin, 
O. Kodolova, V. Korotkikh, A. Kryukov, I. Lokhtin, A. Markina, S. Obraztsov, M. Perfilov, 
S. Petrushanko, A. Popov, A. Proskuryakov, L. Sarycheva, V. Savrin, A. Snigirev, 
I. Vardanyan, V. Andreev, M. Azarkin, I. Dremin, M. Kirakosyan, A. Leonidov, G. Mesyats, 
S. V. Rusakov, A. Vinogradov, I. Azhgirey, I. Bayshev, S. Bitioukov, V. Grishin, V. Kachanov, 
A. Kalinin, D. Konstantinov, A. Korablev, V. Krychkine, A. Levine, V. Petrov, A. Ryabov, 
R. Ryutin, A. Sobol, V. Talov, L. Tourtchanovitch, S. Troshin, N. Tyurin, A. Uzunian, 
A. Volkov, P. Adzic, M. Djordjevic, M. Ekmedzic, D. Krpic, J. Milosevic, N. Smiljkovic, 
M. Zupan, M. Aguilar-Benitez, J. Alcaraz Maestre, P. Arce, C. Battilana, E. Calvo, M. Cerrada, 
M. Chamizo Llatas, N. Colino, B. de la Cruz, A. Delgado Peris, D. Domínguez Vázquez, 
C. Fernandez Bedoya, J. P. Fernández Ramos, A. Ferrando, J. Flix, M. C. Fouz, P. Garcia-Abia, 
O. Gonzalez Lopez, S. Goy Lopez, J. M. Hernandez, M. I. Josa, G. Merino, J. Puerta Pelayo, 
A. Quintario Olmeda, I. Redondo, L. Romero, J. Santaolalla, M. S. Soares, C. Willmott, 
C. Albajar, G. Codispoti, J. F. de Trocóniz, H. Brun, J. Cuevas, J. Fernandez Menendez, 
S. Folgueras, I. Gonzalez Caballero, L. Lloret Iglesias, J. Piedra Gomez, J. A. Brochero Cifuentes, 
I. J. Cabrillo, A. Calderon, S. H. Chuang, J. Duarte Campderros, M. Felcini, M. Fernandez, 
G. Gomez, J. Gonzalez Sanchez, A. Graziano, C. Jorda, A. Lopez Virto, J. Marco, R. Marco, 
C. Martinez Rivero, F. Matorras, F. J. Munoz Sanchez, T. Rodrigo, A. Y. Rodríguez-Marrero, 
A. Ruiz-Jimeno, L. Scodellaro, M. Sobron Sanudo, I. Vila, R. Vilar Cortabitarte, D. Abbaneo, 
P. Aspell, E. Auffray, G. Auzinger, M. Bachtis, J. Baechler, P. Baillon, A. H. Ball, D. Barney, 
J. F. Benitez, C. Bernet, W. Bialas, G. Bianchi, P. Bloch, A. Bocci, A. Bonato, C. Botta, 
H. Breuker, D. Campi, T. Camporesi, E. Cano, G. Cerminara, A. Charkiewicz, T. Christiansen, 
J. A. Coarasa Perez, B. Curé, D. DʼEnterria, A. Dabrowski, J. Daguin, A. de Roeck, S. di Guida, 
M. Dobson, N. Dupont-Sagorin, A. Elliott-Peisert, M. Eppard, B. Frisch, W. Funk, A. Gaddi, 
M. Gastal, G. Georgiou, H. Gerwig, M. Giffels, D. Gigi, K. Gill, D. Giordano, M. Girone, 
M. Giunta, F. Glege, R. Gomez-Reino Garrido, P. Govoni, S. Gowdy, R. Guida, J. Gutleber, 
M. Hansen, P. Harris, C. Hartl, J. Harvey, B. Hegner, A. Hinzmann, A. Honma, V. Innocente, 
P. Janot, K. Kaadze, E. Karavakis, K. Kloukinas, K. Kousouris, P. Lecoq, Y. J. Lee, P. Lenzi, 
R. Loos, C. Lourenço, N. Magini, T. Mäki, M. Malberti, L. Malgeri, M. Mannelli, A. Marchioro, 
J. Marques Pinho Noite, L. Masetti, F. Meijers, S. Mersi, E. Meschi, L. Moneta, 
M. U. Mozer, M. Mulders, P. Musella, A. Onnela, T. Orimoto, L. Orsini, J. A. Osborne, 
E. Palencia Cortezon, E. Perez, L. Perrozzi, P. Petagna, A. Petrilli, A. Petrucci, A. Pfeiffer, 
M. Pierini, M. Pimiä, D. Piparo, G. Polese, H. Postema, L. Quertenmont, A. Racz, W. Reece, 
D. Ricci, J. Rodrigues Antunes, G. Rolandi, C. Rovelli, M. Rovere, V. Ryjov, H. Sakulin, 
D. Samyn, F. Santanastasio, C. Schäfer, C. Schwick, A. Sciaba, I. Segoni, S. Sekmen, 
A. Sharma, P. Siegrist, P. Silva, M. Simon, P. Sphicas, D. Spiga, B. G. Taylor, P. Tropea, 
J. Troska, A. Tsirou, F. Vasey, L. Veillet, G. I. Veres, P. Vichoudis, J. R. Vlimant, P. Wertelaers, 
H. K. Wöhri, S. D. Worm, W. D. Zeuner, W. Bertl, K. Deiters, W. Erdmann, D. Feichtinger, 
K. Gabathuler, R. Horisberger, Q. Ingram, H. C. Kaestli, S. König, D. Kotlinski, 
U. Langenegger, B. Meier, F. Meier, D. Renker, T. Rohe, T. Sakhelashvili, L. Bäni, F. Behner, 
B. Betev, B. Blau, P. Bortignon, M. A. Buchmann, B. Casal, N. Chanon, Z. Chen, 
D. R. da Silva di Calafiori, S. Dambach, G. Davatz, A. Deisher, G. Dissertori, M. Dittmar, 
L. Djambazov, M. Donegà, M. Dünser, C. Eggel, J. Eugster, G. Faber, K. Freudenreich, 
C. Grab, W. Hintz, D. Hits, H. Hofer, O. Holme, I. Horvath, P. Lecomte, W. Lustermann, 
C. Marchica, A. C. Marini, P. Martinez Ruiz del Arbol, N. Mohr, F. Moortgat, C. Nägeli, P. Nef, 
F. Nessi-Tedaldi, F. Pandolfi, L. Pape, F. Pauss, M. Peruzzi, T. Punz, F. J. Ronga, U. Röser, 
M. Rossini, L. Sala, A. K. Sanchez, M. C. Sawley, D. Schinzel, A. Starodumov, B. Stieger, 
H. Suter, M. Takahashi, L. Tauscher, A. Thea, K. Theofilatos, D. Treille, P. Trüb, S. Udriot, 
C. Urscheler, G. Viertel, H. P. von Gunten, R. Wallny, H. A. Weber, L. Wehrli, J. Weng, 
S. Zelepoukine, C. Amsler, V. Chiochia, S. de Visscher, C. Favaro, M. Ivova Rikova, 
B. Millan Mejias, P. Otiougova, P. Robmann, H. Snoek, S. Tupputi, M. Verzetti, Y. H. Chang, 
K. H. Chen, W. T. Chen, A. Go, C. M. Kuo, S. W. Li, W. Lin, M. H. Liu, Z. K. Liu, Y. J. Lu, 
D. Mekterovic, A. P. Singh, R. Volpe, J. H. Wu, S. S. Yu, P. Bartalini, P. Chang, Y. H. Chang, 
Y. W. Chang, Y. Chao, K. F. Chen, C. Dietz, Z. Gao, U. Grundler, W. S. Hou, Y. Hsiung, 
K. Y. Kao, Y. J. Lei, J. Liau, S. W. Lin, R. S. Lu, D. Majumder, E. Petrakou, X. Shi, J. G. Shiu, 
Y. M. Tzeng, K. Ueno, Y. Velikzhanin, X. Wan, C. C. Wang, M. Wang, J. T. Wei, P. Yeh, 
B. Asavapibhop, N. Srimanobhas, A. Adiguzel, M. N. Bakirci, S. Cerci, C. Dozen, 
I. Dumanoglu, E. Eskut, S. Girgis, G. Gokbulut, E. Gurpinar, I. Hos, E. E. Kangal, T. Karaman, 
G. Karapinar, A. Kayis Topaksu, G. Onengut, K. Ozdemir, S. Ozturk, A. Polatoz, K. Sogut, 
D. Sunar Cerci, B. Tali, H. Topakli, L. N. Vergili, M. Vergili, I. V. Akin, T. Aliev, B. Bilin, 
M. Deniz, H. Gamsizkan, A. M. Guler, K. Ocalan, A. Ozpineci, M. Serin, R. Sever, U. E. Surat, 
M. Zeyrek, M. Deliomeroglu, E. Gülmez, B. Isildak, M. Kaya, O. Kaya, S. Ozkorucuklu, 
N. Sonmez, K. Cankocak, B. Grynyov, L. Levchuk, S. Lukyanenko, D. Soroka, P. Sorokin, 
M. K. H. Ahmad, A. Branson, R. McClatchey, M. Odeh, J. Shamdasani, K. Soomro, T. Barrass, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
17 of 19
F. Bostock, J. J. Brooke, E. Clement, D. Cussans, H. Flacher, R. Frazier, J. Goldstein, 
M. Grimes, G. P. Heath, H. F. Heath, L. Kreczko, W. Lacesso, S. Metson, D. M. Newbold, 
K. Nirunpong, A. Poll, S. Senkin, V. J. Smith, T. Williams, L. Basso, E. Bateman, K. W. Bell, 
A. Belyaev, C. Brew, R. M. Brown, B. Camanzi, D. J. A. Cockerill, J. F. Connolly, 
J. A. Coughlan, L. G. Denton, P. S. Flower, M. J. French, R. J. S. Greenhalgh, R. N. J. Halsall, 
K. Harder, S. Harper, J. A. Hill, J. Jackson, B. W. Kennedy, A. L. Lintern, A. B. Lodge, E. Olaiya, 
M. R. Pearson, D. Petyt, B. C. Radburn-Smith, C. H. Shepherd-Themistocleous, B. J. Smith, 
M. Sproston, R. Stephenson, I. R. Tomalin, M. J. Torbet, J. H. Williams, W. J. Womersley, 
R. Bainbridge, G. Ball, J. Ballin, D. Bauer, R. Beuselinck, O. Buchmuller, D. Colling, N. Cripps, 
M. Cutajar, P. Dauncey, G. Davies, M. Della Negra, W. Ferguson, J. Fulcher, D. Futyan, 
A. Gilbert, A. Guneratne Bryer, G. Hall, Z. Hatherell, J. Hays, G. Iles, M. Jarvis, J. Jones, 
G. Karapostoli, M. Kenzie, J. Leaver, L. Lyons, A. M. Magnan, J. Marrouche, B. Mathias, 
D. G. Miller, R. Nandi, J. Nash, A. Nikitenko, M. Noy, A. Papageorgiou, J. Pela, M. Pesaresi, 
K. Petridis, M. Pioppi, D. Rand, D. M. Raymond, S. Rogerson, A. Rose, M. J. Ryan, C. Seez, 
P. Sharp, A. Sparrow, M. Stoye, A. Tapper, C. Timlin, S. Tourneur, M. Vazquez Acosta, 
T. Virdee, S. Wakefield, N. Wardle, T. Whyntie, M. Wingham, O. Zorba, M. Chadwick, 
J. E. Cole, P. R. Hobson, A. Khan, P. Kyberd, D. Leggat, D. Leslie, W. Martin, I. D. Reid, 
P. Symonds, L. Teodorescu, M. Turner, J. Dittmann, K. Hatakeyama, H. Liu, T. Scarborough, 
O. Charaf, C. Henderson, P. Rumerio, A. Avetisyan, T. Bose, E. Carrera Jarrin, C. Fantasia, 
E. Hazen, A. Heister, J. S. John, P. Lawson, D. Lazic, J. Rohlf, D. Sperka, L. Sulak, 
F. Varela Rodriguez, S. Wu, J. Alimena, S. Bhattacharya, D. Cutts, Z. Demiragli, 
A. Ferapontov, A. Garabedian, U. Heintz, R. Hooper, S. Jabeen, G. Kukartsev, E. Laird, 
G. Landsberg, M. Luk, M. Narain, D. Nguyen, M. Segala, T. Sinthuprasith, T. Speer, 
K. V. Tsang, Z. Unalan, R. Breedon, G. Breto, M. Calderon de la Barca Sanchez, M. Case, 
S. Chauhan, M. Chertok, J. Conway, R. Conway, P. T. Cox, J. Dolen, R. Erbacher, M. Gardner, 
G. Grim, J. Gunion, B. Holbrook, W. Ko, A. Kopecky, R. Lander, F. C. Lin, T. Miceli, P. Murray, 
M. Nikolic, D. Pellett, F. Ricci-tam, J. Rowe, B. Rutherford, M. Searle, J. Smith, M. Squires, 
M. Tripathi, R. Vasquez Sierra, R. Yohay, V. Andreev, K. Arisaka, D. Cline, R. Cousins, J. Duris, 
S. Erhan, P. Everaerts, C. Farrell, J. Hauser, M. Ignatenko, C. Jarvis, J. Kubic, S. Otwinowski, 
C. Plager, G. Rakness, P. Schlein, P. Traczyk, V. Valuev, M. Weber, X. Yang, Y. Zheng, 
J. Babb, R. Clare, M. E. Dinardo, J. Ellison, J. W. Gary, F. Giordano, G. Hanson, G. Y. Jeng, 
J. G. Layter, H. Liu, O. R. Long, A. Luthra, H. Nguyen, S. Paramesvaran, B. C. Shen, J. Sturdy, 
S. Sumowidagdo, R. Wilken, S. Wimpenny, W. Andrews, J. G. Branson, G. B. Cerati, 
M. Cinquilli, S. Cittolin, D. Evans, F. Golf, A. Holzner, R. Kelley, M. Lebourgeois, J. Letts, 
I. Macneill, B. Mangano, T. Martin, A. Mrak-Tadel, S. Padhi, C. Palmer, G. Petrucciani, 
M. Pieri, M. Sani, I. Sfiligoi, V. Sharma, S. Simon, E. Sudano, M. Tadel, Y. Tu, A. Vartak, 
S. Wasserbaech, F. Würthwein, A. Yagil, J. Yoo, D. Barge, R. Bellan, C. Campagnari, 
M. DʼAlfonso, T. Danielson, K. Flowers, P. Geffert, J. Incandela, C. Justus, P. Kalavase, 
S. A. Koay, D. Kovalskyi, V. Krutelyov, S. Kyre, S. Lowette, G. Magazzu, N. Mccoll, 
V. Pavlunin, F. Rebassoo, J. Ribnik, J. Richman, R. Rossin, D. Stuart, W. To, C. West, 
D. White, D. Adamczyk, A. Apresyan, A. Barczyk, A. Bornheim, J. Bunn, Y. Chen, G. Denis, 
E. di Marco, J. Duarte, P. Galvez, M. Gataullin, D. Kcira, I. Legrand, V. Litvine, Y. Ma, Z. Maxa, 
A. Mott, A. Mughal, D. Nae, H. B. Newman, S. Ravot, C. Rogan, S. G. Rozsa, S. Shevchenko, 
K. Shin, M. Spiropulu, C. Steenberg, M. Thomas, V. Timciuc, F. van Lingen, J. Veverka, 
B. R. Voicu, R. Wilkinson, S. Xie, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, K. Zhu, R. Y. Zhu, B. Akgun, V. Azzolini, 
A. Calamba, R. Carroll, T. Ferguson, Y. Iiyama, D. W. Jang, S. Y. Jun, Y. F. Liu, M. Paulini, 
J. Russ, N. Terentyev, H. Vogel, I. Vorobiev, J. P. Cumalat, B. R. Drell, W. T. Ford, A. Gaz, 
B. Heyburn, D. Johnson, E. Luiggi Lopez, U. Nauenberg, J. G. Smith, K. Stenson, 
K. A. Ulmer, S. R. Wagner, S. L. Zang, L. Agostino, J. Alexander, A. Chatterjee, N. Eggert, 
L. K. Gibbons, B. Heltsley, A. Khukhunaishvili, B. Kreis, V. Kuznetsov, N. Mirman, 
G. Nicolas Kaufman, J. R. Patterson, D. Riley, A. Ryd, E. Salvati, S. Stroiney, W. Sun, 
W. D. Teo, J. Thom, J. Thompson, J. Tucker, J. Vaughan, Y. Weng, L. Winstrom, P. Wittich, 
D. Winn, S. Abdullin, M. Albert, M. Albrow, J. Anderson, G. Apollinari, M. Atac, W. Badgett, 
J. A. Bakken, B. Baldin, K. Banicz, L. A. T. Bauerdick, A. Beretvas, J. Berryhill, P. C. Bhat, 
M. Binkley, F. Borcherding, K. Burkett, J. N. Butler, V. Chetluru, H. W. K. Cheung, 
F. Chlebana, S. Cihangir, W. Dagenhart, G. Derylo, C. Dumitrescu, D. Dykstra, D. P. Eartly, 
J. E. Elias, V. D. Elvira, G. Eulisse, D. Evans, D. Fagan, I. Fisk, S. Foulkes, J. Freeman, I. Gaines, 
Y. Gao, P. Gartung, L. Giacchetti, E. Gottschalk, D. Green, Y. Guo, O. Gutsche, A. Hahn, 
J. Hanlon, R. M. Harris, J. Hirschauer, B. Holzman, B. Hooberman, J. Howell, C. Huang, 
D. Hufnagel, S. Jindariani, M. Johnson, C. D. Jones, U. Joshi, E. Juska, B. Kilminster, B. Klima, 
S. Kunori, S. Kwan, K. Larson, C. Leonidopoulos, J. Linacre, D. Lincoln, R. Lipton, 
J. A. Lopez Perez, S. Los, J. Lykken, K. Maeshima, J. M. Marraffino, S. Maruyama, D. Mason, 
P. McBride, T. McCauley, K. Mishra, S. Moccia, R. K. Mommsen, S. Mrenna, Y. Musienko, 
S. Muzaffar, C. Newman-Holmes, V. OʼDell, I. Osborne, J. Pivarski, S. Popescu, R. Pordes, 
O. Prokofyev, V. Rapsevicius, A. Ronzhin, P. Rossman, S. Ryu, E. Sexton-Kennedy, 
S. Sharma, T. M. Shaw, R. P. Smith, A. Soha, W. J. Spalding, L. Spiegel, W. Tanenbaum, 
L. Taylor, R. Thompson, A. Tiradani, S. Tkaczyk, N. V. Tran, L. Tuura, L. Uplegger, 
E. W. Vaandering, R. Vidal, J. Whitmore, W. Wu, F. Yang, J. Yarba, J. C. Yun, T. Zimmerman, 
D. Acosta, P. Avery, V. Barashko, D. Bourilkov, M. Chen, T. Cheng, S. Das, M. de Gruttola, 
G. P. di Giovanni, D. Dobur, S. Dolinsky, A. Drozdetskiy, R. D. Field, M. Fisher, Y. Fu, 
I. K. Furic, J. Gartner, L. Gorn, D. Holmes, J. Hugon, B. Kim, J. Konigsberg, A. Korytov, 
A. Kropivnitskaya, T. Kypreos, J. F. Low, A. Madorsky, K. Matchev, P. Milenovic, 
G. Mitselmakher, L. Muniz, M. Park, R. Remington, A. Rinkevicius, B. Scurlock, 
N. Skhirtladze, M. Snowball, J. Stasko, J. Yelton, M. Zakaria, V. Gaultney, S. Hewamanage, 
L. M. Lebolo, S. Linn, P. Markowitz, G. Martinez, J. L. Rodriguez, T. Adams, A. Askew, 
M. Bertoldi, J. Bochenek, J. Chen, W. G. D. Dharmaratna, B. Diamond, S. V. Gleyzer, J. Haas, 
S. Hagopian, V. Hagopian, M. Jenkins, K. F. Johnson, H. Prosper, S. Tentindo, 
V. Veeraraghavan, M. Weinberg, M. M. Baarmand, B. Dorney, M. Hohlmann, H. Kalakhety, 
R. Ralich, I. Vodopiyanov, F. Yumiceva, M. R. Adams, I. M. Anghel, L. Apanasevich, Y. Bai, 
V. E. Bazterra, R. R. Betts, I. Bucinskaite, J. Callner, R. Cavanaugh, M. H. Chung, 
O. Evdokimov, E. J. Garcia-Solis, L. Gauthier, C. E. Gerber, D. J. Hofman, R. Hollis, 
A. Iordanova, S. Khalatyan, G. J. Kunde, F. Lacroix, M. Malek, C. OʼBrien, C. Silkworth, 
C. Silvestre, A. Smoron, D. Strom, P. Turner, N. Varelas, U. Akgun, E. A. Albayrak, A. S. Ayan, 
B. Bilki, W. Clarida, P. Debbins, F. Duru, F. D. Ingram, E. McCliment, J. P. Merlo, 
H. Mermerkaya, A. Mestvirishvili, M. J. Miller, A. Moeller, J. Nachtman, C. R. Newsom, 
E. Norbeck, J. Olson, Y. Onel, F. Ozok, I. Schmidt, S. Sen, P. Tan, E. Tiras, J. Wetzel, T. Yetkin, 
K. Yi, B. A. Barnett, B. Blumenfeld, S. Bolognesi, D. Fehling, G. Giurgiu, A. V. Gritsan, 
Z. J. Guo, G. Hu, P. Maksimovic, S. Rappoccio, M. Swartz, A. Whitbeck, P. Baringer, A. Bean, 
G. Benelli, D. Coppage, O. Grachov, R. P. Kenny Iii, M. Murray, D. Noonan, V. Radicci, 
S. Sanders, R. Stringer, G. Tinti, J. S. Wood, V. Zhukova, A. F. Barfuss, T. Bolton, 
I. Chakaberia, A. Ivanov, S. Khalil, M. Makouski, Y. Maravin, S. Shrestha, I. Svintradze, 
J. Gronberg, D. Lange, D. Wright, A. Baden, R. Bard, M. Boutemeur, B. Calvert, S. C. Eno, 
J. A. Gomez, T. Grassi, N. J. Hadley, R. G. Kellogg, M. Kirn, T. Kolberg, Y. Lu, M. Marionneau, 
A. C. Mignerey, K. Pedro, A. Peterman, K. Rossato, A. Skuja, J. Temple, M. B. Tonjes, 
S. C. Tonwar, T. Toole, E. Twedt, A. Apyan, G. Bauer, J. Bendavid, W. Busza, E. Butz, I. A. Cali, 
M. Chan, V. Dutta, G. Gomez Ceballos, M. Goncharov, K. A. Hahn, Y. Kim, M. Klute, 
K. Krajczar, A. Levin, P. D. Luckey, T. Ma, S. Nahn, C. Paus, D. Ralph, C. Roland, G. Roland, 
M. Rudolph, G. S. F. Stephans, F. Stöckli, K. Sumorok, K. Sung, D. Velicanu, E. A. Wenger, 
R. Wolf, B. Wyslouch, M. Yang, Y. Yilmaz, A. S. Yoon, M. Zanetti, D. Bailleux, S. I. Cooper, 
P. Cushman, B. Dahmes, A. de Benedetti, R. Egeland, G. Franzoni, A. Gude, J. Haupt, 
A. Inyakin, S. C. Kao, K. Klapoetke, Y. Kubota, J. Mans, N. Pastika, R. Rusack, A. Singovsky, 
N. Tambe, J. Turkewitz, L. M. Cremaldi, R. Kroeger, L. Perera, R. Rahmat, J. Reidy, 
D. A. Sanders, D. Summers, G. Attebury, E. Avdeeva, K. Bloom, B. Bockelman, S. Bose, 
D. R. Claes, A. Dominguez, M. Eads, J. Keller, I. Kravchenko, J. Lazo-Flores, C. Lundstedt, 
H. Malbouisson, S. Malik, R. Snihur, G. R. Snow, D. Swanson, U. Baur, A. Godshalk, I. Iashvili, 
S. Jain, A. Kharchilava, A. Kumar, S. P. Shipkowski, K. Smith, G. Alverson, E. Barberis, 
D. Baumgartel, M. Chasco, J. Haley, J. Moromisato, D. Nash, J. Swain, D. Trocino, 
E. von Goeler, D. Wood, J. Zhang, A. Anastassov, B. Gobbi, A. Kubik, L. Lusito, N. Odell, 
R. A. Ofierzynski, B. Pollack, A. Pozdnyakov, M. Schmitt, S. Stoynev, M. Velasco, S. Won, 
L. Antonelli, B. Baumbaugh, D. Berry, A. Brinkerhoff, K. M. Chan, A. H. Heering, M. Hildreth, 
C. Jessop, D. J. Karmgard, N. Kellams, J. Kolb, K. Lannon, W. Luo, S. Lynch, N. Marinelli, 
D. M. Morse, T. Pearson, M. Planer, R. Ruchti, J. Slaunwhite, N. Valls, M. Wayne, M. Wolf, 
A. Woodard, B. Bylsma, L. S. Durkin, C. Hill, R. Hughes, K. Kotov, T. Y. Ling, D. Puigh, 
M. Rodenburg, C. J. Rush, V. Sehgal, C. Vuosalo, G. Williams, B. L. Winer, N. Adam, E. Berry, 
P. Elmer, D. Gerbaudo, V. Halyo, P. Hebda, J. Hegeman, A. Hunt, P. Jindal, D. Lopes Pegna, 
P. Lujan, D. Marlow, T. Medvedeva, M. Mooney, J. Olsen, P. Piroué, X. Quan, A. Raval, 
H. Saka, D. Stickland, C. Tully, J. S. Werner, T. Wildish, Z. Xie, S. C. Zenz, A. Zuranski, 
J. G. Acosta, M. Bonnett del Alamo, E. Brownson, X. T. Huang, A. Lopez, H. Mendez, 
S. Oliveros, J. E. Ramirez Vargas, A. Zatserklyaniy, E. Alagoz, K. Arndt, V. E. Barnes, 
D. Benedetti, G. Bolla, D. Bortoletto, A. Bujak, M. de Mattia, A. Everett, L. Gutay, Z. Hu, 
M. Jones, O. Koybasi, M. Kress, A. T. Laasanen, J. Lee, N. Leonardo, C. Liu, V. Maroussov, 
P. Merkel, D. H. Miller, J. Miyamoto, N. Neumeister, C. Rott, A. Roy, I. Shipsey, D. Silvers, 
A. Svyatkovskiy, M. Vidal Marono, H. D. Yoo, J. Zablocki, Y. Zheng, S. Guragain, 
N. Parashar, A. Adair, C. Boulahouache, V. Cuplov, K. M. Ecklund, F. J. M. Geurts, S. J. Lee, 
W. Li, J. H. Liu, M. Matveev, B. P. Padley, R. Redjimi, J. Roberts, A. Tumanov, P. Yepes, 
J. Zabel, B. Betchart, A. Bodek, H. Budd, Y. S. Chung, R. Covarelli, P. de Barbaro, R. Demina, 
Y. Eshaq, T. Ferbel, A. Garcia-Bellido, G. Ginther, P. Goldenzweig, Y. Gotra, J. Han, A. Harel, 
S. Korjenevski, D. C. Miner, D. Orbaker, W. Sakumoto, P. Slattery, D. Vishnevskiy, 
M. Zielinski, A. Bhatti, R. Ciesielski, L. Demortier, K. Goulianos, G. Lungu, S. Malik, 
C. Mesropian, S. Arora, A. Barker, J. P. Chou, C. Contreras-Campana, E. Contreras-Campana, 
D. Duggan, D. Ferencek, Y. Gershtein, R. Gray, E. Halkiadakis, D. Hidas, A. Lath, 
S. Panwalkar, M. Park, R. Patel, V. Rekovic, J. Robles, K. Rose, S. Salur, S. Schnetzer, C. Seitz, 
S. Somalwar, R. Stone, S. Thomas, G. Cerizza, M. Hollingsworth, G. Ragghianti, S. Spanier, 
Z. C. Yang, A. York, O. Bouhali, R. Eusebi, W. Flanagan, J. Gilmore, T. Kamon, V. Khotilovich, 
R. Montalvo, C. N. Nguyen, I. Osipenkov, Y. Pakhotin, A. Perloff, J. Roe, A. Safonov, 
T. Sakuma, S. Sengupta, I. Suarez, A. Tatarinov, D. Toback, N. Akchurin, J. Damgov, 
C. Dragoiu, P. R. Dudero, C. Jeong, K. Kovitanggoon, S. W. Lee, T. Libeiro, Y. Roh, A. Sill, 
I. Volobouev, R. Wigmans, E. Appelt, A. G. Delannoy, D. Engh, C. Florez, W. Gabella, 
S. Greene, A. Gurrola, W. Johns, P. Kurt, C. Maguire, A. Melo, M. Sharma, P. Sheldon, 
B. Snook, S. Tuo, J. Velkovska, D. Andelin, M. W. Arenton, M. Balazs, S. Boutle, S. Conetti, 
B. Cox, B. Francis, J. Goodell, R. Hirosky, A. Ledovskoy, C. Lin, C. Neu, D. Phillips II, J. Wood, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
18 of 19
S. Gollapinni, R. Harr, P. E. Karchin, C. Kottachchi Kankanamge Don, P. Lamichhane, 
M. Mattson, C. Milstène, A. Sakharov, M. Anderson, D. Belknap, J. N. Bellinger, L. Borrello, 
D. Bradley, D. Carlsmith, M. Cepeda, I. Crotty, S. Dasu, F. Feyzi, E. Friis, T. Gorski, L. Gray, 
K. S. Grogg, M. Grothe, R. Hall-Wilton, M. Herndon, A. Hervé, P. Klabbers, J. Klukas, 
J. Lackey, A. Lanaro, C. Lazaridis, J. Leonard, R. Loveless, S. Lusin, M. Magrans de Abril, 
W. Maier, A. Mohapatra, I. Ojalvo, F. Palmonari, G. A. Pierro, D. Reeder, I. Ross, A. Savin, 
W. H. Smith, J. Swanson, D. Wenman, Observation of a new boson at a mass of 125 GeV 
with the CMS experiment at the LHC. Phys. Lett. B 716, 30–61 (2012).
	 3.	 P. W. Higgs, Broken symmetries and the masses of gauge bosons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 
508–509 (1964).
	 4.	 F. Englert, R. Brout, Broken symmetry and the mass of gauge vector mesons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
13, 321–323 (1964).
	 5.	 R. D. Peccei, H. R. Quinn, CP conservation in the presence of pseudoparticles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
38, 1440–1443 (1977).
	 6.	 S. Weinberg, A new light boson? Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 223–226 (1978).
	 7.	 F. Wilczek, Problem of strong P and T invariance in the presence of instantons.  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 279–282 (1978).
	 8.	 P. A. M. Dirac, The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 117, 610–624 
(1928).
	 9.	 A. D. Sakharov, Violation of CP invariance, C asymmetry, and baryon asymmetry 
of the universe. Sov. Phys. Usp. 5, 32–35 (1967).
	10.	 J. H. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, R. Turlay, Evidence for the 2 decay of the ​​K​2​ 
0​ 
meson. Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 138–140 (1964).
	11.	 M. Kobayashi, T. Maskawa, CP-violation in the renormalizable theory of weak interaction. 
Prog. Theor. Phys. 49, 652–657 (1973).
	12.	 V. C. Rubin, W. K. Ford Jr., Rotation of the andromeda nebula from a spectroscopic survey 
of emission regions. Astrophys. J. 159, 379–403 (1970).
	13.	 N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Ballardini, A. J. Banday, 
R. B. Barreiro, N. Bartolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed, J.-P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, 
P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, 
C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese, J.-F. Cardoso, J. Carron, A. Challinor, H. C. Chiang, 
J. Chluba, L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, D. Contreras, B. P. Crill, F. Cuttaia, P. de Bernardis, 
G. de Zotti, J. Delabrouille, J.-M. Delouis, E. Di Valentino, J. M. Diego, O. Doré, M. Douspis, 
A. Ducout, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, G. Efstathiou, F. Elsner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, 
Y. Fantaye, M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, R. Fernandez-Cobos, F. Finelli, F. Forastieri, M. Frailis, 
A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frolov, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, R. T. Génova-Santos, 
M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gruppuso, 
J. E. Gudmundsson, J. Hamann, W. Handley, F. K. Hansen, D. Herranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, 
E. Hivon, Z. Huang, A. H. Jaffe, W. C. Jones, A. Karakci, E. Keihänen, R. Keskitalo, K. Kiiveri, 
J. Kim, T. S. Kisner, L. Knox, N. Krachmalnicoff, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, 
J.-M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, M. Le Jeune, P. Lemos, 
J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Lilley, V. Lindholm, 
M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lubin, Y.-Z. Ma, J. F. Macías-Pérez, G. Maggio, D. Maino, 
N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, A. Marcos-Caballero, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, M. Martinelli, 
E. Martínez-González, S. Matarrese, N. Mauri, J. D. M. Ewen, P. R. Meinhold, A. Melchiorri, 
A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M.-A. Miville-Deschênes, D. Molinari, 
L. Montier, G. Morgante, A. Moss, P. Natoli, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, L. Pagano, D. Paoletti, 
B. Partridge, G. Patanchon, H. V. Peiris, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Piacentini, L. Polastri, 
G. Polenta, J.-L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, A. Renzi, G. Rocha, 
C. Rosset, G. Roudier, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, B. Ruiz-Granados, L. Salvati, M. Sandri, 
M. Savelainen, D. Scott, E. P. S. Shellard, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, L. D. Spencer, R. Sunyaev, 
A.-S. Suur-Uski, J. A. Tauber, D. Tavagnacco, M. Tenti, L. Toffolatti, M. Tomasi, T. Trombetti, 
L. Valenziano, J. Valiviita, B. Van Tent, L. Vibert, P. Vielva, F. Villa, N. Vittorio, B. D. Wandelt, 
I. K. Wehus, M. White, S. D. M. White, A. Zacchei, A. Zonca, Planck 2018 results. 
VI. Cosmological parameters. Astron. Astrophys. 641, A6 (2020).
	14.	 P. J. E. Peebles, Large-scale background temperature and mass fluctuations due to 
scale-invariant primeval perturbations. Astrophys. J. Lett. 263, L1–L5 (1982).
	15.	 G. Jungman, M. Kamionkowski, K. Griest, Supersymmetric dark matter. Phys. Rep. 267, 
195–373 (1996).
	16.	 E. Aprile, J. Aalbers, F. Agostini, M. Alfonsi, L. Althueser, F. D. Amaro, M. Anthony, 
F. Arneodo, L. Baudis, B. Bauermeister, M. L. Benabderrahmane, T. Berger, P. A. Breur, 
A. Brown, A. Brown, E. Brown, S. Bruenner, G. Bruno, R. Budnik, C. Capelli, J. M. R. Cardoso, 
D. Cichon, D. Coderre, A. P. Colijn, J. Conrad, J. P. Cussonneau, M. P. Decowski, P. de Perio, 
P. di Gangi, A. di Giovanni, S. Diglio, A. Elykov, G. Eurin, J. Fei, A. D. Ferella, A. Fieguth, 
W. Fulgione, A. Gallo Rosso, M. Galloway, F. Gao, M. Garbini, C. Geis, L. Grandi, Z. Greene, 
H. Qiu, C. Hasterok, E. Hogenbirk, J. Howlett, R. Itay, F. Joerg, B. Kaminsky, S. Kazama, 
A. Kish, G. Koltman, H. Landsman, R. F. Lang, L. Levinson, Q. Lin, S. Lindemann, M. Lindner, 
F. Lombardi, J. A. M. Lopes, J. Mahlstedt, A. Manfredini, T. Marrodán Undagoitia, 
J. Masbou, D. Masson, M. Messina, K. Micheneau, K. Miller, A. Molinario, K. Morå, M. Murra, 
J. Naganoma, K. Ni, U. Oberlack, B. Pelssers, F. Piastra, J. Pienaar, V. Pizzella, G. Plante, 
R. Podviianiuk, N. Priel, D. Ramírez García, L. Rauch, S. Reichard, C. Reuter, B. Riedel, 
A. Rizzo, A. Rocchetti, N. Rupp, J. M. F. dos Santos, G. Sartorelli, M. Scheibelhut, 
S. Schindler, J. Schreiner, D. Schulte, M. Schumann, L. Scotto Lavina, M. Selvi, P. Shagin, 
E. Shockley, M. Silva, H. Simgen, D. Thers, F. Toschi, G. Trinchero, C. Tunnell, N. Upole, 
M. Vargas, O. Wack, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Wei, C. Weinheimer, C. Wittweg, J. Wulf, J. Ye, 
Y. Zhang, T. Zhu; XENON Collaboration, Dark matter search results from a one ton-year 
exposure of XENON1T. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 111302 (2018).
	17.	 D. Clowe, A. Gonzalez, M. Markevitch, Weak‐Lensing mass reconstruction 
of the interacting cluster 1E 0657−558: Direct evidence for the existence of dark matter. 
Astrophys. J. 604, 596–603 (2004).
	18.	 C. Abel, S. Afach, N. J. Ayres, C. A. Baker, G. Ban, G. Bison, K. Bodek, V. Bondar, M. Burghoff, 
E. Chanel, Z. Chowdhuri, P. J. Chiu, B. Clement, C. B. Crawford, M. Daum, S. Emmenegger, 
L. Ferraris-Bouchez, M. Fertl, P. Flaux, B. Franke, A. Fratangelo, P. Geltenbort, K. Green, 
W. C. Griffith, M. van der Grinten, Z. D. Grujić, P. G. Harris, L. Hayen, W. Heil, R. Henneck, 
V. Hélaine, N. Hild, Z. Hodge, M. Horras, P. Iaydjiev, S. N. Ivanov, M. Kasprzak, Y. Kermaidic, 
K. Kirch, A. Knecht, P. Knowles, H. C. Koch, P. A. Koss, S. Komposch, A. Kozela, A. Kraft, 
J. Krempel, M. Kuźniak, B. Lauss, T. Lefort, Y. Lemière, A. Leredde, P. Mohanmurthy, 
A. Mtchedlishvili, M. Musgrave, O. Naviliat-Cuncic, D. Pais, F. M. Piegsa, E. Pierre, G. Pignol, 
C. Plonka-Spehr, P. N. Prashanth, G. Quéméner, M. Rawlik, D. Rebreyend, I. Rienäcker, 
D. Ries, S. Roccia, G. Rogel, D. Rozpedzik, A. Schnabel, P. Schmidt-Wellenburg, 
N. Severijns, D. Shiers, R. Tavakoli Dinani, J. A. Thorne, R. Virot, J. Voigt, A. Weis, 
E. Wursten, G. Wyszynski, J. Zejma, J. Zenner, G. Zsigmond, Measurement of the 
permanent electric dipole moment of the neutron. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 081803 (2020).
	19.	 Y. Nambu, Axial vector current conservation in weak interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 
380–382 (1960).
	 20.	 J. Goldstone, Field theories with superconductor solutions. Nuovo Cim. 19, 154–164 (1961).
	21.	 G. Grilli di Cortona, E. Hardy, J. Pardo Vega, G. Villadoro, The QCD axion, precisely. 
J. High Energy Phys. 2016, 34 (2016).
	22.	 L. Di Luzio, M. Giannotti, E. Nardi, L. Visinelli, The landscape of QCD axion models. 
Phys. Rep. 870, 1–117 (2020).
	23.	 M. Dine, W. Fischler, M. Srednicki, A simple solution to the strong CP problem 
with a harmless axion. Phys. Lett. B 104, 199–202 (1981).
	24.	 A. R. Zhitnitsky, On possible suppression of the axion Hadron interactions. (In Russian). 
Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 31, 260 (1980).
	25.	 J. E. Kim, Weak-interaction singlet and strong CP invariance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 103–107 
(1979).
	26.	 M. Shifman, A. Vainshtein, V. Zakharov, Can confinement ensure natural cp invariance 
of strong interactions? Nucl. Phys. B 166, 493–506 (1980).
	27.	 J. Moody, F. Wilczek, New macroscopic forces? Phys. Rev. D 30, 130–138 (1984).
	28.	 A. Arvanitaki, A. A. Geraci, Resonantly detecting axion-mediated forces with nuclear 
magnetic resonance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 161801 (2014).
	29.	 P. Sikivie, Experimental tests of the ‘invisible’ axion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1415–1417 (1983).
	30.	 R. Barbieri, M. Cerdonio, G. Fiorentini, S. Vitale, Axion to magnon conversion: A scheme 
for the detection of galactic axions. Phys. Lett. B 226, 357–360 (1989).
	31.	 D. Budker, P. W. Graham, M. Ledbetter, S. Rajendran, A. O. Sushkov, Proposal for a cosmic 
axion spin precession experiment (CASPEr). Phys. Rev. X 4, 021030 (2014).
	32.	 S. Weinberg, Nonlinear realizations of chiral symmetry. Phys. Rev. 166, 1568–1577 (1968).
	33.	 S. J. Asztalos, G. Carosi, C. Hagmann, D. Kinion, K. van Bibber, M. Hotz, L. J. Rosenberg, 
G. Rybka, J. Hoskins, J. Hwang, P. Sikivie, D. B. Tanner, R. Bradley, J. Clarke, SQUID-based 
microwave cavity search for dark-matter axions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 041301 (2010).
	34.	 T. Braine, R. Cervantes, N. Crisosto, N. du, S. Kimes, L. J. Rosenberg, G. Rybka, J. Yang, 
D. Bowring, A. S. Chou, R. Khatiwada, A. Sonnenschein, W. Wester, G. Carosi, N. Woollett, 
L. D. Duffy, R. Bradley, C. Boutan, M. Jones, B. H. LaRoque, N. S. Oblath, M. S. Taubman, 
J. Clarke, A. Dove, A. Eddins, S. R. O’Kelley, S. Nawaz, I. Siddiqi, N. Stevenson, A. Agrawal, 
A. V. Dixit, J. R. Gleason, S. Jois, P. Sikivie, J. A. Solomon, N. S. Sullivan, D. B. Tanner, 
E. Lentz, E. J. Daw, J. H. Buckley, P. M. Harrington, E. A. Henriksen, K. W. Murch; ADMX 
Collaboration, Extended search for the invisible axion with the axion dark matter 
experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 101303 (2020).
	35.	 Y. K. Semertzidis, J. E. Kim, S. W. Youn, J. Choi, W. Chung, S. Haciomeroglu, D. Kim, J. Kim, 
B. R. Ko, O. Kwon, A. Matlashov, L. Miceli, H. Natori, S. Park, M. J. Lee, S. Lee, E. Sala, Y. Shin, 
T. Seong, S. Uchaykin, D. Ahn, S. Ahn, S. P. Chang, W. Cheong, H. Jeong, J. Joeng, D. O. Kim, 
J. Kim, O. Kim, Y. Kim, C. Kutlu, D. Lee, Z. Omarov, C.-K. Sung, B. Yeo, A. K. Yi, M. Yildiz, 
Axion dark matter research with IBS/CAPP. arXiv:1910.11591 [physics.ins-det]  
(25 October 2019).
	36.	 P. W. Graham, S. Rajendran, New observables for direct detection of axion dark matter. 
Phys. Rev. D 88, 035023 (2013).
	37.	 N. Crescini, D. Alesini, C. Braggio, G. Carugno, D. di Gioacchino, C. S. Gallo, 
U. Gambardella, C. Gatti, G. Iannone, G. Lamanna, C. Ligi, A. Lombardi, A. Ortolan, 
S. Pagano, R. Pengo, G. Ruoso, C. C. Speake, L. Taffarello, Operation of a ferromagnetic 
axion haloscope at ma = 58 eV. Eur. Phys. J. C 78, 703 (2018).
	38.	 D. J. E. Marsh, K. C. Fong, E. W. Lentz, L. Šmejkal, M. N. Ali, Proposal to detect dark matter 
using axionic topological antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 121601 (2019).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Chadha-Day et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabj3618 (2022)     23 February 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | REVI EW
19 of 19
	39.	 D. Aybas, J. Adam, E. Blumenthal, A. V. Gramolin, D. Johnson, A. Kleyheeg, S. Afach, 
J. W. Blanchard, G. P. Centers, A. Garcon, M. Engler, N. L. Figueroa, M. G. Sendra, 
A. Wickenbrock, M. Lawson, T. Wang, T. Wu, H. Luo, H. Mani, P. Mauskopf, P. W. Graham, 
S. Rajendran, D. F. J. Kimball, D. Budker, A. O. Sushkov, Search for axionlike dark matter 
using solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 141802 (2021).
	40.	 D. Horns, J. Jaeckel, A. Lindner, A. Lobanov, J. Redondo, A. Ringwald, Searching for WISPy 
cold dark matter with a dish antenna. J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 2013, 016 (2013).
	41.	 A. Caldwell, G. Dvali, B. Majorovits, A. Millar, G. Raffelt, J. Redondo, O. Reimann, F. Simon, 
F. Steffen; MADMAX Working Group, Dielectric haloscopes: A new way to detect axion 
dark matter. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 091801 (2017).
	42.	 J. Egge, S. Knirck, B. Majorovits, C. Moore, O. Reimann, A first proof of principle booster 
setup for the MADMAX dielectric haloscope. Eur. Phys. J. C 80, 392 (2020).
	43.	 Y. Kahn, B. R. Safdi, J. Thaler, Broadband and resonant approaches to axion dark matter 
detection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 141801 (2016).
	44.	 C. P. Salemi, J. W. Foster, J. L. Ouellet, A. Gavin, K. M. W. Pappas, S. Cheng, K. A. Richardson, 
R. Henning, Y. Kahn, R. Nguyen, N. L. Rodd, B. R. Safdi, L. Winslow, Search for low-mass 
axion dark matter with ABRACADABRA-10 cm. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 081801 (2021).
	45.	 C. S. Reynolds, M. C. D. Marsh, H. R. Russell, A. C. Fabian, R. N. Smith, F. Tombesi, 
S. Veilleux, Astrophysical limits on very light axion-like particles from Chandra grating 
spectroscopy of NGC 1275. Astrophys. J. 890, 59 (2020).
	46.	 J. W. Brockway, E. D. Carlson, G. G. Raffelt, SN 1987A gamma-ray limits on the conversion 
of pseudoscalars. Phys. Lett. B 383, 439–443 (1996).
	47.	 A. Ayala, I. Domínguez, M. Giannotti, A. Mirizzi, O. Straniero, Revisiting the bound 
on axion-photon coupling from globular clusters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 191302 (2014).
	48.	 V. Anastassopoulos, S. Aune, K. Barth, A. Belov, H. Bräuninger, G. Cantatore, 
J. M. Carmona, J. F. Castel, S. A. Cetin, F. Christensen, J. I. Collar, T. Dafni, M. Davenport, 
T. A. Decker, A. Dermenev, K. Desch, C. Eleftheriadis, G. Fanourakis, E. Ferrer-Ribas, 
H. Fischer, J. A. García, A. Gardikiotis, J. G. Garza, E. N. Gazis, T. Geralis, I. Giomataris, 
S. Gninenko, C. J. Hailey, M. D. Hasinoff, D. H. H. Hoffmann, F. J. Iguaz, I. G. Irastorza, 
A. Jakobsen, J. Jacoby, K. Jakovčić, J. Kaminski, M. Karuza, N. Kralj, M. Krčmar, S. Kostoglou, 
C. Krieger, B. Lakić, J. M. Laurent, A. Liolios, A. Ljubičić, G. Luzón, M. Maroudas, L. Miceli, 
S. Neff, I. Ortega, T. Papaevangelou, K. Paraschou, M. J. Pivovaroff, G. Raffelt, M. Rosu, 
J. Ruz, E. R. Chóliz, I. Savvidis, S. Schmidt, Y. K. Semertzidis, S. K. Solanki, L. Stewart, 
T. Vafeiadis, J. K. Vogel, S. C. Yildiz, K. Zioutas, New CAST limit on the axion-photon 
interaction. Nat. Phys. 13, 584–590 (2017).
	49.	 J. Preskill, M. B. Wise, F. Wilczek, Cosmology of the invisible axion. Phys. Lett. B 120, 
127–132 (1983).
	50.	 L. F. Abbott, P. Sikivie, A cosmological bound on the invisible axion. Phys. Lett. B 120, 
133–136 (1983).
	51.	 M. Dine, W. Fischler, The not-so-harmless axion. Phys. Lett. B 120, 137–141 (1983).
	52.	 T. W. B. Kibble, Topology of cosmic domains and strings. J. Phys. A 9, 1387–1398 (1976).
	 53.	 W. H. Zurek, Cosmological experiments in superfluid helium? Nature 317, 505–508 (1985).
	54.	 C. J. Hogan, M. J. Rees, Axion miniclusters. Phys. Lett. B 205, 228–230 (1988).
	55.	 M. Khlopov, B. Malomed, I. Zeldovich, Gravitational instability of scalar fields 
and formation of primordial black holes. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 215, 575–589 (1985).
	56.	 E. Seidel, W. M. Suen, Oscillating soliton stars. Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1659–1662 (1991).
	57.	 F. S. Guzman, L. A. Urena-Lopez, Gravitational cooling of self-gravitating bose 
condensates. Astrophys. J. 645, 814–819 (2006).
	58.	 H.-Y. Schive, T. Chiueh, T. Broadhurst, Cosmic structure as the quantum interference 
of a coherent dark wave. Nat. Phys. 10, 496–499 (2014).
	59.	 L. Hui, A. Joyce, M. J. Landry, X. Li, Vortices and waves in light dark matter. JCAP 2021, 011 
(2021).
	60.	 A. Picozzi, J. Garnier, Incoherent soliton turbulence in nonlocal nonlinear media.  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 233901 (2011).
	61.	 D. J. E. Marsh, J. C. Niemeyer, Strong constraints on fuzzy dark matter from ultrafaint 
dwarf galaxy eridanus II. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 051103 (2019).
	62.	 K. K. Rogers, H. V. Peiris, Strong bound on canonical ultra-light axion dark matter 
from the Lyman-alpha forest. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 071302 (2021).
	63.	 R. Hlozek, D. J. E. Marsh, D. Grin, Using the full power of the cosmic microwave 
background to probe axion dark matter. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 476, 3063–3085 (2018).
	64.	 R. Penrose, R. Floyd, Extraction of rotational energy from a black hole. Nature 229, 
177–179 (1971).
	65.	 A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky, N. Kaloper, J. March-Russell, String axiverse. 
Phys. Rev. D 81, 123530 (2010).
	66.	 M. J. Stott, D. J. E. Marsh, Black hole spin constraints on the mass spectrum and number 
of axionlike fields. Phys. Rev. D 98, 083006 (2018).
	67.	 N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis, C. Vafa, The string landscape, black holes and gravity 
as the weakest force. JHEP 2007, 060 (2007).
	68.	 G. G. Raffelt, Astrophysical axion bounds. Lect. Notes Phys. 741, 51–71 (2008).
	69.	 V. B. Klaer, G. D. Moore, The dark-matter axion mass. JCAP 2017, 049 (2017).
	 70.	 M. Gorghetto, E. Hardy, G. Villadoro, More axions from strings. SciPost Phys. 10, 050 (2021).
	71.	 T. Hiramatsu, M. Kawasaki, K. Saikawa, T. Sekiguchi, Axion cosmology with long-lived 
domain walls. JCAP 2013, 001 (2013).
	72.	 P. Svrcek, E. Witten, Axions in string theory. J. High Energy Phys. 2006, 051 (2006).
	 73.	 F. Wilczek, Two applications of axion electrodynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1799–1802 (1987).
	74.	 R. Li, J. Wang, X.-L. Qi, S.-C. Zhang, Dynamical axion field in topological magnetic 
insulators. Nat. Phys. 6, 284–288 (2010).
	75.	 J. Zhang, D. Wang, M. Shi, T. Zhu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Large dynamical axion field 
in topological antiferromagnetic insulator Mn2Bi2Te5. Chin. Phys. Lett. 37, 077304 (2020).
	76.	 Y. Cheng, B. Peng, Z. Hu, Z. Zhou, M. Liu, Recent development and status 
of magnetoelectric materials and devices. Phys. Lett. A 382, 3018–3025 (2018).
	 77.	 C. A. J. O’Hare, A. M. Green, Axion astronomy with microwave cavity experiments. Phys. Rev. 
95, 063017 (2017).
	78.	 K. A. Frank, S. A. Zhekov, S. Park, R. M. Cray, E. Dwek, D. N. Burrows, Chandra observes 
the end of an era in SN 1987a. Astrophys. J. 829, 40 (2016).
	79.	 S. Orlando, M. Miceli, M. L. Pumo, F. Bocchino, Supernova 1987A: A template to link 
supernovae to their remnants. Astrophys. J. 810, 168 (2015).
	80.	 R. Indebetouw, M. Matsuura, E. Dwek, G. Zanardo, M. J. Barlow, M. Baes, P. Bouchet, 
D. N. Burrows, R. Chevalier, G. C. Clayton, C. Fransson, B. Gaensler, R. Kirshner, 
M. Lakićević, K. S. Long, P. Lundqvist, I. Martí-Vidal, J. Marcaide, R. M. Cray, M. Meixner, 
C.-Y. Ng, S. Park, G. Sonneborn, L. Staveley-Smith, C. Vlahakis, J. van Loon, Dust 
production and particle acceleration in supernova 1987A revealed with ALMA. Astrophys. 
J. Lett. 782, L2 (2014).
	 81.	 A. Vaquero, J. Redondo, J. Stadler, Early seeds of axion miniclusters. JCAP 2019, 012 (2019).
	82.	 E. Armengaud, D. Attié, S. Basso, P. Brun, N. Bykovskiy, J. M. Carmona, J. F. Castel, 
S. Cebrián, M. Cicoli, M. Civitani, C. Cogollos, J. P. Conlon, D. Costa, T. Dafni, R. Daido, 
A. V. Derbin, M. A. Descalle, K. Desch, I. S. Dratchnev, B. Döbrich, A. Dudarev, E. Ferrer-Ribas, 
I. Fleck, J. Galán, G. Galanti, L. Garrido, D. Gascon, L. Gastaldo, C. Germani, G. Ghisellini, 
M. Giannotti, I. Giomataris, S. Gninenko, N. Golubev, R. Graciani, I. G. Irastorza, K. Jakovčić, 
J. Kaminski, M. Krčmar, C. Krieger, B. Lakić, T. Lasserre, P. Laurent, O. Limousin, A. Lindner, 
I. Lomskaya, B. Lubsandorzhiev, G. Luzón, M. C. D. Marsh, C. Margalejo, F. Mescia, 
M. Meyer, J. Miralda-Escudé, H. Mirallas, V. N. Muratova, X. F. Navick, C. Nones, A. Notari, 
A. Nozik, A. O. de Solórzano, V. Pantuev, T. Papaevangelou, G. Pareschi, K. Perez, 
E. Picatoste, M. J. Pivovaroff, J. Redondo, A. Ringwald, M. Roncadelli, E. Ruiz-Chóliz, J. Ruz, 
K. Saikawa, J. Salvadó, M. P. Samperiz, T. Schiffer, S. Schmidt, U. Schneekloth, M. Schott, 
H. Silva, G. Tagliaferri, F. Takahashi, F. Tavecchio, H. Kate, I. Tkachev, S. Troitsky, 
E. Unzhakov, P. Vedrine, J. K. Vogel, C. Weinsheimer, A. Weltman, W. Yin, Physics potential 
of the International Axion Observatory (IAXO). JCAP 2019, 047 (2019).
	83.	 J. Veltmaat, J. C. Niemeyer, B. Schwabe, Formation and structure of ultralight bosonic 
dark matter halos. Phys. Rev. D 98, 043509 (2018).
	84.	 Chandra X-ray Observatory, Supernova 1987A: The Dawn of a New Era for Supernova 
1987A; https://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/2017/sn1987a/.
	85.	 G. Dematteis, T. Grafke, M. Onorato, E. Vanden-Eijnden, Experimental evidence of 
hydrodynamic instantons: The universal route to rogue waves. Phys. Rev. X 9, 041057 (2019).
	86.	 S. Coleman, Aspects of Symmetry (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988).
	87.	 C. Vafa, E. Witten, Parity conservation in quantum chromodynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 
535–536 (1984).
	88.	 H. Georgi, L. Randall, Flavor conserving cp violation in invisible axion models. Nucl. Phys. B 
276, 241–252 (1986).
Acknowledgments: We were saddened to hear during the completion of this paper of the 
deaths of Toshihide Maskawa and Steven Weinberg, whose deep theoretical insights underlie 
the topics reviewed here. We are indebted to Marco Gorghetto for providing an image used in 
Fig. 4, to M. Stott for providing an image used in Fig. 6, to Philip Mocz who provided the 
images used in Fig. 5, and to all authors who have allowed us to reproduce images from their 
published work. The Chandra composite image in Fig. 6 has credit to the following sources: 
x-ray, NASA/CXC/SAO/PSU (78); optical, NASA/STScI (79); millimeter: ESO/NAOJ/NRAO/ALMA 
(80). We thank Y. Smertzidis (CAPP), I. Williams (University of Surrey), and S. Youn (CAPP) for 
comments on the draft. Funding: F.C.-D. is supported by the U.K. STFC grant ST/P001246/1 
and Stephen Hawking Fellowship EP/T01668X/1. The work of J.E. was supported in part by the 
U.K. STFC via grant ST/T000759/1 and in part by the Estonian Research Council via grant 
MOBTT5. D.J.E.M. was previously supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and 
the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research and is now supported by the U.K. STFC 
Ernest Rutherford Fellowship. Author contributions: All authors contributed equally to the 
writing and editing of the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they 
have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate 
the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 14 May 2021
Accepted 14 January 2022
Published 23 February 2022
10.1126/sciadv.abj3618
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN ) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2022 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Axion dark matter: What is it and why now?
Francesca Chadha-Day, John Ellis, and David J. E. Marsh
Sci. Adv., 8 (8), eabj3618. 
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abj3618
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.abj3618
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 04, 2023

