
SCIENTIFIC 
REASONING 
THE BAYESIAN 
APPROACH 
Colin Howson and Peter Urbach 
THIRD EDITION 
... if this [probability] calculus be condemned, then the 
whole of the sciences must also be condemned. 
-Henri Poincare 
Our assent ought to be regulated by the 
grounds of probability. 
-John Locke 
OPEN COURT 
Chicago and La Salle, Illinois 

To order books from Open Court, call toll-free 1-800-815-22110, or visit our 
website at www.opencourtbooks.com. 
Open Court Publishing Company is a division of Carus Publishing Company. 
CopyrightC 2006 by Canis Publishing Company 
First printing 2006 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced. stored in a 
retrieval system. or transmitted, in any form or by any means. electronic. mcchanieal. 
photocopyi ng. rccording. or otherwise. without the prior written permission of the 
publisher, Open Court Publishing Company. a division of Carus Publishing Company. 
315 Fifth Street. P.O. Box 300. Peru, Illinois 6 1354-0300. 
Printed and bound in the l; nited States of America. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Howson. Colin. 
Scientific reasoning : the Bayesian approach Colin lIowson and Peter 
Urbaeh.- 3rd cd. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references (p. 
) and index. 
ISB'J-IJ: 9n-0-81 2(,-'}578-6 (trade pbk. : alk. paper) 
IS8'J-10: 0-gI26-9578-X (trade pbk.: alk. papcr) 
I. Seicncc--Philosophy. 
2. Reasoning. 
3. Bayesian statistical dccision theory. 
I. Urbach, Peter. 
II. Title. 
Q1 75. 1187 2005 
50 I 
de22 
200502486S 

Contents 
Preface to the Third Edition 
Xl 
Introduction 
The Problem of Induction 
Popper on the Problem of Induction 
2 
l ~r Scientific Method in Practice 
3 
.iI Probabilistic Induction: The Bayesian 
Approach 
6 
The Objectivity Ideal 
9 
The Plan of This Book 
10 
The Probability Calculus 
13 
The Axioms 
13 
." ~ 
Useful Theorems of the Calculus 
16 
=c., 
Discussion 
22 
Countable Additivity 
26 
Random Variables 
29 
Distributions 
30 
Probability Densities 
31 
2.11 Expected Values 
32 
The Mean and Standard Deviation 
33 

VI 
CONTENTS 
• .1 
Probabilistic Independence 
35 
~; Conditional Distributions 
37 
The Bivariate Normal 
38 
The Binomial Distribution 
39 
.n The Weak Law of Large Numbers 
41 
The laws of Probability 
45 
Prologue: Frequency-Probability 
45 
Measuring Uncertainty 
51 
Utilities and Probabilities 
57 
Consistency 
63 
The Axioms 
67 
The Principal Principle 
76 
Bayesian Probability and Inductive 
Scepticism 
79 
3.h Updating Rules 
80 
The Cox-Good Argument 
85 
Exchangeability 
88 
Bayesian Induction: 
Deterministic Theories 
91 
Bayesian Confirmation 
91 
Checking a Consequence 
93 
The Probability of the Evidence 
97 
The Ravens Paradox 
99 
The Duhem Problem 
103 
Good data, Bad Data, and Data Too 
Good to be True 
114 

CONTENTS 
Ad Hoc Hypotheses 
Designing Experiments 
Under-Determination and Prior 
Probabilities 
Conclusion 
Classical Inference: 
Significance Tests and Estimation 
Falsificationism in Statistics 
Fisherian Significance Tests 
Neyman-Pearson Significance Tests 
S.d Significance and Inductive 
Significance 
Testing Composite Hypotheses 
Classical Estimation Theory 
Point Estimation 
Interval Estimation 
Sampling 
Conclusion 
Statistical Inference in Practice: 
VII 
118 
127 
128 
130 
131 
131 
133 
143 
149 
161 
163 
163 
169 
177 
181 
Clinical Trials 
183 
Clinical Trials: The Central Problem 
183 
Control and Randomization 
185 
Signi ficance-Test Defences of 
Randomization 
188 
6.d The Eliminative-Induction Defence of 
Randomization 
194 

viii 
Sequential Clinical Trials 
Practical and Ethical Considerations 
Conclusion 
Regression Analysis 
Simple Linear Regression 
7.. 
The Method of Least Squares 
7 
Why Least Squares? 
CONTENTS 
197 
202 
203 
205 
205 
207 
209 
Prediction 
217 
I.e Examining the Form of a Regression 
220 
7. 1' 
Conclusion 
235 
Bayesian Induction: 
Statistical Theories 
237 
The Question of Subjectivity 
237 
{'~ ", 
The Principle of Stable Estimation 
245 
Describing the Evidence 
247 
Sampling 
252 
Testing Causal Hypotheses 
254 
Conclusion 
262 
Finale: Some General Issues 
265 
The Charge of Subjectivism 
265 
I The Principle of Indifference 
266 
Invariance Considerations 
273 
Informationlessness 
276 
~).aA Simplicity 
288 
9.13 Summary 
296 

CONTENTS 
The Old-Evidence Problem 
Conclusion 
Bibliography 
Index 
IX 
297 
301 
303 
319 


Preface to the Third Edition 
How should hypotheses be evaluated, what is the role of evidence 
in that process, what are the most informative experiments to per-
form? Questions such as these are ancient ones. They have been 
answered in various ways, often exciting lively controversy, not 
surprisingly in view of the important practical implications that 
different answers carry. Our approach to these questions, which 
we set out in this book, is the Bayesian one, based on the idea that 
valid inductive reasoning is reasoning according to the formal 
principles of probabi lity. 
The Bayesian theory derives from the Memoir of the mathe-
matician and divine, Thomas Bayes, which was published posthu-
mously by his friend Richard Price in 1763. The principles set out 
by Bayes had considerable influence in scientific and philosophi-
cal circles, though worries about the status of the prior probabili-
ties of scientific theories meant that the whole approach continued 
to be dogged by debate. And by the 1920s, an alternative approach, 
often called 'Classical', achieved dominance, due to powerful 
advocacy by R. A. Fisher and many other distinguished statisti-
cians, and by Karl Popper and similarly distinguished philoso-
phers. Most of the twentieth century was dominated by the 
classical approach, and in that period Bayesianism was scarcely 
taught in universities, except to disparage it, and Bayesians were 
widely dismissed as thoroughly misguided. 
But in recent years, there has been a sea-change, a paradigm 
shift. A search of the Web of Science database shows, during the 
1980s, a regular trickle of around 200 articles published annually 
with the word or prefix 'Bayes' in thei r titles. Suddenly, in 1991 , 
this number shot up to 600 and by 1994 exceeded 800; by 2000 
it had reached almost 1,400. (Williamson and Corfield, 200 I, 
p. 3). This book was one of the first to present a comprehensive, 

XII 
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
philosophical case for the Bayesian approach to scientific rea-
soning and to show its superiority over the classical. Its first and 
second editions were published in 1989 and 1993, and from the 
figures quoted it is clear that the book anticipated a powerful and 
sophisticatcd resurgence of the once-dominant Bayesian 
approach. 
This new edition amends, updates, re-organizes, and seeks to 
make the subject more accessible. The text is intended to be sclf-
contained, calling, in the main, on only elementary mathcmatical 
and statistical ideas. Nevertheless, somc parts are more complex, 
and some more essential to the overall argument than others. 
Accordingly, wc would suggest that readers who are not already 
familiar with mathcmatical probability but who wish to gain an 
initial understanding of the Bayesian approach, and to appreciate 
its power, adopt the following plan of attack. First, read Chapter 
I, which sets the scene, as it werc, with a brief historical 
ovcrview of various approaches to scientific inference. Then, 
look at section a of Chapter 2, which gives the simple principles 
or axioms of the probability calculus, and section b, where there 
are some of the probabi lity theorems that will be found useful in 
the scientific context: the central theorem here is Bayes's theo-
rem in its various forms. We then suggest that the reader look at 
the first few sections of Chaptcr 4, where Bayes's theorcm is 
applied to some simple reasoning patterns that are found partic-
ularly when deterministic theorems arc handled; thi s chapter also 
compares the Bayesian approach with some others, such as 
Popper's well-known falsificationist methodology. Chapters 5 to 
7 deal with non-deterministic, that is, statistical hypotheses, giv-
ing a critical exposition of thc classical, or frequentist, methods 
that constitute the leading alternative to the Bayesian approach; 
the main classical ideas can be gleaned from sections a to d and 
f and g of Chapter 5. The final part of the mini-course we are 
suggesting is to examine Chapter 9, where somc of the more 
widespread criticisms that have becn levelled against the 
Bayesian approach are discussed (and rejccted). 
There are some marked differences between this third edition 
and the preceding ones. For example, some of the objections to 
the Bayesian theory we considered in the second edition have not 
stood the test of time. There have also been changes of mind: one 

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
XIII 
of the most prominent examples is the fact that now we accept the 
strength of de Finetti's well-known arguments against countable 
additivity, and have accordingly dropped it as a generally valid 
principle. Other changes have been largely dictated by the desire 
to make this edition more compact and thereby more accessible. 
We hope that this indeed turns out to be the casco 


CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
1.0 
The Problem of Induction 
Scientific hypotheses have a general character relative to the 
empirical observations they are supposed to explain, carrying 
implications about phenomena and events that could not possibly 
figure in any actual evidence. For instance, Mendel's genetic the-
ory concerns all inherited traits in every kind of flora and fauna, 
including those that are now extinct and those that are yet to 
evolve. There is therefore a logical gap between the information 
derived from empirical observation and the content of typical sci-
entific theories. How then can such information give us reason-
able confidence in those theories'? This is the traditional Problem 
of Induction. 
One answer that has been suggested claims that our stock of 
information is not in fact restricted to the empirical. A number of 
philosophers have taken the view that there are certain principles 
which are sufficiently rich to bridge the logical gap between 
observations and theories, whose truth we are able to cognize a 
priori. Kant, for example, held the proposition 'every event has a 
cause' to be such a principle and he devoted much space and dif-
ficult argumentation to proving that it was indeed a priori. But 
whether or not the argument is valid is beside the point, because 
the principle would not solve the problem of induction anyway. 
That problem is not essentially concerned with causality; and 
where specifically causal theories are at issue, the question is not 
whether every event has a cause, but what the particular cause or 
causes of a particular observed effect are. Kant (1783, p. 9) tells 
us that his "dogmatic slumber" was disturbed by Hume's brilliant 
analysis of the problem of induction, yet he seems not to have 
fully woken up to its significance. 

2 
CHAPTER 1 
Another bridging principle that has been proposed is the so-
called Principle of the Uniformity of Nature, which Humc (1 777, 
Section 32) summed up in the phrase "the future will resemble the 
past". Some philosophers have held that whcn scientists defend 
their thcorics, they are tacitly relying on this principle. But it too 
cannot help with induction. The problem is that the principle is 
empty, since it does not say in what particular rcspects the future 
and the past are similar. And if it is to connect particular observa-
tions with a particular theory, it needs a more specific formula-
tion. For example, in ordcr to act as a bridgc between observations 
that certain metals expandcd on certain occasions when they wcre 
heated and the general proposition that those metals will expand 
when they are heated in future, the principle nceds to be framed 
in terms of those particular properties. And to infer that all met-
als expand when they are heated would require a more elaborate 
formulation still. But, as Hume observed, such versions of the 
Uniformity of Nature Principle are themselves general cmpirical 
propositions, whose own claims are no less problematic than the 
theories they are dcsigncd to guarantee. 
l.b 
Popper on the Problem of Induction 
It seems, then-and this is no longer controversial-that there is 
no solution to the problem of induction that could demonstrate 
with logical ccrtainty the truth of general scientific theories. 
Some, like Paul Fcycrabcnd, havc concludcd from the fact that no 
theory is conclusivcly proved that all thcories arc therefore equal-
ly unproved, and epistemically on a par, and that the trust we com-
monly repose in science is completely irrational. 
But Karl Popper, amongst others, was concerned to resist such 
a sweeping scepticism, whose consequcnccs, if accepted, would 
be alarming. In his attempt to defend the rationality of science and 
to solve the problem of induction, he drew upon two familiar log-
ical facts. First, that while scienti fic theories cannot be decisivcly 
proved from observational evidence, observations may sometimes 
refute them. Popper's strong emphasis of this possibility explains 
why his philosophy is known as Falsificationism. The second log-
ical fact that Poppcr drew on is that deductive consequences of a 

INTRO DUC TIO N 
3 
theory can sometimes be verified through observation; when this 
occurs, Popper said that the thcory was "corroboratcd". This ter-
minology suggests that corroboration confers some epistemic 
merit on the theory, though it is not clcar what implications 
Poppcr thought that had for its rational appraisal. The predomi-
nant opinion now is that no such implications exist, for when a 
particular theory is corroborated (in Popper's sense) by evidence, 
so are infinitely many other theories, all rivals to it and to each 
othcr. Only one of these can bc true. But which? 
Supposc, for example, you were interested in thc general 
law governing the coloration of swans. If the number of swans 
that will ever exist is n and the number of colours is 111, then 
there are m" colour combinations. This then represents a lower 
limit for the number of theories conccrning the colours of 
swans. If we take account of the further possibilities that these 
birds alter their hues from time to time, and from place to place, 
and that some of them are multicoloured, then it is apparent that 
the number of possible theories is immense, indeed, infinite. 
The simple theory ' all swans arc white' that Popper often used 
as an illustration is corroborated, as he said, by the observation 
on particular occasions of white swans; but so arc infinitely 
many of the othcr swan hypotheses. The question of how to sup-
port a rational preference amongst these hypotheses then 
remains. And it is evident that Popper's ideas do nothing to 
solve the problem of induction. I 
l.c 
Scientific Method in Practice 
Popper's idea that unrefuted but corroborated hypotheses enjoy 
somc special epistemic virtue, led him to recommend that scien-
tists should seek out and give preference to such hypotheses. 
There was also a descriptive aspect to this recommendation, for 
Popper assumed that mainstream science is conducted more or 
less as he belicved it ought to be. 
I Other examples illustrating thc same point are given in Chapter 4. Scction i. 
Sec also, e.g., Lakatos 1974, Salmon 1981. and Howson 2000 for decisive criti-
cisms of Popper's views on induction. 

4 
CHAPTER 1 
Popper's descriptive account does reflect two key features of 
scientific reasoning. First, it sometimes happens in scientific 
work that a theory is refuted by experimental findings, and when 
this happens, the scientist usually recognizes that the theory is 
therefore false and abandons it, perhaps re-adopting it in some 
revised form. And secondly, when investigating a deterministic 
theory, scientists frequently focus attention on certain of its logi-
cal consequences and then check these empirically, by means of 
specially designed experiments; and if such consequences turn 
out to be true, the practice is to conclude that the theory has been 
confirmed and made more credible. 
But Popper's methodology has very little further explanatory 
power. This is for two reasons. First, it has no means of discrim-
inating between a particular theory that has been confirmed by a 
successful empirical prediction and the infinity of other, conflict-
ing theories that make the same prediction. In practice, scientists 
do rank such hypotheses according to their value, or credibility, 
or eligibility for serious consideration-
the scientific enterprise 
would be impossible otherwise. Secondly, most scientific evi-
dence does not bear the logical relationship to theories that 
Popper envisaged, for, more usually, such evidence is neither 
implied by the theories they confirm, nor precluded by those they 
disconfirm. 
So, for example, many deterministic theories that appear in sci-
ence, especially the more significant ones, often have no directly 
checkable deductive consequences, and the predictions by which 
they are tested and confirmed are necessarily drawn only with the 
assistance of auxiliary theories. Newton's laws, for instance, con-
cern the forces that operate between objects in general and with the 
mechanical effects of those forces. Observable predictions about 
particular objects, such as the Earth's planets, can be derived only 
when the laws are combined with hypotheses about the positions 
and masses of the planets, the mass-distribution of space, and so 
on. But although they are not immediate logical consequences of 
Newton's theory, planetary observations are standardly taken to 
confirm (and sometimes disconfirm) it.2 
2 This objection to Popper's account was pressed with particular effect by 
Lakatos, as we discuss in Chapter 4. 

INTRODUCTION 
5 
Then there are scientific theories that are probabilistic, and for 
that reason have no logical consequences of a verifiable character. 
For example, Mendel's theory of inheritance states the probabili-
ties with which certain gene combinations occur during reproduc-
tion, but does not categorically rule out nor definitely predict any 
particular genetic configuration. Nevertheless, Mendel obtained 
impressive confirmation from the results of his plant trials, results 
which his theory did not entail but stated to be relatively probable. 
Finally, even deterministic theories may be confirmed or dis-
confirmed by evidence that is only assigned some probability. 
This may arise when a theory's quantitative consequences need to 
be checked with imperfect measuring instruments, subject to 
experimental error. For example, the position of a planet at a cer-
tain time will be checked using a telescope whose readings are 
acknowledged in experimental work not to be completely reliable, 
on account of various unpredictable atmospheric conditions 
affecting the path oflight to the telescope, as well as other uncon-
trollable factors, some connected with the experimenter and some 
with physical vagaries. For this reason, quantitative measurements 
are often reported in the form of a range of values, such as a ± h, 
where a is the recorded reading and a - h and a + b are the bounds 
of an interval in which it is judged the true value very probably 
lies. This judgment is usually based on a theory giving the proba-
bilities that the instrument reading diverges by different amounts 
from the true value of the measured quantity. Thus, for many 
deterministic theories, what may appear to be the checking of log-
ical consequences actually involves the examination of experi-
mental effects which are predicted only with a certain probability. 
Popper tried to extend his falsificationist ideas to the statisti-
cal realm, but insuperable difficulties stand in the way of any such 
attempt, as we show in Chapter 5. In that chapter, we shall review 
the ideas of R.A. Fisher, the eminent statistician, who was also 
inspired by the idea that evidence may have a decisive negative 
impact on a statistical hypothesis, akin to its falsification. He 
called a statistical hypothesis under test the 'null hypothesis' and 
expressed the view that 
the null hypothesis is never proved or established, but is possibly dis-
proved, in the course of experimentation. Every experiment may be 

6 
CHAPTER 1 
said to exist only in order to give the facts a chance of disproving the 
null hypothesis. (1947, p. 16) 
Fisher's theory of so-called 'significance tests', which prescribes 
how statistical hypotheses should be tested, has drawn consider-
able criticism, and other theories have been advanced in opposi-
tion to it. Notable amongst these is the modified theory of 
significance testing due to Jerzy Neyman and Egon Pearson. 
Though they rejected much of Fisher's methodology, their theory 
owed a good deal to his work, particularly to his technical results. 
Above all, they retained the idea of bivalent statistical tests in 
which evidence determines one of only two possible conclusions, 
that is, the acceptance or rejection of a hypothesis. 
1.d 
Probabilistic Induction: 
The Bayesian Approach 
One of the driving forces behind the development of the above-
mentioned methodologies was the desire to vanquish, and provide 
an alternative to, the idea that the theories of science can be and 
ought to be appraised in terms of their 'probabilities' . This 'prob-
abilistic induction' is in fact a well-established position in science 
and philosophy. It has long been appreciated that scientific theo-
ries extend beyond any experimental data and hence cannot be 
verified (that is, logically entailed) by them; yet while it is agreed 
that absolute certainty is therefore unavailable, many scientists 
believe that the explanations they think up can secure for them-
selves an epistemic status somewhere between the two extremes 
of certainly right and certainly wrong and that that status depends 
on the quality of the evidence and can be altered by new evidence. 
This spectrum of degrees of certainty has traditionally been 
characterised as a spectrum of probabilities. For example, Henri 
Poincare, the noted mathematician and physicist, asked himself 
what right he had as a scientist to enunciate a theory such as 
Newton's laws, when it may simply be chance that they are in 
agreement with all the available evidence. How can we know that 
the laws will not break down entirely the next time they are test-
ed? "To this objection the only answer we can give is: It is very 

INTRO DUCTIO N 
7 
improbable" (1905, p. 186). Poincare believed (pp. 183-84) that 
"the physicist is often in the same position as the gambler who 
reckons up his chances. Every time that he reasons by induction, 
he more or less consciously requires the calculus of probabilities." 
And summing up his approach, Poincare remarks (p. 186): "if this 
calculus be condemned, then the whole of the sciences must also 
be condemned." 
Similarly, the philosopher and economist W.S. Jevons: 
Our inferences . . . always retain more or less of a hypothetical char-
acter, and are so far open to doubt. Only in proportion as our induc-
tion approximates to the character of perfect induction does it 
approximate to certainty. The amount of uncertainty corresponds to 
the probability that other objects than those examined may exist and 
falsify our inferences; the amount of probability corresponds to the 
amount of information yielded by our examination; and the theory of 
probability will be needed to prevent us from over-estimating or 
under-estimating the knowledge we possess. ( 1874, Volume 1, p. 
263) 
Many scientists have voiced the same idea, namely, that theories 
have to be judged in terms of their probabilities in the light of the 
evidence. Here are two quotations from Einstein which explicitly 
manifest a probabilistic view: 
I knew that the constancy of the velocity of light was something 
quite independent of the relativity postulate and I weighted which 
was the more probable. (From a letter quoted in Stachel 1998) 
and 
Herr Kaufmann has determined the relation [between electric and 
magnetic deflection] of [3-rays with admirable care ... Using an 
independent method, Herr Planck obtained results which fully agree 
[with the computations of] Kaufmann ... it is further to be noted that 
the theories of Abraham and Bucherer yield curves which fit the 
observed curve considerably better than the curve obtained from rel-
ativity theory. However, in my opinion, these theories should be 
ascribed a rather small probability because their basic postulates 
concerning the mass of the moving electron are not made plausible 
by theoretical systems which encompass wider complexes of phe-
nomena. (Quoted in Pais 1982, p. 159) 

8 
CHAPTER 1 
Einstein is here using a basic probabilistic idea, that a very high 
likelihood (given by the closeness of fit to the data) can combine 
with a small enough prior probability to give an overall small pos-
terior probability. In fact, as Jon Dorling (1979, p. 180) observed, 
it is rare to find any leading scientist writing in, say, the last three 
hundred years who did not employ notions of probability when 
advocating his own ideas or reviewing those of others. 
Philosophers from James Bernoulli in the seventeenth century 
to Rudolf Carnap, Harold Jeffreys, Bruno de Finetti, Frank 
Ramsey and E. T. Jaynes in the twentieth century have attempted 
to explicate these intuitive notions of inductive probability. There 
have been two main strands in this programme. The first regards 
the probabilities of theories as objective, in the sense of being 
determined by logic alone, independent of our subjective attitudes 
towards them. The hope was that a way could be found to ascer-
tain by logical analysis alone the probability that any given theo-
ry is true, and so allow comparative evaluations of competing 
theories to be placed on an objective footing. This would largely 
solve the problem of induction and establish an objective and 
rational basis for science. But, in fact, it is now generally 
acknowledged that no one has succeeded in this approach, and 
that objections that have been made against it have proved crip-
pling and unanswerable. 
The other strand in the programme to explicate inductive prob-
ability treats the probability of a theory as a property of our attitude 
towards it; such probabilities are then interpreted, roughly speaking, 
as measuring degrees of belief. This is called the subjectivist or per-
sonalis! interpretation. The scientific methodology based on this 
idea is usually referred to as the methodology of Bayesianism, 
because of the prominent role it reserves for a famous result of the 
probability calculus known as Bayes's theorem. 
Bayesianism has experienced a strong revival in recent years, 
due in part to its intrinsic plausibility and in part to the weakness-
es which have gradually been exposed in the standard methodolo-
gies. It is fair to claim that we are in the midst of a revolution, in 
which Bayesianism is becoming the new paradigm for inductive 
inference. [n the chapters to come, we shall present a detailed 
account and defence of the Bayesian methodology and will show 
how it illuminates the various aspects of scientific reasoning. 

INTRODUCTION 
9 
1.e I The Objectivity Ideal 
The sharpest and most persistent objection to the Bayesian 
approach is directed at one of its defining features, namely that it 
allows certain subjective factors a role in the appraisal of scientif-
ic theories. Our reply to this objection will be that the element of 
subjectivity is, first of all, minimal and, secondly, exactly right. 
Such a response contradicts an influential school of thought that 
denies that any subjectivity at all should be admitted in theory-
appraisal; such appraisal, according to that school, should be 
completely objective. Lakatos (1978, Volume 1, p. 1) expressed 
this objectivist ideal in uncompromising style, thus: 
The cognitive value of a theory has nothing to do with its psycholog-
ical influence on people's minds. Belief, commitment, understand-
ing are states of the human mind. But the objective, scientific value 
of a theory is independent of the human mind which creates it or 
understands it, its scientific value depends only on what objective 
support these conjectures have infacts. 3 
It was the ambition of Popper, Lakatos, Fisher, Neyman and 
Pearson, and others of their schools to develop this idea of a cri-
terion of scientific merit, which is both objective and com-
pelling, and yet non-probabilistic. And it is fair to say that their 
methodologies, especially those connected with significance 
testing and estimation, which comprise the bulk of so-called 
Classical methods of statistical inference, have achieved pre-
eminence in the field and become standards of correctness with 
many scientists. 
In the ensuing chapters, we shall show that these classical 
methods are in fact intellectually quite indefensible and do not 
deserve their social success. Indeed, we shall argue that the ideal 
of total objectivity is unattainable and that classical methods, 
which pose as guardians of that ideal, actually violate it at every 
turn; virtually none of those methods can be applied without a 
generous helping of personal judgment and arbitrary assumption. 
3 These characteristic italics were edited out of the posthumously published ver-
sion of Lakatos's original mimeographed paper. 

10 
CHAPTER 1 
1.f I The Plan of This Book 
The thesis we propound in this book is that scientific reasoning is 
reasoning in accordance with the calculus of probabilities. 
In Chapter 2 we introduce that calculus, along with the princi-
pal theorems that will later serve in an explanatory role with 
respect to scientific method; and we shall also in that chapter 
introduce the notion of a probability density, and describe some of 
the main probability distributions and associated theorems that 
will be needed later on. 
We shall then, in Chapter 3, consider different interpretations 
of the probability calculus and introduce the notion of degrees of 
belief. 
In Chapter 4 we examine how scientific theories may be con-
firmed or disconfirmed and look at characteristic pattcrns of 
inductive reasoning, particularly in relation to deterministic theo-
ries; we argue that these patterns are best understood as arguments 
in probability and that non-Bayesian approachcs, by comparison, 
offer little or no insight into them. 
Then, in Chapter 5, we turn to statistical hypotheses, where 
the philosophy of scientific inference has mostly been the pre-
serve of statisticians. Far and away the most in fl uential voice in 
statistics in recent times has been that of the classical statisti-
cian, and we shall therefore first give an account of the classical 
viewpoint and of its expression in the theories of significance 
tests and estimation. 
In Chapter 6, we examine the practical areas of agricultural 
and clinical trials and argue that restrictions placed on such trials 
by classical principles of inference are largely unjustified and 
often harmful to their efficient and ethical conduct. 
Another practical area where classical principles have been 
highly influential is in the study of the regression, or correlation 
of one physical parameter on others, and in Chapter 7 we argue 
that standard classical methods of regression analysis are also 
misconceived and harmful to scientific advancc. 
In Chapter 8, we outline the Bayesian approach to statistical 
inference and show its merits over its chief rivals. And finally, in 
the last chapter, we consider the commonest objections brought 

INTRODUCTION 
\I 
against the Bayesian theory, principally the complaint that the 
subjectivism implicit in it is at variance with any proper under-
standing of the scientific process and of inductive inference. This, 
and the other objections we show are baseless. 


CHAPTER 2 
The Probability Calculus 
2.0 
The Axioms 
The rules governing the assignment of probabilities, together with 
all the deductive consequences of those rules, are collectively 
called the probability calculus. Formally, the rules, or axioms, of 
the probability calculus assign non-negative real numbers (the 
probabilities), from among those between 0 and 1 inclusive, to a 
class of possible states of affairs, where these are represented under 
some appropriate manner of description. For the time being all that 
we shall assume about this class of representations, called the 
domain of discourse, or domain for short, is that it is closed under 
conjoining any two items with 'and', di,~joining them with 'or', and 
negating any single item with 'not'. Thus if a and b represent pos-
sible states of affairs, so do respectively 'a and b', symbolised a & 
b; 'a or b', symbolised a v b; and 'not-a', symbolised -a. 
We shall allow for a certain amount of redundancy in the way 
the members of this possibility structure are characterised, just as 
we do in ordinary discourse. For example, '--a' is just another, 
morc complicated, way of saying a, and a and --a are logically 
equivalent. In general, if a and b are logically equivalent repre-
sentations of any possible state we shall symbolise the fact by the 
notation a ~ b. It is useful (actually indispensable in the devel-
opment of the formal theory) to consider as limiting cases those 
possible states of affairs which must necessarily occur, such as 
the state of its either raining or not raining, and those which nec-
essarily cannot occur, such as its simultaneously raining and not 
raining (in a particular place). The symbolism a v -a represents 
a necessary truth, and is itself is called a logical truth, while a & 
-a represents a neccssary falsehood, and is called a logicalfalse-
hood, or contradiction. In what follows, t will be the generic 

14 
C HAPTER 2 
symbol of a logical truth and ..l that of a contradiction. To any 
reader who has had exposure to an elementary logic course these 
concepts and the notation will be familiar as the formal basics of 
a propositional language, and for that reason we shall call these 
items, a, b, c, .. . and the compounds we can form from thcm, 
using the operations -, v and &, propositions. Thc ' proposition' 
terminology is not ideal, but thcrc is no better general-purpose 
term around to refer to classes of possible states of affairs, be they 
localised in spacetime or larger-scale types of possible world. 
A word to the wise, that is, to those who have at some point 
consultcd textbooks of probability, clcmentary or advanced. 
These texts frequently start off by defining a probabilitl'-c\ystem, 
which is a triple (S, :S, P), where P is a non-negative, real-valued 
function on ~ , which is called a field of subsets of S, where the 
latter is called variously the class oj' elementary events, sample-
space or possibili(v .\pace. That .~. is a field of subsets of S means 
that it contains S itself, and is closed under the set-theoretic oper-
ations of complementation vvith respect to S, union and intersec-
tion. It follows that 
.~. contains 0, thc cmpty set, since this is the 
complement of S with respect to itself. We can relate this to our 
own rather (in fact deliberatcly) informal treatment as follows. 2i 
corresponds to our domain of propositions (referring to a class of 
possible states of affairs hcre represented by S), with negation rep-
resented by relative complement, conjunction by intersection, and 
disjunction by union. The only significant difference is that the 
set-theoretic formalism is purely extensional: there is no room for 
equivalent yet distinct descriptions of the same events in S. Thus, 
for example, S is the singlc extension of all the logically true 
propositions like a v -a, -(a & -a), and so forth), and 0 the sin-
gle extension of all logical falsehoods. By writing t and ..l as 
generic logical truths and falsehoods wc arc in effect pcrforming 
notationally the same collapsing operation as is achieved by going 
set -theoretical. 
A word to the very wise. Sometimes thc probability function 
is said to be defined on a Boolean algebra, or algebra for short. A 
celebratcd mathcmatical result lies bchind this terminology, 
namely Stone's Theorem that every Boolean algebra is isomor-
phic to a field of sets. Thus we ean talk of an algebra of scts, 
implicitly referring to the unique algebra isomorphic to the given 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
IS 
field. Also, the propositional operations of conjunction and di s-
junction arc often symbolised using the Boolean-algebraic sym-
bols for meet and join, 1\ and v. The reason for this is that if we 
identify logically equivalent elements of a propositional language 
we also obtain a Boolean algebra, the so-called Lindenbaum (zlge-
bra of the language. Sometimes, for this reason, people speak of 
an algebra of propositions. Strictly speaki ng, however, the ele-
ments of a propositional language are not isomorphic to a 
Boolean algebra, merely homomorphic, because the mapping is 
only many-one from the propositions to corresponding elements 
of the algebra (all logical truths map to the unique maximal ele-
ment I of the algebra, and all logical falsehoods map to the unique 
least element 0, and in general all equivalent propositions map to 
the same member of the algebra; the reader might like to check 
that the algebra determined by one propositional variable has four 
members, that generated by two has sixteen, and that generated by 
11 has 2 raised to the power 211 members). 
So much for peripheral technicalities. In what follows we shall 
regard probabilities as defined on domains of propositions closed 
under negation, conjunction, and disjunction, with the probability 
function on a particular domain denoted by P, and P(a) read as 'the 
probability of a' . This brings us to the question of what P(a) actu-
ally means. A remarkable fact about the probability calculus, dis-
covered two hundred years ago, is that such statements can be 
endowed with two quite distinct types of meaning. One refers to 
the way the world is structured, and in particular the way it appears 
to endow certain types of stochastic (chance-like or random) 
experiment with a disposition to deliver outcomes in ways which 
betray marked large-scale regularities. Herc the probabilities are 
objective, numerical measures of these regularities, evaluated 
empirically by the long-run relative frequencies of the correspon-
ding outcomes. On the alternative interpretation the meaning of 
P(a) is epislemic in character, and indicates something like the 
degree to which it is felt some assumed body of background 
knowledge renders the truth ofa more or less likely, where a might 
be anything from a prediction about the next toss of a particular 
coin to a statement of the theory of General Relativity. These sens-
es of Pray are not entirely unrelated. Knowing the objective prob-
ability of getting heads with a particular coi n should, it seems 

16 
CHAPTER 2 
reasonable to believe, also tell you how likely it is that the next 
toss of the coin wi II yield a head. 
We shall investigate these interpretative issues in more detail 
later. The task now is to get a feel for the formal principles of the 
probability calculus, and in particular see what the fundamental 
postulates are and discover some useful consequences of them. 
The fundamental postulates, known as the probability axioms, are 
just four in number: 
(1) P(a) ~ 0 for all a in the domain of P 
(2) P(t) = I. 
(3) P(a v b) = pray + P(b) if a and b are mutually inconsis-
tent; that is, if a & b ~ ..l. 
(1)- (3) above suffice to generate that part of the probability cal-
culus dealing with so-called absolute or unconditional, probabil-
ities. But a good deal of what follows will be concerned with 
probability functions of two variables, unlike P above which is a 
function of only one. These two-place probability functions are 
called conditional probabilities, and the conditional probability of 
a given b is written P(a / b). There is a systematic connection 
between conditional and unconditional probabilities, however, 
and it is exprcssed in our fourth axiom: 
P(a & b) 
(4) P(a/b) = 
where P(b) ;z' O. 
P(b) 
Many authors take P(a I b) actually to be defined by (4). We prefer 
to regard (4) as a postulate on a par with (1)- (3). The reason for this 
is that in some interpretations of the calculus, independent mean-
ings are given to conditional and unconditional probabilities, which 
means that in those (4) cannot be true simply by definition. 
2.b 
Useful Theorems of the Calculus 
The first result states the well-known fact that the probability of a 
proposition and that of its negation sum to I: 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
17 
(5) P(-a) = I - P(a) 
Proof: 
a entails -- a. Hence by (3) P(a v a) = P(a) + P(-a). But by 
(2) P(a v -a) = I, whence (5). 
Next, it is simple to show that contradictions have zero probability: 
(6) P(.l) = O. 
Proof: 
-.l is a logical truth. Hence P(-.l) = 1 and by (5) P(.l) = O. 
Our next result states that equivalent sentences have the same 
probability: 
(7) If a ¢? b then P(a) = P(b). 
Proof: 
First, note that a v -b is a logical truth if a ¢? b. 
Assume that a ¢? b. Then P(a v -b) = I . Also if a ¢? b then a 
entails -- b so P(a v - h) = P(a) + P(-b). 
But by (5) P(-b) = I - P(h), whence P(a) = P(h). 
We can now prove the important property of probability func-
tions that they respect the entailment relation; to be precise, the 
probability of any consequence of a is at least as great as that of 
a itself: 
(8) If a entails b then pro) :s; P(b). 
Proof: 
If 0 entails b then [a v (h & -a)] ¢? b. Hence by (7) P(b) = 
pra v (b & -a)}. But a entails -(b & -a) and so pra v (b & 
-a)] = pray + P(b &-a). Hence P(h) = P(a) + P(b &-a). But 
by (1) P(b & -a) 2: 0, and so P(a) :s; P(h). 
From (8) it follows that probabilities are numbers between 0 and 
I inclusive: 

18 
(9) ° 
$ P(a) $ I, for all a in the domain of P. 
Proof: 
CHAPTER 2 
By axiom I , P(a) ~ 0, and since a entails t, where t is a logi-
cal truth, we have by (8) that P(a) ~ P(t) = I. 
We shall now demonstrate the general (finite) additivity condition: 
(10) Supposc a i entails -ai' where I $ i <j $ n. Then P(a I v 
... va,) = P((lI) + ... + P(a n ). 
Proof: 
P(a l v ... va,, ) = P[(a l v ... van I) va), assuming that n > 
L if not the result is obviously trivial. But since a. entails -a, 
I 
I 
for all i ~ j. it follows that (a 1 v . .. v an 
1) entails -a l1, and 
hence P(a 1 v ... va,) = P(a I v ... v a" 
I) + P(a,). Now sim-
ply repeat this for the remaining ai' .. . ,a l1 
I and we have (10). 
(This is essentially a proof by mathematical induction.) 
Corol/arv. If (II v . . . v a is a logical truth, and (I. entails -a . 
• 
1/ 
[ I  
for i ~j , then I = P(a,) + ... + P(a,). 
. 
Our next result is often called the 'theorem of total probability' . 
(11) If P((li v ... va) = I, and a . entails -a . for i ~ j. then 
11 
I 
.I 
P(b) = P(b & a l ) + ... + P(b & a,). for any proposition 
b. 
Proof: 
h entails (b & (1 , ) v ... v (b & an) v [b & -(a, v ... va,)}. 
Furthermore, all the disjuncts on the right-hand side arc mutu-
ally exclusive. Let a = (/1 V ... v a". Hence by (10) we have that 
P(h) = P(b & a l ) + ... + P(b & a,) + P(h & -a). But P(h & 
-0) $ P(-a). by (8), and P(-a) = I - P(a) = 1 - 1 = 0. Hence 
P(b & -a) = 0 and (11) follows. 
Coro/fan) I. Ifa l v ... v a is a logrical truth, and a. entails -a . 
~ 
1/ 
I 
J 
for i ;z!j, then P(b) = 'LP(b & (Ii)' 
Corollary 2. P(h) = P(b I e) Pre) + P(h I -c) P(-c), for any c 
such that pre) > 0. 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
19 
Another useful consequence of (11) is the following: 
(12) If P(a j v ... va) = I and a. entails ~a. for i '" J', and 
II 
I 
.I 
. 
P(a) > 0, then for any b, P(b) = P(b I aj)P(a j ) + ... + 
P(b I a) P(a,). 
Proof: 
A direct application of (4) to (11). 
(12) itself can be generalized to: 
IfP(a j v ... va) = I and P(a & a) = ° 
for all i =J', and P(a) 
II 
'I 
I' 
. 
f 
> 0, then for any b, P(b) = P(bl a j ) P(a j) + ... + P(b I 
a,)P(an). 
We shall now develop some of the important properties of the 
function P(a I 17). We start by letting b be some fixed proposition 
such that P(b) > ° 
and defining the function Q(a) of one variable 
to be equal to P(a I b), for all a. 
Now define 'a is a logical truth modulo b' simply to mean '17 
entails a' (for then a and t are equivalent given b), and 'a and e 
are exclusive modulo b' to mean '17 & a entails -e'; then 
(13) Q(a) = 1 if a is a logical truth modulo b; and the corol-
lary 
(14) Q(h) = I; 
(15) Q(a v c) = Q(a) + Q(e) , if a and e are exclusive modulo 
b. 
Now let Q'(a) = P(a I c), where pre) > 0; in other words, Q' is 
obtained from P by fixing e as the conditioning statement, just as 
Q was obtained by fixing h. Since Q and Q' are probability func-
tions on the same domain, we shall assume that axiom 4 also 
Q(a & d) 
holds for them: that is, Q(a I d) = 
,where Q(d) > 0, and 
Q(d) 
similarly for Q '. We can now state an interesting and important 
invariance result: 

20 
(16) Q(a I c) = Q' (a I b). 
Proof: 
Q(a & c) 
P(a & b I c) 
Q(a & c) =
. Q(c) 
P(c I b) 
P(a&blc) 
Q'(a&b) 
----
= Q(a I b). 
P(b I c) 
Q' (b) 
CHAPTER 2 
P(a & b & c) 
P(b & c) 
Corollary. Q(a I c) = P(a I b & c) = Q '(a I b). 
(16) and its corollary say that successively conditioning P on b 
and then on c gives the same result as if P were conditioned first 
on c and then on b, and the same result as if P were simultaneously 
conditioned on b & c. 
(17) If h entails e and P(h) > 0 and Pre) < 1, then P(h I e) > 
P(h). 
This is a very easy result to prove (we leave it as an exercise), but it 
is of fundamental importance to the interpretation of the probabili-
ty calculus as a logic of inductive inference. It is for this reason that 
we employ the letters hand e; in the inductive interpretation of 
probability h will be some hypothesis and e some evidence. (17) 
then states that {f"h predicts e then the occurrence ole will, if the 
conditions of" (17) are satisfied, raise the probability C?lh. 
(17) is just one of the results that exhibit the truly inductive 
nature of probabilistic reasoning. It is not the only one, and more 
celebrated are those that go under the name of Bayes :So Theorems. 
These theorems are named after the eighteenth-century English 
clergyman Thomas Bayes. Although Bayes, in a posthumously 
published and justly celebrated Memoir to the Royal Society of 
London (1763), derived the first form of the theorem named after 
him, the second is due to the great French mathematician Laplace. 
Bayes's Theorem (First Form) 
pre I h) P(h) 
(18) P(h I e) = ----p(~T . where P(h), pre) > O. 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
21 
Proof: 
P(h & e l 
P(h I e) = 
/ 
Pre) 
p re I h) P(h) 
_
._. __ .-
--
Pre) 
Again we use the letters hand e, standing for hypothesis and evi-
dence. This form of Bayes's Theorem states that the probability of 
the hypothesis conditional on the evidence (or the posterior prob-
ability of the hypothesis) is equal to the probability of the data 
conditional on the hypothesis (or the likelihood of the hypothesis) 
times the probability (the so-called prior probability) of the 
hypothesis, all divided by the probability of the data. 
Bayes's Theorem (Second Form) 
(19) i/P(h l V ... v hJ = I 
P(h), Pre) > 0 then 
and h . entails ~h. i()r i ;" J' and 
, 
J.I'. 
pre I hk) P (hk ) 
P(hk I e) = "LP(e Ih,) P (h) 
Coro/tm:v. If hi v ... V hl/ is a logical truth, then if Pre), P(h) 
> 0 and h entails ~h for i or ,', then 
/ 
. 
pre I hk) P(hi) 
P(hk I e) = "LP(e I h) P(~) 
, 
, 
Bayes's Theorem (Third Form) 
Plh) 
(20) P(h 1 e) = P(h) + P(~\'I ~h)P(-h) 
pre 1 h) 
From the point of view of inductive inference, this is one of 
the most important forms of Bayes's Theorem. For, since P(~h) = 
I - P(h). it says that P(h I e) =f{P(h), pre I -h)) wherefis an in-
\ 
pre I h) 
creasing function of the prior probability P(h) of h and a decreas-
ing function of the likelihood ratio pre 1 -h) . In other words, for 
pre 1 h) 

22 
CHAPTER 2 
a given value of thc likelihood ratio, the posterior probability of h 
increases with its prior, while for a givcn value of the prior, the 
posterior probabi I ity of h is the greatcr, the less probable e is rel-
ative to ~h than to h. 
2.c 
Discussion 
Despite their scemingly abstract appearance, implicit in axioms 
(1)~(4) is some very interesting, significant and sometimes sur-
prising information, and a good deal of this book will be taken up 
with making it explicit and explaining why it is significant. 
To whet the appctite, consider the following apparently simple 
problem, known as the Harvard Medical School Test (Casscells, 
Schoenberger, and Grayboys 1978), so called because it was given 
as a problem to students and staff at Harvard Medical School, 
whose rcsponses we shall come to shortly. I A diagnostic test for a 
disease, D, has two outcomes 'positive' and 'negative' (supposed-
ly indicating the presence and absence of D respectively). The test 
is a fairly sensitive one: its chance of giving a false negative out-
come (showing 'negative' when thc subject has D) is cqual to 0, 
and its chance of giving a false positivc outcome (showing 'posi-
tive' when the subject does not have D) is small: let us supposc it 
is equal to YYo. Suppose the incidence of thc disease is very low, 
say one in onc thousand in the population. A randomly selected 
person is given the test and shows a positive outcome. What is the 
chance they have D? 
One might reason intuitively as follows. They have testcd pos-
itive. The chance of testing positive and not having D would bc 
only one in twcnty. So the chance of having D given a positive 
result should be around ninetcen twcntieths, that is, 95%. This is 
the answer given by the majority of thc respondents too. It is 
wrong; very wrong in fact: the correct answer is less than two in 
one hundred! Let us see why. 
Firstly, anyone who answered 95% should have been suspi-
cious that a piece of information given in the problem was not 
used, namely the incidence of D in the population. In fact, that 
information is highly relevant, because the correct calculation 
I The discussion here fo llows Howson 2000, Chapter 3. 

THE PROBABILITY CALC ULUS 
23 
cannot be performed without it, as we now show. We can repre-
sent the false negative and false positive chances formally as con-
ditional probabilities P(-e I h) = 0 and pre I -h) = 0.05 
respectively, where h is 'the subject has D' and e is 'the outcome 
is positive'. This means that our target probability, the chance that 
the subject has D given that they tested positive, is P(h I e), which 
we have to evaluate. Since the subject was chosen randomly it 
seems reasonable to equate P(h), the absolute probability of them 
having D, to 0.00 I, the incidence of D in the population. By (5) 
in section b we infer that pre I h) = I, and that P(-h) = 0.999. We 
can now plug these numbers into Bayes's Theorem in the form 
(20) in b, and with a little arithmetic we deduce that P(h I e) = 
0.0196, that is, slightly less than 2%. 
Gigerenzer (1991) has argued that the correct answer is more 
naturally and easily found from the data of the problem by trans-
lating the fractional chances into whole-number frequencies with-
in some actual population of 1,000 people in which one individual 
has D, and that the diagnosis of why most people initially get the 
wrong answer, like the Harvard respondents, is due to the fact that 
the data would originally have been obtained in the form of such 
frequencies, and then been processed into chance or probability 
language which the human mind finds unfamiliar and unintuitive. 
Thus, in the Gigerenzer-prescribed format, we are looking to find 
the frequency of D-sufferers in the subpopulation of those who 
test positive. Well, since the false negative rate is zero, the one 
person having D should test positive, while the false negative rate 
implies that, to the nearest whole number, 50 of the 999 who don't 
have D will also test positive. Hence 51 test positive in total, of 
whom I by assumption has D. Hence the correct answer is now 
easily seen to be approximately I in 51 , without the dubious aid 
of recondite and unintelligible formulas. 
Caveat empfor! 2 When something is more difficult than it 
apparently needs to be, there is usually some good reason, and 
there is a compelling reason why the Gigerenzer mode of reason-
ing is not to be recommended: it is invalid! As we shall see later, 
there is no direct connection between frequencies in finite sam-
ples and probabilities. One cannot infer directly anything about 
2 Buyer beware! 

24 
CHAPTER 2 
frequencies in finite samples from statements about a probability 
distribution, nor, conversely, can one infer anything directly about 
the latter from frequencies in finite samples. Tn particular, one is 
certainly not justified in translating a 5% chance of e conditional 
on ~h into the statement that in a sample of 999, 50 will test pos-
itive, and even less can one, say, translate a zero chance of e con-
ditional on h into the statement that a single individual with D will 
test positive. As we shall also see later, the most that can be assert-
ed is that with a high probability in a big enough sample the 
observed frequency wi II lie within a given neighbourhood of the 
chance. How we compute those neighbourhoods is the task of sta-
tistics, and we shall discuss it again in Chapters 5 and 8. 
It is instructive to reflect a little on the significance of the 
probability-calculus computation we have just performed. It 
shows that the criteria of low false-positive and false-negative 
rates by themselves tell you nothing about how reliable a positive 
outcome is in any given case: an additional piece of information 
is required, namely the incidence of the disease in the population. 
The background incidence also goes by the name of 'the base 
rate', and thinking that valid inferences can be drawn just from the 
knowledge of false positive and negative rates has come to be 
called the 'base-rate fallacy'. As we see, if the base-rate is suffi-
ciently low, a positive outcome in the Harvard Test is consistent 
with a very small chance of the subject having the disease, a fact 
which has profound practical implications: think of costly and 
possibly unpleasant follow-up investigations being recommended 
after a positive result for some very rare disease. The Harvard Test 
is nevertheless a challenge to the average person's intuition, which 
is actually rather poor when it come to even quite elementary sta-
tistical thinking. Translating into frequency-language, we see that 
even if it can be guaranteed that the null hypothesis (that the sub-
ject does not have the disease) will be rejected only very infre-
quently on the basis of an incorrect (positive) result, this is 
nevertheless consistent with almost all those rejections being 
incorrect, a fact that is intuitively rather surprising-which is of 
course why the base-rate fallacy is so entrenched. 
But there is another, more profound, lesson to be drawn. We 
said that there are two quite distinct types of probability, both 
obeying the same formal laws (1)-(4) above, one having to do 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
25 
with the tendency, or objective probability, of some procedure to 
produce any given outcome at any given trial, and the other with 
our uncertainty about unknown truth-values, and which we called 
epistemic probability, since it is to do with our knowledge, or lack 
of it. Since both these interpretations obey the same formal laws 
(we shall prove this later), it follows that every formally valid 
argument involving one translates into aformally valid argument 
involving the other. 
This fact is of profound significance. Suppose hand e in the 
Harvard Test calculation had denoted some scientific theory 
under scrutiny and a piece of experimental evidence respectively, 
and that the probability function P is of the epistemic variety 
denoting something we can call 'degree of certainty'. We can 
infer that even if e had been generated by an experiment in which 
e is predicted by h but every unlikely were h to be false, that 
would still by itse(j'give us no warrant to conclude anything about 
the degree of certainty we are entitled to repose in h3• To do that 
we need to plug in a value for P(h) , the prior probability of h. That 
does not means that you have to be able to compute P(h) accord-
ing to some uniform recipe; it merely means that in general you 
cannot make an inference ending with a value for P(h I e) without 
putting some value on P(h), or at any rate restricting it within cer-
tain bounds (though this is not always true, especially where there 
is a lot of experimental data where, as we shall see, the posterior 
probability can become almost independent of the prior). 
The lessons of the Harvard Medical School Test now have a 
much more general methodological applicability. The results can be 
important and striking. Here are two examples. The first concerns 
what has been a major tool of statistical inference, significance 
] That it does is implicit in the so-called Neyman-Pearson theory of statistical 
testing which we shall discuss later in some detail. And compare Mayo: if e 'fits' 
h [is to be expected on the basis of h] and there is a very small chance that the 
test procedure 'would yield so good a fit if h is false', then 'e should be taken as 
good grounds for h to the extent that h has passed a severe test with e' (1996, 
p.I77; we have changed her upper case e and h to lower case). Mayo responds to 
the Harvard Medical School Test example in Mayo 1977, but at no point docs 
she explain satisfactorily how obtaining an outcome which gives one less than a 
2% chance of having the disease can possibly constitute 'good grounds' for the 
hypothesis that one has it. 

26 
CHAPTER 2 
testing, a topic we shall discuss in detail in Chapter 5. A Neyman-
Pearson significance test is a type of so-called likelihood ratio 
test, where a region in the range of a test variable is deemed a 
rejection region depending on the value of a likelihood ratio on 
the boundary. This is determined in such a way that the probabil-
ities of (a) the hypothesis being rejected if it is true, and (b) its 
being accepted if it is false, are kept to a minimum (the extent to 
which this is achievable will be discussed in Chapter 5). But these 
probabilities (strictly, probability-densities, but that does not 
affect the point) are, in effect, just the chances of a false negative 
and a false positive, and as we saw so graphically in the Harvard 
Medical School Test, finding an outcome in such a region conveys 
no information whatever by Uselfabout the chance of the hypoth-
esis under test being true. 
The second example concerns the grand-sounding topic oLvei-
entitie realism, the doctrine that we are justified in inferring to at 
least the approximate truth of a scientific theory r if certain con-
ditions are met. These conditions are that the experimental data 
are exceptionally unlikely to have been observed if r is false, but 
quite likely if it is true. The argument, the so-called No Miracles 
argument, for the inference to the approximate truth of r is that if 
T is not approximately true then the agreement between r and the 
data are too miraculous to be due to chance (the use of the word 
'miraculous', whence the name of the argument, was due to 
Putnam 1975). Again, we see essentially the same fallacious infer-
ence based on a small false positive rate and a small false nega-
tive rate as was committed by the respondents to the Harvard Test. 
However much we want to believe in the approximate truth of the-
ories like quantum electrodynamics or General Relativity, both of 
which produce to order predictions correct to better than one part 
in a billion, the No Miracles argument is not the argument to jus-
tify such belief (a more extended discussion is in Howson 2000, 
Chapter 3). 
2.d 
Countable Additivity 
Before we leave this general discussion we should say something 
about a further axiom that is widely adopted in textbooks of math-

THE PROBABILITY CALC ULUS 
27 
ematical probability: the axiom of countable additivity. This says 
that ifa), a2, a3, ... are a countably infinite family (this just means 
that they can be enumerated by the integers I, 2, 3, ... ) of mutu-
ally inconsistent propositions in the domain of P and the state-
ment 'One of the G. is true' is also included in the domain of P 
I 
then the probability of the latter is equal to the sum of the P(aJ 
Kolmogorov included a statement equivalent to it, his 'axiom of 
continuity', together with axioms (1)- (4) in his celebrated mono-
graph (1950) as the foundational axioms of probability (except 
that he called (4) the ' definition' of conditional probability), and 
also required the domain of P to be closed not only under finite 
disjunctions (now unions, since the elements of the domain are 
now sets) but also countable ones, thus making it what is called a 
0-field, or a-algebra. These stipulations made probability a 
branch of the very powerful mathematical theory of measure, and 
the measure-theoretic framework has since become the paradigm 
for mathematical probability. 
Mathematical considerations have undoubtedly been upper-
most in this decision: the axiom of countable additivity is required 
for the strongest versions of the limit theorems of probabi lity 
(characteristically prefaced by 'almost certainly', or 'with proba-
bility one', these locutions being taken to be synonymous); also 
the theory of random variables and distributions, particularly con-
ditional distributions, receives a very smooth development if it is 
included. But we believe that the axioms we adopt should be driv-
en by what logicians call 'soundness' considerations: their conse-
quences should be true ofwhatcvcr interpretation we wish to give 
them. And the brute fact is that for each of the principal interpre-
tations of the probability calculus, the chance and the epistemic 
interpretation, not only are there no compelling grounds for think-
ing the countable additivity axiom always true but on the contrary 
there are good reasons to think it sometimesja/se. 
The fact is that if we measure chances, or tendencies, by lim-
iting relative frequencies (see Chapter 3) then we certainly have 
no reason to assume the axiom, sincc limiting relative frequen-
cies, unlike finite frequencies in fixed-length samples, do not 
always obey it: in particular, if each of a countable infinity of 
exclusive and exhaustive possible outcomes tends to occur only 
finitely many times then its limiting relative frequency is zero, 

28 
CHAPTER 2 
while that of the disjunction is 1. As for the epistemic interpreta-
tion, as de Finetti pointed out (1972, p. 86), it may be perfectly 
reasonable (given suitable background information) to put a zero 
probability on each member of an exhaustive countably infinite 
partition of the total range of possibilities, but to do so contradicts 
the axiom since the probability of the total range is always 1. To 
satisfy the axiom of countable addivity the only permissible dis-
tribution of probabilities over a countable partition is one whose 
values form a sufficiently quickly converging sequence: for 
example, 112, 1/4, 1/8, ... , and so forth. In other words, only 
very strongly skewed distributions are ever permitted over count-
ably infinite partitions! 
In both case, for chances and epistemic probabilities, there-
fore, there are cases where we might well want to assign equal 
probabilities to each of a countable infinity of exclusive and 
exhaustive outcomes, which we can do consistently if countable 
additivity is not required (but they must receive the uniform value 
0), but would be prevented from doing so by the principle of 
countable additivity. It seems wrong in principle that an apparent-
ly gratuitous mathematical rule should force one to adopt instead 
a highly biased distribution. Not only that: a range of apparently 
very impressive convergence results, known in the literature as 
Bayesian convergence-of-opinion theorems, appear to show that 
under very general conditions indeed one's posterior probabilities 
will converge on the truth with probability one, where the truth in 
question is that of a hypothesis definable in a 0-field of subsets of 
an infinite product space (see, for example, Halmos 1950, p. 213, 
Theorem B). In other words, merely to be a consistent probabilis-
tic reasoner appears to commit one to the belief that one's poste-
rior probability of a hypothesis about an infinite sequence of 
possible data values will converge on certainty with increasing 
evidence. Pure probability theory, which we shall be claiming is 
no more than a type of logic, as empty 0/ spec(/ic content as 
deductive logic, appears to be all that is needed to solve the noto-
rious problem of induction! 
If this sounds a bit too good to be true, it is: these results all 
turn out to require the principle of countable additivity for their 
proof, and exploit in some way or other the concentration of prob-
ability over a sufficiently large initial segment of a countably infi-

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
29 
nite partition demanded by the principle. To take a simple exam-
ple from Kelly 1996, p. 323: suppose h says that a data source 
which can emit 0 or I emits only 1 s on repeated trials, and that 
P(h) > O. So h is false if and only if a 0 occurs at some point in an 
indefinitely extended sample. The propositions all saying that a 0 
occurs first at the nth repetition are a countably infinite disjoint 
family, and the probability of the statement that at least one of the 
ai is true, given the falsity of h, must be 1. So given the front-end 
skewedness prescribed by the axiom of countable additivity, the 
probability that h is false will be mostly concentrated on some 
finite disjunction a 1 v ... van' It is left to the reader to show, as 
an easy exercise in Bayes's Theorem in the form (20), section b 
above, that the probability that h is true, given a sufficiently long 
unbroken run of 1 s, is very close to 1. 
There is (much) more to be said on this subject, but for further 
discussion the reader is encouraged to consult de Finetti 1872, 
Kelly 1996, pp. 321- 330, and Bartha 2004. Kelly's excellent book 
is particularly recommended for its illuminating discussion of the 
roles played not only by countable additivity but also (and non-
neglibly) by the topological complexity of the hypotheses in prob-
abilistic convergence-to-the-truth results. 
2.e I Random Variables 
In many applications the statements in the domain of P are those 
ascribing values, or intervals of values, to random variables. Such 
statements are the typical mode of description in statistics. For 
example, suppose we are conducting simultaneous measurements 
of individuals' heights and weights in pounds and metres. 
Formally, the set S of relevant possible outcomes will consist of 
all pairs s = (x, y) of non-negative real numbers up to some big 
enough number for each of x and y , height and weight respective-
ly (measuring down to a real number is of course practically 
impossible, but that is why this is an idealisation). 
We can define two functions X and Yon S such that X(x, y) = 
x and Y('C, y) = y . X and Yare examples of random variables: X 
picks out the height dimension, and Ythe weight dimension of the 
various joint possibilities. In textbooks of mathematical probabil-

30 
CHAPTER 2 
ity or statistics, a typical formula might be P(X > x). What does 
this mean? The answer, perhaps not surprisingly, will depend on 
which of the two interpretations of P mentioned earlier is in play. 
On the chance interpretation, P(X > x) will signify the tendency 
of the randomising procedure to generate a pair of observations 
(x', y') satisfving the condition that x' > x, and this tendency, as 
we observed, will be evaluated by inspecting the frequency with 
which it does generate such pairs, 
On the other, epistemic, interpretation, P(X > x) will signify a 
degree of uncertainty about some specific event signified by the 
same inequality formula X> x. For example, suppose that we are 
told that someone has been selected, possibly but not necessarily 
by a randomising procedure, but we know nothing about their 
identity. We are for whatever reason interested in the magnitude 
of their height, and entertain a range of conjectures about it, 
assigning uncertainty-probabilities to them. One such conjecture 
might be 'The height of the person selected exceeds x metres', 
and P(X > x) now symbolises the degree of certainty attached to 
it. 
This second reading shows that 'random variable' does not 
have to refer to a random procedure: there, it was just a way of 
describing the various possibilities determined by the parameters 
of some application. Indeed, not only do random variables have 
nothing necessarily to do with randomness, but they are not vari-
ables either: as we saw above, X, Y, etc. are not variables at all but, 
since they take different values depending on which particular 
possibilities arc instantiated,/ime/ions on an appropriate possibil-
ity-space (in the full measure-theoretic treatment, their technical 
name is measurable jill1ctions). 
2.f 
Distributions 
Statements of the form 'X < x', 'X:s; x', play a fundamental role 
in mathematical statistics. Clearly, the probability of any such 
statement (assuming that they are all in the domain of the proba-
bility function) will vary with the choice of the real number x; it 
follows that this probability is a function F(x:) , the so-called dis-
tributionfimction, of the random variable X. Thus, where P is the 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
31 
probability measure concerned, the value of F(x) is defined to be 
equal, for all x to P(X::; x) (although F depends therefore also on 
X and P. these arc normally apparent from the context and F is 
usually written as a function of x only). Some immediate conse-
quences of the definition of F(.x:) are that 
(i) 
if Xj < x 2 then F('(j) ::; F(x2). and 
(ii) P(''(j < X::; x 2) = F(x) - F(.x: j ). 
Distribution functions arc not necessarily functions of one 
variable only. For example, we might wish to describe a possible 
eventuality in terms of the values taken by a number of random 
variables. Consider the 'experiment' which consists in noting the 
heights (X, say) and weights (Y) jointly of members of some 
human population. It is usually accepted as a fact that there is a 
joint (objective) probabil ity distribution for the vector variable 
(X Y), meaning that there is a probability distribution function 
F(x. y) = P(X::; x & Y::; y). Mathematically this situation is straight-
forwardly generalised to distribution functions of n variables. 
2.9 
Probability Densities 
It follows from (ii) that ifF('() is differentiable at the point x, then 
the probability density at the point x is defined and is equal to 
dF(x) 
f(x) = 
dx 
in other words, if you divide the probability that X 
is in a given interval (x. x + h) by the length h of that interval and 
let h tend to 0, then if F is differentiable, there is a probability 
density at the point x, which is equal tof('(}. If the density exists 
at every point in an interval, then the associated probability dis-
tribution of the random variable is said to be continuous in that 
interval. The simplest continuous distribution, and one which we 
shall refer to many times in the following pages, is the so-called 
uniform distribution. A random variable X is uniformly distrib-
uted in a closed interval I if it has a constant positive probabili-
ty density at every point in I and zero density outside that 
interval. 

32 
CHAPTER 2 
Probability densities are of great importance in mathematical 
statistics-indeed, for many years the principal subject of 
research in that field was finding the forms of density functions 
of random variables obtained by transformations of other ran-
dom variables. They are so important because many of the prob-
ability distributions in physics, demography, biology, and 
similar fields are continuous, or at any rate approximate contin-
uous distributions. Few people believe, however, in the real-as 
opposed to the mathematical-existence of continuous distribu-
tions, regarding them as only idealisations of what in fact are 
discrete distributions. 
Many of the famous distribution functions in statistics are 
identifiable only by means of their associated density functions; 
more precisely, those cumulative distribution functions have no 
representation other than as integrals of their associated density 
functions. Thus the famous normal distributions (these distribu-
tions, of fundamental importance in statistics, are uniquely deter-
mined by the values of two parameters, their mean and standard 
deviation, which we shall discuss shortly) have distribution func-
tions characterised as the integrals of density functions. 
Some terminology. Suppose X and Yare jointly distributed 
random variables with a continuous distribution function F(X, Y) 
and density function ./(t. y). Then F(XJ = r f(x, y)dy is called 
the marginal distribution of X. The operation of obtaining margin-
al distributions by integration in this way is the continuous ana-
logue of using the theorem of total probability to obtain the 
probability P(a) of a by taking the sum 'i:.P(a & b). Indeed, if X 
and Yare discrete, then the marginal distribution for X is just the 
sum P(X = x) = IP(X = x. & Y = v). The definitions are 
• 
I 
I 
I 
• j 
straightforwardly generalised to joint distributions of n variables. 
2.h 
Expected Values 
The expected value of a function g(X) of X is defined to be (where 
it exists) the probability-weighted average of the values of g. To 
take a simple example, suppose that g takes only finitely many 
valuesg l,···· ,gil with probabilities a l ,· .. ,an' Then the expect-
ed value E(g) of g always exists and is equal to 'i:.g;G;. If X has a 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
33 
probability density function.f(x) and g is integrable, then E(g) = 
f 
x, g(x)[r-,)dx where the integral exists. 
X,In most cases, functions of random variables are themselves 
random variables. For example, the sum of any n random vari-
ables is a random variable. This brings us to an important proper-
ty of expectations: they are so-called linearfimctionals. In other 
words, if XI' ... , Xn are n random variables, then if the expecta-
tions exist for all the ~, then, because expectations are either 
sums or limits of sums, so does the expected value of the sum X = 
Xl + ... + Xn and E(X) = E(XI) + . .. + E(XJ 
2.i I The Mean and Standard Deviation 
Two quantities which crop up all the time in statistics are the mean 
and standard deviation of a random variable X The mean value of 
X is the expected value E(X) of X itself, where that expectation 
exists; it follows that the mean of X is simply the probability-
weighted average of the values of X The variance of X is the 
expected value of the function (X - mi, where that expectation 
exists. The standard deviation of X is the square root of the vari-
ance. The square root is taken because the standard deviation is 
intended as a characteristic measure of the spread of X away from 
the mean and so should be expressed in units of X Thus, if we write 
s.d.(X) for the standard deviation of X, s.d.(X) = vE[(X - m)2J. 
where the expectation exists. The qualification 'where the expec-
tation exists' is important, for these expected values do not always 
exist, even for some well-known distributions. For example, if X 
has the Cauchy density -
a ~_ then it has neither mean nor 
. 
n(a2 + x2) 
vanance. 
We have already mentioned the family of normal distributions 
and its fundamental importance in statistics. This importance 
derives from the facts that many of the variables encountered in 
nature are normally distributed and also that the sampling distri-
butions of a great number of statistics tend to the normal as the 
size ofthe sample tends to infinity (a statistic is a numerical func-
tion of the observations, and hence a random variable). For the 
moment we shall confine the discussion to normal distributions of 

34 
C HAPTER 2 
one variable. Each member of this family of distributions is com-
pletely determined by two parameters, its mean ,Ll and standard 
deviation 0: The normal distribution function itself is given by the 
integral over the values of the real variable t from -
00 to x of the 
density we mentioned above, that is, by 
I 
_ 1 ( I -
~I )2 
l (t) =
- e 
2 -iT 
. 
aV2ii: 
It is easily verified from the analytic expression for F(x) that 
the parameters ,Ll and (J are indeed the mean and standard devi-
ati on of X. The curve of the normal density is the famili ar bell-
shaped curve symmetrical about x = ,Ll with the points x = jLl ± 
(J corresponding to the points of maximum slope of the curve 
(Figure 2.1). For these distributions the mean coincides with 
the median, the value ofx such that the probability of the set {X 
< x} is one hal f (these two points do not coincide for all other 
types of distribution, however). A fact we shall draw on later is 
that the interval on the x-axis determined by the distance of 
1.96 standard deviations centred on the mean supports 95% of 
the area under the curve, and hence receives 95% of the total 
probability. 
f(x) 
'11 - 0" 
x 
FIGURE 2.1 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
35 
2.; 
Probabilistic Independence 
Two propositions h I and h2 in the domain of P are said to be prob-
abilistically independent (relative to some given probability 
measure P if and only if P(h l & h2) 
= P(h l )P(hJ It follows 
immediately that, where P(h I) and P(h2 ) are both greater than 
zero, so that the conditional probabilities are defined, P(h I 1 h2) = 
P(h f) and P(h II h f) = P(h), just in case h I and h2 are probabilis-
tically independent 
Let us consider a simple example, which is also instructive in 
that it displays an interesting relationship between probabilistic 
independence and the so-called Classical Definition of probability. 
A repeatable experiment is determined by the conditions that a 
given coin is to be tossed twice and the resulting uppermost faces 
are to be noted in the sequence in which they occur. Suppose each 
of the four possible types of outcome-two heads, two tails, a 
head at the first throw and a tail at the second, a tail at the first 
throw and a head at the second-has the same probability, which 
of course must be one quarter. A convenient way of describing 
these outcomes is in terms of the values taken by two random 
variables XI and X2, where XI is equal to 1 if the first toss yields a 
head and 0 if it is a tail, and X2 is equal to I if the second toss 
yields a head and 0 if a tail. 
According to the Classical Definition, or, as we shall call it, 
the Classical Theory of Probability, which we look at in the next 
chapter (and which should not be confused with the Classical 
Theory of Statistical Inference, which we shall also discuss), the 
probability of the sentence XI = I' is equal to the ratio of the 
number of those possible outcomes of the experiment which sat-
isfy that sentence, divided by the total number, namely four, of 
possible outcomes. Thus, the probability of the sentence 'XI = \' 
is equal to \ 12, as is also, it is easy to check, the probability of 
each of the four sentences of the form 'X = X " i = \ or 2, x = 0 
I 
I· 
I 
or I. By the same Classical criterion, the probability of each of the 
four sentences 'XI = XI & X2 = xc' is \/4. 
Hence 

36 
CHAPTER 2 
and consequently the pairs of sentences 'XI = x I', 'X2 = x2' are 
probabilistic ally independent. 
The notion of probabilistic independence is generalised to n 
propositions as follows: hi' ... ,hn are said to be probabilistically 
independent (relative to the measure P) if and only if for every 
subset hi!' ... ,hik of hI' ... ,hn. 
It is easy to see, just as in the case of the pairs, that if any set of 
propositions is probabilistically independent, then the probability 
of anyone of them being conditional on any of the others, where 
the conditional probabilities are defined, is the same as its uncon-
ditional probability. It is also not difficult to show (and it is, as we 
shall see shortly, important in the derivation of the binomial dis-
tribution) that if hI' ... ,hn are independent, then so are all the 2" 
sets ± h /' ... ,± hn' where +h is hand -h is ~h. 
Any n random variables XI' ... ,Xn are said to be independent 
if for all sets of intervals II' ... ,In of values of XI' ... ,Xn respec-
tively, the propositions XIE 11' ... ,Xn E In are probabilistically 
independent. We have, in effect, already seen that the two random 
variables XI and X 2 in the example above are probabilistically 
independent. If we generalise that example to that of the coin's 
being tossed n times, and define the random variables XI ' ... ,X n 
just as we defined XI and X 2, then again a consequence of apply-
ing the Classical 'definition' to this case is that XI' ... ,x" are 
probabilistically independent. It is also not difficult to show that 
a necessary and sufficient condition for any n random variables 
XI' ... ,x" to be independent is that 
where F(x l , ••• ,x) is the joint distribution function of the vari-
ables XI' ... ,Xn and F(x) is the marginal distribution of Xi' 
Similarly, if it exists, the joint density f(xI' ... ,x,) factors 
into the product of marginal densitiesj(x l ) .. . f(x,) if the Xi are 
independent. 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
2. k I Conditional Distributions 
According to the conditional probability axiom, axiom 4, 
(1) P( X < x I y < Y < Y + 6 y) = 
P(X <x &y<Y~y+6y) 
pry < Y ~ y + 6y) 
37 
The left-hand side is an ordinary conditional probability. Note 
that if F(x) has a densityHx) at the point x, then P(X = x) = 0 at 
that point. We noted in the discussion of(4) that P(a I b) is in gen-
eral only defined if P(b) > O. However, it is in certain cases pos-
sible for b to be such that P(b) = 0 and for P(a I b) to take some 
definite value. Such cases are afforded where b is a sentence of 
the form Y = Y and there is a probability densityf(y) at that point. 
For then, if the joint density f(x, y) also exists, then multiplying 
top and bottom in ( I) by 6 y, we can see that as 6 y tends to 0, the 
right-hand side of that equation tends to the quantity 
I
Xf(u,y)dU , 
- x 
.1M 
wherej(v) is the marginal density ofy, which determines a distri-
bution function for X, called the conditional distribution .Iimction 
of X with respect to the event Y = Y. Thus in such cases there is a 
perfectly well-defined conditional probability 
P(x] < X ~ x21 Y = y), 
even though pry = y) = O. 
The quantity f('(,y! is the density function at the point X = 
.1M 
x of this conditional distribution (the point Y = y being regarded 
now as a parameter), and is accordingly called the conditional 
probability density of X at x, relative to the event Y = Y. It is of 
great importance in mathematical statistics and it is customarily 
denoted by the symbol.f(x I y). Analogues of (18) and (19), the 

38 
C HA PTER 2 
two forms of Bayes's Theorem, are now easily obtained for densi-
ties: where the appropriate densities exist 
1(, I y) = f(y I ~Y)jlx) 
f(y) 
and 
Rv I x)frx) 
f(, I y) =-
--_.- . 
. 
fXxf(y I x)fMdx 
2.1 
The Bivariate Normal 
We can illustrate some of the abstract formal notions we have dis-
cussed above in the context of a very important multivariate dis-
tribution, the bivariate normal distribution. This distribution is, as 
its name implies, a distribution over two random variables, and it 
is determined by five parameters. The marginal distributions of 
the two variables X and Yare both themselves normal, with means 
,ux ' fly and standard deviations ox' Oy. One more parameter, the 
correlation coefficient p, completely specifies thc distribution. 
The bivariate density is given by 
f(x,y) = 
This has the form of a more-or-Iess pointed, more-or-Iess elongat-
ed hump over the x. y plane, whose contours are cllipses with 
eccentricity (departure from circularity) determined by p. plies 
between -1 and + 1 inclusive. When p = 0, X and Yare uncorre-
lated, and the contour ellipses are circles. When p is either + 1 or 
-1 the ellipses degenerate into straight lines. In this case all the 
probability is carried by a set of points of the form y = ax + b. for 
specified a and b. which will depend on the means and standard 
deviations of the marginal distributions. It follows that the condi-
tional probability P(X = x I Y = y) is 1 if y = ax + b. and ° 
if not. 
The conditional distributions obtained from bivariate (and 
more generally multivariate) normal distributions have great 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
39 
importance in the area of statistics known as regression ana~vsis. 
It is not difficult to show that the mean ,u(X I y) = r :"(./("( I y)dx 
(or the sum where the conditional distribution is disErete) has the 
equation Il(X I y) = Ilx + P d' (y - Ilv)' In other words, the depend-
) 
. 
ence of the mean on y is linear, with gradient, proportional to p, 
and this relationship defines what is called the regression of X on 
Y. The linear equation above implies the well-known phenomenon 
of regression to the mean. Suppose Px = Py and ,ux = Ily = m. Then 
,u(X I y) = m + pCv - m), which is the point located a proportion p 
of the distance between y and m. For example, suppose that peo-
ple's heights are normally distributed and that Y is the average of 
the two parents' height and X is the offspring's height. Suppose 
also that the means and standard deviations of these two variables 
are the same and that p = 112. Then the mean value of the off-
spring's height is halfway between the common population mean 
and the two parents' average height. It is often said that results like 
this explain what we actually observe, but explaining exactly how 
parameters of probability distributions are linked to what we can 
observe turns out to be a hotly disputed subject, and it is one 
which will occupy a substantial part of the remainder of this book. 
Let us leave that topic in abeyance, then, and end this brief 
outline of that part of the mathematical theory of probability 
which we shall have occasion to use, with the derivation and some 
discussion of the limiting properties of the first non-trivial ran-
dom-variable distribution to be investigated thoroughly, and 
which has no less a fundamental place in statistics than the nor-
mal distribution, to which it is intimately related. 
2.m 
The Binomial Distribution 
This was the binomial distribution. It was through examining the 
properties of this distribution that the first great steps on the road 
to modern mathematical statistics were taken, by James Bernoulli, 
who proved (in Ars Conjectandi, published posthumously in 
1713) the first of the limit theorems for sequences of independent 
random variables, the so-called Weak Law o.fLarge Numbers, and 

40 
CHAPTER 2 
Abraham de Moivre, an eighteenth-century Huguenot mathemati-
cian settled in England, who proved that, in a sense we shall make 
clear shortly, the binomial distribution tends for large n to the nor-
mal. Although Bernoulli demonstrated his result algebraically, it 
follows, as we shall see, from de Moivre's limit theorem. 
Suppose (i) Xi' i = I, ... , n, are random variables which take 
two values only, which we shall label 0 and 1, and that the prob-
ability that each takes the value 1 is the same for all i, and 
equals p: 
P(J\ = 1) = P(~ = 1) = p. 
Suppose also (ii) that the Xi are independent; that is, 
P(XI = Xl & ... & Xn = X) = P(XI = XI) x ... X P(J\, = xJ 
where Xi = 1 or O. In other words, the Xi are independent, identi-
cally distributed random variables. Let Yin) = XI + ... + XII. Then 
for any f; 0 S r s n, 
since using the additivity property, the value of P is obtained by 
summing the probabilities of all conjunctions 
where r of the X are ones and the remainder are zeros. There 
I 
are "C, of these, where "C, is the number of ways of selecting 
b· 
f 
d . 
1 
n! 
h 
. 
I 
r 0 
~ects out 0 n, an 
IS equa to --- -
,were n! IS equa to 
(n -r)!r! 
n(n - l)(n - 2) ... 2.1, and O! is set equal to 1). By the independ-
ence and constant probability assumptions, the probability of each 
conjunct in the sum is p'"(I - pr ',since P(Xi = 0) = 1 - p. 
~II) is said to possess the binomial distrihution. The mean of 
~11) is np, as can be easily seen from the facts that 

THE PROBABILITY CALCULUS 
and that 
E(X) = P . I + (1 - p) . 0 = p. 
The squared standard deviation, or variance of Yin)' is 
E(Y(n) - npj2 = E(Y(n/) + E(npj2- E(2~n)np) 
= E(~n/) + (npj2- 2npE(Y(n) 
= E(~n/) - (npj2. 
Now 
E~f/) = "L(X2) + "Li"jE(~X) 
= np + n(n - 1)p2. 
Hence 
2.m I The Weak Law of Large Numbers 
41 
The significance of these expressions is apparent when n becomes 
very large. De Moivre showed that for large n, ~n) is approximately 
normally distributed with mean np and standard deviation 
vnp(f - p) (the approximation is very close for quite moderate 
values of n). This implies that the so-called standardised variable 
Z 
O;n) - np) . 
. 
1 
11 d' 
'b del 
= 
. IS approximate y norma y Istn ute lor arge n, 
ynp(l - p) 
with mean 0 and standard deviation I (Z is called 'standardised' 
because it measures the distance of the relative frequency from its 
mean in units of the standard deviation). Hence 
P(-k < Z < k) = <t>(k) - <t> ( - k), 
where <t> is the normal distribution function with zero mean and 
unit standard deviation. Hence 

42 
CHAPTER 2 
P(p - k jl!-nq < '! < p + kip;;) = ¢(k) - ¢ (- k), 
n 
11 
where q = 1 - p. So, setting E = k 1 
P: ' 
11 
P(p - E < .~ < p + E) = (P (E/~- ) - ¢ (- EI n \ 
11 
pq 
\ 
pq ! 
Clearly, the right-hand side of this equation tends to 1, and we 
have obtained the Weak Len!' oj"Large Numhers: 
y 
P( I p i < t") -- 1, for all E > O. 
n 
This is one of the most famous theorems in the history of 
mathematics. James Bernoulli proved it originally by purely com-
binatorial methods. It took him twenty years to prove, and he 
called it his "golden theorem". It is the first great result of the dis-
cipline now known as mathematical statistics and the forerunner 
of a host of other limit theorems of probability. Its significance 
outside mathematics I ies in the fact that sequences of independent 
binomial random variables with constant probability, or Bernoulli 
sequences as they are called, are thought to model many types of 
sequence of repeated stochastic trials (the most familiar being 
tossing a coin n times and registering the sequence of heads and 
tails produced). What thc theorem says is that for such sequences 
of trials thc relative frequency of the particular character con-
cerned, like heads in the example we have just mentioned, is with 
arbitrarily great probability going to be situated arbitrarily close 
to the parameter p. 
The Weak Law, as stated above, is only one way of appreciat-
ing the significance of what happens as 11 increases. As we saw, it 
was obtained from the approximation 
ftj 
f -
pq 
Y 
pq 
P(p - k 
... <- < p +k
- )=<I>(k)-¢ (- k), 
n 
11 
n 
where q = 1 - p, by replacing the variable bounds (depending on 

THE PROBABILITY CALCU LUS 
43 
n) ± k ;-;;q by £, and replacing k on the right-hand sidc by £/;-. 
J ~ 
M 
The resulting equation is equivalent to the first. In other words, 
the Weak Law can be seen either as the statement that if we select 
some fixed interval of length 2£ centred on p. then in the limit as 
n increases, all the distribution will lie within that interval, or as 
the statement that if we first select any value between 0 and 1 and 
consider the interval centred on p which carries that value of the 
probability, then the endpoints of the interval move towards p as 
n increases, and in the limit coincide with p. 
Another ' law of large numbers' seems even more emphatically 
to point to a conncction between probabilities and frcquencies in 
sequences of identically distributed, independent binomial ran-
dom variables. This is the so-called Strong Law, which is usually 
stated as a result about actually infinite sequenccs of such vari-
ables: it asserts that with probability cqual to 1, the limit of ~1i/11 
exists (that is to say, the relative frequency of ones converges to 
some finite value) and is equal top. 
So stated, the Strong Law requires for its proof thc axiom of 
countable additivity, which we have cautioned against accepting 
as a general principle. Nevertheless, a 'strong enough' version of 
the Strong Law can be stated which does not assumc countable 
additivity (the other ' strong' limit theorems of mathematical prob-
ability can usually be rephrased in a similar way): it says that for 
an infinite sequence XI ' X2, .... of {O, I }-valued random vari-
ables, if D, £ are any positive numbers, however small, then there 
exists an 11 such that for all m>n the probability that ~II , III) - P is 
less than £ is greater than I-D. 
What this version of the Strong Law says is that the conver-
gence of the ~11 ) is 1ll1i/hrm in the small probability. The Weak 
Law is weak in the sense that it merely says that the probability 
that the deviation of Y . from J) is smallcr than £ can be madc 
(II I 
arbitrarily close to I by taking n large enough; the Strong Law 
says that the probability that thc deviation will become and 
remain smaller than £ can be made arbitrarily close to I by tak-
ing n large enough. 
At any rate, throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies people took these results to justify inferring, from the 

44 
CHAPTER 2 
observed relative frequency of some given character in long 
sequences of apparently causally independent trials, the approxi-
mate value of the postulated binomial probability. While such a 
practice may seem suggested by these theorems, it is not clear that 
it is in any way justified. While doubts were regularly voiced over 
the validity of this 'inversion', as it was called, of the theorem, the 
temptation to see in it a licence to infer to the value of p from 
'large' samples persists, as we shall see in the next chapter, where 
we shall return to the discussion. 

CHAPTER 3 
The Laws of Probability 
3.a 
Prologue: Frequency-Probability 
We pointed out in 2.c that there are two main ways of interpreting 
the probability axioms. Throughout this book we shall be mainly 
concerned with one of them, an epistemic interpretation in which 
the probability function measures an agent's uncertainty. This 
interpretation is also called Bayesian probability. However, some 
discussion of the other interpretation of the axioms is unavoid-
able, because much of the application of Bayesian probability is 
to hypotheses about these other probabilities. There is a slight 
problem of terminology here, since there is no ready antonym to 
'epistemic', but to emphasise the fact that these probabilities are 
supposed to characterise objective factual situations and set-ups 
we shall rest content with the not wholly satisfactory terminology 
of 'objective probabilities'. 
What makes these important to science is that in a variety of 
contexts, from demography in the large to quantum mechanics in 
the small, they seem to be readily amenable to empirical measure-
ment, at any rate in principle. For to say that an experimental 
arrangement has a stable objective probability of delivering any 
one of its possible outcomes is at least arguably to say that it has 
a characteristic tendency to do so, the magnitude of which is plau-
sibly gauged in terms of the normalised, or relative, frequency 
with which the outcome in question is actually produced; or in 
other words, the number of times the outcome occurs in n trials, 
divided by n. Thus Pitowsky: 
The observational counterparts of the theoretical concept 'probabil-
ity distribution' are the relative frequencies. In other words, as far as 
repeatable ... events are concerned probability is manifested in fre-
quency (1994, p. 98) 

46 
CHAPTER 3 
But not just frequency: fundamental to the identification of objec-
tive probability with relative frequency is the long run, for it is 
only in the long run, in general, that such frequencies behave as 
sufficiently stable features to be the counterparts of the postulat-
ed probability-distribution, and indeed to be objects of scientific 
enquiry at all. Moreover, there is a good deal of evidence that in 
suitable experimental contexts the relative frequency with which 
each of the various possible outcomes occurs settles down within 
a smaller and smaller characteristic interval as the number of 
observations increases. This is not very precise, however (how 
should the interval vary as a function of sample size?), and we 
shall follow von M ises (1939) in replacing the rather vague notion 
ofa relative frequency 'settling down within an increasingly small 
interval' by the precise mathematical definition of a limit. Thus, 
where a describes a generic event A in the outcome-space of the 
experiment, I and n(A) is the number of occurrences of A in n rep-
etitions of the experiment, we define the measure of the probabil-
ity (we shall often simply write 'probability' where the context 
shows that it is objective probability that is being referred to) of a 
to be thc limit of n(A)/n as n tends to infinity. This limit is to be 
regarded as a characteristic attribute of the experimental condi-
tions themselves. Indeed, just as tendencies manifest themselves 
in frequencics of occurrence when the conditions are repeatedly 
instantiated, we can think of this postulated limiting relative frc-
quency as an exact measure of the tendcncy of those conditions to 
deliver the outcomc in question (this idea has of course been pro-
moted under the name 'propensity theory of probability', by 
Popper (1959) and others; it was also the view of von Mises 
whose own frequency theory is usually, and incorrectly, regarded 
as not being of this type). 
A pleasing feature of the limit definition is that limiting fre-
quencies demonstrably satisfy the axioms of the probability cal-
culus. This is very easy to show for unconditional probabilities, 
and we leave it as an exercise. For conditional probabilities the sit-
I A generic event-description is one which states simply that the event occurs. 
without reference to any specific feature of the situation, its time, place. and so 
forth. So, if the experiment consists in tossing a given coin, A might be the event 
or landing heads, in which ease a is the statement 'the coin lands heads'. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
47 
uation is only slightly more complicated, due to the fact that as yet 
conditional probabilities have not been defined in a frequency-
context. But the definition is entirely natural and intuitive: where 
a and b are generic event-descriptors as above, we define P(a I b) 
to be the long-run relative frequency of outcomes of type A among 
all those of type B. Hence P(a I b) = lim n---;.x n(A&Bln(B). 
It immediately follows that P(alh) = lim ~x [n(A&B)ln + 
n(B)ln] where lim n(B) exists. Hence P(alb) = P(a&b)IP(b) where 
P(h) > O. 
While the use of the limit definition allows us to regard objec-
tive probabilities as probabilities in the purely formal sense of the 
probability calculus, it has nevertheless elicited from positivisti-
cally-minded philosophers and scientists the objection that we can 
never in principle, not just in practice, observe the infinite 
n-limits. Indeed, we know that in fact (given certain plausible 
assumptions about the physical universe) these limits do not exist. 
For any physical apparatus would wear out or disappear long 
before n got to even moderately large values. So it would seem 
that no empirical sense can be given to the idea of a limit of rela-
tive frequencies. To this apparently rather strong objection anoth-
er is frequently added, that defining chances in terms of limiting 
frequencies is anyway unnecessary: the mathematical theory of 
probability 
itself~ in the form of the Strong Law of Large 
Numbers shows how the apparent convergence of the relative fre-
quencies to a limit can be explained as a feature oflong sequences 
of Bernoulli trials.c 
Let us look into this claim. The 'strongest' form of the Strong 
Law refers to thc set of possible outcomes VI" of an infinitely repeat-
ed experiment which generates at each repetition either a 0 or a 1. 
These possibilities are described by a sequence Xi of independent, 
identically distributed random variables such that X/w) is equal to 
the ith coordinate of VI' (0 or 1) and P(Xi = I) = P for some fixed p 
and all i. This Strong Law says that with probability 1 the limit, as 
C A variant of the Strong Law, the LUll' of the Iterated Logarithlll. also seems to 
answer the other question of how large the interval is within which the frcquen-
cies are confined with increasing n: with probability 1 the frequency oscillates 
within an interval of length ([In In 11]/2n)1 " where In signifies the natural loga-
rithm. the inverse function to expo 

48 
CHAPTER 3 
n tends to infinity, of n -/ LXi' where the sum is from I to 11, exists 
and is equal to p (as we pointed out in Chapter 2, its proof in this 
form requires the principle of countable additivity). Thus, the 
claim proceeds, the assumption that a sequence of coin tosses is 
approximately modelled as a sequence of Bernoulli trials (we 
shall return to this question in a moment) is sufficient to explain 
the convergence of the frequencies of heads and tails to within an 
arbitrarily small interval characteristic (because of the fixed value 
of p) of the experimental arrangement. 
More than a pinch of salt is advised before swallowing this 
story. Even if we were to permit the use of countable additivity, 
and hence approve the Strong Law in its strongest form, it is not 
difficult to see that in itself it explains nothing at all, let alone 
sanctions the identification of probabilities with observed relative 
frequencies, since no empirical meaning has yet been given to the 
probability function P. Even were it true that a large value of P, 
even the value J, attaches to a particular event cannot by itself 
explain any occurrence of that event: no statement of the pure 
probability calculus by itself makes any categorical prediction. 
Not only that: even were it the case that in some acceptable sense 
the Strong Law, or rather the modelling hypothesis implying it, 
that the coin tosses are an instantiation of a Bernoulli process, 
explained the convergence of relative frequencies, this by itself 
would be no ground for accepting the explanation offered. As we 
shall see in a subsequent chapter, there are infinitely many possi-
ble distinct and mutually inconsistent explanations of any 
observed effect. There has to be some independent reason for 
selecting anyone of these rather than any other, which the 
Bayesian theory formally represents in terms of different prior 
probabilities. 
We can also reject the frequently-made claim that the Strong 
Law shows why chance cannot be defined as limiting relative fre-
quency-because the identity only occurs on a set of measure I, 
and so it is possible in principle for the relative frequency not to 
converge, or to converge to some other value. But again, without 
any independent meaning given to P, or independent reason to 
accept the modelling hypothesis itself, this claim is empty. Some 
additional assumption linking statements of the probability calcu-
lus to physical reality is, on the contrary, indispensable. We have 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
49 
made long-run frequency a definitional link, because that is the 
simplest procedure that avoids the objections. There have been 
other suggestions. One, which seems first to have been explicitly 
made by A.A. Coumot in the nineteenth century, and which often 
goes under the name of Cournot :s' Principle, is that sufficiently 
small probabilities should be assumed to be practical impossibil-
ities (the same rule was also proposed by Kolmogorov in his 1950 
monograph 1950). After all, the minute probability that the kinet-
ic theory ascribes to ice forming spontaneously in a warm bath is 
typically taken as an affidavit that it won't happen in anyone's 
lifetime. Conversely, if it happened rather often, that would almost 
certainly be taken as a good indication that the kinetic theory is 
incorrect. 
It should be clear, however, that without some qualification 
Coumot's Principle is false, for events with almost infinitesimal 
probabilities occur all the time without casting any suspicion 
upon the theories which assign them those probabilities: the exact 
configuration of air molecules in a room at any given time has a 
microscopic probability; so does any long sequence of outcomes 
of tosses of a fair coin (even with so small a number as twenty the 
probability of each possible sequence is already around one in a 
million). Can the Principle be qualified in such a way as to make 
it tenable? This is just what the well-known and widely-used the-
ories of bivalent statistical tests of R.A. Fisher, and Neyman and 
Pearson (all believers in a long-run frequency account of statisti-
cal probabilities), attempt to do in their different ways. 
Unfortunately, as we shall show later, in Chapter 5, these attempts 
also fail. 
But there remains the objection to a limiting frequency meas-
ure of objective probability that relative frequencies in finite 
samples deductively entail nothing whatever about the behaviour 
oflimits, an objection reinforced by the fact that these limits only 
exist in an idealised modelling sense. The remarkable fact is that 
empirical data do nevertheless give us information about the 
limit, though to show how we need to add to that definition 
another feature of actual random sequences besides their appar-
ent convergence to small neighbourhoods of some characteristic 
value. This is the fact that these sequences are random. The intu-
itive idea, which was made mathematically rigorous by the 

50 
CHAPTER 3 
American mathematician and logician Alonzo Church using the 
theory of computable functions which he had independently 
invented, is that a sequence is random if there is no algorithm, into 
which a knowledge of the first 11 members can be inputted, 11 = 
1, 2, 3, ... , for discovering subsequences in which the probabili-
ties (the limiting relative frequencies) differ: were such a possibil-
ity to exist then it could be exploited by a mathematically adept 
gambler to generate a sure profit. 
According to Richard von Mises the two principles of conver-
gence and randomnness, or immunity to gambling systems, deter-
mine a plausible mathematical model, which he called a Kollektiv, 
of what is empirically observed in the field of stochastic phenom-
ena, either carefully cultivated in casinos, or occurring naturally 
in the passing on of genes from two parents, radioactive emis-
sions, and so forth. One of their consequences is partitioning a 
Kollektiv into n-termed subscquences, for each 11 = I, 2, 3, ... , 
generates a new Kollektiv of n-fold Bernoulli sequences, in which 
successive members are probabilistically independent, with the 
chance of any specified outcome occurring at the ith place the 
same for all i, i = 1,2, ... ,11 (von Mises 1964, pp. 27, 28). In other 
words, a Kollektiv with outcomes 0 and I (say) represents an infi-
nite sequence of n-fold random samples in which the outcomes 
are characterised by the same chance, p, as in the original 
Kollektiv. This remarkable fact might seem to preclude the appli-
cation of the theory to the important and extensive field of sto-
chastic phenomena where independence fails, and which instead 
exhibit systematic probabilistic dependencies like Markov 
processes for example. This is fortunately quite untrue: all that 
follows is that the particular random variables Xi' i = L ... , 11, 
defined on the set of all 211 n-tuples (x I' ... ,x,), .\ = 0 or 1, where 
Xi = Xi' are independent. The random variables Yk = XI + ... + Xk, 
k = L .... , 11, are certainly not independent. 
Later, we shall show how it follows from these properties of 
Kollektivs that data from finite sequences can and do actually 
give information about the behaviour of limits. To do this we 
need first to develop the theory of epistemic probability, the 
Bayesian theory, for it is only within such a theory that this fact 
can be demonstrated. That it can be demonstrated at all is 
remarkable enough. That it needs a theory of epistemic probabil-

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
51 
ity to do so underlines the indispensability of the latter for pro-
viding a basis of inductive inferencc; that this basis is also a 
secure logical basis is even more remarkable. That is the pro-
gramme for the remainder of this chapter. 
3.b 
Measuring Uncertainty 
To carry out this programme we shall first have to explain more 
exactly what epistemic probabilities are. The answers that have 
been given, at different times over the past three centuries, ditTcr in 
the details, but one thing on which nearly everyone is agreed is that 
epistemic probabilities are numerical measures of uncertainty. So 
far, so good, except that it is not very far, and the question is where 
to go from there. Here opinions differ. The development we shall 
favour is the one that seems to us the most natural and definitely 
the simplest; it brings with it as a consequence that the rules of 
epistemic probability arc nothing but rules of logic: not deductive 
logic, but a logic that is very closely kin to it. We shall show that 
the axioms of probability are a logic a/uncertain inference. 
The idea that there is an authentic logic of uncertain inference, 
complementing the deductive logic of 'certain' inference, has an 
ancient pedigree, extending back to the beginnings of the mathe-
matical theory of probability in the seventeenth century. Leibniz in 
the Nouveaux Essais and elsewhere said so explicitly, and the idea 
runs like a thread, at times more visible, at times less, through the 
subsequent development of the epistemic view of probability, right 
up to the end of the twentieth century. Thus Ramsey: "The laws of 
probability are laws of consistency, an extension to partial beliefs 
of formal logic, the logic of consistency" ( 1931, p. 182). Ironically 
enough, however, Ramsey did more than anyone else to deflect it 
out of a logical path by choosing to embed his discussion not with-
in the theory of logic as it was then being (very successfully) 
developed in continental Europe, but within the very different the-
oretical matrix of axiomatic utility, which Ramsey himself was the 
first to develop axiomatically, and of which more anon. 
In this chapter we shall try to establish just this link between 
contemporary deductive logic and the laws of epistemic probabili-
ty. We shall proceed in stages, the first of which will be to show 

52 
CHAPTER 3 
how it is possible to make numerical assessments of uncertainty, 
and then see what follows from the properties these have. That it 
is possible to make such assessments is hardly in doubt: people 
have been doing so for centuries, albeit indirectly, in terms of 
odds; for example: 
SPEED: Sir, Proteus, save you! Saw you my master? 
PROTEUS: But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan. 
SPEED: Twenty to one, then, he is shipp'd already. (William 
Shakespeare, Two Gentlemen oj" Verona. 3) 
We say 'indirectly' in terms of odds because 'odds' traditionally 
means 'betting odds', and betting odds directZv determine the 
ratio in which money changes hands in a bet, a fact which raises 
problems for any attempt to use the odds the agent gives or 
accepts as a measure of their uncertainty. The method suggested 
in de Finetti (1937, p. 102), of identifying your personal degree of 
uncertainty with the odds at which you would be prepared to take 
either side of a bet at arbitrary stakes will certainly not work, for 
reasons which have been well-documented and are by now very 
familiar (your willingness to bet will be sensitive to the size ofthc 
stake, to your attitude to risk, maybe to moral considerations, and 
to possible other 'external' factors), and which were historically a 
powerful factor in making people think that there was no alterna-
tive to the explicitly utility-based approach which we shall discuss 
in the next section. It is not possible to evade the problem by 
requiring that the stakes are always sufficiently small that they can 
be safely assumed to be approximately linear in utility, since the 
Dutch Book argument for the conditional probability axiom 
(Chapter 2, axiom (4)) requires that one be prepared to make a 
combined bet against b and on a&b with a stake on b which can 
in principle be arbitrarily large, and the Duteh Book argument fur-
nishes the prudential reason for making your betting quotients 
'We arc grateful to Vittorio Ciirotto and Michel Gonzalez (200 I) for drawing our 
attention to this quotation. A more recent example of the same thing is this: "The 
betting among physicists. however. was that there was an even chance that the 
sse [Superconducting Supercollider] would find exotic particles beyond the 
Standard Model" (Kaku 1994. p. 1 X3). 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
53 
obey the probability axioms: if they don't, you can be made to 
lose come what may (for an elementary proof see Gillies 2000 pp. 
59- 64). 
But citing odds does not necessarily indicate a corresponding 
propensity to bet that way, and Speed's 20: I odds were probably 
not meant to be taken in any such way: they are more likely to be 
(for Shakespeare) his assessment of the relative chances of his 
master shipping versus not shipping (we are using the word 
'chance' here in an entirely informal vernacular sense). Call such 
odds chance-based odds. It is important to keep in mind that 
these odds are conceptually distinct from betting odds: they are 
(so far at any rate)judgments about the relative likelihoods of the 
relevant proposition and its negation. That said, these odds are 
nevertheless numericalZv identical to a special type of such odds, 
the agent's fair betting odds, which is the reason that they are 
referred to as odds at all. What are fair betting odds'? The answer, 
as old as probability itself, is that betting at your personal, 
chance-based odds balances the risk (according to your own 
estimation) betH·'een the sides oj'the bet. According to a standard 
definition (Mood and Graybill 1963, p. 276, for example), risk is 
expected loss, and expected loss is something that is straightfor-
wardly computable, using the normalisations 20/21 and 1/21 of 
Speed's 20: I chance-ratio as Speed's respective personal proba-
bilities of his master having shipped and not having shipped: the 
word 'probabilities' is justified by the fact that these normalisa-
tions are numbers in the probability scale of the closed unit inter-
val, summing to I. 
It is now simple to see that odds in this ratio do indeed balance 
the risk. Suppose Speed is observing two individuals actually bet-
ting on whether his master has shipped. One individual collects Q 
ducats from the other if the proposition is true, and loses R ducats 
to the other if it is false. It is easy to work out that, according to 
Speed's evaluation, the risk of this bet to the first individual is 
equal to the risk to the second if and only if R:Q = 20: I. Hence 
20: I is Speed's fair odds. Note that the bet is fair according to 
Speed independel1t~v o(the magnitude oj' Q + R, i.e. oj'the stake: 
its fairness, or otherwise, depends only on the odds R:Q. SO 
chance-based odds are also fair betting odds. Normalised betting 
odds are called betting quotients, and so normalised chance-based 

54 
C HA PTER 3 
odds arc also personal fair betting quotients. Thus we havc the 
equations: 
Personal probahilities = normalisedfair betting quotients = 
normalised chance-based odds 
There is one proviso in all this, applying whcn the truth-value 
of the proposition in question is not fully decidablc. One of the 
major applications of the Bayesian formalism is to the problem of 
deriving posterior probabilities for scientific hypotheses (hencc 
thc title of this book!). Yct, as Poppcr becamc famous for pointing 
out, if they are sufficiently general these are at bcst only one-way 
decidable, being refutable (with the help of suitable auxiliary 
hypotheses) but not verifiable. Clearly, the only practical way to 
equalise risk in a bet on these is for it to be at zero odds. But thcsc 
may not, and often will not, correspond to your chance-based 
odds. But all we have to do to re-establish equality is to make the 
proviso, possibly countcrfactual, that any bct will be decided, if 
necd bc by an omniscicnt oraclc (this is a fairly standard proce-
dure and, since nothing in this account stipulatcs that the agent 
must or should bet at their fair odds, an unexceptionablc one; cf 
Gai fman 1979, p. 134, n.4). 
The condition of equal (and hence zero) risk is, of coursc, 
equal to that of equal (and hence zero) expected gain, a quantity 
that Laplace termed advantage (1820, p. 20); thus fair odds are 
those also that confcr cqual, mcaning zcro, advantage on each 
sidc ofthc bet. Appeal to zero expected gain as the critcrion offair 
exchanges has of course come in for a good deal of adversc com-
ment, with the celebrated St Petersburg problem alleged to show 
the practice must cither be abandoncd on pain of inconsistency, or 
amended to a corrcsponding condition of zero cxpccted utilitv. 
This piccc of conventional wisdom is incorrect. True, thc zero-
expected-gain condition, plus the additivity of expectation, 
implies that any finite sum paid for the famous offer gives the 
advantagc to thc buyer (thc offer is payment of$2/l if the first head 
in a scqucnce of indefinitely many tosses of a fair coin occurs at 
the nth toss, for 11 = 1,2,3, ... ). But all that follows from anyone 
actually bcing willing to pay a substantial sum is that they are 
cither foolish or they have money to burn. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
55 
What does not follow is that the bet is unfair, and to conclude 
otherwise is simply to contlate equity and preference. That these 
are conceptually distinct is evident from the fact that J may prefer, 
for a variety of reasons, to accept a bet at greater odds than those 
I believe are the fair ones-I might actually want my opponent to 
have the advantage, for example. Nevertheless the contlation is 
routinely made. Explicit in Savage's claim that "to ask which of 
two 'equal ' betters has the advantage is to ask which of them has 
the preferable alternative" (1954, p. 63 )4, it has been a systemat-
ic feature of discussions of subjective probability throughout the 
twentieth century, undoubtedly assisting the acceptance of the 
orthodox view that defining a fair bet in terms of expected gain 
commits the error of assuming that money is linear in value. Of 
course it is not, but nothing in the zero-expected-gain account 
implies that it is, or indeed anything at all about the value that 
should be placed on a gamble (the point is made forcibly in 
Hellman 1997). Savage's claim is, moreover, as he half-confesses,5 
a very considerable distortion of the historical record. From the 
early eighteenth century, the zero-expected gain condition has 
been a legally enforceable condition offairness in games of chance 
in lotteries and casinos, any divergence between the odds and the 
assumed chances being thought almost certain to be manifested in 
the average gains in repeated gambles failing to tend to equality. 
Condorcet pointed this out over two centuries ago by way of 
defending the fairness of the St Petersburg gamble (Todhunter 
1886, p. 393), and in general it seems to have been for a long time 
regarded as a fact, certainly about repeated games of chance: 
We ean actually 'see' the profits or losses of<l persiSlent gamble. We 
naturally translate the lolal into average g<lin and thereby 'observe' 
the expectation even more readily than the prob<lbility ... Certainly 
a gambler could notice that one strategy is in (J<llileo's words "more 
advantageous" than another. (Hacking 1975, p. 92) 
-l This is typical w ithin the orthodox approach: "the fair price of a wager is the 
Sllm of moncy at which [the buyer] should be equally happy to have either a 
straight payment ()f the SUIll or the wager itself" (Joyce 1999, p. 13). 
" " Perhaps I distort history sOlllewhat in insisting that early problems were 
framed in terills of choice among bets" ( 1954, p. 63). Quite so. But every suc-
cessful revolution tends to rewrite history in its own favour, and the utility revo-
lution is no exception. 

56 
CHAPTER 3 
Be that as it may (the scare-quotes suggest less than complete con-
fidence on the part of the author), the discussion shows one impor-
tant sense of fairness of odds which demonstrably has nothing to do 
with any consideration of preference. We cannot, however, invoke 
presumptive tendencies in long sequences of independent repeti-
tions, if for no other reason than that most of the propositions we 
will consider do not describe repeatable events at all: they are the-
ories and evidence-statements whose truth, or falsity, are singular 
'events' par excellence. Nor does the surrogate of calibration seem 
to otTer an acceptable solution. Your probability assignments arc 
calibrated if, for each probability value p, the proportion of true 
propositions in the class of all propositions to which you ascribe p 
is sufficiently close to p . To rule out unrepresentative swamping by 
many repetitions of the same event (like tossing the same suitably 
weighted coin) some condition of independence is required, but this 
and the other conditions needed on size and structure of the equi-
probable reference classes beg more questions than are answered. 
Van Fraassen proves that calibration in some possible world ensures 
obedience to the probability axioms (1983), and Shimony proves a 
similar result in terms of 'reasonable' constraints on truth-frequen-
cy estimation (1993), but the assumptions required are so strong as 
to deprive the results of most of their significance. 
We nevertheless believe that the old idea that fair betting quo-
tients are identified with personal chance-based odds represents a 
sound enough basic intuition which, despite orthodox claims to the 
contrary, can be maintained consistently with acceptance of the 
phenomena of risk aversion, concavity of utility functions, and so 
forth. The one which begs fewest questions of all, and would be the 
one presented if our aim were unalloyed rigor, is R.T. Cox's (we 
shall describe it briefly later), but it also requires fairly sophisticat-
ed mathematics. At any rate, we shall continue with our much sim-
pler development based on the traditional idea of fair odds being 
those corresponding to the agent's 'true' odds- traditional, that is, 
until becoming (unjustly) a casualty of the utility revolution. This is 
a fitting opportunity to pause and take a longer look at that revolu-
tion, whose tendentious redefinitions of fairness and equity we 
have considered, and rejected as question-begging. Even a rigorous 
axiomatic development is no protection against questions begged 
or, as we shall see in the next section, fundamental problems left 
unsolved. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILIN 
57 
3.e 
Utilities and Probabilities 
Inaugurated in Ramsey's seminal essay 'Truth and Probability' 
(1926), the utility-revolution was and still is widely regarded as 
culminating successfully thirty years later in Savage's classic 
work (1954). Savage analyses an individual's uncertainty with 
respect to any proposition a in terms of how he or she ranks their 
preferences for gambles involving a. Thus, if two gambles with 
the same payoffs but on different propositions are ranked differ-
ently it is assumed to be because the agent thinks one of the 
propositions more likely than the other (an axiom states that this 
preference must be independent of the absolute magnitudes of the 
payoffs). Given suitable constraints on the agent's preference 
ranking, this relation determines what Savage calls a 'qualitative 
probability' ordering on propositions which, within a sufficiently 
big space of possibilities (it must be infinite), is representable by 
a unique probability function. 
Secured on what seemed like a rigorous axiomatic base, this 
utility-based account of epistemic probability by philosophers 
became so dominant after the publication of Savage's text that it 
is fair to call it now the orthodox account. It is certainly so among 
philosophers, promulgated in Earman's declaration that "degrees 
of belief and utilities have to be elicited in concert" (1992, pp. 
43--44), and Maher's "You have subjective probability function p 
just in case there exists a utility function u such that your prefer-
ences maximise expected utility relative to p and u" (1990, p. 
382). Yet dissent is, we believe, well-founded. To start with, the 
claim that a utility-based development is the only sure foundation 
for a theory of personal probability is not true: the path via utili-
ty theory is actually far from sure. There is, in particular, a pro-
found problem with the way probabilities are supposed to emerge 
from preferences. The gambles relative to which the agent's qual-
itative probability ordering is defined are a subclass of the class 
of possible acts, and it is this more inclusive class on which the 
preference relation is defined. Formally, they are fitnctions from 
states to consequences (including constant functions which for 
each consequence takes that consequence as value for all states), 
and a critical assumption is that the consequences are capable of 
being described in such a way that their value to the agent can be 

58 
CHAPTER 3 
regarded as constant across possible states. This constancy 
assumption is highly unrcalistic/' and Savage himself acknowl-
edges that in practical situations the value-rclevant conse-
quences of our actions, as we represent them to ourselves at any 
rate, will depend on states of affairs holding that as yet remain 
uncertain: we necessarily contemplate what he calls 'small 
worlds', whose states are coarsenings of the ' grand-world' states 
that determine the ultimate consequences of our acts. 
Knowledge of these being typically denied us, the consequences 
we actually envisage are therefore in reality 'grand-world' acts 
with consequences indeterminate in terms of the 'small world' 
states (1954, pp. 82- 91). Since to every' small world' act there 
corresponds a unique 'grand world' act, it is a natural consistency 
condition that the expected-utility ranking of the 'small world' 
acts is consistent with that of their 'grand world' counterparts. 
Yet, as Savage himself shows, there are 'small world'-'grand 
world' pairs in which the preference ran kings are consistent with 
each other but in such a way that the 'small world' probability 
function is inconsistent with the 'grand world' probability 
(1954, pp. 89-90). 
While in itself this might seem, according to taste, either 
merely mildly anomalous or something rather more serious, it 
nevertheless portends something definitely morc to the latter end 
of the spectrum. For a development of Savage's example by 
Schervish et al. shows that the phenomenon of sameness of rank-
ing with di flerent probabilities can be reproduced entirely within 
one 'grand world' (1990 p. 845). Their result is not, as it seems to 
be, in contlict with Savage's well-known proof of the uniqueness 
of the probability-utility representation, because that proof 
assumes that the values attached to the consequences arc fixed 
independently of the states. In the construction of Schervish et al. 
this is actually true for each probability-utility representation sep-
arately, but the values assigned consequences in one representa-
tion are state-dependent in the other, and vice versa. While the 
formal correctness of Savage's result is not impugned, therefore, 
the fact nevertheless remains that altering the way consequences 
(' CfAumann 2()()(), pp. 30506. Savage's reply to him is hardly convincing (ihid. 
pp. 307- 310). 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
59 
are valued can, at any rate in Savage's account1, actually alter the 
probabilities elicited from the same set of preferences. Jeffreys 
had earlier voiced scepticism about basing subjective probability 
on revealed preferences among uncertain options, precisely on the 
ground that such preferences are irreducibly "partly a matter of 
what we want, which is a separate problem from that of what it is 
reasonable to believe" (1961, p. 30), a judgment which now 
seems fully vindicated. Schervish et al. themselves conclude that 
the situation described above places "the meaning of much of this 
theory . .. in doubt" (1990, p. 846). 
The path from utilities to determinate probabilities is, para-
doxically, rendered even less firm by improving the conceptual 
foundations of Savage's theory. Jeffrey's decision theory (1964), 
published a decade after Savage's, replaces Savage's problematic 
state-action partition with a more appealing single algebra of 
propositions describing both the taking of actions and the possi-
ble consequences ensuing, generating thereby a modified expect-
ed-utility representation of preference (,desirability') whose 
probability-weights are conditional probabilities of outcomes 
given the action contemplated (in Savage's theory they are uncon-
ditional probabilities distributed over a partition of states). But a 
well-known feature of Jeffrey's theory is that the desirability-
axioms permit a class of probability functions, and one so exten-
sive that it contains functions which disagree in their ordering of 
the propositions. 
It follows almost immediately that it is possible for an agent to 
order propositions by degree of belief consistently with the 
Jeffrey axioms in a way not representable by any single probabil-
ity function (Joyce 1999, p. 136). True, the class of functions can 
in principle be narrowed down: the trouble is that all the attempts 
to do so cause disruption elsewhere or beg the question. For 
example, Bradley (1998) shows that uniqueness can be obtained 
by adjoining to the underlying algebra of propositions a class of 
conditionals satisfying the so-called Adams Principle (which says 
essentially that the probability of a conditional is a conditional 
probability). But then some famous results of Lewis (1976) imply 
7 And not just in that: Schervish et al. point out that the same problem atnicts 
Anscombe and Aumann's (1963) and de Finetti's (1974) theories. 

60 
CHAPTER 3 
that the resulting logic must be non-Boolean, to say nothing of 
these conditionals possessing very counterintuitive features: for 
example 'If Jones is guilty then Jones is guilty' turns out to have 
no truth-value if Jones is in fact not guilty. Jeffrey himself coun-
selled adding further axioms for qualitative probability orderings 
(1974, pp. 77--78)8, and it is well-known how to do this to secure 
uniqueness. But this strategy effectively sells the pass as far as the 
programme for determining subjective probabilities by appeal to 
properties of rational preference is concerned. The continued con-
centration of activity in the theory of rational preference should 
not conceal the fact that one of its historically principal objec-
tives, the determination of personal probabilities by a suitable 
elicitation of preferences9, is if anything farther from being 
achieved than ever. 
Not only do they seem to provide no secure foundations for 
personal probability: decision theories like Savage's rather notice-
ably fail to discharge the function they themselves set, which is, 
typically, identifying criteria for making optimal choices among 
possible actions. Savage's theory is explicitly a theory of rational-
ity, of "the behaviour of a 'rational' person with respect to deci-
sions" (p. 7). The scare-quotes signify a degree of ideal isation in 
the theory Savage is about to develop; to this end he calls it a 
model. But a model of what? It is increasingly appreciated that the 
theory's prescriptions are, at any rate in most interesting applica-
tions, beyond the capacity of even the most rational human agent 
to obey, a feature remarked in observations to the effect that the 
theory assumes an in-principle impossible "logical omniscience" 
(Earman 1992, p. 124), and that its characteristically sharp (point) 
probability-values are completely unrealistic. The objection is not 
substantially deflected by appeal to the idealising character of 
Savage's theory. A model of rational behaviour that makes no 
allowance for the fact that people are highly bounded reasoners, 
using irreducibly vague estimates of probability, is an inadequate 
S A strategy endorsed by Joyce: "The bottom line is that JcfTrey-l3olker axioms 
need to be augmented. not with further constraints on rational preference, but 
with further constraints on rational belief" (1999. p. 137). 
" It was the explicit goal of Ramsey. who proved. or more accurately sketched a 
proof oC the first representation theorem for utilities. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
61 
model; hence the various attempts over the last forty or so years 
to develop what Hacking called "slightly more realistic personal 
probability" (1967). 
What these last objections reveal, we believe, is not that the 
standard formalism of personal probability is insufficiently 
human-centric, but that it is misidentified as a model, even a high-
ly idealising one, of a rational individual's beliefs. On the other 
hand, if it is not that, what is it? It is suggestive to ask what other 
well-known theory has as its domain a full Boolean algebra of 
assertions (up to equivalence) and rules for distributing values 
over its elements. Answer: deductive logic. Nobody (presumably) 
would regard this as the theory of the mental workings of even an 
ideal human reasoner; it is a theory of necessary and sufTieient 
conditions for inferences to be valid and sets of sentences to be 
consistent, whose connection with human reasoning exists only in 
the occasional ability to map in a more or less faithful way infer-
ences actually considered into the set defined and evaluated with-
in the model. The formalism ofepistemic probability suggests, we 
believe, a similar conclusion: that formalism is a model of what 
makes a valid probabilistic inference, not of what ideally rational 
agents think or ought to think in conditions of uncertainty. Of 
course, so far the kinship between epistemie probability and logic 
is no more than suggestion, and certainly does not amount to a 
proof, or even a semi-rigorous argument, to that effect. The differ-
ences between probability-values, inhabiting as they do an inter-
val of real numbers, and the two truth-values 'true' and 'false', as 
well as their difference of interpretation, shows that any proof of 
identity between the two models is out of the question. But 
acknowledging their distinctively probabilistic features does not 
mean that in some relevant sense the laws of probability are not 
sufficiently close to those of deductive logic to merit being 
assigned the status of logic. 
Indeed, we believe such a logical interpretation is not only 
possible (and the rest of this chapter will be devoted to arguing the 
case for this), but that 011(1' such an interpretation is capable of 
accounting in a natural way for those features of the formalism of 
epistemic probability which arc otherwise highly anomalous. For 
example, on the logical view the charge of 'logical omniscience' 
is clearly misplaced, for there is no knowing or reasoning subject, 

62 
CHAPTER 3 
even an ideal one, appealed to or legislated for. The use of 'sharp' 
probability values is also easily justified as a simplifying move 
analogous to the adoption of 'sharp'-that is, strictly two-val-
ued-truth-values in the standard deductive models. These latter 
would also be judged unrealistic were their function that of mir-
roring accurately the semantics of natural languages where, as the 
many varieties of Sorites demonstrate, truth is typically vague if 
not actually fuzzy (nor is even mathematics, that alleged para-
digm of precision, immune, a fact most notably pointed out by 
Lakatos, who used the vagueness in the concept of a polyhedron 
as the starting point from which he began a celebrated investiga-
tion into the foundations of mathematics (1963); and opinion is 
still far from unanimous on the meanings of 'set', 'function' , 
'continuous', 'number', and other basic mathematical notions). 
Their role is not that of mirroring natural-language semantics, 
however, but of playing a central role within simplifying models 
of valid deductive inference whose payoff is information, about 
the scope and limits of deductive systems: witness the signifi-
cance given the classic theorems of G6del, L6wenheim, Skolcm, 
Church, Tarski, Cohen, and others. Similarly, sharp probability 
values are justified by the explanatory and informational divi-
dends obtained from their use within simplifying models of 
uncertain inference. And as we shall see in the remainder of this 
book, these are very considerable. 
One-indeed the principal-question we must answer is why 
the probability axioms should be regarded as constraints on the 
distribution of fair betting quotients. One well-known way of try-
ing to justify the probability axioms within a general betting-odds 
approach appeals to a purely arithmetical result known as the 
Dutch Book Theorem. First proved by de Finetti (1937), its con-
tent is this: a function P whose values are betting quotients can-
not generate, for any set of stakes, a positive net loss or gain 
independently of the truth-values of the propositions bet 011, (fand 
only P satisfies the/inite!y additive probability axioms. A system 
of betting quotients invulnerable to such a forced loss de Finetti 
termed 'coherent', usually translated into English as 'coherent' 
though it is also translatable as 'consistent'. Thus the theorem 
states that coherence for belief-functions measured in this way is 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
63 
equivalent to their satisfying the probability calculus. For a sim-
ple proof of the thcorem see Gillics 2000, pp. 59-64. 
As mathematics, the result is unquestionable. What is prob-
lematic about it is why being a guarantee of invulncrability to a 
forced loss should authorise the probability axioms to constrain 
the distribution of personal fair betting quotients whose defini-
tion, as we have taken pains to stress, implies no propensity of the 
agent whose beliefs they characterise to bet at the corresponding 
odds, or even to bet at all. There is an answer to this question, as 
we shall see later in section e, but at the present stage of the dis-
cussion it is not obvious. In what follows we shall try a different 
approach. 
3.d 
Consistency 
Ramsey and de Finetti both regarded the probability axioms as 
consistency constraints. However, de Finetti identified proba-
bilistic consistcncy with coherence (1937, p. 102), which rather 
begs the question, while Ramsey saw consistency as a property 
of sets of preferences. That way, of course, is the orthodox way 
of utility theory, which we have repudiated. Nevertheless, 
despite this unpromising start, we shall persist with the claim 
that the probability axioms are laws of consistency. Indeed, we 
shall argue that they are laws of consistency in very much the 
same way that the laws of deductive logie are laws of deductive 
consistency. 
Now this might seem an even more unpromising proposal than 
either de Finetti's or Ramsey's, since to start with deductive con-
sistency is a property of sets of sentences, not of assignments of 
numerical fair betting quotients to propositions. The proposition-
sentence difference is not the problem here, since for our purpos-
es they can be regarded as the same things. The problem, or what 
seems to be a problem, is that in one case consistency is predicat-
ed of assignments of number-values, and in the other of sets of 
sentences or propositions. Perhaps surprisingly, this gulf is less 
formidable than it looks. At any rate, it is easily bridged by recog-
nising that the apparently distinct notions are merely subspecies 
of a single more general concept, the familiar mathematical 

64 
CHAPTER 3 
concept of consistency defined as the solvability o/sets 0/ equa-
tions. To see why this is so, firstly note that a set of assignments 
of number-values to a Boolean function is in effect a set of equa-
tions. Thus, considering a consistent set K of assignments to a 
belief function Bcl( ) and a conditional belief function 8el( I ), 
Paris writes 
Consistent means that, with whatever additional conditions current-
ly apply to Bel( ), Bel( I ), there is a solution satisfying these and the 
equations in K. ( 1994, p. 6) 10 
Thc next step consists in observing that deductive consistcncy is 
also rcally nothing but solvability in this sense. This is easiest to 
see in the context of a popular deductivc system for first order, 
and in particular propositional logic, the semantic tableau or tree 
system. 
This is specifically designed to be an efficient test for the 
deductive consistency of sets of sentences. Here is a simplc exam-
ple: we want to test the set {a, a ~ b, ~h} for consistency. The 
test consists of writing these sentences so 
a 
and beneath ~h appending the tableau rule for the unnegated con-
ditional a 
---c"> h 
/ \ 
~a b 
We have two branches from the root, on both of which are a sen-
tence and its negation. The tree is now closed, signifying that the 
set is inconsistent, and the test is complete (the classic text is 
Smullyan 1968; more elementary texts are Jeffrey 1989 and 
Howson 1997). 
10 Paris takcs K morc gcncrally to bc a sct of I in car constraints on belieffunctions. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
65 
Essentially the same tableau, or tree, could however have been 
written in the 'signed' form 
v(a) 
= 1 
v(a --;. b) = I 
v (b) 
= () 
II 
v(a) = () v(b) = 1 
(i) 
(ii) 
(ii i) 
where I signifies truth and 0 falsity, and v is a truth-valuation 
function II. What we see here is most revealing: the signed tree 
shows that the initial assignment represented by the equations 
(i)-(iii) is overdetermined. Those equations are unsolvable over 
the set of propositional variables: there is no assignment of values 
to a and b which satisfies them. Conversely, had the initial set 
been consistent, a corresponding complete and open (signed) tree 
could be constructed which would exhibit at least one single-val-
ued extension of the initial valuation to all the sentences of the 
propositional language (Howson 1997, pp. 57-60). We should 
note that this phenomenon is not restricted to propositional logic: 
it is straightforward to show that signed trees perform an analo-
gous role for full first order logic. 
We see, then, that the signed tree method shows explicitly that 
the consistency or inconsistency oja set ofsentcnces is eqllivalent 
to the saris/iability or Llilsatisjiabili(v ojsets ojequations. It should 
also be evident that all signed tableaux can be converted into 
unsigned ones (by first removing all the truth-values and then 
negating any sentence to which 0 had been assigned), and converse-
ly. In other words, we see that the ordinary concept of deductive 
consistency of a set of sentences in some interpretative structure is 
equivalent to the solvability of an assignment of truth-values. 
We can now paraphrase Paris's definition of a consistent set 
K of assignments appropriately for this deductive example: K 
(here the set {(i), (ii), (iii)}) is consistent if, with whatever addi-
tional conditions apply to v(), there is a solution satisfying these 
I I Smullyan 1968, to whom the definition of signed tableaux is due, signs them 
with T and F; we equate the sentences to 1 and 0 to emphasise the equational 
character of the tableau. 

66 
CHAPTER 3 
conditions and the equations in K. It follows that truth is involved 
in the concept of deductive consistency on~v via the constraints, 
and suggests that corresponding to different types of constraint on 
'values' attached to propositions we shall obtain different types 
of logic: so for example the logic of consistent assignments of 
truth-values subject to the constraints given by a classical truth-
definition is deductive logic; the logic of consistent assignments 
offair betting quotients determined by appropriate constraints on 
them we can legitimately call probability-logic. 
The Big Question, of course, is what these 'appropriate con-
straints' are. We already have one: the scale of probabilities, since 
we are dealing with normalised odds, which occupy the closed 
unit interval (and add over pairs a, ~a). And we also have the 
primitive idea that those numbers represent fair betting quotients, 
reflecting assessments of the agent's 'true' odds. The immediate 
question is where to go from there. 
A clue is suggested by the fact that since we are discussing 
consistent distributions of probabilities, we should presumably be 
looking for some collective condition or conditions. But what col-
lective condition? Joyce has recently argued that the probability 
axioms follow from the condition that an overall assignment is 
'truth-directed', but the conclusion depends on representing 'true' 
by I and 'false' by 0 (1998): reverse this entirely conventional 
proxying, and the result fails. But let us try to exploit the idea of 
fairness a bit more. A very plausible condition is that fair gambles 
should not become collectively unfair on collection into a joint 
gamble, and it also points in the desired direction since (a)-(c) 
below show that the laws of probability pretty well all follow from 
the condition that a finite set of fair bets is fair (de Finetti first 
showed this in his 1972, p. 77). A problem is that if the criterion 
of fairness is zero-expected gain, we have as yet no information 
on how to aggregate expectations on sums of bets; that they add 
over finite sums of random variables is a consequence of the 
finitely additive probability axioms, but to invoke the axioms at 
this stage would clearly beg the question. 
However, there is nothing to stop us adding as an independent 
assumption that the class of fair bets, bets whose betting quotient 
is the agent's fair betting quotient, is closed under finite sums. De 
Finetti himself does so, in the form of a definition of fairness for 
finite sums of bets (ibid.) For him, however, this 'definition' is in 
effect a consequence of insisting monetary stakes be kept small: 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
67 
in the limit of small sums utility-gains are equal to monetary ones, 
and utility functions compensate for the departures from additiv-
ity (which he calls 'rigidity' [1974, p. 77]) caused by risk-aversion 
where the stakes are in monetary units. But that, of course, is a 
utility-based justification. Our own, where no condition is placed 
on the size of the stakes, is merely that it is a natural assumption 
that chance-based odds do not 'interfere' when combined in finite 
sums of bets, one arguably as analytic in its way as the deductive 
assumption that a conjunction is true just in case all its conjunc-
tions are. We do not even need the principle in its generality, only 
the following special case: 
(C) If the sum of finitely many (and in fact we never need to 
exceed two) fair bets uniquely determines odds 0 in a bet 
on proposition a, then 0 are the fair odds on a. 
(C stands for 'Closure', that is, the fact that it is a closure princi-
ple on fair bets; "uniquely" means 'independently of choice of 
stakes'; on those occasions when we will use (C) it is not difficult 
to see that the condition is satisfied.) 
3.e 
The Axioms 
To keep things simple we shall now follow de Finetti 1972 in 
identifying a proposition a with its indicator function: i.e. the 
function taking the value 1 on those states of affairs making a true 
and 0 on those making a false. This means that from now on we 
are dealing with an algebra (of indicator functions). The random 
quantity (de Finetti's terminology) 5(a - p) then represents an 
unconditional bet on/against a with stake 5 (5 positive for 'on' and 
negative for 'against') and betting quotient p, paying 5(J - p) 
when a is true and - p5 when a is false. A bet on a conditional on 
the truth of another proposition b is a bet on a if b is true, called 
off if b is false. If the stake is 5 it is therefore the quantity b5(a-
p). p is your conditionalfair hetting quotient if it is your fair bet-
ting quotient in a conditional bet. 
The following facts are easy to establish: 
(a) If p is the fair betting quotient on a then 1- p is the fair 
betting quotient on ~a. This anyway we know to be the 

68 
CHAPTER 3 
case, since as we saw earlier p and I - p arc the normali-
sations of the agent's chance-based odds. 
(b) If a and b are disjoint with fair betting quotients p and q 
respectively then p + q is the fair betting quotient on a v 
b. 
(c) If p and q are the fair betting quotients on a&b and b 
respectively, and q > 0, then plq is the conditional fair 
betting quotient on a given b. 
Proof: 
(a) S(o - p) = -S(-a - [/ - p}). Now use (C). 
(b) S(a - p) + S(b - q) = S(avb-(p + q)). Now use (C). 
(c) If both p,q > 0 then there are nonzero numbers S. T, W 
such that S(a&b - p) + T(b - q) = a W(o - p Iq) (TIS must 
be equal to p Iq). Now use (C). The restriction to p > 0 can 
be eliminated by noting that if p = 0 then S(a&b - p) = 
Sa&b = Sab = bS(a - 0). 
A point of interest is that (C) can be seen as a more general addi-
tivity principle: (b) tells us that it underwrites the familiar addi-
tivity principle for probabilities, but (c) tells us that it also 
underwrites the quotient ' definition ' of conditional probabili-
ties. This kinship between two of the fundamental laws of prob-
ability usually regarded as bcing di stinct from each other is of 
interest whatever view one might take of the naturc of probabi 1-
ity itself. 
We now come to the main result of this chapter. Let m be some 
algebra of propositions, assumed fixed for the following discus-
sion (as we shall see shortly, the result does not depend on the par-
ticular choice of m), and let K be an assignment of personal fair 
betting quotients (including conditional betting quotients) to a 
t'" 
b 
1)\ 
flP 
Illite su set . '0 
0 at. 
Theorem: K can bc extended to a single-valued function F on 
m, wherc F satisfies (C), if and only if K is thc restriction of a 
finitely additive probability function on m. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
69 
Prool 
We shall actually prove something slightly stronger, namely 
that the (nonempty) class of all single-valued extensions of K 
to m which satisfy (C) is exactly the (nonempty) class of 
finitely additive probability functions on m which agree with 
K on mo' 
(i) 
'Only if'. It follows almost immediately from (a)-(e) that 
any extension of K satisfying the conditions stated is a 
finitely additive probability function on m (the additivity 
principle is obvious, and we also have that the logieal 
truth t is equal to a v -a for any a, and P(a v -a) = P(a) + 
P(-a) = praY + 1 - praY = 1; the corresponding condition 
that P(J..) = P(a&-a) = ° 
follows immediately). 
(ii) 'If'. Suppose that K is the restriction of some probability 
function P on m. It is sufficient to show that if p / .... ,Pk 
are the values given by P to a /' ... ,ak , and a sum of bets 
XI' ... ,Xk at those betting rates is a bet on some proposi-
tion a with betting quotient P, then p = PraY. For then P 
itself will be such a single-valued extension of K to m sat-
isfying (C). Suppose the antecedent is true. Since the 
expectations of the X; with respect to P are all 0, it follows 
that the expected value of Z = .LX; is 0 also, by the linear-
ity of expectations. Hence if Z = S(a - p) for some propo-
sition a then the expected value of the right hand side 
must be zero, in which case P = pray (it is straightforward 
to show that the result continues to hold if one or more of 
the bets is a conditional bet). QED 
Corollary 1 
K is consistent just in case K is the restriction of 
a finitely additive probability function. 
We can now push the analogy with propositional logic even far-
ther. Define a model of a consistent assignment K to be any 
single-valued extension of K to m which satisfies (C), and say that 
an assignment K' is a consequence of another assignment K just 
in case every model of K is a model of K '. We then have: 

70 
CHAPTER 3 
Corollary 2 
K'is a consequence of K just in case every prob-
ability function which extends K assigns values to members of 
1ft as specified by K '. 
Discussion. To say that? is a probability function over 1ft is to 
say that the pair (1ft,?) is a system implicitly defined by the famil-
iar axioms of mathematical probability: the probability calculus is 
just their deductive closure. Indeed, having now situated the enter-
prise of uncertain reasoning firmly within the province of logic, 
we can construe those axioms as logical axioms, mediating the 
drawing of consequences from specific sets of premises, which 
we can regard as assignments like K (rather like in the signed 
semantic tree representation of deductive inference, where the ini-
tial sentences are also value-assignments). A further corollary is 
that valid uncertain reasoning, construed as reasoning involving 
personal probabilities, is formally probabilistic reasoning-rea-
soning in accordance with the rules of the probability calculus. 
Indeed, suppose that we can construct a representation of 1ft in a 
deductive system, in which we can also express the ideas of a 
probability system, and of an arbitrary assignment of real num-
bers to members of 1ft. Such a deductive system is a probability 
calculus based on 1ft whose axioms, since they serve only to medi-
ate a consequence relation, can accordingly be regarded as having 
logical status: they are in effect logical axioms in a theory of valid 
probabilistic consequence. 
And we can say more. The only 'facts' about the general prop-
erties of a probability function on an algebra are the logical con-
sequences of a suitable axiomatisation, together with a suitable 
representation of the algebra. In a first-order framework these log-
ical consequences are just the formally provable consequences, in 
which case the theorem above can be seen as a soundness and 
completeness theorem fc)r probabilistic conseqllence: it implies 
that K' is a consequence ol Kjust in case there is a prool of K' 
fimn K in the corre:-,pondingformal calclilus. A concrete example 
is provided by Paris (1994, pp. 83~85), where the domain of the 
agent's uncertainty is the set SL of sentences in the language L 
generated by a finite set of propositional variables under the con-
nectives &. v, and -. Paris presents a formal deductive system n 
for sequents of the form KI K' (to be read "K entails K ' ''), where 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
71 
K and K' are now finite sets of linear constraints (i .e. sets of the 
form 
k L uijB(a) = v"i = 1, ... , m 
j~l 
where B(a.) is the agent's probability assignment to a, and 
j 
) 
where the axioms and rules of inference are explicitly specified. 
Paris then proves the following theorem: 
For any pair K, K', the set alaI! probabilityfimctions extend-
ing K to SL is contained in those extending K' ~land only ~lthe 
sequent K I K' is a theorem a/' n. 
(We can straightforwardly adapt the result to a corresponding 
algebra of propositions, or their indicator functions, by the usual 
device of identifying logically equivalent members of SL.) Since 
the antecedent of Paris's theorem is equivalent to the condition for 
probabilistic consequence as defined above, that theorem is 
indeed such a soundness and completeness theorem relative to an 
explicitly-defined syntactical structure. 
In the light of this discussion there seems no longer any room 
for doubt that the probability calculus is interpretable as, and we 
would argue should be interpreted as, a set of consistency con-
straints on distributions of personal probability in a way strongly 
analogous to the way that standard deductive rules are consisten-
cy constraints on truth-value assignments. 
Corol/ary 3 
K is consistent if and only if no system of bets 
with odds given by K will lead to certain loss. 
This follows immediately from the result above and a sharpening 
of the Dutch Book theorem by de Finetti (this states that a non-
negative real-valued function F on mo can be extended to a finite-
ly additive probability function on any algebra ~}T' including mo iff 
the betting quotients obtained from F are coherent on mo (de 
Finetti 1972, p. 78; the proof is by induction on the well-ordered 
set obtained from mo by adding an arbitrary proposition at each 
stage; inn' is uncountable the proof uses transfinite induction on 

72 
CHAPTER 3 
a well-ordering of ffi', for the existence of which the Axiom of 
Choice has to be assumed}. 
Disclission. While coherence is now not a primary, or in itself 
any, justification of the probability axioms, merely a corollary of 
the consistency of the assignments of fair betting quotients, this 
result is of considerable importance from another point of view, 
namely sanctions. It is precisely the issue of sanctions for viola-
tion of the rules of the probability calculus that might be thought 
to present a big disanalogy between probabilistic and deductive 
logic. Disobeying deductive rules of consistency invites the pos-
sibility of accepting a set of statements as simultaneously true 
which in fact cannot be. This is, of course, a feature peculiar to 
deductive logic, though it is one whose importance is, we believe, 
greatly exaggerated. The constraints usually regarded as deter-
mining deductive consistency are the rules of a classical truth-def:' 
inition. Yet in ordinary discourse these rules are frequently and, 
depending on the case, systematically violated-
fortunately: oth-
erwise we could immediately infer the existence of God from the 
apparently true premise that it is not true that if He exists we arc 
free to do as we like. That the negation of a material conditional 
implies the truth of its antecedent is an artefact of its definition as 
a bivalent truth-function, resulting in classical first-order logic 
providing a notoriously poor model of conditional reasoning (this 
is a fact that is not emphasised in the standard textbooks, includ-
ing one by one of the authors, Howson 1997). And that is merely 
an extreme case: the commutativity of conjunction is frequently 
'infringed' without people declaring the speaker inconsistent: for 
example, 'she got married and had a baby' does not necessarily 
mean the same as 'she had a baby and got married'. These facts, 
together with the development and serious candidacy of certain 
types of non-classical deductive logic, suggest that it is merely 
na'ive to believe that deleterious consequences are any more like-
ly to flow from accepting a classically inconsistent set of sen-
tences. For that matter, none of our current foundational scientific 
theories, including that for mathematics itself, are or even can be 
known in any non-question-begging way to be classically consis-
tent: Godel's famous Second Incompleteness Theorem states that 
there is no consistency proof for them which does not require 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
73 
stronger premises than they themselves possess--unless they are 
inconsistent. 
So, surprisingly for those who accept the conventional wis-
dom, the case that failure to the canons of deductive consistency 
placcs the violator in any sort of jeopardy has yet to be made, and 
in view of the preceding observations it is most unlikely that it 
ever will be. By contrast (and turning the conventional wisdom on 
its head), the corollary above shows that there are much more pal-
pable sanctions against violating the rules of probabilistic consis-
tency. Personal probabilities determine fair betting quotients, and 
being inconsistent in the use of these means potentially inviting 
certain loss. It is no objection to say that the potential for certain 
loss is merely that, a potentiality: also 'merely potential' are the 
deleterious consequences supposedly arising from accepting an 
inconsistent set of sentences. 
Coro//ary 4 
If K is consistent then it is so independently of 
the particular m chosen; that is, K has a single-valued exten-
sion satisfying (C) to any algebra which includes mrr 
This follows immediately from the theorem of de Finetti stated in 
Corollary 4. Note that it is certainly not the case ifone substitutes 
'countably' for 'finitely', since it is well-known that not every 
subset of the unit interval, for example, is measurable (assuming 
the Axiom of Choice). 
Discussion. There is an important analogous property of deduc-
tive consistency: the consistency of a truth-value assignment 
depends only on its domain; equivalently, a set of sentences is 
deductively consistent, or not, independently of the constitution of 
the language in which it is included. This local character of deduc-
tive consistency, and by implication deductively valid inference, is 
therefore mirrored in the account of probabilistic consistency 
(and probabilistic consequence; see the following corollary). The 
importance of focusing on local assignments to sets of proposi-
tions which are not necessarily, or even usually, closed algebras, 
is always stressed by de Finetti in his writings, and it is no acci-
dent that he often chose a logical or quasi-logical vocabulary to 
describe his results: he certainly saw what he was doing as a part 
of a more general theory of logic. It is no accident either that 

74 
CHAPTER 3 
characteristic properties of deductive logic carryover to its prob-
abilistic analogue, and the fact that in Carnap's early systems of 
inductive logic the 'degree of partial entailment' between hand e 
did depend on the structure of the language of which hand e were 
a part is a significant factor against them. 
Historical Note. Most people who have tried to construct logical 
theories of probability regard them as assigning probabilities to 
formulas in a formal language. Interesting results have come out 
of this research. For example, Gaifman proved a 'logical' ana-
logue of the Extension Theorem for measures: he showed that any 
probability function defined on the quantifier-free sentences of a 
first order language L with denumerably many constants has a 
unique extension to the full set of sentences of L, which satisfies 
the condition that the probability of an existentially quantified 
sentence is the supremum (in the corresponding Lindenbaum 
algebra) of the probabilities of its instantiations with constants 
(Gaifman 1964; this condition is now known as the Gaifman con-
dition). Similar results were proved for infinitary languages by 
Scott and Krauss (1966), and 'logical' analogues of Bayesian con-
vergence-of-opinion theorems have been obtained by Gaifman 
and Snir (1982). 
Our view is that the assignment of probabilities to formal sen-
tences or more generally formulas is neither a necessary nor a suf-
ficient condition for an authentically logical interpretation of 
probability. It is not sufficient, because the case for making epis-
temic probability authentically logical arguably requires finding 
some way of interpreting the rules of assignment, the probability 
axioms, as recognisably logical rules, and this is not done simply 
by assigning non-negative real numbers to formulas in a way that 
satisfies the probability axioms. Nor is it necessary, we believe, 
because the account given above provides an authentically logical 
interpretation of the probability calculus. It is actually quite com-
patible with the numbers-assigned-to-formal-sentences one, since 
we can if we wish take the algebra of propositions to be the sets 
of realisations (models) of the corresponding sentences (the alge-
bra is then isomorphic to the Lindenbaum algebra of the lan-
guage), but it is much more general in that it includes in its scope 
propositional structures not explicitly linguistic in character. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
75 
Standard formal languages are actually rather restrictive when 
it comes to describing mathematical structures. First-order lan-
guages are well-known to be deficient in this respect, being 
unable to characterise up to isomorphism even very simple struc-
tures like the natural numbers, or indeed any infinite structure at 
all, so the increase in determinateness provided by higher-order 
languages has to be traded against the loss of a complete axioma-
tisation of the underlying logic. 
The logical perspective provides compelling answers to some 
of the most frequently raised problems, or what are taken to be 
problems, in the literature on Bayesian probability. One of the most 
prominent of these is the so-called 'problem of logical omnis-
cience'. This is that the incorporation of deductive conditions in 
the probability axioms-
for example the condition that all logical 
truths have probability one, and all logical falsehoods have proba-
bility zero-means that the Bayesian agent has to be ' logically 
omniscient' to apply those axioms correctly. This is a serious prob-
lem if the Bayesian theory is supposed to be a model of rational 
agents, but no problem at all, as we noted carl ier, if the formal ism 
of Bayesian probability is seen merely as a model not of reasoners 
but of valid reasoning in itselt~ in which the axioms are consisten-
cy constraints in much the same way that the axioms of first order 
logic are consistency constraints, or in other words as constraints 
on the consistent distribution of certain quantities independently of 
any agent's thought-process or cognitive abilities. 
These observations also effectively dispose of another fre-
quently-made objection, that the Bayesian theory requires that all 
the possible hypotheses, and all the possi ble evidence statements, 
one might ever consider must all be expl icitly present in any cal-
culation. The theory was invcnted by working scientists (we havc 
mentioned Bayes, Laplace, Poincare, Jeffreys, Jaynes, Cox, 
Savage, Lindley and others) to help them codify, understand and 
justify the principles they appeared to be applying in making 
inferences from data, and it seems hardly likely that they would 
have produced a theory impossible in principle to use. At any 
given time there may be a limited number of hypotheses in play 
that one would want to eonsidcr seriously, or find relevant to the 
problem at hand. Probability is distributed over these, with per-
haps some kept in hand to be assigned to 'other causes' when and 

76 
CHAPTER 3 
if these ever come to be considered (this is the view propounded 
by Abner Shimony under the name of "tempered personalism" 
(Shimony 1993, pp. 205-07). It may be that new information, or 
merely more recent consideration, causes one to want to redistrib-
ute these probabilities, and not just by conditionalisation (that is, 
after considering new data); perhaps the information is logical, 
and one sees logical dependencies where before one failed to; per-
haps new hypotheses are invented, or discovered, but then again 
perhaps not, and one just feels dissatisfied that one 's original 
assignments reflect what reflection deems they should. Well and 
good; nothing in the Bayesian theory says that this should not be 
allowed; it would be absurd to insist on any such statute of limi-
tation, and the theory does not do so. Its propositions are there to 
be consulted, but in a sensible way, understanding that, just like 
those of deductive logic, they are a servant and not a master. 
3.f i The Principal Principle 
Relative to the constraints that fair betting quotients I ie in the 
closed unit interval, together with the collective condition (C), the 
probability axioms are necessary and sufficient conditions for 
assignments of personal probability to be consistent. But there is 
one aspect in which the constraints themselves are incomplete. 
Suppose that a describes one of the possible outcomes of an 
observation, over which there is a well-defined objective proba-
bility distribution P*. Our assumptions (a) that objective proba-
bi I ities are numerical measures of tendencies scaled in the closed 
unit interval, and (b) that personal probabilities reflect personal 
assessments of relative likelihoods, strongly suggest that condi-
tional on your sole information that the data source possesses a 
definite tendency to produce outcomes as measured by P*, your 
personal probability of an a-type outcome should be equal to 
P*(a). We can express this principle formally as follows. Let a be 
a generic event-descriptor, and all be the prediction that a specif-
ic instance of a will be observed when suitable conditions have 
been instantiated. Then 
P(Q() I P*(a) = r) = r 
(2) 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
77 
(2) is a version of the principle traditionally known (in the 
English-speaking world) as the Principle of Direct Probability, 
whimsically redubbed The Principal Principle by David Lewis in 
a well-known paper (1 980). 
It is (2) that enables posterior distributions to be calculatecL 
via Bayes's Theorem, over values of these chances: without (2), 
the subjective probability formalism would be empty of any 
methodological content. IndeecL one of the most striking results 
obtained by using it provides the solution to a problem raised ear-
lier, with the promise that it would be solved. This is the problem 
of how defining objective probabilities as limiting relative fre-
quencies allows sample data, or records of what happens in finite 
sequences of observations, to provide any information at all 
about objective probabilities. After all, not only is any behaviour 
in an initial segment of an infinite sequence compatible with any 
limiting behaviour, but we can be assured that infinite Kollektivs 
do not even exist, given that the lifetime of the Universe, at any 
rate of that bit of it in which a coin, say, is repeatedly tossed, is 
presumably finite. It seems frankly almost beyond belief that 
such information could be provided. But it can, as we shall now 
see. 
There are threc steps in the explanation of how. Thc first is to 
recall that, because thcy are defined in tcrms of limiting relative 
frequencies, objective probabilities satisfy the axioms of the prob-
ability calculus. The second is also to recall that Kollektivs arc 
Bernoulli sequences: the probability of any outcome at any point 
is independent of the outcomes at other points, and is constant 
from point to point. The third and final step is to use the resources 
of our theory of epistemic probability. To this end, let h state that 
the Xi are generated by a chance mechanism, in other wsords, for 
some value of the chance that X = I, and h state that that chance 
I 
I' 
is p. Finally, let e(/: 11) be the statement that r ones are observed in 
a sample of size 11 . Suppose that we have a fairly smooth prior 
density function h(p) for p, whose integral of h(p) between 0 and 
1 is P(h) , since h just says that hI' is true for some value of p . By 
Bayes's Theorem and the Principal Principle the posterior density 
h(p I e(I:n)) is proportional to IIC, p'(l - p)II -'h(p). As 11 grows large 
this density becomes dominated by the likelihood p' ( 1 - p) II , (for 
large 11 the logarithm of the likelihood is approximately a constant 

78 
CHAPTER 3 
times n), which is a maximum atp = rln and falls to zero very rap-
idly away from the maximum, leaving the posterior density of 
points close to the relative frequency proportionally increased 
more as the sample grows large. Anothcr way of putting this is 
to note that the approximate likelihood ratio (rln)'(l--- (rln)),, - ' + 
p'(l - p)" 
I increases without bound for p outside a small inter-
val which tends to 0 as n grows large, and if one accepts the plau-
sible Likelihood Principle (see Chapter 5, p. 156), which says that 
the information gained from the sample is expressed in the likeli-
hood function, then the relative frequency in finite samples is cer-
tainly highly informative about the value ofp. Either way, we have 
demonstrated, within the Bayesian theory of epistemie probabili-
ty, that finite sample data do provide information about a chance 
parameter even ',vhen this paramete,. refers to an in-principle 
unobservable limit. 
The posterior probability of any interval of values for p will 
also depend on the prior probability P(h) of h, since the prior den-
sity h(p) must integrate to P(h) between the limits p = 0 and p = 
1. P(h) , recall, is the prior probability that the data source will 
generate a Koflektiv, and so it is the prior probability of a one-
dimensional statistical model, with undetermined parameter p. 
Von Mises was extremely careful to base his theory on what he 
took to be two already established empirical laws about random 
phenomena: (i) that they are truly random, in the sense of being 
immune to gambling systems, and (ii) that their relative frequen-
cies exhibit convergent behaviour. In SaFesian lams. von Mises 
(Ihough he was not. at anv rate consciolls(v. a Sa.vesian) was in 
effect {IIguingjor a considerable prior probabilitl' TO be attached 
10 the modelling hYPolhesis h. Thc posterior prohabili(v of h is of 
course obtained by integrating the posterior density between the 
limits 0 and I. 
In the following chapters we shall apply the Bayesian tools to 
more sophisticated, and also practically more important, statisti-
cal hypotheses than toy examples like h, involving models with 
arbitrary numbers of adjustable parameters. But in terms of estab-
lishing one of the central claims of this book, that an appropriate 
thcory ofepistemic probablity permits a demonstration of the fact 
that finite sample data can indeed provide information about infi-
nite limits, the example above is anything but trivial. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
79 
3.g I Bayesian Probability and Inductive Scepticism 
David Hume produced a celebrated circularity argument, that 
any justification for believing 'that the future will resemble the 
past' in any spec ified manner must explicitly or implictly 
assume what it sets out to prove. We belicve (the claim is argued 
at length in Howson 2000) that Hume 's argument shows infor-
mally and in general terms that a valid inductive inference must 
possess, in addition to whatever observational or experimental 
data is specified, at least one independent assumption (an induc-
tive assumption ) that in effect weights some of the possibilities 
consistent with the evidence more than others. The Bayes ian 
theory viewed in a logical perspective endorses this view in a 
quite satisfactory way, and in so doing reveals a further illumi-
nating parallel with deductive logic. A nontrivial conclusion 
(one which is not itselfa theorem of logic) ofa deductively valid 
inference depends on at least one nontrivial premise. Similarly, 
a nontrivial conclusion (one which is not a theorem ofprobabil-
ity) of a valid probabilistic argument depends on one or more 
nontrivial probabilistic premises. And just as the logical axioms 
in Hilbert-style axiomatisations of classical logic are rcgarded 
as empty offactual content because they arc universally valid, so 
is the same true of the probabil ity axioms in the view wc have 
been advocating. They too are logical axioms, empty of factual 
content because universally valid. 
Putting all this together, we can derive a probabilistic ana-
logue of the celebrated conservation result of deductive logic, 
that valid deductive inference does not beget new factual content, 
but merely transforms or dimini shes the content already existing 
in the premises. So too here: valid probabilistic inference does 
not beget new content, merely transforming or diminishing it in 
the passage from premises to conclusion. This was well under-
stood by de Finetti: 
The ca/clI/lls o{probabilitl' call sav abso/ute/" nothillg ahout rea/-
itF . .. As with the logic of certainty. the logic of the probable adds 
nothing of its own : it merely helps one to see thc implications con-
tained in what has gone before. (1974. p. 21 5; cmphasis in the 
original) 

80 
CHA PTER 3 
We can say more. The 'synthetic' premises in a probabilistic infer-
ence are generally prior, or unconditional, probabilities, and 
because their exogenous nature is explicitly acknowledged within 
the so-called subjective Bayesian theory they are often seen as its 
Achilles heel. Hume's argument enables us to view them in a less 
unfavourable light, for it implies that some degree of indetermi-
nacy is a natural and indeed inevitable feature in any adequatc 
theory of valid inductive inference. Far, therefore, from being a 
disabling feature of the subjective Bayesian theory, the exogenous 
prior distributions, together with the partition of logical space 
with respect to which they are defined (that is, the hypothesis-
space chosen), merely show where that indeterminacy is located. 
3.h 
Updating Rules 
There is probably no other controversial topic in the Bayesian the-
ory on which the logical perspective casts as much illumination as 
that of so-called updating rules, and in particular that of the rule 
of Bayesian conditionalisation. This rule is still widely regarded 
as a fundamental principle on a par with the probability axioms 
themselves, and a core feature of the Bayesian theory. We shall 
deny that it deserves this status, but at the same time show that 
under suitable conditions, which would be fulfilled in the sorts of 
circumstances in which updating would be typically applied, the 
rule is valid. 
An updating rule tells 'Bayesian agents' how to adjust their 
belief function globally when they acquire new evidence (the rea-
son for putting 'Bayesian agents' in quotes is because, as we have 
said earlier, we do not think this is a theory of agents, Bayesian 
or otherwise; it is a logic). There must, according to a widespread 
view, be such a rule for doing this, otherwise there could be no 
principled account of 'learning from experience'. The rule in this 
case is this. Suppose that your probability of a just before the 
time t, call it t -, at which you its learn its truth is ~
. (aJ. Your 
new probability for a we can therefore write as ~(a) , which is 
presumably I. Obviously, you will have to change at least some 
of your other probabilities to accommodate this change consis-
tently: for example, it might have been that ~ (h) < 1 where b 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
81 
is some logical consequence of a, but consistency demands 
that you now change this value too to I. This prompts two ques-
tions: (i) are there any rules which will allow one to make the 
necessary changes consistently, and (ii), if so, which should we 
adopt? To avoid subscripts we shall henceforth write P for P,. 
and Q for P,. 
The answer to (i) is yes, and the rule almost universally recom-
mended in the Bayesian literature is this one, called the rule of 
Bayesian conditionalisation: 
If P(a) > 0, set Q( . ) equal to P( . I a) 
(3) 
We already know (Chapter 2.e (14) and (15» that Q as defined 
by (3) is a finitely additive probability function and is therefore 
a consistent way of distributing probabilities. It is also not diffi-
cult to show that the single assignment Q(a) = I can be extend-
ed consistently in ways that do not satisfy (3). So why should (3) 
be adopted? There are various arguments in the literature. There 
is, for example, the ' obvious ' reason that since P(e I a) is your 
probability at time t- that c is true given a, then on learning a 
and nothing else your updated probability of c should be a. 
Also, (3) has some pleasing properties: for example, that Q(b) = 
I if b is entailed by a is now a consequence (Chapter 2e (13»; 
also, by (16), Chapter 2e, successively conditioning on e and 
d is the same as successively conditioning on d and e, and 
so on. 
But there is also a simple, and compelling, reason why (3) 
should not be adopted: it is inconsistent. Given the 'obvious' 
argument for (3 ), and the fact that it is often advertised as itself 
a principle of consistency, or of 'dynamic coherence', this might 
seem a surprising claim. Nevertheless it is easy to prove. 
Suppose that there is a contingent proposition b of whose truth 
you are P-certain; i.e. P(b) = I. Suppose also that for whatever 
reason (the favourite example is that you are about to take a 
mind-altering drug) you think it distinctly P-possible that Q(b) 
will take some value q less than I; that is, that P(Q(b) = q) > O. 
Let a be 'Q(b) = q'. It follows by the probability calculus that 
P(b I a) = I. But suppose at the appropriate time you learn a by 
introspection; then Q(b) = q. IfyoLl conditionalise on a then you 

82 
CHAPTER 3 
must set Q(b) = P(b I a) = 1. 12 Note that there is no conceptual 
problem, nor any implicit appeal to 'second-order probabilities' (a 
frequent but erroneous claim), in a statement like 'Q(b) = q' being 
in the domain of an ordinary probability function: a makes a def-
inite factual assertion, just as much as 'The next toss of this coin 
will land heads' . In fact, a can be written in a formally unim-
peachable way as 'X" = q', where X/s) is the random variable, 
defined on possible states of the world, whose value at s is the 
value of your future probability Q of b. 
Nor is it an objection that the shift to 'Q(b) = q' is not the 
result of rational deliberation (whatever that may mean). Indeed, 
such a consideration is rather obviously beside the point, which is 
whether conditionalisation is a valid rulc. And it clearly is not: the 
information that Q(b) = q cannot be conditionalised on in the cir-
cumstances described if you are consistent. Ramsey, in an of ten-
quoted passage, pointed out that (3) might fail ' for psychological 
reasons' (1926, p. 180); what he did not seem to appreciate is that 
it might also fail for purely logico-mathematical ones. 
Invalid rules breed counterexamples. What is surprising in the 
case of conditionalisation is that nobody seems to have realised 
why it, and its generalisation to Jeffrey conditionalisation in the 
case of an exogenous shift on any finite partition, is anything 
other than a completely arbitrary rule when expressed uncondi-
tionally. Why should I unconditionally make Q( . ) equal P(. I a) 
when pray shifts to Q(a) = I? Despite the 'obvious' argument 
given above, there is actually nothing in the meaning of P(. la) 
that tells me I should: for P(e I a) is my probability, given by.fil11c-
tirm P, of c on the assumption that a is true. Given that.f(J/' rea-
sons of" eonsistencv I now have to reject P, to say that my 
probability of c should be equal to P(e I a) clearly begs the ques-
tion. Nor do the motley jumble of 'justifications' in the literature 
for the rule succeed in doing anything else. The most widely 
accepted of these is a so-called dynamic Dutch Book argument, 
due to Teller ( 1973), who attributes it to David Lewis. This cer-
tainly shows that you would be fooli sh to announce a policy in 
Ie Thus this is also a counterexample to the so-called 'Reflection PrincipJc ', 
which says that P( . IO( . l = xl = x, 0 :5 X :5 I. Intuitively absur(L it has attracted 
a disproportionate amount of discussion. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
83 
advance of lcarning a for setting Q(c) at a different value to 
P(e I a), and then give or accept bets at both betting quotients, but 
the folly is your willingness to bet in that way, not the updating 
policy. Thus we see an interesting difference between 'dynamic' 
and 'synchronic ' coherence: the former is entirely without proba-
tive significance, while the latter is merely a corollary of deeper 
principles which do not rely on considerations of financial pru-
dence for justification. 
Another alleged justification is that the updating function 
given by Jeffrey's rule, and hence ordinary conditionalisation 
which is a special case, represents the smallest departure from the 
initial distribution consistent with the shifted values on the parti-
tion, and hence should be the one chosen. Even if the antecedent 
claim is true, and that turns out entirely to depend on the appro-
priate choice of mctric in function spacc, the conclusion simply 
begs the question. An analogy with another putative (spurious) 
deductive 'updating rule' is illuminating. Suppose at time t you 
accept the conditional a -;> b and at t + I you learn (and hence 
accept) a. The putative rule, which we might humorously call 
'dynamic modus ponens' , says that if by t + I you have learned 
nothing other than a you should acccpt h. Clearly thc inference is 
not deductively valid, since (to usc the terminology of Gabbay 
1994) the statements have different labels. Indeed, it is easy, just 
as it was in the probabilistic case, to exhibit choices of a and b 
which actually make this spurious 'rule' yield an inconsistency. 
For example, a might be the negation -b of 17, so that a -;> b is just 
a convoluted way of asserting -b (assuming that it is the material 
conditional being used here), and learning a then in effect means 
learning that a -;> b is false. In other words, learning a in this 
example undermines the previously accepted conditional. 
A similar undermining happens in the probabilistic counterex-
ample above: the initial conditional probability of I of b given 
Q(b) = q is undermined by learning the latter proposition, since 
the conditional probability should then clearly change to q. This 
is intuitively obvious, but in support we can cite the fact that a bet 
on b conditional on a, i.e. on Q(b) = q, with unit stake and where 
the betting quotients are determined by thc function Q, has the 
following payoff table: 

84 
b Q(b) = q 
T T 
F T 
F 
I-q 
-q 
() 
CHAPTER 3 
This is of course the table of a bet on b given Q(b) = q with stake 
I and betting quotient q. 
We now have an explanation of why conditionalisation should 
in suitable circumstances seem compelling. Those circumstances, 
just as with 'dynamic modus ponens', consist in the preservation 
of the relevant conditional valuations. The following probabilistic 
analogue of a version of modus ponens is clearly valid (to obtain 
the deductive rule replace b I a by a ~ b, let Q and P be valua-
tions with q in {O, I } instead of [0,1]): 
Q(a) = I 
Q(b I a) = q 
Q(b) = q 
whence we obtain this conditional form of conditionalisation: 
Q(a) = I 
Q(b l a) = P(bl a) 
Q(b) = P(b I a) 
(4) 
But (4):~ validi(v is easilv seen to be derived from the ordinwy, 
'cSynchronic', probabiliry axioms. Conditionalisation is thus not a 
new principle to be added to the probability axioms as a 'dynam-
ic' supplement-
indeed, that way, as we saw, lies actual inconsis-
tency-
but a derived rule whose conditions of applicability are 
given by the standard axioms together with assumptions which on 
any given occasion mayor may not be reasonable, about relevant 
conditional probabilities. As to a possible objection that the 
Bayesian methodology relies crucially on conditionalisation, the 
simple answer is that nothing of value can possibly be lost by 
recognising that the limits within which any rule is valid. 
The same conditions of validity, namely the maintaining of the 
relevant conditional probabilities pre and post the exogenous 
shift, are required for Jeffrey conditionalisation, or 'probability 
kinematics ' as Jeffrey himself calls it. When an exogenous shift 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
85 
from Pta) to Q(a) occurs on a proposition a, Jeffrey's rule is that 
your new function Q should be defined by 
Q( . ) = P( . I a)Q(a) + P(. l-a)Q(-a) 
where Q(-a} is of course l-Q(a}.13 The equation above generalis-
es to arbitrary finite partitions. It is well known that the necessary 
and sufficient condition for the validity of Jeffrey's rule (its valid-
ity relative to the 'synchronic' probability axioms) is that the fol-
lowing cquations hold: Q(. I a) = P(. I a), Q( . I-a) = P( . I -a). 
Jeffrey conditional isation, despite alleged justificatory credentials 
ranging from maximum-information principles (Chapter 9.d) to 
commutative diagrams,14 is no more absolutely valid than 
Bayesian conditionalisation. 
3.i 
The Cox-Good Argument 
A compelling way of showing why the probability axioms can be 
regarded as conditions for consistent uncertain reasoning is due 
independently to R.T. Cox (1946, 1961) and U. Good (1950), 
though as Cox's discussion was both earlier and more systematic it 
is the onc wc shall brict1y describe here. Cox was a working physi-
cist (he was Professor of Physics at Johns Hopkins University) 
who sought to set out the fundamental laws of probabilistic reason-
ing independently of any particular scale of measurement (1961, p. 
1). To this end he proved that any function on an algebra of propo-
sitions which obeyed these laws can always be rescaled as a prob-
ability function. To be more precise, suppose that M(a I b) is a 
function where a and b are members of a set S of propositions con-
taining logical truths, falsehoods and closed under the operations 
& , v, -, such that M takes values in an interval J of real numbers, 
assigns the same values to equivalent propositions, and 
U Jctlr cy's rule generalises straightforwardly to a simultaneous shift on the 
members of a partition (i.e. on a set of exclusive and exhaustive propositions), 
but not to a shift on any finite number of logically independent propositions. 
1-1 Sec, for example, Diaconis and Zabell 1982, Williams 1980, Shore and 
Johnson 1980, and van Fraassen 1989, pp. 331-37. 

86 
CHAPTER 3 
I. M(~a I c) =.f(M(a Ie)) 
2. M(a&blc) =g(M(alb&e), M(ble)) 
for any consistent e, wherefis strictly decrcasing and g is increas-
ing in both arguments and each is sufficiently smooth, i.e. satisfy 
certain differentiability conditions ({must have continuous second 
derivatives). The nub of Cox's proof is showing that the underlying 
logical rules governing &, v and ~ entail that f is associative in 1, 
i.e. that/(.rf(v,z)) =.I(1(x,y),::), a functional equation whose gener-
al solution is of the form Ch(/(x,y)) = h(r). hev) where h is an arbi-
trary increasing continuous function. IS C is the value assigned to 
certainty and can be set equal to unity. Thus using the rescaling 
function h we obtain the so-called multiplication law of probabili-
ties, a form of axiom (4). Using the product form fort: Cox then 
proved that g(r) must have the form (I -
X 111) 1/ 111, and since the 
product rule is also satisfied if h is replaced with hl11, we can with-
out loss of generality take m = I in both. From this it is a short step 
to showing that there is an increasing (and hence order-preserving) 
function h:/ ~ [0, I] such that hM(a I c) is a conditional probabili-
ty Pea I c) on S. 16 Defining P' (a) = Pea I 1) where I is a logical truth, 
it follows that P' obeys the unconditional probability axioms 
together with the rule that P '(a & b) = P '(a I b)P '(b). 
To sum up: Cox has shown that for any M satisfying I.and 2. 
there is a probability function which orders the propositions 
equivalently. This result might seem too weak to be useful: there 
are infinitely many different algebras with the same total order-
ings of their clements but which admit quite different represent-
ing probability functions. But there are additional considerations 
which will determine the function uniquely. As de Finetti showed, 
if the algebra is embedded in one permitting arbitrarily many 
I' By taking logarithms the general solution could equally wcll bc stated in the 
form 11(/(\, . .1)) = H(x) + H(1). 
1(, An objection to Cox's argument is that the associativity of/is demonstrated 
only for triples (\,.l·.~) where.\ = ivl(o ll>&('&II) . . " = M{h lc&d). ~ - /v/(e ld) for 
arbitrary a.h.c.d, which certainly do not cx haust I' if thc domain of M is finite 
(Halpern 1999). !\ reasonable response is that Cox is considering not only actu-
al but pO,l'sihle values of M in I for these arguments (this is implicit in the differ-
entiability assumptions ). Paris (1994, Chapter 3) gives a proof which does not 
assume differentiability at all. 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
87 
judgments of indifference over finite sets of alternatives, that 
ordering will admit a unique representing finitely additive proba-
bility functions ( 1937, p. 101; Savage employs the same device in 
his 1954, pp. 38-39). 
Notice how formally similar these rules are to the Boolean val-
uation rules for propositional logic: they tell you that the values 
(probability-values, truth-values) on two primitive Boolean com-
pounds depend functionally on the values on the components. In 
the deductive case, since there are only two values in play, it is 
much easier for the rules to tell you exactly what the dependence 
looks like. In the probabilistic case there is a continuum of values. 
Nevertheless the negation case is very simple: the value on a 
negation is a smooth increasing function of the value on the negat-
ed proposition. The deductive rule for conjunction assumes that a 
Boolean valuation V, considered formally as a two-valued proba-
bility function, entails independence of the conjuncts: we have 
V(A&B) = V(A)V(B). In the probabilistic case we must allow for 
the possibility of dependence, and Cox's axiom 2. does so in the 
simplest possible way, by merely requiring that the joint 'proba-
bility' of A and B given consistent C depends only on the 'proba-
bility' of A given Band C and that of B given C. 
It is indeed a profound result. We also have an answer to why 
probability functi ons should be chosen as the canonical represen-
tatives of belief functions satisfying l.and 2.: because of the facts 
that additive functions have greater computational simplicity and 
that they give a common scale for objective and subjective prob-
abilities. The proof of Cox's result is not at all a trivial matter, 
however, and for this reason among others we have chosen to 
develop the argument for the probability axioms in terms of con-
sistent distributions of fair betting quotients: these are more 
familiar objects, and the proof that they generate the probability 
axioms is elementary by comparison. That it requires a bit more 
in the way of assumptions is the price paid. 
3.j 
Exchangeability 
We end this chapter by returning to the discussion which started 
it. We have claimed that there are two distinct interpretations of 

88 
CHAPTER 3 
the probability calculus, one as the formal theory of objective 
probability, which plays a fundamental role in statistics, and more 
generally in the natural, social and biological sciences, the other 
as a system of consistency constraints on the distribution of per-
sonal probabilities. We have said quite a lot about the latter com-
pared with the former, because it is with epistemic probability that 
we principally concerned in this book. But we shall conclude by 
looking briefly at a very influential case made by de Finetti that a 
separate theory of objective probability is redundant (he also 
thought the idea of there being such things as objective probabil-
ities reprehensibly metaphysical). 
To discuss his arguments we first need to look at what he 
called exchangeable random quantities. Suppose that we are con-
sidering a possibility space W consisting of all denumerably infi-
nite sequences of Os and 1 s. We can think ofthis as the (ideal) set 
of all possible outcomes in a sequence of indefinitely repeated 
observations, where I and 0 record respectively the observation of 
some specific characteristic. Suppose that P is a Bayesian person-
al probability function which assigns definite values to all propo-
sitions of the form X, = Xi' to be read as 'the ith outcome is Xi' 
where Xi is 0 or 1. These variables are said to be exchangeable 
(with respect to P) if the P-probability of any finite conjunction 
x,! = Xi! & ... & X,1 = Xik remains the same for any permutation of 
the x. 
If 
De Finetti regarded the notion of an exchangeability as provid-
ing a solution to what he saw as two outstanding problems: one is 
the problem of induction, and the other is that of explaining why 
a theory of objective probability is redundant. His solution of the 
first is based on the second, and that stems from a celebrated the-
orem de Finetti proved about sequences of exchangeable vari-
ables. He showed that if a sequence like the X above is 
I 
exchangeable then the P-probability of any sequence of n of them 
taking the value I r times and 0 the remaining n - r, in some given 
order, is independent of that order and equal to 
Jz '(1 - z)" 'dF(z) 
(I) 
where the integration is from minus infinity to plus infinity, 
and F(z) is a distribution function, uniquely determined by the 

THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY 
89 
P-values on the ~, of a random variable Z equal to the limit, 
where that is defined, of the random variables Y = m -1 SX. 
m 
I 
But as we saw earlier, (l) is also the expression you get for the 
value of the (epistemic) probability r of the ~ taking the value 1 
if you believe (i) that there is an objective, but unknown, proba-
bility p of a 1 at any point in the sequence, where F defines the 
epistemic probability distribution over p, over the closed unit 
interval [0, I], (ii) that the Xi are independent relative to this 
unknown probability, and (iii) you evaluate the epistemic proba-
bility of r 1 sand n-r Os to be equal to the unknown probability of 
the same event. The significance of de Finetti's result (1) is that 
we obtain formally the same explanation of the apparent conver-
gence of the relative frequencies without needing to appeal either 
to the existence of an objective probability (which he repudiated 
for reasons based on a personal positivistic philosophy) or to the 
additional hypothesis h of independence with constant p. As we 
observed, de Finetti believed that his theorem reveals the hypoth-
esis of independence and constant probability with respect to an 
objective probability to be merely redundant metaphysical bag-
gage, the phenomena they purport to explain being merely a con-
sequence (for consistent reasoners) of a prior judgment that 
certain events are exchangeable-a judgment that amounts to no 
more than saying that in your opinion they betray no obvious 
causal dependence, a very mild judgment indeed. 
Or is it? We claim that it is not, and that the independence 
assumption apparently eschewed in (1) is nonetheless implicitly 
present. Consider two finite sequences of length 2n: one, Sf' has 
the form 
01010101010 ... 01 
wh ile the other, s" is some fairly disorderly sequence of Os and Is, 
also having n Os -and n I s, and ending with a 1. Let S3 be a third 
sequence, obtained by eliminating the terminal 1 of s ,. Assume 
again that all the sequences, i.e. all the variables~, are exchange-
able. By the probability calculus 
P(Sf) = P(l I 010101 ... O)P(OlOlOl ... 0) 

90 
CHAPTER 3 
And 
By exchangeability 
P(OIOIOI .. . I) = P(s) 
And hence 
P (l I s) = P( II 0 I 0 I 0 I ... 0) 
(3) 
But (3) holds for all 11 , however large. Were we to deny that the Xi 
are independent there could surely be no reason for accepting (3) 
for large values of 11 ; we should on the contrary expect that the 
right hand side would move to the neighbourhood of I and the left 
hand side to stay in the region of 112 or thereabouts. We should 
certainly not expect equality (this example is in Good 1969, p. 
21 ). 
This is not a proof that exchangeability deductively implies 
independence (which is certainly not true), but it is a powerful 
reason supposing that exchangeability assumptions would not be 
made relative to repeated trials unless there was already a belief 
that the variables were independent. It is noteworthy that there is 
a proof, due to Spielman (1976), that if the Xi are all exchangeable 
according to your personal probability measure (assumed count-
ably additive) then you must believe with probability one with 
respect to that same measure that they constitute a von M ises 
Ko/lecfi v. 

CHAPTER 4 
Bayesian Induction: 
Deterministic Theories 
Philosophers of science have traditionally concentrated mainly on 
deterministic hypotheses, leaving statisticians to di scuss how sta-
tistical , or non-deterministic theories should be assessed. 
Accordingly, a large part of what naturally belongs to philosophy 
of science is normally treated as a branch of statistics, going 
under the heading ' statistical inference'. It is not surprising there-
fore, that philosophers and statisticians havc developed distinct 
methods for their different purposes. We shall follow the tradition 
of dealing separately with deterministic and statistical theories. 
As will become apparent however, we regard thi s separation as 
artificial and shall in due course explain how Bayesian principles 
provide a unified scientific method. 
4.a 
Bayesian Confirmation 
Information gathered in the course of observation is often con-
sidered to have a bearing on the merits of a theory or hypothesis 
(we use the terms interchangeably), either by confirming or dis-
confirming it. Such information may derive from casual obser-
vation or, morc commonly, from experiments deliberately 
contrived with a view to obtaining relevant evidence. The idea 
that observations may count as evidence either for or against a 
theory, or be neutral towards it, is at the heart of scientific rea-
soning, and the Bayesian approach must start with a suitable 
understanding of these concepts. 
As we have described. a very natural one is at hand, for if P(h) 
measures your belief in a hypothesis when you do not know the 
evidence, and P(h I e) is the corresponding measure when you do, 
e strengthens your belief in h or, we may say, confirms it, just in 

92 
CHAPTER 4 
case the second probability exceeds the first. We refer in the usual 
way to P(h) as 'the prior probability' of h, and to P(h I e) as the 
'posterior probability' of h relative to, or in the light of e, and we 
adopt the following definitions: 
e confirms or supports h just in case P(h I e) > P(h) 
e disconfit'ms h just in case P(h I e) < P(h) 
e is neutral towards h just in case P(h I e) = P(h) . 
One might reasonably take P(h I e) - P(h) as measuring the 
degree of e's support for h, though other measures, involving for 
example the ratios of these terms, have also been suggested, 1 but 
disagreements on this score need not be settled in this book. We 
shall, however, say that when P(h I e) > P(h I e') > P(h), the first 
piece of evidence confirms the hypothesis more than the second 
does. 
According to Bayes's theorem, the posterior probability of a 
hypothesis depends on the three factors: pre I h), pre) and P(h). 
Hence, if you know these, you can determine whether or not e 
confirms h, and more importantly, calculate P(h I e). Tn practice, 
the various probabilities may be known only imprecisely, but as 
we shall show in due course, this does not undermine Bayes's the-
orem as a basis for scientific inference. 
The dependence of the posterior probability on these three 
terms is reflected in three principal aspects of scientific inference. 
First, other things being equal, the more probable the evidence, 
relative to the hypothesis, the more that hypothesis is confirmed. 
At one extreme, if e refutes h, then pre I h) = 0 and so disconfir-
mation is at a maximum, while the greatest confirmation is given 
when pre I h) = 1, which will be met in practice when h logically 
implies e. Statistical hypotheses admit intermediate values for 
pre I h); as we show in later chapters, the higher the value, the 
greater the confirmation, other things being equal. 
I For discussions of various other measures sec, for example, Good 1950, and 
Jeffrcy 2004. pp. 29-32. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
93 
Secondly, the power of e to confirm h depends on Pre), that is, on 
the probability of e when h is not assumed to be true. This, of 
course, is not the same as the probability of e when h is assumed 
to be false; in fact Pre) is related to the latter by the formula: Pre) = 
p re I h)P(h) + pre I -h)P(-h) , as we showed in Chapter 2 
(Theorem 12). This inverse dependence of P(h I e) on pre) corre-
sponds to the familiar intuition that the more surprising the evi-
dence, the more confirmation it provides. 
Thirdly, the posterior probability of a hypothesis depends on 
its prior probability, a dependence that is sometimes discernible in 
attitudes to so-called 'ad hoc' hypotheses and in the frequently 
expressed preference for the simpler of two hypotheses. As we 
shall see, scientists always discriminate in advance of any experi-
mentation between theories they regard as more or less credible 
(and, so, worthy of attention) and others. 
We shall, in the course of this chapter, examine each of these 
facets of inductive reasoning. 
4.b 
Checking a Consequence 
A characteristic pattern of scientific inference occurs when a log-
ical consequence of a theory is shown to be false and the theory 
thereby refuted. As we saw, this sort of inference, with its unim-
peachable logic, impressed Popper so much that he made it the 
centrepiece and guiding principle of his scientific philosophy. 
Bayesian philosophy readily accommodates the crucial features of 
a theory's refutation by empirical evidence. For if a hypothesis 
h entails a consequence e, then, as is easily shown, provided 
P(h) > 0, pre I h) = I and P(h I -e) = 0. Interpreted in the Bayesian 
fashion, this means that h is maximally disconfirmed when it is 
refuted. Moreover, as we should expect, once a theory has been 
refuted, no further evidence can ever confirm it, unless the refut-
ing evidence be revoked. For if e' is any other observation that 
is logically consistent with e, and if P(h I - e) is zero, then so is 
P(h I -e & e'). 
Another characteristic pattern of scientific inference occurs 
when a logical conseq uence of a theory is shown to be true and 
the theory then regarded as confirmed. Bayes's theorem shows 

94 
CHAPTER 4 
why and under what circumstances a theory is confirmed by its 
consequences. First, it follows from the theorem that a theory is 
always confirmed by a logical consequence, provided neither the 
evidence nor the theory takes either of the extreme probability 
P(h) 
values. For if h entails e, pre I h) = I, so that P(h I e) = -
-
. 
Pee) 
Hence, provided ° 
< Pre) < I and P(h) > 0, P(h I e) > P(h), which 
means that e confirms h. 
Secondly, the probability axioms tell us, correctly, that suc-
ceeding confirmations by logical consequences eventually dimin-
ish in force (Jeffrcys 1961 , pp. 43-44). For let e I ' e2, ..• , en be a 
succession of logical consequences of h, then 
P(h I e l & ... & en . l ) = P(h & ell I e l & ... & en_I) = 
P(h I e l & ... & ell )P(ell l e l & ... & ell I)' 
As we showed earlier, if h entails all the ei, then P(h I e l & ... & 
en) ~ P(h l ei & ... & en I)' It follows from the Bolzano-
Weierstrass theorem that the non-decreasing sequence of postcri-
or probabilities has a limit. Clearly, the limits, as n tends to 
infinity, of the two posterior probabilities in this equation are the 
same, viz, limP(h I e l & ... & ell) = IimP(h I e l & ... & en_I)' Hence, 
provided that P(h) > 0, P(elll e l & ... & ell _I) must tend to 1. This 
explains why it is not sensible to test a hypothesis indefinitely. 
The result does not however tell us the precise point beyond 
which further predictions of the hypothesis are sufficiently 
probable not to be worth examining, for that would require a 
knowledge of individuals' belief structures which logic does not 
supply. 
A third salient feature of confirmation by a theory's conse-
quences is that in many instances, specific categories of those 
consequences each have their own, limited capacity to confirm. 
This is an aspect of the familiar phenomenon that however often 
a particular experiment is repeated, its results can confirm a gen-
eral theory only to a limited extent; and when an experiment's 
capacity to generate significant confirming evidence for the the-
ory has been exhausted through repetition, further support is 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
95 
sought from other experiments, whose outcomes are predicted by 
other parts of the theory. 2 
This phenomenon has a Bayesian explanation (Urbach 1981). 
Consider a general hypothesis h and let hr be a substantial restric-
tion of that hypothesis. A substantial restriction of Newton's the-
ory might, for example, express the idea that freely falling bodies 
near the Earth's surface descend with constant acceleration, or 
that the period and length of a pendulum are related by the famil-
iar formula. Since h entails hr' P(h) :5 P(h), as we showed in 
Chapter 2, and if h,. is much less speculative than its progenitor, it 
will often be much more probable. 
Now consider a series of predictions that are implied by h, and 
which also follow from h,.. If the predictions are verified, they 
may confirm both theories, whose posterior probabilities are 
given by Bayes's theorem thus: 
P(h) 
P(h Ie & e) & ... & e ) = _...... 
. ... _
-
I 
-
/I 
P( e I & e 2 & ... & e) 
and 
P(h,) 
P(h,. 1 e l & e) & ... & e) = ---
-- . -c"-. -
-
-
-
P( e I & e 2 & ... & e) 
Combining these two equations to eliminate the common 
denominator yields 
P(h) 
P(h I e l & e) & ... & e ) = 
P(h _ I el & e 1 & ... & e ). 
-
n 
P(h,.) 
I 
-
/I 
Since the maximum value of the last probability in this equation 
is 1, it follows that however many predictions of h,. have been ver-
ified, the posterior probability of the main theory, h, can never rise 
b 
P( h) 
. 
b'l-
f h d 
. 
a ove -
-
. Therefore, the pnor proba 1 Ity 0 
_ etermmes a 
P(h,.) 
I 
limit to how far evidence entailed by it can confirm h. And this 
explains the phenomenon under consideration, for the predictions 
verified by means of an experiment (that is, a procedure designed 
2 This is related to the phenomenon that the more varied a body of evidence, 
the greater its inductive force, which we discuss in section 4.g below. 

96 
CHAPTER 4 
to a specified pattern) do normally follow from and confirm a 
much-restricted version of the predicting theory. 
The arguments and explanations in this section rely on the pos-
sibility that evidence already accumulated from an experiment can 
increase the probability that further performances of the experi-
ment will produce similar results. Such a possibility was denied by 
Popper and by his supporters, on the grounds that the probabilities 
involved are not objective. How then do they explain the fact, 
familiar to every scientist, that repeating some experiment indefi-
nitely (or usually, more than a very few times) is pointless? 
Musgrave (1975) attempted an explanation. He argued that after a 
certain (unspecified) number of repetitions, the scientist should 
form a generalization to the effect that the experiment will always 
yield a result that is similar, in ccrtain respects to those results 
already obtained, and that this generalization should then be 
entered into 'background knowledge' . Relative to the ncwly aug-
mented background knowledge, the experiment is certain to pro-
duce the same result when it is next performed as it did before. 
Musgrave then appealed to the putative principle, which we dis-
cuss in the next section, that evidcnce confirms a hypothesis in 
proportion to the difference between its probability relative to the 
hypothesis plus background knowledge and its probability relative 
to background knowledge alone, that is, to P(e I h & b) - P(e I b), 
and inferred that even if the experiment did produce the expected 
result when next conducted, the hypothesis would receive no new 
confirmation. 
A number of decisive objcctions can be raised against this 
account. First, as we show in the next section, although it forms 
part of the Bayesian account and seems to be a feature of sci-
ence that confirmation depends in its degree upon the probabil-
ity of the evidcnce, that principle has no basis in Popperian 
methodology. Popper simply invoked it ad hoc. Secondly, 
Musgrave 's suggestion takes no account of the fact that particU-
lar experimental results may be generalized in infinitely many 
ways. This is a substantial objection since different generaliza-
tions givc rise to different implications about future experimen-
tal outcomes. So Musgrave's explanation calls for a rule that 
would guide the scientist to a particular and appropriate gener-
alization; but we cannot see how appropriateness could be 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
97 
defined or such a rule possibly justified within the limitations of 
Popperian philosophy. Finally, the decision to designate the gen-
eralization background knowledge, with the effect that has on 
our evaluation of other theories and on our future conduct 
regarding for example, whether or not to repeat certain experi-
ments, is comprehensible only if we have invested some confi-
dence in the generalization. But then this Popperian account 
tacitly invokes the same kind of inductive notion as it was 
designed to avoid. The fact is that the phenomena concerning 
the confirming power of experiments and their repetitions are 
essentially inductive and are beyond the reach of anti-inductivist 
methodologies such as Popper's. 
4.c I The Probability of the Evidence 
In the Bayesian account, confirmation occurs when the posterior 
probability of a hypothesis exceeds its prior probability, and the 
greater the difference, the greater the confirmation. Now Bayes's 
theorem may be expressed in the following ways: 
P(h I e) 
P(h) 
pre I h) 
Pre) 
pie I ~h) . 
P(h) + P(~h) \' 
pre I h) 
We see that the evidential force of e is entirely expressed by the 
pre I ~h) 
ratio -
- , known as the Bayes {actor. The smaller this factor, 
P~I~ 
. 
that is to say, the more probable the evidence if the hypothesis is 
true than if it is false, the greater is the confirmation. In the deter-
ministic case, where h entails e, so that pre I h) = I, confirmation 
depends inversely on Pre) or pre I -h); this fact is reflected in the 
everyday experience that information that is particularly unex-
pected or surprising, unless some hypothesis is assumed to be 
true, supports that hypothesis with particular force. Thus if a 
soothsayer predicts that you will meet a dark stranger some time 
and you do, your faith in his powers of precognition would not be 
much enhanced: you would probably continue to regard his pre-
dictions as simply guesswork. But if the prediction also gave you 

98 
CHAPTER 4 
the correct number of hairs on the head of that stranger, your pre-
vious scepticism would no doubt be severely shaken. 
Cox (1961 , p. 92) illustrated this point nicely with an incident 
in Shakespeare's Macbeth. The three witches, using their special 
brand of divination, tell Macbeth that he will soon become both 
Thane of Cawdor and King of Scotland. Macbeth finds these two 
predictions incredible: 
By Sinel 's death I know I am Thane of Glamis; 
But how of Cawdor? the Thane of Cawdor lives, 
A prosperous gentleman; and to be King 
Stands not within the prospect of belief 
No more than to be Cawdor. 
But shortly after making this declaration, he learns that the Thane 
of Cawdor prospered no longer, was in fact condemned to death, 
and that he, Macbeth, had succeeded to the title, whereupon, his 
attitude to the witches' powers of foresight alters entirely, and he 
comes to believe their other predictions. 
Charles Babbage (1827), the celebrated polymath and 'father 
of computing', examined numerous logarithmic tables published 
over two centuries in various parts of the world, with a view to 
determining whether they derived from a common source or had 
been worked out independently. He found the same six errors in 
all but two and drew the "irresistible" conclusion that the tables 
containing those errors had been copied from a single original. As 
Jevons (1874, pp. 278- 79) pointed out, the force of this conclu-
sion springs from the t~lct that if the tables originated from the 
same source, then it is practically certain that an error in one will 
be reproduced in the others, but if they did not, the probability of 
errors being duplicated is minuscule. Such reasoning is so COIll-
pelling that compilers of mathematical tables regularly protect 
their copyrights by purposely incorporating some minor errors 
"as a trap for would-be plagiarists" (L.J. Comrie )\ and cartogra-
phers do the same. 
The inverse relationship between the probability of evidence 
and its confirming power is a simple and direct consequence of 
.1 This is quoted in Bowden 1953. p. 4. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
99 
Bayesian theory. On the other hand, methodologies that eschew 
probabilistic evaluations of hypotheses, in the interests of objec-
tivity, seem constitutionally unable to account for the phenome-
non. Popper (1959a, appendix *ix) recognized the need to provide 
such an account and rose to the challenge. First, he conceded that, 
in regard to confirmation, the significant quantities are Pre I h) 
and pre); he then measured the amount of confirmation or "cor-
roboration" which e confers on h by the difference between those 
quantities. But Popper never said explicitly what he meant by the 
probability of evidence. He could not allow it a SUbjective conno-
tation without compromising the intended objectivist quality of 
his methodology, yet he never worked out what objective signifi-
cance the term could have. His writings suggest he had in mind 
some purely logical notion of probability, but neither he nor any-
one else has managed to give an adequate account oflogical prob-
ability. Secondly, Popper never satisfactorily justified his claim 
that hypotheses benefit in any epistemie sense from improbable 
evidence; indeed, the idea has been closely examined by philoso-
phers and is generally regarded as indefensible within the 
Popperian scheme. (Sec Chapter 1, above, and, for example, 
Howson 2000, and Grunbaum 1976.) 
The Bayesian position has recently been misunderstood to 
imply that if some evidence is known, then it cannot support any 
hypothesis, on the grounds that known evidence must have unit 
probability. That the objection is based on a misunderstanding is 
shown in Chapter 9, where some other criticisms of the Bayesian 
approach arc rebutted. 
4.d 
The Ravens Paradox 
The Bayesian position that confirmation is a matter of degree, 
determined by Bayes's theorem, scotches a famous puzzle, first 
posed by Hempel (1945), known as the Paradox ol Confirmatiol1 
or sometimes as the Ravens Paradox. It was called a paradox 
because its premises seemed extremely plausible, despite their 
supposedly counter-intuitive consequences, and the reference to 
ravens stems from the paradigm hypothesis, 'All ravens are 
black', that is frequently used to present the problem. The alleged 

100 
CHAPTER 4 
difficulty arises from the following assumptions about confirma-
tion. (RB will signify the proposition that a certain object is black 
and a raven, and RB that it is neither black nor a raven.) 
I. Hypotheses of the form 'All Rs are B' are confirmed by 
evidence of something that is both Rand B. (Hempel called 
this Nicod~' Condition, after the philosopher Jean Nicod.) 
2. Logically equivalent hypotheses are confirmed by the 
same evidence. (This is the Equivalence Condition.) 
Now, by the Nieod Condition, 'All non-Bs are non-Rs' is con-
firmed by RB; and by the Equivalence Condition, so is 'All Rs are 
B', since the two generalizations are logically equivalent. Many 
philosophers regard this consequence as blatantly false, since it 
says that you can confirm the hypothesis that all ravens are black 
by observing a non-black non-raven, say, a white lie or a red her-
ring. This seems to suggest that you could investigate that and 
other similar general izations jllst as lvell by examining objects on 
your desk as by studying ravens on the wing. But that would be a 
non sequitur. For the fact that RB and RB both confirm a hypoth-
esis does not mean that they do so with equal force. And once it 
is recognized that confirmation is a matter of degree, the conclu-
sion ceases to be counter-intuitive, because it is compatible with 
RB confirming 'All Rs are B', but to a negligible degree. This sim-
ple point constitutes the Bayesian solution to the problem. 
But a Bayesian analysis can take the matter further, first of all, 
by demonstrating that in the case of the paradigm hypothesis, data 
of the form R B do in fact confirm to a negl igible degree; second-
ly, by showing that Nicod's condition is not valid as a universal 
principle of confirmation. Consider the first point. The impact of 
the two data on h, 'All ravens are black', is given as follows: 
P(h I RB) 
P(RB I h) 
P(h I RB) 
P(RIJ I h) 
-
---
= 
.. _-- & --
= ---'---
P(h) 
P(RB) 
P(II) 
P(RB) . 
These expressions can be simplified. First, P(RB I /1) 
= 
PCB I h & R)P(R I /1) = P(R I h) = peR). We arrived at the last 
equality by assuming that whether some arbitrary object is a raven 
is independent of the truth of h, which seems plausible to us, at 

3AVESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEO RIES 
101 
my rate as a close approximation, though Horwich (1982, p. 59) 
hinks it lacks plausibility.4 By parallel reasoning, P(kB I h) = 
P(B I h) = P(B). Also, P(RB) = P(B I R)P(R), and P(B I R) = 
'f.P(B I R & 8)P(8 I R) = LP(B I R & fJ)P(fJ) , where 8 represents 
Jossible values of the proportion of ravens that arc black (h says 
hat fJ = 1), and assuming independence between 8 and R. Finally, 
P(B I R & 8) = 8, for if the proportion of ravens in the universe 
hat are black is fJ, the probability of a randomly selected raven 
Jeing black is also 8. 
Combining all these considerations with Bayes 's theorem 
yields: 
P( h I RB) 
1 
P( h I RB ) 
--- = -- _. &-.. 
= 
P(h) 
L8P(8) 
P(h) 
P(RIE) 
i\ccording to the first of thcse equations, the ratio of the posteri-
)r to the prior probabilities of h is inversely proportional to 
'f.fJP(8). This means, for example, that if it were initially very 
Jrobable that all or virtually all ravens are black, then LfJP(fJ) 
>Yould be large and RB would confirm h rather little. While if it 
>Yere initially relatively probable that most ravens are not black, 
he confirmation could be substantial. Intermediate degrees of 
lIlcertainty regarding fJ would bring their own levels of confirma-
ion to h. 
The second equation refers to the confirmation to be derived 
from the observation of a non-black non-raven, and here the cru-
~ial probability term is peR I B). Now presumably there are vast-
.y morc non-black things in the universe than ravens. So even if 
>Ye felt certain that no ravens are black, the probability of some 
)bject about which we know nothing, except that it is not 
Jlack, being a non-raven must be very high, practically I. Hence, 
P(h I RE) = (1 - E)P(h), where E is a very small positive number; 
Vranas (2004) interprets the assumption as asserting that whether some arbi-
rary object is a raven "should" be independent or h. and he criticizes this and 
lther Bayesian accounts for depending upon a claim for which, he says. there 
:an be no reasoned defence. i:3ut our argument docs not need slich a strong 
Isslimption. Ollr position is merely that in this particular case, our and, we SIIS-
)ect, most other people's personal probabilities are such that independence 
lbtains. 

102 
CHAPTER 4 
therefore, observing that some object is neither a raven nor black 
provides correspondingly little confirmation for h.5 
A Bayesian analysis necessarily retains the Equivalence 
Condition but gives only qualified backing to thc Nicod 
Condition, for it anticipates circumstances in which the condition 
fails. For instance, suppose the hypothesis under examination is 
'A ll grasshoppers are located outside the County of Yorkshire'. 
One of these creatures appearing just beyond the county border is 
an instance of the generalization and, according to Nicod, con-
firms it. But it might be more reasonably argued that since there 
are no border controls or other obstacles to restrict the movement 
of grasshoppers in that area, the observation of one on the edge of 
the county but outside it increases the probability that some oth-
ers have actually crossed over, and hence, contrary to Niemi, it 
undermines the hypothesis. In Bayesian terms, this is a case 
where, relative to background information, the probability of 
some datum is reduced by a hypothesis--that is, pre I h) < P(e)-
which is thereby disconfirmed-that is, P(h I e) < P(h).6 This 
example is adapted from Swinburne 1971, though the idea seems 
to originate with Good 1961. 
Another, more striking case where Nicod's Condition breaks 
down was invented by Rosenkrantz (1977, p. 35). Three people 
leave a party, each with a hat. The hypothesis that none of the 
three has his own hat is confirmed, according to Nicod, by the 
observation that person I has person 2's hat and by the observa-
tion that person 2 has person 1 's hat. But since the hypothesis con-
cerns only three, particular people, the second observation must 
rejitfe the hypothesis, not confirm it. 
Our grasshopper example may also be used to show that 
instances of the type RB can sometimes confirm 'All Rs are B' . 
Imagine that an object that looks for all the world like a grasshop-
per had been found hopping about just outside Yorkshire and that 
it turned out to be some other sort of insect. The discovery that the 
object was not a grasshopper after all would be relatively unlikely 
unless the grasshopper hypothesis were true (hence, Pre) < pre I h)); 
'The account given here is substantially similar to Mackic's, 1963. 
(, This example is adapted from Swinburne 1971. though the idea secms 10 orig-
inate with Good 19() I. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
103 
so it would confirm that hypothesis. [fthe deceptively grasshopper-
like object were discovered within the county, the same conclusion 
would follow for this RB instance. 
Horwich (1982, p. 58) has argued that the ravens hypothesis 
could be differently confirmed depending on how the black raven 
was chosen, either by randomly selecting an object from the pop-
ulation of ravens, or by restricting the selection to the population 
of black objects. Korb ( 1994) provides a convincing demonstra-
tion of this, which we discuss in a related context in Chapter 8. 
We do not accept Horwich's argument for his conclusion. 
Denoting a black raven either R* B or RB*, depending on whether 
it was discovered by the first selection process or the second, he 
claims that evidence of the former kind always confirms more, 
because only it subjects the raven hypothesis to the risk of falsifi-
cation. But this conf1ates the process of collecting evidence, 
which may indeed expose the hypothesis to different risks of refu-
tation, with the evidence itself~ which either does or does not 
refute the hypothesis, and in the present case it does not. 
Our conclusions are, first, that the so-called paradox of the 
ravens is not in fact problematic; secondly, that of the two condi-
tions of confirmation that generated it only the Equivalence 
Condition is acceptable; and thirdly, that Bayesian theory explains 
why. 
4.e 
The Duhem Problem 
The Duhem (sometimes called the Duhem-Quine) problem aris-
es with philosophies of science of the type associated with 
Popper, which emphasize the power of certain evidence to refute 
a theory. According to Popper, falsifiability is the feature of a 
theory which makes it scientific. "Statements or systems of state-
ments," he said, "in order to be ranked as scientific, must be 
capable of conflicting with possible, or conceivable. observa-
tions" (1963, p. 39). And claiming to apply this criterion, he 
judged Einstein's gravitational theory scientific and Freud's psy-
chology not. The term 'scientific' carries a strong f1avour of 
commendation, which is, however, misleading in this context. 
For Popper could never demonstrate a link between his concept 

104 
C HA PTER 4 
of scientificness and epistemic or inductive merit: a theory that is 
scientific in Popper's sense is not necessarily true, or probably true, 
nor can it be said either definitely or even probably to lead to the 
truth. There is little alternative then, in our judgment, to regarding 
Popper's demarcation between scientific and unscientific state-
ments as without normative signif icance, but as a claim about the 
content and character of what is ordinarily termed science. 
Yet as an attempt to understand the practice of science, 
Popper's ideas bear little fruit. First of all , the claim that scien-
tific theories are falsifiable by "possible, or conceivable. obser-
vations" raises a difficulty, because an observation can only 
falsify a theory (in other words conclusively demonstrate its fal-
sity) if it is itself conclusively certain. Yet as Popper himself 
appreciated, no observations fall into this category; they are all 
fallibl e. But unwilling to concede degrees of fallibility or any-
thing of the kind, Popper took the view that observation reports 
that are admitted as evidence "are accepted as the result of a 
decision or agreement; and to that extent they are conventions" 
(1959a, p. 106; our italics). It is unclear to what psychological 
attitude such acceptance corresponds, but whatever it is, 
Popper's view pulls the rug from under his own philosophy, 
since it implies that no theory can really be falsified by evi-
dence. Every ' fa lsif ication ' is merely a convention or decision: 
"From a logical point of view, the testing of a theory depends 
upon basic statements whose acceptance or rejection, in its turn, 
depends upon our decisions. Thus it is decisions which settle the 
fate of theories" (\ 959a, p. 108). 
Watkins was one of those who saw that the Popperian position 
could not rest on this arbitrary basis, and he attempted to shore it 
up by arguing that some infallibly true observation statements do 
in fact exist. He agreed that a statement like 'the hand on this dial 
is pointing to the numeral 6' is fallible, since it is possible, how-
ever unlikely, that the person reporting the observation mistook 
the position of the hand. But he claimed that introspective percep-
tual reports, such as 'in my visual field there is now a silvery cres-
cent against a dark blue background'. "may rightly be regarded by 
their authors when they make them as infa llibly true" (1984, pp. 
79 and 248). But in our opinion Watkins was wrong, and the state-
ments he regarded as infallible are open to the same sceptical 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
105 
doubts as any other observational report. We can illustrate this 
through the above example: clearly it is possible, though admit-
tedly not very probable, that the introspector has misremembered 
and mistaken the shape he usually describes as a crescent, or the 
sensation he usually receives on reporting blue and silvery 
images. These and other similar sources of error ensure that intro-
spective reports are not exempt from the rule that non-analytic 
statements are fallible. 
Of course, the kinds of observation statement we have men-
tioned, if asserted under appropriate circumstances, would never 
be seriously doubted, for although they could be false, they have 
a force and immediacy that carries conviction: in the traditional 
phrase, they are 'morally certain'. But if they are merely indu-
bitable, then whether or not a theory is regarded as refuted by 
observational data rests ultimately on a subjective feeling of cer-
tainty, a fact that punctures the objectivist pretensions of 
Popperian philosophy. 
A second objection to Popper's falsifiability criterion, and the 
one upon which we shall focus for its more general interest, is that 
it deems unscientific most of those theories that are usually judged 
science's greatest achievements. This is the chief aspect of the 
well-known criticisms advanced by Polanyi (1962), Kuhn (1970), 
and Lakatos (1970), amongst others, but based on the arguments 
of Duhem ( 1905). They pointed out that notable theories of science 
are typically unfalsifiable by observation statements, because they 
only make empirical predictions in association with certain auxil-
iary theories. Should any such prediction turn out to be false, logic 
does not compel us to regard the principal theory as untrue, since 
the error may lie in one or more of the auxiliaries. Indeed, there are 
many occasions in the history of science when an important theo-
ry led to a false prediction but was not itself significantly 
impugned thereby. The problem that Duhem posed was this: when 
several distinct theories are involved in deriving a Ialse prediction. 
which olthem should be regarded asfalse? 
Lakatos and Kuhn on the Duhem Problem 
Lakatos and Kuhn both investigated scientific responses to 
anomalies and were impressed by the tendency they observed for 

106 
C HA PTER 4 
the benefit of the doubt persistently to be given to particular, 
especially fundamental theories, and for one or more of the aux-
iliary theories regularly to be blamed for any false prediction. 
Lakatos drew from this observation the lesson that science of the 
most significant kind usually proceeds in what he called scientif-
ic research programmes, each comprising a central, or ' hard 
core', theory, and a so-called ' protective belt' of auxiliary theo-
ries. During the lifetime of a research programme, these clements 
are combined to yield empirical predictions, which arc then 
experimentally checked; and if they turn out to be false, the aux-
iliary hypotheses act as a protective shield, as it were, for the hard 
core, and take the brunt of the refutation. A research programme 
is also characterised by a set of heuristic rules by which it devel-
ops new auxiliary hypotheses and extends into new areas. Lakatos 
regarded Newtonian physics as an example of a research pro-
gramme, the three laws of mechanics and the law of gravitation 
comprising the hard core, and various optical theories, proposi-
tions about the natures and dispositions of the planets, and so 
forth, being the protective belt. 
Kuhn's theory is similar to the methodology we have just out-
lined and probably inspired it in part. Broadly speaking, Kuhn 's 
' paradigm ' is the equivalent of a scientific research programme, 
though his idea is developed in less detail. 
Lakatos, following Popper, also added a normative element, 
something that Kuhn deliberately avoided. He held that it was per-
fectly all right to treat the hard core systematically as the innocent 
party in a refutation, provided the research programme occasion-
ally leads to successful "novel" predictions or to successful, "non-
ad hoc" explanations of existing data. Lakatos called such 
programmes "progressive." 
The sophisticated falsificationist [which Lakatos counted himself] ... 
sees nothing wrong with a group of brilliant scientists conspiring to 
pack cvcrything they can into their favourite research programme . 
with a sacred hard core. As long as their genius----and luck-
enables 
them to expand their programme 'pmgressil'eh" , whilc sticking to its 
hard core, they are allowed to do it. (Lakatos 1970, p. 187) 
I f, on the other hand, the research programme persistently pro-
duces false predictions, or if its explanations are habitually ad 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
107 
hoc, Lakatos called it "degenerating." The notion of an ad hoc 
explanation-briefly, one that does not produce new and verified 
predictions-is central to attempts by the Popperian school to deal 
with the Duhem problem and we discuss it in greater detail below, 
in section g. In appraising research programmes, Lakatos 
employed the tendentious terms 'progressive' and 'degenerating' , 
but he never succeeded in substantiating their normative intima-
tions, and in the end he seems to have abandoned the attempt and 
settled on the more modest claim that, as a matter of historical 
fact, progressive programmes were well regarded by scientists, 
while degenerating ones were distrusted and eventually dropped. 
This last claim, it seems to us, contains a measure of truth, as 
cvidenced by case studies in the history of science, such as those 
in Howson 1976. But although Lakatos and Kuhn identified and 
described an important aspect of scientific work, they could not 
explain it or rationalize it. So, for example, Lakatos did not say 
why a research programme's occasional predictive success could 
compensate for numerous failures, nor did he specify how many 
such successes arc needed to convert a degenerating programme 
into a progressive one, beyond remarking that they should occur 
"now and then". 
Lakatos was also unable to explain why certain theories arc 
raised to the privileged status of hard core in a research pro-
gramme while others are left to their own devices. His writings 
give the impression that the scientist is free to decide the question 
at will, by "methodological fiat", as he says. Which suggests that 
it is perfectly canonical scientific practice to set up any theory 
whatever as the hard core of a research programme, or as the cen-
tral pattern of a paradigm, and to attribute all empirical difficul-
ties to auxiliary hypotheses. This is far from being the case. For 
these reasons and also because of ditTiculties with the notion of 
an ad hoc hypothesis, to be discussed bclow, neither Kuhn's theo-
ry of paradigms nor Lakatos's so-called 'sophisticated falsifica-
tionism' are in any position to solve the Duhem problem. 
The Bayesian Resolution 
The questions left unanswered in the Kuhn and Lakatos method-
ologies are addressed and resolved, as Dorling (1979) brilliantly 

108 
CHAPTER 4 
showed, by referring to Bayes's theorem and considering how the 
individual probabilities of theories are severally altered when, as 
a group, they have been falsified. 
We shall illustrate the argument through a historical example 
that Lakatos (1970, pp. 138-140; 1968, pp. l74-75) drew heavi-
ly upon. In the early nineteenth century, William Prout (1815, 
1816), a medical practitioner and chemist, advanced the idea that 
the atomic weight of every element is a whole-number multiple of 
the atomic weight of hydrogen, the underlying assumption being 
that all matter is built up from different combinations of some 
basic element. Prout believed hydrogen to be that fundamental 
building block. Now many of the atomic weights recorded at the 
time were in fact more or less integral multiples of the atomic 
weight of hydrogen, but some deviated markedly from Prout's 
expectations. Yet this did not shake the strong belief he had in his 
hypothesis, for in such cases he blamed the methods that had been 
used to measure those atomic weights. Indeed, he went so far as 
to adjust the atomic weight of the element chlorine, relative to that 
of hydrogen, from the value 35.83, obtained by experiment, to 36, 
the nearest whole number. Thomas Thomson (1818, p. 340) 
responded in a similar manner when confronted with 0.829 as the 
measured atomic weight (relative to the atomic weight of oxygen) 
of the element boron, changing it to 0.87S, "because it is a multi-
ple of 0.125, which all the atoms seem to be". (Thomson erro-
neously took the relative atomic weights of hydrogen and oxygen 
as 0.12S.) 
Prout's reasoning relative to chlorine and Thomson's, relative 
to boron, can be understood in Bayesian terms as follows: Prout's 
hypothesis t, together with an appropriate assumption a, asserting 
the accuracy (within specified limits) of the measuring tech-
niques, the purity of the chemicals employed, and so forth, 
implies that the ratio of the measured atomic weights of chlorine 
and hydrogen will approximate (to a specified degree) a whole 
number. In 181S that ratio was reported as 3S.83-call this the 
evidence e-a value judged to be incompatible with the conjunc-
tion of t and a. 
The posterior and prior probabilities of t and of a are related 
by Bayes's theorem, as follows: 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
109 
P(e I t)P(t) 
P(e I a)P(a) 
P(t I e) = 
and P( a Ie) = -
P(e) 
P(e) 
To evaluate the two posterior probabilities, it is necessary to quan-
tify the various terms on the right-hand sides of these equations. 
Consider first the prior probabilities oft and of a. J.S. Stas, a dis-
tinguished Belgian chemist whose careful atomic weight measure-
ments were highly influential, gives us reason to think that chemists 
of the period were firmly disposed to believe in t, recalling that "In 
England the hypothesis of Dr Prout was almost universally accept-
ed as absolute truth" and that when he started investigating the sub-
ject, he himself had "had an almost absolute confidence in the 
exactness of Prout's principle" (1860, pp. 42 and 44). 
It is less easy to ascertain how confident Prout and his contem-
poraries were in the methods used to measure atomic weights, but 
their confidence was probably not great, in vicw of the many clear 
sources of error. For instance, errors were recognised to be inherent 
in the careful weighings and manipulations that were required; the 
particular chemicals involved in the experiments to measure the 
atomic weights were of questionable purity; and, in those pioneer 
days, the structures of chemicals were rarely known with certainty. 7 
These various uncertainties were reinforced by the fact that inde-
pendent measurements of atomic weights, based on the transforma-
tions of different chemicals, rarely delivered identical results.s On 
the other hand, the chemists of the time must have felt that that their 
atomic weight measurements were more likely to be accurate than 
not, otherwise they would hardly have reported them. 9 
, The several sources of error were rehearsed by Mallet ( 1893). 
~ For example, Thomson (1818, p. 340) reported two independent measurc-
ments--2.998 and 2.66-for the weight. relative to the atomic weight of oxygcn. 
ofa molecule of boracic (boric) acid. He required this value in order to calculatc 
the atomic weight of boron from the weight of the boric acid produced after the 
c1cmcnt was combusted. 
4 " I am far from flattcring myself that thc numbers which I shall give are all 
accurate; on the contrary, I have not the least doubt that many of them are still 
erroneous. But they constitute at least a nearer approximation to the truth than 
the numbers contained in thc first tablc [which Thomson had published some 
years before]" (Thomson 1818. p. 339). 

110 
CHAPTER 4 
For these reasons, we conjecture that P(a) was in thc ncigh-
bourhood of 0.6 and that P(t) was around 0.9, and these are the 
figures we shall work with. Wc stress that these figures and those 
we shall assign to other probabilities are intended chiefly to show 
that hypotheses that are jointly refuted by an observation, may 
sometimes be disconfirmed to very different degrees, so illustrat-
ing the Bayesian resolution of Duhem's problem. Nevertheless, 
we believe that the figures we have suggested are reasonably 
accurate and sufficiently so to throw light on the historical 
progress of Prout's hypothesis. As will become apparent, the 
results we obtain are not very sensitive to variations in the 
assumed prior probabilities. 
The posterior probabilities of f and of a depend also on Pre), 
pre I t), and pre I a). Using the theorem of total probability, the 
first two of these terms can be expressed as follows: 
Pre) 
= P( e I t)P(t} + pre I ~t)P(~t) 
pre I t) = P( e If & a)P(a I t) + pre I t & -a)P(-a I (). 
We will follow Dorling in taking t and a to be independent, 
viz, P(a I t) = P(a) and hence, P(-a I t) = P(-a). As Dorling points 
out (1996), this independence assumption makes the calculations 
simpler but is not crucial to the argument. Nevertheless, that 
assumption accords with many historical cases and seems clearly 
right here. For we put ourselves in the place of chemists of Prout's 
day and consider how our confidence in his hypothesis would 
have been affected by a knowledge that particular chemical sam-
ples were pure, that particular substances had particular molecu-
lar structures, specific gravities, and so on. It seems to us that it 
would not be affected at all. Bovens and Hartmann (2003, p. Ill) 
take a different view and have objected to the assumption of inde-
pendence in this context. Speaking in general terms, they allege 
that "experimental results are determined by a hypothesis and 
auxiliary theories that are often hopelessly interconnected with 
each other." 
And these interconnections raise havoc in assessing the value of 
experimental results in testing hypotheses. There is always the fear 
that the hypothesis and the auxiliary theory really come out of the 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
III 
samc deceitful family and that the lics of one reinforce the lies of 
the other. 
Wc do not assert that theories are never entangled in the way that 
Bovcns and Hartmann describe, but for the reasons we have just 
cited, it secms to us that thc prcscnt situation is very far from 
being a case in point. 
Returning to the last equation, if we incorporate the independ-
ence assumption and take account of the fact that since the con-
junction f & a is rcfutcd bye, pre I f & a) must be zero, we obtain: 
pre I t) 
= pre I t & ~a)P(~a). 
By parallel reasoning, we may derive the results: 
p re I a) 
= P( e I ~t & a)P(~ t) 
pre I - t) = P( e I - t & a)P(a) + pre I ~t & ~a)P(~a). 
So, provided the following terms are fixed, which we havc donc in 
a tentative way, to be justified presently, the posterior probabilities 
of t and of a can be calculated: 
pre I - t & a) 
= 0.0] 
pre I - t &-a) = 0.0] 
Pre I t & -a) = 0.02. 
The first of these gives the probability ofthc evidence if Prout's 
hypothesis is not true, but if the assumptions madc in calculating 
the atomic weight of chlorine are accurate. Certain ninctecnth-
century chemists thought carcfully about such probabilities, and 
typically took a theory of random distribution of atomic weights as 
the alternative to Prout's hypothesis (for instance, Mallet ]880): we 
shall follow this. Suppose it had been established for ccrtain that 
the atomic weight of chlorine lies between 35 and 36. (The final 
results wc obtain respecting the postcrior probabilities of t and of 
a are, incidentally, unaffected by the width of this interval.) The 
random-distribution theory assigns equal probabilities to the atom-
ic weight of an element lying in any 0.0 I-widc band. Hence, on 

112 
CHAPTER 4 
the assumption that a is true, but t false, the probability that the 
atomic weight of chlorine lies in the interval 35.825 to 35.835 is 
0.01. We have attributed the same value to pre I -( & -a), on the 
grounds that if a were false, because, say, some of the chemicals 
were impure, or had been inaccurately weighed, then, still 
assuming t to be false, one would not expect atomic weights to 
be biased towards any particular part of the interval between 
adjacent integers. 
We have set the probability pre I t & -a) rather higher, at 0.02. 
The reason for this is that although some impurities in the chem-
icals and some degree of inaccuracy in the measurements were 
moderately likely at the time, chemists would not have considered 
their techniques entirely haphazard. Thus if Prout's hypothesis 
were true and the measurement technique imperfect, the meas-
ured atomic weights would be likely to deviate somewhat from 
integral values; but the greater the deviation, the less the likeli-
hood, so the probability distribution of atomic weight measure-
ments falling within the 35-36 interval would not be uniform, but 
would be more concentrated around the whole numbers. 
Let us proceed with the figures we havc proposed for the cru-
cial probabilities. We note however that the absolute values of 
the probabilities are unimportant, for, in fact, only their relative 
values count in the calculation. Thus we would arrivc at the 
samc results with the weaker assumptions that pre I -t & a) = 
Pre I -{ & -a) = ~P(e I t & -a). Wc now obtain: 
pre 1- t) = 0.01 x 0.6 + 0.01 x 0.4 = 0.01 
pre I t) 
= 0.02 x 0.4 
= 0.008 
pre I a) 
= 0.01 x 0.1 
= 0.001 
Pre) 
= 0.008 x 0.9 + 0.01 x 0.1 = 0.0082. 
Finally, Bayes's theorem allows us to derive the posterior proba-
bilities in which we are interested: 
P(t I e) = 0.878 (Recall that P(t) = 0.9) 
P(a I e) = 0.073 (Recall that P(a) = 0.6). 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
113 
We see then that the evidence provided by the measured atom-
ic weight of chlorinc affects Prout's hypothesis and the set of aux-
iliary hypotheses very differently; for while the probability of the 
first is scarcely changed, that of the second is reduced to a point 
where it has lost all credibility. 
It is true that these results depend upon certain-we have 
argued plausible-
premises concerning initial probabilities, but 
this does not seriously limit their general significance, because 
quite substantial variations in the assumed probabilities lead to 
quite similar conclusions, as the reader can verify. So for exam-
ple, if the prior probability of Prout's hypothesis were 0.7 rather 
than 0.9, the other assignments remaining unchanged, P(t I e) 
would equal 0.65, and P(a I e) would be 0.21. Thus, as before, 
Prout's hypothesis is still more likely to be true than false in the 
light of the adverse evidence, and the auxiliary assumptions are 
still much more likely to be false than true. 
Successive pieces of adverse evidence may, however, erode the 
probability of a hypothesis so that eventually it becomes more 
likely to be false than true and loses its high scientific status. Such 
a process would correspond to a Lakatosian degcnerating research 
programme or be the prelude to a Kuhnian paradigm shift. In the 
prescnt case, the atomic weight of chlorine having been repeated 
in various, improved ways by Stas, whose laboratory skill was 
universally recognized, Mallet (1893, p. 45) concluded that "It 
may be reasonably said that probability is against the idea of any 
future discovery ... ever making the value of this element agree 
with an integer multiple of the atomic weight of hydrogen". And 
in the light of this and other atomic weight measurements he 
regarded Prout's original idea as having been "shown by the cal-
culus of probability to be a very improbable one". And Stas him-
selt~ who started out so very sure of its truth, reported in 1860 that 
he had now "reached the complete conviction, the entire certain-
ty, as far as certainty can be attained on such a subject, that Prout's 
law ... is nothing but an illusion" (1860, p. 45). 
We conclude that Bayes's theorem provides a framework that 
resolves the Duhem problem, unlike the various non-probabilistic 
methodologies which philosophers have sought to apply to it. And 
the example of Prout's hypothesis, as well as others that Dorling 

114 
CHAPTER 4 
( 1979 and 1996) has analysed, show in our view, that the Bayesian 
model is essentially correct. 
4.f 
Good Data, Bad Data, and Data Too Good 
to Be True 
Good Data 
The marginal influence that an anomalous observation may 
exert on a theory 's probability contrasts with the dramatic effect 
of some confirmations. For instance, if the measured atomic 
weight of chlorine had been a whole number, in line with 
Prout's hypothesis, so that P(e I t & a) = I instead of 0, and if 
the other probability assignments remained the same, the prob-
ability of the hypothesis would shoot up from a prior ofO.9 to 
a posterior of 0.998. And even more striking: had thc prior 
probability of t been 0.7, its posterior probability would have 
risen to 0.99. 
This asymmetry between the effects of anomalous and con-
firming instances was emphasized by Lakatos, who regarded it as 
highly significant in science, and as a characteristic feature of a 
research programme. He maintained that a scientist involved in 
such a programme typically "forges ahead with almost complete 
disregard of 'refutations' ," provided there arc occasional predic-
tive successes (1970, p. 137): the scientist is "encouraged by 
nature's YES, but not discouraged by its NO" (p. 135). As we have 
indicated, we believe there to be much truth in Lakatos's observa-
tions: the trouble, however, is that these observations are merely 
absorbed, without justification, into his methodology; the 
Bayesian methodology, on the other hand, explains why and under 
what circumstances the asymmetry effect is present. 
Bad Data 
An interesting fact that emerges from the Bayesian analysis is that 
a successful prediction derived from a combination of two theo-
ries docs not necessarily redound to the credit of both of them, 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
lIS 
indeed one may even be discredited. Consider Prout's hypothesis 
again, and suppose the atomic weight of chlorine had been deter-
mined, not in the established way, but by concentrating hard on 
the element while selecting a number blindly from a given range 
of numbers. And let us suppose that the atomic weight of chlorine 
is reported by this method to be a whole number. This is just what 
one would predict on the basis of Prout's hypothesis, if the out-
landish measuring technique were accurate. But accuracy is obvi-
ously most unlikely, and it is equally obvious that the results of the 
technique could add little or nothing to the credibility of Prout's 
hypothesis. This intuition is upheld by Bayes's theorem: as before, 
let t be Prout's hypothesis and a the assumption that the measur-
ing technique is accurate. Then, set p re I I & ~a) = pre I - ( & - a) = 
Pre I-I & a) = 0.0 I, for reasons similar to those stated above. And, 
because, as we said, a is extremely implausible, we will set P(a) 
at, say 0.0001. It then fo llows that t is not signif icantly confirmed 
bye, for P(t) and P(t I e) are virtually identical. 
This example shows that Leibniz was wrong to declare as a 
maxim that" It is the greatest commendation of a hypothesi s (next 
to truth) if by its help predictions can be made even about phe-
nomena or experiments not [yet] tried". Leibniz, and Lakatos, 
who quoted these words with approval ( 1970, p. 123 ), seem to 
have overlooked the fact that if a prediction can be deduced from 
a hypothesis only with the assistance of highly questionable aux-
iliary claims, then that hypothesis may accrue very little credit 
when the prediction is verified. This explains why the various 
sensational predictions that Velikovsky drew from his theory 
failed to impress most serious astronomers, even when some of 
those predictions were to their amazement fulfilled. For 
instance, Velikovsky 's prediction (1950, p. 351) of the existence 
of large quantities of petroleum on the planet Venus relied not 
only on hi s pet theory that various natural disasters in the past 
had been caused by co llisions between the Earth and a comet, 
but al so on a string of unsupported and implausible assump-
tions, for instance, that the comet in question carried hydrogen 
and carbon; that these had been converted to petroleum by elec-
trical discharges supposedly generated in the violent impact 
with the Earth; that the comet had later evolved into the planet 
Venus; and some others. (More details of Velikovsky's theory 
are given in the next section.) 

116 
CHAPTER 4 
Data Too Good to Be True 
Data are sometimes said to be 'too good to be true', when they fit 
a favoured hypothesis more perfectly than seems reasonable. 
Imagine, for instance, that Prout had advanced his hypothesis and 
then proceeded to report numerous atomic weights that he had 
himself measured, each an exact whole number. Such a result 
looks almost as if it was designed to impress, and just for this rea-
son it fails to. 
We may analyse this response as follows: chemists in the early 
nineteenth century recognized that the measuring techniques 
available to them were not absolutely precise in their accuracy but 
were subject to experimental error, and so liable to produce a cer-
tain spread of results about the true value. On this assumption, 
which we label a l 
, it is extremely unlikely that numerous inde-
pendent atomic weight measurements would all produce exactly 
whole numbers, even if Prout's hypothesis were true. So pre I t & a 1 ) 
is extremely small, and clearly pre I ~t & a I) could be no larger. 
Now there are many possible explanations of e, apart from those 
involving aI, one being that the experiments were consciously or 
unconsciously rigged so as to appear favourable to Prout's 
hypothesis. If this were the only plausible alternative (and so, in 
effect, equivalent to ~a), pre I t & ~a I) would be very high, as too 
P(e I ~t & ~a). It follows from the equations in section e, above 
that 
pre I t) = P(e I t & ~a ')P(~a I) and 
P(e I ~t) = pre I ~t & ~a I)P(~a I) 
and hence, 
pre) = P(e I t & ~a')P(-a')P(t) + pre I ~t & -a l) P(-a l)P(~t). 
Now presumably the rigging of the results to produce exactly 
whole numbers would be equally effective whether t was true or 
not; in other words, 
pre I t & ~a') = pre I -t & _al). 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
117 
Therefore, 
Pee I t)P(t) 
Pee I t & ~a!)P(~a! )P(t) 
P(tle)=· 
= 
=P(t). 
Pee) 
Pee I t & ~a!)P(~a!) 
Thus e does not confirm t significantly, even though, in a mislead-
ing sense, it fits the theory perfectly. This is why it is said to be 
too good to be true. A similar calculation shows that the probabil-
ity of a! is diminished, and on the assumptions we have made, this 
implies that the idea that the experiments were fabricated is ren-
dered more probable. (The above analysis is essentially due to 
Dorling 1996.) 
A famous case of data that were alleged to be too good to be 
true is that of Mendel's plant-breeding results. Mendel's genetic 
theory of inheritance allows one to calculate the probabilities of 
different plants producing specific kinds of offspring. For exam-
ple, under certain circumstances, pea plants of a certain strain 
may be calculated to yield round and wrinkled seeds with proba-
bilities 0.75 and 0.25, respectively. Mendel obtained seed fre-
quencies that matched the corresponding probabilities in this and 
in similar cases remarkably well, suggesting (misleadingly, 
Fisher contended) substantial support for the genetic theory. 
Fisher did not believe that Mendel had deliberately falsified his 
results to appear in better accord with his theory than they really 
were. To do so, Fisher said, "would contravene the weight of the 
evidence supplied in detail by ... [Mendel's] paper as a whole". 
But Fisher thought it a "possibility among others that Mendel 
was deceived by some assistant who knew too well what was 
expected" (1936, p. 132), an explanation that he backed up with 
some, rather meagre, evidence. Dobzhansky (1967, p. 1589), on 
the other hand, thought it "at least as plausible" that Mendel had 
himself discarded results that deviated much from his ideal, in 
the sincere belief that they were contaminated or that some other 
accident had befallen them. (For a comprehensive review sec 
Edwards 1986.) 
The argument put forward earlier to show that too-exactly 
whole-number atomic weight measurements would not have sup-
ported Prout's hypothesis depends on the existence of some suffi-
ciently plausible alternative hypothesis that would explain the 
data better. We believe that in general, data are too good to be true 

118 
C HA PTER 4 
relative to one hypothesis only if there are such alternatives. This 
principle implies that if the method of eliciting atomic weights had 
long been established as precise and accurate, and if careful pre-
cautions had been taken against experimenter bias and deception, 
so that all the natural alternatives to Prout's hypothesis could be 
discounted, the inductive force of the data would then no longer be 
suspicious. Fisher, however, did not subscribe to the principle, at 
least, not explicitly; he believed that Mendel's results told against 
the genetic theory, irrespective of any alternative explanations that 
might be suggested. But despite this official position, Fisher did in 
fact, as we have just indicated, sometimes appeal to such alterna-
tives when he formulated his argument. We refer again to Fisher's 
case against Mendel in the next chapter, section b. 
4.9 
Ad Hoc Hypotheses 
We have been discussing the circumstances in whieh an important 
scientific hypothesis, in combination with others, makes a false 
prediction and yet emerges with its reputation more or less intact, 
while one or more of the auxiliary hypotheses are largely discred-
ited. We argued that this process necessarily calls for alternatives 
to the discredited hypotheses to be contemplated. Philosophers, 
such as Popper and Lakatos, who deny any inductive role for evi-
dence, and who oppose, in particular, the Bayesian approach take 
note of the 
t~l c t that scientists often do deal with paJ1icuiar 
instances of the Duhem problem by proposing alternative hypothe-
ses; some of these philosophers have suggested certain normative 
rules that purport to say when such alternatives are acceptable and 
when they are not. Their idea is that a theory that was introduced 
ad hoc, that is, " for the sole purpose of saving a hypothesis seri-
ously threatened by adverse evidence" (Hempel 1966, p. 29), is in 
some way inferior. The adhocness idea was largely inspired by cer-
tain types of scientific example, which appeared to endorse it, but 
in our view, the examples are misinterpreted and the idea badly 
flawed. The following are four such examples. 
1 Velikovsky, in a daring book called Worlds in Collision that 
attracted a great deal of interest and controversy some years ago, 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
119 
advanced the theory that the Earth has been subject at various 
stages in its history to cosmic disasters, through near collisions 
with massive comets. He claimed that one such comet passed 
close by our planet during the Israelites' captivity in Egypt, caus-
ing many of the remarkable events related in the Bible, such as the 
ten plagues and the parting of the Red Sea, before settling down 
as the planet Venus. Because the putative cosmic encounter 
rocked the entire Earth, Velikovsky expected other peoples to 
have recorded its consequences too, if they kept records at all. But 
as a matter of fact, many communities around the world failed to 
note anything out of the ordinary at the time, an anomaly that 
Velikovsky attributed to a "collective amnesia". He argued that 
the cataclysms were so terrifying that whole peoples behaved "as 
if [they had] obliterated impressions that should be unforget-
table". There was a need Velikovsky said, to "uncover the ves-
tiges" of these events, "a task not unlike that of overcoming 
amnesia in a singlc person" (1 950, p. 288). 
Individual amnesia is the issue in the next example. 
2 Dianetics is a theory that purports to analyse the causes of 
insanity and mental stress, which it sees as caused by the 'misfil-
ing' of information in un suitable locations in the brain. By re-fil-
ing these 'engrams', it claims, sanity may be restored, composure 
enhanced and, incidentally, the mcmory vastly improved. The 
therapy is long and expensive and few people have been through 
it and borne out the theory's claims. However, L. Ron Hubbard, 
the inventor of Dianetics, trumpeted one purported success, and 
exhibited this person to a large audience, saying that she had a 
"full and perfect recall of every moment of her lifc". But ques-
tions from the floor ("What did you have for breakfast on October 
3rd, 1942,?", "What colour is Mr Hubbard's tie?", and the likc) 
soon demonstrated that the hapless woman had a most imperfect 
memory. Hubbard explained to the dwindling assembly that when 
she first appeared on the stage and was asked to come forward 
"now", the word had frozen her in "present time" and paralysed 
her ability to recall the past. (See Miller 1987.) 
3 Investigations into the IQs of different groups of people 
show that the average levels of measured intelligence vary. Some 

120 
CHAPTER 4 
environmentalists, so-called, attribute low scores primarily to 
poor social and educational conditions, an explanation that ran 
into trouble when a large group of Inuit, leading an aimless, poor 
and drunken existence, were found to score very highly on IQ 
tests. The distinguished biologist Peter Medawar (1974), in an 
effort to deflect the difficulty away from the environmentalist the-
sis, tried to explain this unexpected observation by saying that an 
"upbringing in an igloo gives just the right degree of cosiness, 
security and mutual contact to conduce to a good performance in 
intell igence tests." 
In each of these examples, the theory that was proposed in 
place of the refuted one seems highly unsatisfactory. It is not like-
ly that any of them would have been advanced, save in response to 
particular anomalies and in order to evade the consequent diffi-
culty, hence the label 'ad hoc'. But philosophers who attach 
inductive significance to adhocness recognize that the mere fact 
that the theory was proposed under such circumstances is not by 
itself grounds for condemnation. For there are examples, like the 
following, where a theory that was proposed for the sole purpose 
of dealing with an anomaly was nevertheless very successful. 
4 William Herschel, in 1781 , discovered the planet Uranus. 
Astronomers quickly sought to describe the orbit of the new plan-
et in Newtonian terms, taking account of the perturbing influence 
of the other known planets, and were able to deduce predictions 
concerning its future positions. But discrepancies between pre-
dicted and observed positions of Uranus substantially exceeded 
the accepted limits of experimental error, and grew year by year. 
A few astronomers mooted the possibility that the fault lay with 
Newton's laws but the prevailing opinion was that there must be 
some unknown planet acting as an extra source of gravitational 
attraction on Uranus, which ought to be included in the 
Newtonian calculations. Two astronomers in particular, Adams 
and Le Verrier, working independently, were convinced of this and 
using all the known sightings of Uranus, they calculated in a 
mathematical tOllr dej(Jrce where the hypothetical planet must be. 
The hypothesis was ad hoc, yet it was vindicated when careful tel-
escopic observations as well as studies of old astronomical charts 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
121 
revealed in 1846 the presence of a planet with the anticipated 
characteristics. The planet was later called Neptune. Newton's 
theory was saved, for the time being. (See Smart 1947.) 
The Adhocness Criteria 
Examples like the first three above have suggested to some 
philosophers that when a theory t, and an auxiliary hypothesis a, 
are jointly refuted by some evidence, e I, then any replacement, of 
the form t & a', must not only imply e', but should also have 
some new, ' independent' empirical implications. And examples 
similar to the fourth have suggested that if the new theory satis-
fies this condition, then it is a particular virtue if some of the new, 
independent implications are verified. 
These two criteria were anticipated some four hundred years 
ago, by the great philosopher Francis Bacon, who objected to any 
hypothesis that is "only fitted to and made to the measure of those 
particulars from which it is derived". He argued that a hypothesis 
should be "larger or wider" than the observations that gave rise to 
it and said that "we must look to see whether it confirms its large-
ness and wideness by indicating new particulars" (1620, I, 106). 
Popper ( 1963, p. 241) advanced the same criteria, laying it down 
that a "new theory should be independently testable. That is to say, 
apart from explaining all the explicanda which the new theory 
was designed to explain, it must have new and testable conse-
quences (preferably consequences of a new kind)." And secondly, 
he said, the new theory "should pass the independent tests in ques-
tion". Bacon called hypotheses that did not meet the criteria "friv-
olous distinctions", while Popper termed them "ad hOC".10 
10 The first recorded use of the term 'ad hoc' in this context in English was in 1936, 
in a review of a psychology book, where the reviewer criticized some explanations 
proffered by the book's author for certain aspects of childish behaviour: 
There s a suspicion of 'ad-hoe-ness' about the 'explanations'. The whole point is that 
such an account cannot be satisfactory until we can prcdict the child's movements 
from a knowledge of the tensions, vectors and valences which are operative, inde-
pendent of our knowledge of how the child actually behaved. So far we seem reduced 
to inventing valences, vectors and tensions from a knowledge of the child's behaviour. 
(Sprott, p. 249; our italics) 

122 
CHA PTER 4 
Lakatos (1970, p. 175) refined this terminology, calling a the-
ory that failed the first requirement ad hoc l , and one that failed 
the second ad hoc" intending these, of course, as terms of disap-
proval. By these criteria, the theories that Velikovsky, Medawar, 
and Hubbard advanced in response to anomalous data arc proba-
bly ad hoc I' for they seem to make no independent predictions, 
though of course a closer study of those theories might reverse 
that assessment. The Adams-Le Verrier hypothesis, on the other 
hand, is ad hoc in neither sense, because it did make new predic-
tions, some of which were verified by telescopic sightings of 
Neptune. Again, philosophical and intuitive judgment coincides. 
Nevertheless, the adhocness criteria are unsound. 
This unsoundness is evident both on apriori grounds and 
through counter-examples, some of which we consider now. For 
instance, suppose one were examining the hypothesis that a par-
ticular urn contains only white counters, and imagine an experi-
ment in which a counter is withdrawn from the urn at random and 
then, after its colour has been noted, replaced; and suppose that in 
10,000 repetitions of this operation 4,950, say, of the selected 
counters were red and the rest white. This evidence clearly refutes 
the initial hypothesis taken together with the various necessary 
auxiliary hypotheses, and it is then natural to conclude that, con-
trary to the original assumption, the urn contains both red and 
white counters in approximately equal numbers. This inference 
seems perfectly reasonable, and the revised hypothesis appears 
well justified by the evidence, yet there is no independent evi-
dence/hI" it. And if we let the urn vaporize immediately after the 
last counter has been inspected, no such independent evidence 
would be possible. So the hypothesis about the (late) urn's con-
tents is ad hoc I & 2; but for all that, it seems plausible and satisfac-
tory (Howson 1984; Urbach 1991). 
Speculating on the contents of an urn is but a humble form of 
enquiry, but there are many instances in the higher sciences which 
have the same import. Take the following one from the science of 
genetics: suppose it was initially proposed or believed that two 
phenotypic characteristics of a certain plant are inherited in accor-
dance with Mendel's principles, through the agency of a pair of 
independently acting genes located on different chromosomes. 
Imagine now that plant-breeding experiments throw up a surpris-

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
123 
ing number of plants carrying both phenotypes, so that the origi-
nal hypothesis of independence is rejected in favour of the idea 
that the genes are linked on the same chromosome. Again, the 
revised theory would be strongly confirmed, and established as 
acceptable merely on the evidence that discredited its predecessor, 
without any further, independent evidence. (Fisher 1970, Chapter 
IX, presented an example of this sort.) 
The history of the discovery of Neptune, which we have 
already discussed, illustrates the same point. Adams estimated 
the mass of the hypothetical planet and the elements of its orbit 
by the mathematical technique of least squares applied to all the 
positional observations available on Uranus. Adams's hypothesis 
fitted these observations so well that even belore Neptune had 
been sighted through the telescope or detected on astronomical 
charts, its existence was contemplated with the greatest confi-
dence by the leading astronomers of the day. For instance, in his 
retirement address as president of the British Association, Sir 
John Herschel, after remarking that the previous year had seen 
the discovery of a minor planet, went on: "It has done more. It 
has given us the probable prospect of the discovery of another. 
We see it as Columbus saw America from the shores of Spain. 
Its movements have been felt, trembling along the far-reaching 
I ine of our analysis, H·ith a certainty hardly il!j(:rior to that ol 
ocular demonstration". And the Astronomer Royal, Sir George 
Airy, who was initially inclined to believe that the problem with 
Uranus would be resolved by introducing a slight adjustment to 
the Inverse-Square law, spoke of "the extreme prohahility of now 
di scovering a new planet in a very short time" (quoted by Smart, 
p. 6 1; our italics). Neptune was indecd discovered within a very 
short time. 
There is a more general objection to the idea that hypothe-
ses are unacceptable if they are ad hoc. Imagine a scientist who 
is interested in the conjunction of the hypotheses t & a, whose 
implication e can be checked in an experiment. The experi ment 
is performed with the result e', incompatible with e, and the 
scientist ventures a new theory t & a', which is consistent with 
the observations. And suppose that either no new predictions 
follow or none has been confirmed, so that the new theory is 
ad hoc. 

124 
CHAPTER 4 
Imagine that another scientist, working without knowledge of 
his colleague's labours, also wishes to test t & a, but chooses a dif-
ferent experiment for this purpose, an experiment with only two 
possible outcomes: either e or -e. Of course, he obtains the latter, 
and having done so, must revise the refuted theory, to t & a I, say. 
This scientist now notices that e I follows from the new theory and 
performs the orthodox experiment to verify the prediction. The 
new theory can now count a successful prediction to its credit, so 
it is not ad hoc. 
But this is strange. We have arrived at opposite valuations of 
the very same theory on the basis of the very same observations, 
breaching at the same time what we previously called the 
Equivalence Condition and showing that the standard adhocness 
criteria are inconsistent. Whatever steps might be taken to resolve 
the inconsistency, it seems to us that one element ought to be 
removed, namely, the significance that the criteria attach to the 
order in which the theory and the evidence were thought up by a 
particular scientist, for this introduces into the principles of theo-
ry evaluation considerations concerning the state of scientists' 
minds that are irrelevant and incongruous in a methodology with 
pretensions to obj~ctivity. No such considerations enter the corre-
sponding Bayesian evaluations. 
The Bayesian approach, incidentally, explains why people 
often react with instant incredulity, even derision, when certain ad 
hoc hypotheses are advanced. Is it likely that their amusement 
comes from perceiving, or even thinking they perceive, that the 
hypotheses lead to no new predictions? Surely they are simply 
struck by the utter implausibility of the claims. 
Independent Evidence 
The adhocness criteria are formulated in terms that refer to 'inde-
pendent' evidence, yet this notion is always left vague and intu-
itive. How can it be made more precise? Probabilistic 
independence cannot fit the case. For suppose theory h was 
advanced in response to a refutation bye' and that h both explains 
that evidence and makes the novel prediction e". It is the general 
opinion, certainly shared by Popperians, and also a consequence 
of Bayes's theorem, that e II confirms h, provided it is sufficiently 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
125 
improbable, relative to already available information. As dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter, such confirmation occurs, in partic-
ular, when pre II I h & e ') > pre II Ie'). But this inequality can hold 
without e!l and e' being independent in the probabilistic sense. 
Logical independence is also not the point here, for e!l might 
be independent from e' in this sense through some trivial differ-
ence, say, by relating to a slightly different place or moment of 
time. And in that case, e" would not necessarily confirm or add 
credibility to h. For, as is intuitive, new evidence supports a theo-
ry significantly only when it is significantly different from known 
results, not just trivially different in the logical sense described. It 
is this intuition that appears to underlie the idea of independence 
used in the adhocness criteria. 
That 'different' or 'varied' evidence supports a hypothesis 
more than a similar volume of homogeneous evidence is an old 
and widely held idea. As Hempel (1966, p. 34) put it: "the confir-
mation of a hypothesis depends not only on the quantity of the 
favourable evidence available, but also on its variety: the greater 
the variety, the stronger the resulting support". So, for example, a 
report that a stone fell to the ground from a certain height in such-
and-such time on a Tuesday is similar to that relating to the stone's 
fall on a Friday; it is very different, however, from evidence of a 
planet's trajectory or of a fluid's rise in a particular capillary tube. 
But although it is often easy enough to classify particular bodies 
of evidence as either similar or varied, it is not easy to give the 
notions a precise analysis, except, in our view, in probabilistic 
terms, in the context of Bayesian induction. 
The similar instances in the above list are such that when one 
of them is known, any other would be expected with consider-
able confidence. This recalls Francis Bacon's characterisation of 
similarity in the context of inductive evidence. He spoke of 
observations "with a promiscuous resemblance one to another, 
insomuch that if you know one you know all" and was probably 
the first to point out that it is superfluous to cite more than a 
small, representative sample of such observations in evidence 
(see Urbach 1987, pp. 160-64). We are not concerned to give an 
exhaustive analysis of the intuitive notion, which is probably too 
vague for that to be possible, but are interested in that aspect of 
evidential similarity that is pertinent to confirmation. Bacon's 

126 
CHAPTER 4 
observations seem to capture this aspect and we may interpret 
his idea in probabilistic terms by saying that if two items of evi-
dence, e2 and e\, are similar, then P(e2 I e\) ,., 1; when this con-
dition holds, e2 provides I ittle support for any hypothesis if e \ 
has already been cited as evidence. When the pieces of evidence 
are dissimilar, then P(e2 I e \) is significantly less than I, so that 
e2 now does add a useful amount of confirmation to any already 
supplied by e\. Clearly this characterization allows for similarity 
to be analysed in terms of degree. 
To summarize, the non-Bayesian way of appraising hypothe-
ses, and thereby of solving the Duhem problem, through the 
notion of adhocness is ungrounded in epistemology, has highly 
counter-intuitive consequences, and relies on a concept of inde-
pendence amongst items of evidence that seems unsusceptible to 
analysis, except in Bayesian terms. In brief, it is not a success. 
4.h 
Designing Experiments 
Why should anyone go to the trouble and expense of performing 
a new experiment and of seeking new evidence? The question has 
been debated recently. For example, Maher (1990) argues that 
since evidence can neither conclusively verify nor conclusively 
refute a theory, Popper's scientific aims cannot be served by gath-
ering fresh data. And since a large part of scientific activity is 
devoted to that end, if Maher is right, this would constitute yet 
another serious criticism of Popper's philosophy. Of more concern 
to us is Miller's claim (1991, p. 2) that Bayesian phi losophy 
comes up against the same difficulty: 
If e is the agent's total evidence, then P(h I e) is thc value of his prob-
ability and that is that. What incentive does he have to change it, for 
example by obtaining more evidence than he has already? He might 
do so, enabling his total evidence to advance from e to e-; but in no 
clear way would P(h Ie') be a better evaluation of probability than 
P(h I e) was. 
But the purpose of a scientific investigation, in the Bayesian 
view, is not to better evaluate inductive probabilities. It is to 
diminish uncertainty about a certain aspect of the world. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
127 
Suppose the question of interest concerns some parameter. You 
might start out fairly uncertain about its value, in the sense that 
your probability distribution over its range of possible values is 
fairly diffuse. A suitable experiment, if successful, would fur-
nish evidence to lessen that uncertainty by changing the proba-
bility distribution, via Bayes's theorem, making it now more 
concentrated in a particular region; the greater the concentration 
and the smaller the region the better. This criterion has been 
given a precise expression by Lindley (1956), in terms of 
Shannon's characterization of information, and is discussed fur-
ther in Howson 2002. Lindley showed that in the case where 
knowledge of a parameter (3 is sought, provided the density of x 
varies with (3, any experiment in which x is measured has an 
expected yield in information. But, of course, this result is com-
patible with a well-designed experiment (with a high expected 
information yield) being disappointingly uninformative in a par-
ticular case; and by the same token, a poor experiment may be 
surprisingly productive of information. 
In deciding whether to perform a particular experiment, at 
least three other factors should be taken into account: the cost of 
the experiment; the morality of performing it; and the value, both 
theoretical and practical, of the hypotheses one is interested in. 
Bayes's theorem, of course, cannot help here. 
4.i 
Under-Determination and Prior Probabilities 
We pointed out in Chapter 1 that any data are explicable by infi-
nitely many, mutually incompatible theories, a situation that some 
philosophers have called the 'under-determination' of theories by 
data. For example, Galileo carried out numerous experiments on 
freely falling bodies, in which he examined how long they took to 
descend various distances. His results led him to propound the 
well-known law: s = a + ut + ±gt2, where s is the distance fallen by 
the body in time t, and a, 1I and g are constants. Jeffreys (1961, p. 
3) pointed out that without contradicting his own experimental 
results, Galileo might instead have advanced as his law: 

128 
CHAPTER 4 
where t" te, ... , t" are the elapsed times of fall that Galileo record-
ed in each of his experiments; a, u and g have the same values as 
above; and I is any function that is not infinite at any of the val-
ues tl , f2' . . . , tn . Jeffreys's modification therefore represents an 
infinity of alternatives to the orthodox theory, all implying 
Galileo's data, all mutually contradictory, and all making different 
predictions about future experiments. 
There is a similar example due to Goodman (1954; for a live-
ly and illuminating discussion, see Jeffrey 1983, pp. 187-190). He 
noted that the evidence of many green emeralds, under varied cir-
cumstances, would suggest to most observers that all emeralds are 
green; but he pointed out that that hypothesis bears the same rela-
tion to the evidence as does a type of hypothesis that he formulat-
ed as 'All emeralds are grue'. Goodman defined something as 
'grue' when it was either observed before the present time (T = 0) 
and was green, or was not observed before that time and was blue. 
Clearly there are infinitely many grue-type predicates and infi-
nitely many corresponding hypotheses, each associated with a dif-
ferent value of T > O. All the current evidence of green emeralds 
is implied by both the green-hypothesis and the grue variants, yet 
not more than one of the hypotheses could be true. 
As Jeffreys put it, there is always "an infinite number of rules 
that have held in all previous cases and cannot possibly all hold in 
future ones." This is a problem for those non-Bayesian scientific 
methods that regard a theory's scientific value as determined just 
by pre I h) and, in some versions, by Pre). Such philosophical 
approaches, of which Popper's is one example, and maximulll-
likelihood estimation (Chapter 7, section e) another, would have 
to regard the standard law offree fall and Jeffreys's peculiar alter-
natives as equally good scientific theories relative to the evidence 
that was available to Galileo, and similarly with Goodman's 
strange hypotheses concerning emeralds, although these are judg-
ments with which no scientist would agree. 
In the Bayesian scheme, if two theories explain the evidence 
equally well, in the sense that pre I hi) = pre I h), this simply 
means that their posterior probabi I ities are in the sallle ratio as 
their priors. So theories, such as the contrived variants ofGalileo's 
law and the Goodman grue-alternatives, which have the same 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: DETERMINISTIC THEORIES 
129 
relation to the evidence as the orthodox theories and yet are 
received with incredulity, must have much lower prior probabili-
ties. The role of prior probabilities also accounts for the important 
feature of scientific reasoning that scientists often prefer a theory 
that explains the data imperfectly, in the sense that pre I h) < I, to 
an alternative that explains them perfectly. This occurs when the 
better explanatory power of the alternative is offset by its inferior 
prior probability (Jeffreys 1961, p. 4). 
This Bayesian account is of course only partial, for we can pro-
vide no general account of the genesis of prior probabilities. In 
some situations, the prior may simply be the posterior probability 
derived from earlier results and an earlier prior. Sometimes, when 
there are no such results, a prior probability may be created 
through what we know from other sources. Consider, for instance, 
a theory that makes some assertion about a succession of events in 
the development of a human society; it might, for example, say 
that the elasticity of demand for herring is constant over a particu-
lar period, or that the surnames of all future British prime minis-
ters and American presidents will start with the letter B. These 
theories could possibly be true, but are immensely unlikely to be 
so. And the reason for this is that the events they describe are the 
causal effects of numerous, independent processes, whose separate 
outcomes are improbable. The probability that all the processes 
will turn out to favour one of the theories in question is therefore 
the product of many small probabilities and so is itself very small 
indeed (Urbach 1987b). But the question of how the probabilities 
of the causal factors are estimated remains. This could be answered 
by reference to other probabilities, in which case the question is 
just pushed one stage back, or else by some different form of rea-
soning. For instance, the 'simplicity' of a hypothesis has been 
thought to have an influence on its initial probability. This and 
other possibilities are discussed in Chapter 9. 
4.j I Conclusion 
The various, mostly familiar aspects of scientific reasoning that 
we have examined have all shown themselves to correspond nat-

130 
C HAPTER 4 
urally to aspects of Bayesian logic, whereas non-Bayesian 
accounts fail more or less completely. So far, we have concentrat-
ed chiefly on deterministic theories. We shall see in the next and 
following chapters that the Bayesian approach applies equally 
well to statistical reasoning. 

CHAPTER 5 
Classical Inference: 
Significance Tests and 
Estimation 
In the last chapter, we showed how leading aspects of scientific 
rcasoning are illuminated by reference to Bayes's theorem, con-
fining our attention, however, mainly to deterministic theories. 
We now consider theories that are not deterministic but proba-
bilistic, or statistical. From the Bayesian viewpoint the division is 
artificial and unnecessary, the two cases differing only in regard 
to the probability of the evidence relative to the theory, that is, 
pre I h), which figures in the central theorem: when h is determin-
istic, this probability is either I or 0, depending on whcther h 
entails e or is refuted by it; when h is statistical, pre I h) typically 
takes an intermediate value. The uniform treatment that this 
affords is unavailable in non-Bayesian methodologies, whose 
advocates have instead developed a specific system, known as 
Classical Statistical inference or sometimes as Frequentism, to 
deal with statistical theories. 
This system, with its ' significance tests', 'confidence inter-
vals' , and the rest, swept the board for most of thc twentieth cen-
tury, and its influence is still considerable. The challenge to 
Bayesian methodology posed by Frequentism requires an answer, 
and this we shall give in the present and succeeding chapters. 
5.a 
Falsificationism in Statistics 
The simple and objective mechanism by which a hypothcsis may. 
under certain circumstances, be logically refuted by observation-
al evidence could never work with statistical hypotheses, for these 
ascribe probabilities to possible events and do not say of any that 
they will or will not actually occur. The fact that statistical theo-
ries have a respected place in science and are regularly tested and 

132 
CHAPTER 5 
evaluated through experiment is therefore an embarrassment to 
the methodology of falsificationism. In consequence, defenders 
of that methodology have tried to take account of statistical theo-
ries by modifying its central dogma. 
The modified idea acknowledges that a statistical hypothesis 
is not strictly falsifiable, and what it proposes is that when an 
event occurs to which the hypothesis attaches a sufficiently 
small probability, it should be deemed false; scientists, Popper 
said, should make "a methodological decision to regard highly 
improbable events as ruled out-
as prohibited" and he talked of 
hypotheses then being "practically falsified" (1959a, p. 191). 
The mathematician and cconomist Cournot (1843, p. ISS) 
expressed the samc idea when he said that events of sufficient 
improbability "are rightly regarded as physically impossible". 
But is it right? After all, a distinctive feature of statistical 
hypotheses is that they do not rule out cvents that they class as 
improbable. For example, the Kinetic Theory attaches a tiny prob-
ability to the event of ice spontaneously forming in a hot tub of 
water, but does not rule it out; indeed the fact that the theory 
reveals so strange an event as a possibility, contrary to previous 
opinion, is one of its especially interesting features. And even 
though this particular unlikely event may never materialize, 
immensely improbable events, which no one would regard as 
refuting the Kinetic Theory, do occur all the time, for instance, the 
spatial distribution at a particular moment of the molecules in this 
jug of water. 
Or take the simple statistical theory that we shall frequently 
use for the purpose of illustration, which claims of some particu-
lar coin that it has a physical probability, constant from throw to 
throw, of 1 of landing heads and the same probability of landing 
tails (the coin is said then to be 'fair'). The probability of any par-
ticular sequence of heads and tails in, say, 10,000 tosses of the 
coin is 2 - 10.000, a minuscule value, yet it is the probability of every 
possible outcome of the experiment, one of which will definitely 
occur. The implication of the Cournot-Popper view that this defi-
nite occurrence should be regarded as physically impossible is 
clearly untenable. 

C LASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
133 
S.b 
Fisherian Significance Tests 
Fisher was inspired by both the falsificationist outlook and the ideal 
of objectivity when, building on the work of Karl Pearson and WS. 
Gossett (the latter, writing under the pen name' Student'), he devel-
oped his system of significance tests for testing statistical theories. 
Fisher did not postulate a minimal probability to represent physical 
impossibility, and so avoided the problem that destroys the 
Cournot-Popper approach. His proposal, roughly speaking, was 
that a statistical hypothesis should be rejected by experimental evi-
dence when it is, on the assumption of that hypothesis, contained in 
a certain set of outcomes that are relative~v unlikely, relative, that is, 
to other possible outcomes of the experiment. 
Before assessing how well they are suited to their task, let us 
set out more precisely the nature of Fisher's significance tests, 
which we shall illustrate using, as the hypothesis under test (what 
Fisher called the null hypothesis), the fair-coin hypothesis men-
tioned above. To perform the test, an experiment must be devised: 
in our example, it will involve flipping the coin a predetermined 
number of times, say 20, and noting the result; this result is then 
analysed in the following four stages. 
1 First, specify the outcome ,Ipace, that is, all the results that 
the experiment could have produced. In our example, this would 
normally be taken to comprise the 220 possible sequences of 20 
heads or tails. (We examine the assumptions underlying the spec-
ification of any outcome space in the next section when we dis-
cuss 'stopping rules'.) The result of a coin-tossing experiment 
would not normally be reported as a point in the outcome space 
just described but would be summarized in some numerical form, 
and for the purpose of our example, we shall select r, the number 
of heads in the outcome. Such a numerical summary when used 
in a significance test is known as a test-statistic; it is formally a 
random variable, as defined in Chapter 2. (We shall presently dis-
cuss the basis upon which test-statistics are chosen.) 
2 Next, calculate the probability, relative to the null hypoth-
esis, of each possible value of the test-statistic-its sampling 
distribution. In general, if the probability of getting a head in a 

134 
C HAPTER 5 
coin-tossing experiment is p, and of getting a tail is q, then r heads 
will appear in n tosses of the coin with probability "C,p'q"-,. I In 
the present case, p = q = ~ and n = 20. The required probabilities 
can now be directly calculated; they are shown in Table 5.1 and 
also displayed graphically below. 
TABLE 5.1 
The Probabilities of Obtaining r Heads in a Trial consisting of 20 
Tosses of a Fair Coin 
Number oj' 
Heads (r) 
Proba/Jilitl' 
----------
0 
9 X 10 7 
1 
1.9x10 5 
2 
2 x 10 4 
3 
0.0011 
4 
0.0046 
5 
0.0148 
6 
0.0370 
7 
(J.(l739 
8 
0.1201 
9 
0.1602 
10 
0.1762 
0.2 
Probability. 
given the 
0.1 
null hypothesis 
0.0 
o 
5 
Number oj' 
Heads (r) 
1 1 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
10 
Number of heads 
Probability 
0.1602 
0.1201 
0.0739 
0.0370 
(l.0148 
0.0046 
0.0011 
2 x 10-4 
1.9 X 10-5 
9 x 10-7 
15 
in 20 throws of the coin 
20 
I This familiar fact is demonstrated in standard statistics textbooks. "C, is equal to 
(/I') 
(11-1')' 1") 

C LASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
135 
3 The third stage of Fisher's analysis requires us to look at all 
the results which could have occurred and which, relative to the 
null hypothesis, are, as Fisher put it, "more extreme than" the result 
that did occur. In practice, this vague expression is interpreted prob-
abilistically, the requirement then being that we examine possible 
outcomes of the trial which, relative to the null hypothesis, have a 
probability less than or cqual to the probability of the actual out-
come. We should then calculate the probability (p*) that the exper-
imental result will fall within this group. (p* is often called the 
p-vallle of the result.) 
To illustrate, suppose our experiment produced 4 heads and 16 
tails, which we see from the table occurs, if the null hypothesis is 
true, with probability 0.0046. The results with less or equal prob-
ability to this are r = 4,3,2, 1,0 and r = 16,17,18,19,20 and 
the probability of anyone of them occurring is the sum of their 
separate probabilities, viz: 
p * = 2 x (0.0046 + (>.00 II + 2 x 10 4 + 1. 9 x 10 5 + 9 x 10 7) = 
0.012. 
4 A convention has grown up, following Fisher, to reject the 
null hypothesis just in case p * ,;:; 0.05. However, some statisticians 
recommend 0.0 I or even 0.00 I as the critical probability. The crit-
ical probability that is adopted is called the significance level of 
the test and is usually labelled n. I f an experimental result is such 
that p* ,;:; n , it is said to be significant at the n significance level, 
and the null hypothesis is said to be rejecled al Ihe (J. (or I ()()CJ. 
percent) level. 
In our example. the coin produced 4 heads when flipped 20 
times, corresponding to p* = 0.012; since this is below 0.05. the 
null hypothesis should be rejected at the 0.05 or 5 percent level. 
But a result of6 heads and 14 tails, withp* = 0.115, would not be 
significant, and so the null hypothesis should then not be rejected 
at that level. 
This simple example illustrates the bare bones of Fisher's 
approach. It is, however, not always so easy to apply in practice. 
Take the task often treated in statistics textbooks of testing 
whether two populations have the same means, for instance, 

136 
C HA PTER 5 
whether two groups of children have the same mean IQ. It may not 
be feasible to take measurements from every child, in which case, 
the recommended procedure is to select children at random from 
each of the groups and compare their IQs. But to perform a signif-
icance test on the results of this sampling one needs a test-statistic 
with a determinate and known distribution and these are often dif-
ficult to find. A solution was found in the present case by 'Student', 
who showed that provided the experimental samples were suffi-
ciently large to ensure approximate normality, the so-called t-statis-
tic2 has the appropriate properties for use in a significance test. 
Which Test-Statistic? 
Fisher's theory as so far expounded is apparently logically incon-
sistent. This is because different random variables may be defined 
on any given outcome space, not all of them leading to the same 
conclusion when used as the test-statistic in a significance test; 
one test-statistic may instruct you to reject some hypothesis when 
another tells you not to. 
We can illustrate this very simply in relation to our coin-toss-
ing experiment. We there chose the number of heads in the out-
come as the test-statistic, which, with 20 throws of the coin, takes 
values from 0 to 20. Now define a new statistic, r', with values 
from 0 to 18, derived from the earlier statistic by grouping the 
results as indicated in Table 5.2. In this slight modification, the 
outcome 5 heads and the outcome J 0 heads are counted as a si n-
gle result whose probability is that of obtaining either one of 
these; similarly, for the results J 4 and J 5 heads. This new statistic 
is artificial, having no natural meaning or appeal, but according to 
the definition, it is a perfectly proper test-statistic. 
It will be recalled that previously, with the number of heads as 
the test-statistic, the result 6 heads. J 4 tails was not significant at 
the 0.05 level. It is easy to see that using the modified statistic, 
this result now is significant at that level (p* = 0.049). Hence 
Fisher's principles as so far described tell us both to reject and not 
to reject the null hypothesis, which is surely impossible. Clearly 
2 See Section 6.c for morc dctails of the I-statistic. 

:::LASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
137 
fABLE 5.2 
fhe Probability Distribution of the " -Statistic 
-----
Value (~l 
Value of 
Statistic (r') 
Probability 
Statistic (r') 
Probability 
------------.-
0(0 heads) 
9 x 10 7 
10 (I I heads) 
0.1602 
1 (I heads) 
1.9 x lO S 
II (12 heads) 
0.1201 
2 (2 heads) 
2 x 10-4 
12 (13 heads) 
0.0739 
3 (3 heads) 
0.0011 
13 (14 or IS heads) 
0.0518 
4 (4 heads) 
0.0046 
14 (16 heads) 
0.0046 
5 (6 heads) 
0.0370 
15 (17 heads) 
0.0011 
6 (7 heads) 
0.0739 
16 (18 heads) 
2 x 10 4 
7 (8 heads) 
0.1201 
I 7 (19 heads) 
1.9xlO s 
8 (9 heads) 
0.1602 
18 (20 heads) 
9 x 10-7 
9 (5 or 10 heads) 
0.1910 
----- - -
est-statistics need some restriction that will ensure that all per-
nissiblc ones lead to similar conclusions. And any such restric-
ion must be recommended by more than the consistency it 
)rings; it must produce the right consistent result, if there is one, 
or the right reasons, if there are any. 
'he Chi-Square Test 
'\ striking illustration of the difficulties posed by the multiplic-
ty of possible test-statistics is the chi-square (or X 2) goodncss-
If-fit test, which bulks large in the literature and is widely used 
o test hypotheses that ascribe probabilities to several different 
ypes of event, for example, to the outcomes of rolling a partic-
dar die. Suppose the die were rolled n times and landed with a 
ix, five, etc. showing uppermost with frequencies 06' 0 S , ••• , 
),. Ifp, is the probability that the null hypothesis ascribes to the 
,utcome i, then np, is the expected Fequency (E) of that out-
ome. The null hypothesis is tested by the following so-called 
hi-square statistic: 

138 
CHAPTER 5 
the sum being taken over all the possible outcomes of the trial. 
Karl Pearson discovered the remarkable fact, very helpful for 
its application to significance tests, that thc probability distribu-
tion of this statistic is practically independent of the unknown 
probabilities and of 11 and is dependent just on the number, v, of 
the test's so-called degrees of Fee do Ill, where v = J - J, and J is 
the number of separate cells into which the outcome was divided 
when calculating X2. The probability density distributions of X2, 
for various values of v , are roughly as follows: 
v = 5 
o 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
We may illustrate the x2-test with a simple example. Let the 
null hypothesis assert that a particular dic is 'true', that is, has 
equal probabilities, of t, constant from throw to throw, of falling 
with each of its sides uppermost. Now consider an experiment 
involving 600 rolls of the die, giving the results, say: six (90),flve 
(91 ),jhur (125), Three (85), two (116), one (93). 
To perform a ch i-square test, we must calculate X" for these 
data, as follows (E = 600 X _(1 = 100, for each i): 
I 
1 
I 
X2 = 100 [(100 - 90)2 + (100 - 91)2+(100-125)2 + 
(100 - 85)2 + (100 -
11 6)2 + (100 - 93)2] = 13.36. 
Since the outcome involves six cells, the number of degrees of 
freedom is five and, as can be roughly gauged from the above 
sketches and more precisely established by consulting the appro-

CLASSICAL INFERENC E SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
139 
priate tables, the probability of obtaining a value of X2 as large or 
larger than 13.36 is less than 0.05, so the result is significant, and 
the null hypothesis must therefore be rejected at the correspon-
ding significance level. 
Chi-square tests are also used to test theories asserting that 
some population has a particular, continuous probability distribu-
tion, such as the normal distribution. To test such a theory, the 
range of possible results of some sampl ing trial would be divided 
into several intervals and the numbers of subjects falling into each 
would be compared with the 'expected' number, proceeding then 
as with the examplc of the die. 
Although the test has been much further developed and with 
great technical ingenuity, it is, we believe, vitiated by the absence 
of any principled rule for partitioning the outcomes into separate 
intervals or cells, for not all partitions lead to the same inferences 
when the significance test is applied. For instance, in our die-
rolling example, if we had based X" on just three cells, formed, 
say, by combining thc pairs of outcomes [sLt,five], [four, three], 
and (two, one], the result would not now be significant at the 5 
percent level. 
This problem is rarely taken up in expositions of the chi-
square test. When it is, it is resolved by considerations of conven-
ience, not epistemology. For instance, Kendall and Stuart ( 1979, 
p. 457) argued that the class boundaries should be drawn so that 
each cell has the same probability (relative to the null hypothesis) 
of containing the experimental outcome, and they defended this 
rule on the epistemically irrelevant grounds that it is "perfectly 
definite and unique". But it is not even true that the equal-proba-
bility rule leads to a unique result, as we can see from our last 
example. We there considered partitioning the outcomes of the 
die-rolling experiment into three pairs: there are in fact fifteen 
distinct ways of doing this, all satisfying the equal-probability 
rule, and only two of them render the results significant at the 5 
percent level. 
The complacency of statisticians in the face of this difficul-
ty is remarkable. Although Hays and Winkler (1970, p. 195) 
warn readers repeatedly and emphatically that "the arrangement 
into population cLass intervals is arbitrary", their exposition 
proceeds without recognizing that this renders the conclusions 

140 
CHAPTER 5 
of a chi-square test equalZv arbitrary. Cochran (1952, p. 335) 
claimed that the problem is a "minor" one, which merely calls for 
"more standardization in the application of the test". But stan-
dardization would only institute the universal application of arbi-
trary principles and would not address the central problem of the 
chi-square test, which is how to set it on a firm epistemic basis. 
No such basis appears to exist, and in view of this, the test should 
be abandoned. 
It might be argued that, despite its epistemic difficulties, 
there are strong indications that the chi-square test is sound, 
because the conclusions that are in practice drawn from it gen-
erally fit so well with intuition. In many cases, intuition is 
indeed satisfied but the test can also produce quite counter-intu-
itive inferences, and once one such inference has been seen, it is 
easy to generate more. Suppose, for instance, that the above trial 
with the die had given the results: six (123), five (100), jintr 
(100), three (100), two (100), one (77). In a test of the hypothe-
sis that the die was true, X2 takes the value 10.58, which is not 
significant at the 5 percent level, and any statistician who adopt-
ed this as the critical value would not be obliged to reject the 
null hypothesis, even though the results of the trial tell us pretty 
clearly that it is quite wrong. 3 
In the examples we have so far considered, only large values 
of X2 were taken as grounds for rejecting a hypothesis. But for 
Fisher both extremities of any test-statistic's distribution were 
critical. In his view, a null hypothesis is "as definitely disproved" 
when the observed and the expected frequencies are very similar, 
leading to a very small X2, as it is when the frequencies are 
sharply discrepant and X2 is large (Fisher 1970, Section 20). This 
forms the basis of Fisher's famous criticism of Mendel's experi-
mcntal results, which we discussed above in 4.e. Those results, he 
said, were "too good to be true", that is to say, although they 
seemed to be in close accord with Mendelian theory, and were 
usually taken to be so, they corresponded to X2 values that were 
sufficiently small to imply its rejcction in a significance test. For 
Fisher the chi-square test had to override intuitions in this case. 
But this is not the universal opinion amongst classical statisti-
.> Good 1981 , p.161 . makes this point. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIG NIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATIO N 
141 
cians. For example, Stuart (1954) maintained that a small X2 is 
critical only if all "irregular" alternatives to the null hypothesis 
have been ruled out, where the irregularity might involve "varia-
tions due to the observer himself", such as "all voluntary and 
involuntary forms offalsification". Indeed, the Fisherian idea that 
a null hypothesis can be tested in isolation, without considering 
rival hypotheses, is not now widely shared and the predominant 
form of the significance test, that of Neyman and Pearson, which 
we discuss shortly, requires hypotheses to be tested against, or in 
the context of, alternative hypotheses. 
Sufficient Statistics 
It is sometimes claimed that consistency may be satisfactorily 
restored to Fisher's significance tests by restricting test-statistics 
to so-called minimal-sl!lficient statistics, because of their standard 
interpretation as containing all the information that is relevant to 
the null hypothesis and none that is irrelevant. We shall argue, 
however, that this interpretation is unavailable to Fisher, that there 
are no grounds for excluding irrelevant information from a test, 
and that the difficulty confronting Fisherian principles is uncon-
nected with the amount of information in the test-statistic, but lies 
elsewhere. 
Let us first examine the concept of a sufficient statistic. 
Some statistics clcarly abstract more information from the out-
comes than others. For instance, tossing a coin four times will 
result in one of the sixtecn sequences of heads and tails 
(HHHH) , (THHH), . . . , (TTTT), and a statistic that assigns dis-
tinct numbers to each element of this outcome space preserves 
all the information produced by the experiment. But a statistic 
that records only the number of heads thereby discards informa-
tion, so if you knew only that it took the value 3, say, you could 
not determine from which of the four different outcomes con-
taining 3 heads it was derived. Whether some of the discarded 
information is relevant to an inference is a question addressed 
by the theory of sufficiency. 
A sample statistic, t, is said to be sufficient, relative to a 
parameter of interest, 8, if the probabi lity of any particular mem-
ber of the outcome space, given t, is independent of 8. In our 

142 
CHAPTER 5 
example, the statistic representing the number of heads in the out-
come is in fact sufficient for 8, the physical probability ofthe coin 
to land heads, as can be simply shown. The outcome space of the 
coin-tossing experiment consists of sequences x = x I' ... , x"' 
where each Xi denotes the outcome either heads or tails, and 
P(r: I t) is given as follows, remembering that, since the value of t 
is logically implied by x, P("( & t) = P(r:): 
P(x & t) 
P(r:) 
W (1 - 8)" - , 
P(x I t) =-P(t)--
= P(t) = ;'-C,-(), (I -- fJ)" - , 
"C , 
Since the binomial term, "C" is independent of 8, so is P(r: I t) ; 
hence, t is sufficient for 8. 
It seems natural to say that if P(r: I t) is the same whatever the 
parameter value, then x "can give us no information about 8 that 
the sufficient statistic has not already given us" (Mood and 
Graybill 1963, p. I 68). Certainly Fisher (1922, p. 3 16) understood 
sufficiency that way: "The Criterion of Sufficiency", he wrote, is 
the rule that "the statistic chosen should summarize the whole of 
the relevant information supplied by the sample". But natural as it 
seems, this interpretation is unavailable to Fisher, for a hypothe-
sis subjected to one of his significance tests may be rejected by 
one sufficient statistic and not by another. Our coin-tossing exam-
ple illustrates this, for the statistic that summarizes the outcome 
as the number of heads in the sample, and the statistic that assigns 
separate numbers to each member of the outcome space are both 
sufficient, as is the artificial statistic r', described above, though 
these statistics do not generally yield the same conclusion when 
used in a Fisherian test of significance. 
Since the sufficiency condition does not ensure a unique con-
clusion, the further restriction is sometimes argued for (for exam-
ple by Seidenfeld 1979, p. 83) that the test-statistic should be 
minima/-sufficient; that is, it should be such that any further 
reduction in its content would destroy its sufficiency. A minimal-
sufficient statistic is thought of as containing all the information 
supplied by the sample that is relevant, and none that is irrelevant. 
But this second restriction has received no adequate defence; 
indeed it would be surprising if a case could be made for it, for if 
information is irrelevant, it should make no difference to a test, so 
there should be no need to exclude it. It is curious that, despite the 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATIO N 
143 
almost universal lip service paid to the sufficiency condition, the 
principal statistics that are in practice used in significance tests-
the X2, t and F statistics- are none of them sufficient, let alone 
minimal-sufficient (Pratt 1965, pp. 169-1 70). 
The idea of restricting admissible statistics according to their 
information content seems in any case misconceived as a way of 
saving Fisherian significance tests. For Neyman (1952, pp. 
45-46) has shown that where the null hypothesis describes a con-
tinuous probability density distribution over the space, there may 
be pairs of statistics that are related by a I-I transformation, such 
that only one ofthem leads to the rejection (at a specified signif-
icance level) of the null hypothesis. Since these statistics neces-
sarily carry the same information, there must be some other 
source of the trouble. 
S.c 
Neyman-Pearson Significance Tests 
Fisher's significance tests were designed to provide for the statis-
tical case something akin to the falsification available in the deter-
ministic case; hence his insistence that the tests should operate on 
isolated hypotheses. But as we indicated earlier, statistical 
hypotheses cannot be refuted and, as we show later (Section 5.d), 
Fisher's own analysis of and arguments for a quasi-refutation are 
quite unsatisfactory. For this reason, Neyman felt that a different 
epistemic basis was required for statistical tests, in particular, one 
that introduces rival hypotheses into the testing process. The ver-
sion of significance tests that he and Pearson developed resem-
bled Fisher's however, in according no role to prior or posterior 
probabilities of theories, for they were similarly opposed to 
Bayesian methodolo!:,'Y. 
In setting out the Neyman-Pearson method, we shall first 
consider the simplest cases, where only two hypotheses, h I and 
h2' are in competition. Neyman-Pearson tests permit two kinds 
of inference: either a hypothesis is rejected or it is accepted. And 
such inferences are subject to two sorts of error: you could 
regard h I as false when in fact it is true, or accept hi (and, hence, 
reject h2 ) when it is false. When these errors can be distin-
guished by their gravity, the more serious is called a type 1 error 

144 
CHAPTER 5 
and the less serious a type II error. The seriousness of the two 
types of error is judged by the practical consequences of acting 
on the assumption that the rejected hypothesis is false and the 
accepted one true. For example, suppose two alternative 
hypotheses concerning a food additive were admitted, one that 
the substance is safe, the other that it is highly toxic. Under a 
variety of circumstances, it would be less dangerous to assume 
that a safe additive was toxic than that a toxic one was safe. 
Neyman and Pearson, adapting Fisher's terminology, called the 
hypothesis whose mistaken rejection is the more serious error 
the null hypothesis, and where the errors seem equally serious, 
either hypothesis may be so designated. 
The possibilities for error are summed up in Table 5.3. 
TABLE 5.3 
Decision 
True Hypothesis 
Reject hi 
Error 
Accept hi 
/ 
Error 
The Neyman-Peason approach aims to minimize the chance of 
committing both types of error. We will examine the Neyman-
Pearson approach through an example borrowed from Kyburg 
( 1974, pp. 26- 35). The label on a particular consignment of tulip 
bulbs has been lost and the purchaser cannot remember whether it 
was the one that contained 40 percent of the rcd- and 60 percent 
of the yellow-flowering sort, or 40 percent of the yellow and 60 
percent of the red. We shall designate these possibilities h I and h:, 
respectively, and treat the former as the null hypothesis. An exper-
iment to test these hypotheses might involve planting a predeter-
mined number of bulbs, say 10, that have been randomly selected 
from the consignment, and observing which grow red and which 
yellow. The testing procedure is similar to Fisher's and involves 
the following steps. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
145 
First, specify the outcome space, which in the present case 
may be considered to comprise 2 10 sequences, each sequence indi-
cating the flower-colour of the tulip bulb that might be selected 
first, second, and so on, down to the tenth. Next, a test-statistic 
that summarizes the outcome in numerical form needs to be stip-
ulated, and in this example we shall take the number of reds 
appearing in the sample for this purpose. (We discuss the basis for 
these arbitrary-seeming stipulations below.) Thirdly, we must 
compute the probabil ities of each possible value of the test-statis-
tic, relative to each of the two rival hypotheses. If, as we shall 
assume, the consignment of tulip bulbs is large, the probabil ity of 
selecting r red-flowering bulbs in a random sample of n is approx-
imated by the familiar binomial function 
11 Crpl"q 11 - r. We are 
assuming here that the probability, p, of selecting a red-flowering 
bulb is constant, an assumption that is more approximately true, 
the larger the population of bulbs. In the present case, h I corre-
sponds to p = 0.40, and h] to p = 0.60. The sampling distributions 
for the imagined trial, relative to the two hypotheses, are given in 
Table 5.4 and displayed graphically, below. 
TABLE 5.4 
The Probabilities of Selecting r Red- and (10 - r) Yellow-flowering 
Tulips 
Outcome 
hi 
h, 
(Red, Ye/hJH) 
(p = 0.40) 
(p = 0.60) 
0,10 
0.0060 
0.0001 
1,9 
0.0403 
0.0016 
2, 8 
0.1209 
0.0106 
3, 7 
0.2150 
0.0425 
4,6 
0.2508 
0.1115 
5, 5 
0.2006 
0.2006 
6,4 
0.1115 
0.2508 
7, 3 
0.0425 
0.2150 
8,2 
0.0106 
0.1209 
9,1 
0.0016 
0.0403 
10, 0 
0.0001 
0.0060 
- -

146 
CHAPTER 5 
0.25 
0.20 
Probability 
0.15 
relative to 
h, and h, 
0.10 
0.05 
0.00 b~::::::::~----r-'----r-""---r-~~~~ 
o 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
The number of red tulips in a sample of 10 
Finally, the Neyman-Pearson method calls for a rule that will 
determine when to reject the null hypothesis. Consider the possi-
bility of rejecting the hypothesis just in case 6 or more red-flow-
ering plants appear in the sample. Then, if hi is true, the 
probability of a rejection may be seen from the table to be: 0.111 5 
+ 0.0425 + 0.0106 + 0.0016 + 0.0001 = 0.1663, and this is there-
fore the probability of a type I error associated with the postulat-
ed rejection rule. This probability is called, as before, the 
significance level of the test, or its size. The probability of a type 
II error is that of accepting h I when it is false; on our assumption 
that one of the two hypotheses is true, this is identical to the prob-
abil ity of rejecting h.' when it is true, which may be calculated 
from the tablc as 0.3664. 
The povver of a test is defined as I - P(type II error) and is 
regarded by advocates of this approach as a measure of how far 
the test 'discriminates' between the two hypotheses. It is also the 
probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is false, and in 
the present case has the value 0.6336. 
In selecting the size and power of any test, a natural ideal 
might seem to be to try to minimize the former and maximize the 
latter, in order to reduce as far as possible the chances of both 
types of error. We shall, in due course, consider whether an ideal 
couched in terms of type I and type II errors is suited to inductive 
reasoning. We have to note straightaway, though, that the ideal is 
incoherent as it stands, for its twin aims are incompatible: in most 
cases, a diminution in size brings with it a contraction in power, 
and vice versa. Thus, in our example, if the rejection rule were 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
147 
changed and hi rejected in the event of at least 7 red tulips in the 
sample, the size of the test would be reduced from 0.1663 to 
0.0548, but its power would also be lower - 0.3823, compared 
with 0.6336. We see then that while the revised test has a smaller 
size, this advantage (as it is judged) is offset by its smaller power. 
For this reason, Neyman and Pcarson proposed instead that one 
first fix the size of a test at an appropriate level and, thus con-
strained, then maximize its power. 
Randomized Tests 
It is generally held amongst classical statisticians that the size of 
a significance test should not exceed 0.05 and, for a reason we 
shall describe later, practitioners are often exhorted always to 
employ roughly the same significance levels. But with the meth-
ods introduced so far the size of a test cannot always be chosen at 
will. For this purpose, randomized tests have been devised, which 
Kyburg has lucidly explained in the context of the example we 
have been discussing. Suppose a test of size 0.10 were desired. 
Let the two tests considercd abovc bc labelled I and 2. As wc 
showed, they have thc following characteristics: 
TABLE 5.5 
Probability ola 
Pmbability ola 
Ope I error 
type 11 ermr 
P01,l'er 
Test I 
0.1663 
0.3664 
0.6336 
Test 2 
0.0548 
0.6177 
0.3823 
Imagine, now, a third test which is carried out in the following 
manner: a pack of 200 cards, of which 119 are red and 81 black, 
is well shuffled, and one of these cards is then randomly select-
ed. If the selected card is black, test I is applied, and if red, test 
2. This mixed or randomized test has the required size of 0.10, 
given by 

148 
CHAPTER 5 
81 
119 
x 0.1663 + -
x 0.0548 = 0.100. 
200 
200 
The corresponding probability of a type II error is similarly cal-
culated to be 0.5159; so the power of the mixed test is 0.484l. 
Readers might be surprised by the implication that inspecting 
a piece of coloured card, whose causal connexion to the tulip con-
signment is nil, can nevertheless provide an insight into its com-
position. Randomized tests are rarely if ever used, but they form 
a proper part of the Neyman-Pearson theory, so any criticism that 
they merit can quite correctly be re-directed to the Neyman-
Pearson theory in general. 
The Choice of Critical Region 
An advantage that Neyman-Pearson significance tests enjoy over 
Fisher's is that they incorporate in a quite natural way a feature that 
Fisher seems to have adopted arbitrarily and in deference merely 
to apparent scientific practice, namely, to concentrate the critical 
region in (one or both of) the tails of the sampling distribution of 
outcomes. Fisher's reasoning seems to have been that evidence 
capable of rejecting a hypothesis must be very improbable and 
should lie in a region of very low probability (see Section 5.d). But 
Neyman pointed out that by this reasoning, Fisher could equally 
well have chosen for the rejection region a narrow band in the cen-
tre of a bell-shaped distribution as a broader band in its tails. 
By contrast, in the Neyman-Pearson approach, the critical 
region is uniquely determined, according to a theorem known as the 
Fundamental Lemma. This states that the critical region of maxi-
mum power in a test of a null hypothesis, h I' against a rival, h2' is 
the set of points in the outcome space that satisfies the inequality: 
P(x I h 1) 
-- _. 
~k, 
PV .. ·I h) 
where k is a constant that depends on the hypotheses and on 
the significance level.4 The probabilities may also be densities. 
4 Strictly speak ing. the likelihoods P{y I h I). ?(x I h cJ should not be expressed 

CLASSICAL INFERENC E SIGNIFICANC E TESTS AND ESTI MATION 
149 
The lemma embraces randomized tests, the critical region then 
comprising those of the component non-randomized tests, which 
are selected at random, as already described. 
Neyman-Pearson Tests and Sufficient Statistics 
N eyman-Pearson tests have another fortunate consequence, 
namely, that for them sufficient statistics do contain all the rele-
vant information. For if hI and h 2 ascribe different values to a 
parameter 8, and if t is a sufficient statistic relative to the out-
comes x = XI' ... , xn' then, by definition, P(, I t) is independent of 
8, and it follows almost directly that 
P(X I hi) 
P(x I h2) 
Pet I hi) 
pet I h2) 
The above lemma tells us that the left-hand ratio does not 
exceed some number k; hence, the same holds also for the right-
hand ratio. So if the outcome were summarized in terms of t, 
rather than x, the region of maximum power would comprise 
the same outcomes, and consequently, none of the information 
in X that is omitted from t is relevant to the significance test 
inference. 
S.d 
Significance and Inductive Significance 
'The null hypothesis was rejected at such-and-such a significance 
level' is a technical expression that simply records that an experi-
mental result fell in a certain designated 'rejection region' of the 
outcome space. But what does it mean as an inductive conclusion 
about the hypothesis? There are three principal views on this 
amongst advocates of the significance test. None, we shall argue, 
is in the least satisfactory. 
here as conditional probabilities. for thcse presuppose that the hypotheses them-
selves have a probability. something thai classical statisticians strenuously deny. 
Hence, they are sometimes written P(x: Ii) or L(x I Ii). Bayesians. of course. need 
have no such qualms. 

ISO 
CHAPTER 5 
Fisher's View 
Fisher took the process of logical refutation as the model for his 
significance tests. This is apparcnt in his frequently voiced claim 
that such tests could "disprove" a theory (for example, 1947, p. 
16), and that "when used accurately, [they] are capable of reject-
ing or invalidating hypotheses, in so far as these are contradicted 
by the data" (1935; our italics). 
Fisher seems to be saying here that statistical theories may 
actually be falsified, though, of course, he knew full well that this 
was impossible, and in his more careful accounts he took a differ-
ent line. 5 The force of a test of significance, he said (1956, p. 39), 
"is logically that of the simple disjunction: Either an exceptional-
ly rare chance has occurred, or the theory of random distribution 
[i.e., the null hypothesis] is not true". But in thus avoiding an 
unreasonably strong interpretation, Fisher fell back on one that is 
unhelpfully weak, for the significant or critical results in a test of 
significance are by definition improbable, relative to the null 
hypothesis. Inevitably, therefore, a significant result is either a 
"rare chance" (an improbable event) or the null hypothesis is 
false, or both. And Fisher's claim amounts to no more than this 
empty truism. 6 
Significant Results and Decisions to Act 
Neyman and Pearson proposed what is now the most widely 
adopted view, namely, that on 'accepting' a hypothesis after a sig-
nificance test, one should act as if one believed it to be true, and 
if one 'rejects' it, one's actions should be guided by the assump-
tion that it is false, "without", as Lindgren (i 976, p. 306) put it, 
"necessarily being convinced one way or the other". Neyman and 
Pearson (1933, p. 142) defended their rule by saying that although 
; The careless way that Fisher sometimes dcscribed the inductive meaning of a 
significant result is often encountered in statistics texts. For example, Bland 
(1987, p. 158) concludes from one such result "that the data are not cOllsistent 
with the null hypothesis"; he then wanders to the further conclusion that the 
alternative hypothesis is "morc likely". 
(, Hacking 1965, p.81, pointed this out. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
151 
a significance test "tells us nothing as to whether in a particular 
case h is true"7, nevertheless 
it may often be proved that if we behave according to ... [the rule], 
then in the long run we shall reject h when it is true not more, say, 
than once in a hundred times [when the significance level is 0.0 I], 
and in addition we may have evidence that we shall reject h sufficient-
ly often when it is false [i.e., when the test's power is sufficiently 
large ]. 
This is a surpnsIng argument to encounter in this context. 
After ali, the signif icance test idea was born out of the recogni-
tion that events with probability p cannot be proved to occur with 
any particular frequency, let alone with frequency p; indeed, they 
may never occur at all. This is acknowledged tacitly in the above 
argument, through the proviso "in the long run", a prevarication 
that suggests some largish but practicaliy accessible number, yet 
at the same time also hints at the indefinite and infinite. The for-
mer suggestion is, as we have said, unsustainable; the latter would 
turn the argument into the unhelpful truism that with a signifi-
cance level of 0.01, we would reject a true null hypothesis with 
probability 0.01. Either way, the argument does not uphold the 
Neyman-Pearson rejection rule. 
There are also objections to the idea of acti ng as if a hypoth-
esis were definitely true or defi nitely false when one is not con-
vinced one way or the other. If, to go back to our earlier 
example, one were to reject the hypothesis that the tulip con-
signment contained 40 percent of the red variety and then act as 
if it were definitely false, there would be no incentive to repeat 
the experiment and every incentive to stake all one's worldly 
goods, and whatever other goods one might possess, on a wager 
offered at any odds on the hypothesis being true. The idea is clear-
lyabsurd. 
Neyman (1941 , p. 380), on the other hand, argued that there 
are in fact occasions when it is reasonable to behave as if what one 
believed to be fal se were actually true, and vice versa, citing the 
7 These are our italics. Neyman's view that no inductive inferences arc licensed 
by sampling information is discussed in Section S.f.2 below. 

152 
CHAPTER 5 
purchase of holiday insurance as a case in point. In making such 
a purchase, he said, "we surely act against our firm belief that 
there wi II be no accident; otherwise, we would probably stay at 
home". This, however, seems a perverse analysis of the typical 
decision to take out insurance. We surely do not firmly believe 
that there will be no accident when we go away, but regard the 
eventuality as more or less unlikely, depending on the nature of 
the holiday, its location, and so forth; and the degree of risk per-
ceived is reflected in, for example, the sum we are prepared to lay 
out on the insurance premium. 
Another example that is sometimes used to defend the idea of 
acting as if some uncertain hypothesis were true is industrial qual-
ity control.g 
The argument is this. Suppose an industrialist would lose 
money by marketing a product-run that included more than a 
certain percentage of defective items. And suppose product-runs 
were successively sampled, with a view to testing whether they 
were of the loss-making type. In such cases, there could be no 
graduated response, it is claimed, since the product-run can 
cither be marketed or not; but, the argument goes, the industri-
alist could be comforted by the thought that "in the long run" of 
repeatedly applying the same significance test and the same 
decision rule, only about, say, S percent of the batches marketed 
will be defective, and that may be a financially sustainable fail-
ure rate. 
But this argument does not succeed, for the fact that only two 
actions are possible does not imply that only two beliefs can be 
entertained about the success of those actions. The industrialist 
might attach probabilities to the various hypotheses and then 
decide whether or not to market thc batch by balancing those 
probabilities against the utilities of the possible consequences of 
the actions, in the manner described by a branch of learning 
known as Decision Theory. Indeed, this is surely the more plausi-
ble account. 
X Even some vigorous opponents of the Neyman-Pearson method, such as, 
A. W. F. Edwards ( 1972, p. 176) accept this defence. 

CLASSICAL INFERENC E: SIG NIFICANC E TESTS AND ESTIMATIO N 
153 
Significance Levels and Inductive Support 
The fact that theories are not generally assessed in the black-and-
white terms of acceptance and rejection is acknowledged by many 
classical statisticians, as we see from attempts that have been 
made to find in significance tests some graduated measure of evi-
dential support. For example, Cramer ( 1946, p. 421- 23) wrote of 
results being "almost significant", "significant" and "highly sig-
nificant", depending on the value ofthe test-statistic. Although he 
cautiously added that such terminology is "purely conventional", 
it is clear that he intended to suggest an inverse relationship 
between the strength of evidence against a null hypothesis and the 
significance level that would just lead to its rejection. 9 
Indeed, he implies that when this significance level exceeds 
some (unspecified) value, the evidence ceases to have a negative 
impact on the null hypothesis and starts to support it; thus, when 
the X2 value arising from some of Mendel's experiments on pea 
plants was a good way from rejecting Mendel's theory at the 5 
percent level, Cramer concluded that "the agreement must be 
regarded as good", and, in another example, when the hypothesis 
would only be rejected if the significance level were as high as 
0.9, Cramer said that "the agreement is very good". 
Classical statisticians commonly try to superimpose this sort 
of notion of strength of evidence or inductive support on their 
analyses. For instance, Weinberg and Goldberg (1990, p. 291): 
"The test result was significant, indicating that H I ... was a more 
plausible statement about the true value of the population mean 
. . . than [the null hypothesis] Hr/'. The words we have italicised 
would, of course, be expected in a Bayesian analysis, but they 
have no legitimacy or meaning within classical philosophy. And 
the gloss which the authors then add is not any clearer or better 
founded: "all we have shown is that there is reason to believe that 
[HI is true]". And, of the same result, which was very improbable 
according to the null hypothesis and significant at the 0.0070 
q The significance level that. for a given result, would j ust lead to the rejection 
of a null hypothesis is also called the p-value of that result, as we stated earlier. 
"The lower the p-value, the less plausible this null hypothesis . .. and the more 
plausible are the alternatives" (Wood 2003, p. 134). 

154 
CHAPTER 5 
level, they say that it is "quite inconsistent with the null hypothe-
sis" (ihid., p. 282). 
But the result is not "inconsistent" with the null hypothesis, in 
the logical sense of the term. And as no useful alternative sense 
seems to exist-certainly none has been suggested-the term in 
this context is quite misleading. And the project of linking signif-
icance levels with strength of evidence has no prospect of success. 
To prove such a link, you would need to start with an appropriate 
concept of evidential or inductive support; in fact, no such con-
cept has been formulated in significance test terms, nor is one 
likely to be. This, for two compelling reasons. First, the conclu-
sions of significance tests often flatly contradict those that an 
impartial scientist or ordinary observer would draw. Secondly, 
significance tests depend on factors that it is reasonable to regard 
as extraneous to judgments of evidential support. We deal with 
these objections in the next three subsections. 
A Well-Supported Hypothesis Rejected in a 
Significance Test 
The first objection was developed in considerable generality by 
Lindley, 1957, and is sometimes referred to as Lindley's Paradox. 
We illustrate it with our tulip example. Table 5.6 lists the numbers 
of red tulips in random samples of size n that would just be suffi-
cient to reject the null hypothesis at the 0.05 level. 
It will be noticed that as 11 increases, the critical proportion of 
red tulips in the sample that would reject h / at the 0.05 level 
approaches more closely to 40 percent, that is, to the proportion 
hypothesized in hI" Bearing in mind that the only alternative to h / 
that the example allows is that the consignment contains red tulips 
in the proportion of 60 percent, an unprejudiced consideration 
would clearly lead to the conclusion that as 11 increases, the sup-
posedly critical values support h / more and more. 
The table also includes information about the power of each 
test, and shows that the classical thesis that a null hypothesis may 
be rejected with greater confidence, the greater the power of the 
test is not borne out; indeed, the reverse trend is signalled. 
Freeman (1993, pp. 1446-48) is one of the few to have pro-
posed a way OLlt of these difficulties, without abandoning the 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
155 
TABLE 5.6 
The sample size.n 
10 
20 
50 
100 
1,000 
10,000 
100,000 
The numher (~/" red 
tulips (expressed as a 
proportion o/"n) that 
wouldjust reject hi 
at the 5% level. 
0.70 
0.60 
0.50 
0.480 
0.426 
0.4080 
0.4026 
------,_ .. . 
---------
The power of the 
test against h2 
0.37 
0.50 
0.93 
0.99 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
~--- ---,. 
-------
basic idea of the significance test. He argued that Neyman and 
Pearson should not have formulated their tests as they did, by 
first fixing a significance level and then selecting the rejection 
region that maximizes power. It is this that renders them vulner-
able to the Lindley Paradox, because it means that the inductive 
import of a rejection at a given significance level is the same 
whatever the size of the sample. Instead, Freeman proposes that 
the primary role should go to the likelihood ratio-
that is, the 
ratio of the probabilities of the data relative to the null and an 
alternative hypothesis. And he argued that in a signif icance test, 
the rule should be to rej ect the null hypothesis if the likelihood 
ratio is less than some f ixed value, on the grounds that this 
ensures that the probabil ities of hoth the type I and the type II 
errors dimini sh as the sample size increases. 
Freeman's rule is a version of the so-called Likelihood 
Principle, according to which the inductive force of evidence is 
contained entirely in the likelihood ratios of the hypotheses under 
consideration. This principle, in fact, follows directly from Bayes's 
theorem (see Section 4.c) and is unavoidable in Bayesian inductive 
inference. Freeman (1993, p. 1444) too regards this principle as 
essential-"the one secure foundation for all of statistics"-but 

156 
CHAPTER 5 
neither he nor any other non-Bayesian has proved it. And this is not 
surprising, for they strenuously deny that hypotheses have proba-
bilities, and it is precisely upon this idea that the Bayesian proof 
depends. The likelihood principle therefore cannot save signifi-
cance tests from the impact of Lindley's Paradox, which, it seems 
to us, shows unanswerably and decisively that inferences drawn 
from significance tests have no inductive significance whatever. 
We now consider a couple more aspects of significance tests 
which reinforce this same point. 
The Choice of Null Hypothesis 
In a Neyman-Pearson test you need to choose which of the com-
peting hypotheses to treat as the null hypothesis, and the result <;If 
that choice has a bearing on which is finally accepted and which 
rejected. Take the tulip example again: if an experiment showed 50 
red-flowering plants in a random sample of 100, then h, (40 per-
cent red) would be rejected at the 0.05 level if it were the null 
hypothesis, and h2 (60 percent red) would be accepted. But with h] 
as null hypothesis, the opposite judgment would be delivered! It 
will be recalled that the role of null hypothesis was filled by con-
sidering the desirability, according to a personal scale of values, of 
certain practical consequences of rejecting a true hypothesis; and 
where the hypotheses were indistinguishable by this practical yard-
stick, the null hypothesis could be designated arbitrarily. But prag-
matic and arbitrary decisions such as these have no epistemic 
meaning and cannot form the basis of inductive support. 
Another sort of influence on significance tests that is also at 
odds with their putative role in inductive reasoning arises through 
the stopping rule. 
The Stopping Rule 
Significance tests are performed by comparing the probability of 
the outcome obtained with the probabilities of other possible out-
comes, in the ways we have described. Now the space of possible 
outcomes is created, in part, by what is called the stopping rule; 
this is the rule that fixes in advance the circumstances under 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
157 
which the experiment should stop. Our trial to test the fair-coin 
hypothesis, for example, was designed to stop after the coin had 
been flipped 20 times. Another stopping rule for that experiment 
might have instructed the experimenter to end it as soon as 6 
heads appeared, which would exclude many of the outcomes that 
were previously possible and introduce an infinity of new ones. 
Expressed as the number of heads and tails in the outcome, the 
possibilities for the two stopping rules are: (20,0), (19,1), ... , 
(0,20), in the first case, and (6,0), (6,1), (6,2), ... , and so on, in 
the second. The two stopping rules have surprisingly and pro-
foundly different effects. 
Consider, for example, the result (6,14), which could have 
arisen with either stopping rule. When the rule was to stop after 6 
heads, the null hypothesis would be rejected at the 0.05 level. This 
is shown as follows: the assumed stopping rule produces the result 
(6, i) whenever (5, i), appearing in any order, is then succeeded by 
a head. Thus, relative to the fair-coin hypothesis, the probability 
of the result (6, i) is given by it5CS( ~ )5( ~ Y X ~ . Table 5.7 shows 
the sampling distribution. 
TABLE 5.7 
The Probabilities of Obtaining i Tails with a Fair Coin in a Trial of 
Designed to Stop after 6 Heads Appear. 
--------
Outcome 
Outcome 
(H,T) 
Probability 
(H,T) 
Probabi/i(v 
6,0 
0.0156 
6, II 
0.0333 
6,1 
0.0469 
6,12 
0.0236 
6,2 
0.0820 
6,13 
0.0163 
6,3 
0.1094 
6,14 
0.0 III 
6,4 
0.1230 
6,15 
0.0074 
6,5 
0.1230 
6,16 
0.0048 
6,6 
0.1128 
6,17 
0.0031 
6,7 
0.0967 
6,18 
0.0020 
6,8 
0.0786 
6,19 
0.0013 
6,9 
0.0611 
16,20 
0.0008 
6,10 
0.0458 
6,21 
0.0005 
etc. 
etc. 

158 
CHAPTER 5 
We see from the table that the results which are at least as 
improbable as the actual one are (6,14), (6, J 5), ' . . , and so on, 
whose combined probability is 0.0319. Since this is below the 
critical value of 0.05, the result (6,14) is significant at this level 
and the null hypothesis should therefore be rejected. It will be 
recalled that when the stopping rule predetermined a sample size 
of 20, the very same result was not significant. 10 So in calculating 
the significance of the outcome of any trial, it is necessary to 
know the stopping rule that informed it. 
We have considered just two stopping rules that could have 
produced some particular result, but any number of others have 
that same property. And not all of these other possibilities rest the 
decision to stop on the outcomes themselves, which some statis-
ticians regard as not quite legitimate. For instance, suppose that 
after each toss of the coin, you drew a playing card at random 
from an ordinary pack, with the idea of calling the trial off as soon 
as the Queen of Spades has been drawn. This stopping rule intro-
duces a new outcome space, which will lead to different conclu-
sions in certain cases. Or suppose the experimenter intends to 
continue the trial until lunch is ready: in this case, the sampling 
distribution could only be worked out with complex additional 
information about the chance, at each stage of the trial, that prepa-
rations for the meal are complete. 
The following example brings out clearly how inappropriate it 
is to involve the stopping rule in the inductive process: two scien-
tists collaborate in a trial, but are privately intent on different stop-
ping rules; by chance, no conflict arises, as the result satisfies 
both. What then are the outcome space and the sampling distribu-
tion for the trial? To know these you would need to discover how 
each of the scientists would have reacted in the event of a dis-
agreement. Would they have conceded or insisted, and if they had 
put up a fight, which of them would have prevailed? We suggest 
that such information about experimenters' subjective intentions, 
their physical strengths and their personal qualities has no induc-
tive relevance whatever in this context, and that in practice i! is 
never sough! or even contemplated. The fact that significance 
10 This illustration of the stopping-rule clfeet is adapted from Lindley and 
Phillips 1976. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
159 
tests and, indeed, all classical inlerence models require it is a 
decisive objection to the whole approach. 
Whitehead (1993) is one of the few to have defended the stop-
ping rule as an essential component of the inductive process. He 
denies that the subjective intention underlying the stopping rule is 
irrelevant, illustrating his point with a football match, of all 
things, in which the captain of one side is allowed to decide when 
the game should finish, and in fact blows the whistle when his 
team is 1-0 ahead. Whitehead remarks that learning the stopping 
rule here would reduce his high opinion of the winning side. To 
revert to a case where classical statistics can more obviously be 
applied, this is analogous to an experimenter, who is predisposed 
in favour of one of the hypotheses, deciding to stop sampling as 
soon as more red than yellow tulips have flowered. If the final 
count were, say, I red and ° yellow, we would indeed not be much 
swayed in favour of the experimenter's preferred hypothesis, but 
not because of the known bias, or the stopping rule, rather, we 
suggest, because of the smallness of the sample. To believe other-
wise runs into the objection we raised earlier, namely, that if the 
biased experimenter were working with an impartial, or different-
ly biased colleague, who was actuated by a different stopping rule, 
you would have to delve into the personal qualities of the experi-
menters in order to discover the outcome space of the experiment, 
and hence the inductive significance of the result. 
Experimenters' prejudices can only have inductive signifi-
cance for us if we believe them to have clairvoyant knowledge 
about future samples; but this is just what a random sampling 
experiment effectively precludes. On the other hand, the captain 
in charge of the stopping rule in the hypothetical football match 
does have information about the likely course of the game, since 
he may know the teams' recent form and can observe how well 
each side is presently playing. But a football game is not a random 
sampling experiment, and is therefore an unsuitable example in 
this context. 
Gillies (1990, p. 94) also argued that the stopping rule is an 
essential part of a scientific inference. He claimed that "to those 
who adopt falsificationism (or a testing methodology)" it "seems 
natural and only to be expected" that the stopping rule should in 
general affect a theory's empirical support, because "wherever 

160 
CHAPTER 5 
possible the experimental method should be applied, and this con-
sists in designing and carrying out a repeatable experiment .. . 
whose result might refute h [the null hypothesis]". This, he 
claims, means that the stopping rule is evidentially relevant. 
Tn response, we certainly concede that it can do no harm and 
might do good to repeat an experiment. But why should it be 
repeatable? Many useful and informative tests cannot be repeat-
ed: for example, pre-election opinion polls and certain astronom-
ical observations. Would our confidence in the age of the Turin 
Shroud be any different if the entire cloth had been consumed in 
the testing process, so precluding further tests? Surely not. 
Moreover, in an important sense, no experiment is repeatable, 
for none could ever be done in exactly the same way again. 
Indefinitely many factors alter between one performance of an 
experiment and another. Of course, not all such changes matter. 
For instance, the person who tossed the coin might have worn yel-
low shoes or sported a middle parting; but these are irrelevant, 
and if you called for the experiment to be repeated, you would 
issue no instructions as to footwear or hairstyle. On the other 
hand, whether or not the coin had a piece of chewing gum 
attached to one side, or a strong breeze was blowing when it was 
tossed should be taken into account. The question then is whether 
the stopping rule falls into the first category of irrelevant factors 
or into the second of relevant ones. Gillies (ibid., p. 94) simply 
presumes the latter, arguing, with reference to the coin trial, that 
the "test of h in this case consists of the whole carefully designed 
experimental procedure", and suggesting thereby that this proce-
dure must include reference to the stopping rule. But Gillies nei-
ther states this explicitly nor provides any reason why it should be 
so-unavoidably, in our view. 
We show in Chapter 8 that in the Bayesian scheme thc poste-
rior probabilities in each case are unaffected by the subjective 
intentions implicit in the stopping rules and depend on the result 
alone. Thus, if the experimental result is, for instance, 6 heads, 14 
tails, it does not matter whether the experimenter had intended to 
stop the trial after 20 tosses of the coin, or after 6 heads, or after 
lunch, or after the Queen of Spades has made her entrance, or 
whatever. 

C LASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
161 
S.e 
Testing Composite Hypotheses 
We have, so far, restricted our account of the Neyman-Pearson 
method to cases where just two, specific hypotheses are assumed 
to exhaust the possibilities. But such cases are atypical in practice, 
and we need to look at how Neyman and Pearson extended and 
modified their approach to deal with a wider range of alternative 
hypotheses. They considered, for instance, how to test a hypothe-
sis, h J' that some population parameter, (), has a specific value, say 
(-}J' against the unspecific, composite hypothesis, h2' that () > (}r 
The principle of maximizing the power of a test for a given 
significance level cannot be applied where these are the compet-
ing hypotheses. For, although the situation allows one to deter-
mine a critical region corresponding to any designated 
significance level, as before, the probability of a type II error is 
indeterminate. Neyman and Pearson responded by varying their 
central principle. 
They first of all proposed that in such cases one should choose 
for the critical region one that has maximum power for each com-
ponent of h]. Tests satisfying this new criterion are called 
Uniformly Most Power/it! (UMP). But they ran into the problem 
that, relative to some elements of h 2' the power of UMP tests 
might be very low, indeed, lower than the significance level, in 
which case there would be a greater chance of rejecting the null 
hypothesis when it is true than when it is false. This possibility 
was unacceptable to Neyman and Pearson and to avoid it, they 
imposed the further restriction that the test should be unbiased, 
that is, its power relative to each element of h;} should be at least 
as great as its significance level. 
We can illustrate the idea of tests that are both UMP and unbi-
ased (UMPU) with a simple example. The test will be based on 
the mean, X, of a random sample drawn from a normal population 
with known standard deviation and unknown mean, (). The dia-
gram shows the sampling distributions relative to the null hypoth-
esis h J: (-) = (-}J' and relative to an arbitrary element, hi' of the 
composite alternative hypothesis h2: (-) > (}r 

162 
CHAPTER 5 
AN UMPU TEST 
Power 0' the test 
h. 
h 
[Dotted plJS hatched area) 
Consider a critical region for rejecting hi consisting of points 
to the right of the critical value, xc' The area of the hatched por-
tion is proportional to the significance level. The area under the 
hi-curve to the right of Xc represents the probability of rejecting 
hi if h; is true (and hence, hi false). Clearly, the closer are the 
means specified by hi and hi' the smaller this probability will be. 
But it could never be less than the significance level. In other 
words, the test is U M pu. 
Suppose now that the range of alternatives to the null hypoth-
esis is greater still and that h / A = A, is to be tested against 
h.': H ;;e HI' the standard deviation again being known. A critical 
region located in one tail of the sampling distribution associated 
with h I would not now constitute an unbiased test. But an UMPU 
test can bc constructed by dividing the critical region equally 
between the two tails. This can be appreciated diagrammatically 
and also rigorously shown (see for instance Lehmann 1986). An 
UMPU test thus provides some basis for the two-tailed tests 
implied by Fisher's theory, for which he offered no rationale. 
But UMPU tests are in fact rather academic, since they exist 
in very few situations. And they depart somewhat from the 
Neyman-Pearson ideal of maximum power for a givcn signifi-
cance level, in that the power of such a test can never be deter-
mined; so in particular cases, it may, for all we know, be only 
infinitesimally different from the significance level. More seri-
ously, the modifications introduced to meet the challenge of com-
posite hypotheses are equally afflicted by the various difficulties 
we have shown to discredit even the most uncomplicated form of 
the significance test. 

CLASSICAL INFERENC E SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
163 
5.f 
Classical Estimation Theory 
Scientists often estimate a physical quantity and come thereby to 
regard a certain number, or range of numbers, as a more or less 
good approximation to the true valuc. Significance tests do not in 
general deliver such estimates and the need tor them has prompt-
ed classical statisticians to develop a distinct body of doctrine 
known as Estimation Theory. The theory is classical, in that it pur-
ports to provide objective, non-probabilistic conclusions. It has 
two aspects, namely, point estimation and interval estimation, 
both of which we regard as fallacious, as wc explain in the follow-
. 
. 
mg reView. 
S.t.l . Point Estimation 
Point estimation differs from interval estimation, which we deal 
with below, in offering a single number as the so-called 'best esti-
mate' of a parameter. Suppose a population parameter, such as its 
mean, is in question. The technique for estimating this is to draw a 
random sample of predetermined size, 11, from the population, and 
to measure each element drawn. Then, letting x = x l' ... ,x/1 denote 
the measurements thus derived, the next step is to pick an estimat-
ing statistic, f, this taking the form of a calculable function t =j(.r). 
Finally, the best estimate of the unknown parameter is inferred to 
be to' the value of t yielded by the experiment. But not every sta-
tistic is accepted as an estimator. The authors of this approach to 
estimation have specified certain conditions that any estimator 
must meet; the most frequently mentioned being the conditions of 
sutficieJ1(Y, ul1iJiasedness, consisteJ1(~v and e.Uiciency. We discuss 
these in turn. 
Sufficient Estimators 
It will be recalled from Section S.b, that a statistic I is sufficient 
for f} when P(:r I t) is independent of (1. The present requirement 
is that any estimating statistic should be sufficient in this sense. 
The mean of a random sample satisfies the requirement when it is 

164 
C HAPTER 5 
used to estimate a population mean, but the sample range, for 
example, is not. Nor is the sample median. I I 
Sufficiency is a Bayesian requirement too. Expressed in 
Bayesian terms a statistic, t, is sufficient for e, just in case P(x I t) = 
P(x I t & e), for all e. It follows straightforwardly from Bayes's 
theorem that t is sufficient for e if, and only if, P(8 I t) = p(el x). 
Hence, when a sample statistic is sufficient, it makes no differ-
ence whether you calculate the posterior distribution using it or 
using the full experimental information in x; the results will be the 
same. In other words, a sufficient statistic contains all the infor-
mation that in Bayesian terms is relcvant to 8. 
A compelling intuition tells us that, in evaluating a parameter, 
we should not neglect any relevant information. There is a satis-
factory rationale for this. Suppose you have two bits of informa-
tion, a and h. There arc then three posterior distributions to 
consider: p(e I (I), P(8 I b) and pre I a & h). If these differ, which 
should describe your current belief state? The Bayesian has no 
choice, for P(8 I a) is your distributi on of beliefs were you to learn 
a and nothing else. But you have in fact learned a & h and noth-
ing else. Therefore, your current belief state must be described by 
p(el (I & b), rather than by the other mathematical possibilities. 
The injunction to use all the relevant evidence in an inductive 
inference, which Carnap (1947) called thc Total Evidence 
Requirement, is often considered to be an independent postulate. 
This is true, at any ratc, within classical estimation theory, which 
also has to rely on the intuition, which it cannot prove either, that 
a sufficient statistic captures all the relevant evidence. The intu-
itions are well founded, but their source, in our opinion, is Bayes's 
theorem, applicd unconsciously. 
Unbiased Estimators 
These are defined in terms of the expectation, or expected val ue, 
of a random variable, which is givcn by E(.\) = L XjP(X), the sum 
I I The sample !tIl1ge is the difference between the highest and lowest measure-
ments: if the sample measurements are arra nged in increasing order, and if 11 is 
odd, their mediall is the m iddle element of the series: if II is even, the median is 
the higher of the midd le two elements. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
165 
or in the continuous case, the integral, bcing taken ovcr all possi-
ble values of Xi' We mentioned in Chapter 2 that the expectation 
of a random variable is also callcd the mean of its probability or 
density distribution; when the distribution is symmetrical, its 
mean is also its geometric centre. A statistic is defined as an unbi-
ased estimator of () just in case its expectation equals the parame-
tcr's true value. The idea is often glossed by saying that the value 
of an unbiascd statistic, averaged over repeated samplings, will 
"in the long run", be equal to the parameter being estimated. 12 
Many intuitively satisfactory estimators arc unbiased, for 
instance the proportion of red counters in a random sample is 
unbiased for the corresponding proportion in the urn from which 
it was drawn, and the mean of a random sample is an unbiased 
estimator of the population mean. However, sample variance is 
not an unbiased estimator of population varianee and is generally 
n 
"corrected" by the factor -- . 
n - 1 
But unbiasedness is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condi-
tion for a satisfactory estimation. We may see this through an 
example. Suppose you draw a sample, of predetermined size, from 
a population and note the proportion of individuals in the sample 
with a certain trait, and at the same time, you toss a standard coin. 
We now posit an estimating statistic which is calculated as the 
sample proportion plus k (> 0), if the coin lands heads, and plus k' 
. if it lands tails. Then, if k = - k', the resulting estimator is unbi-
ased no less than the sample proportion itself, but its estimates are 
very different and are clearly no good. If, on the other hand, k' = 
0, the estimator is biased, yet, on the occasions when the coin lands 
tails, the estimates it gives seem perfectly fine. 
Not surprisingly, then, one finds the criterion defended, if at 
all, in terms which have nothing to do with epistemology. The 
usual defence is concerned rather with pragmatics. For example, 
Barnett claimed that, "within the classical approach unbiased-
ness is often introduced as a practical requirement to limit the 
class of estimators" (1973, p. 120; our italics). Even Kendall and 
Stuart, who wrote so confidently of the need to correct biased 
12 See for example Hays 1963, p. 196. 

166 
C HAPTER 5 
estimators, conceded that they had no epistemie basis for this 
censorious attitude: 
There is nothing except convenience to exalt the arithmetic mean 
above other measures of location as a criterion of bias. We might 
equal/v well have chosen the median of the distribution of t or its 
mode as determining the "unbiased" estimator. The mean value is 
used, as always, fbr its mathematical convenience. ( 1979, p. 4; our 
italics) 
These authors went on to warn their readers that "the term 
' unbiased' should not be allowed to convey overtones of a non-
technical nature". But the tendentious nature of the terminology 
makes such misleading overtones hard to avoid. The next criterion 
is also named in a way that promises more than can be delivered. 
Consistent Estimators 
An estimator is defined to be consistent when, as the sample size 
increases, its probability distribution shows a diminishing scatter 
about the parameter's true value. More precisely, a statistic 
derived from a random sample of size n is a consistent estimator 
for e if, for any positive number, E, P( I ( -- e I:s E) tends to I, as 
n tends to infinity. This is sometimes described as f tending prob-
abilistically to e. 
There is a problem with the consistency criterion as described, 
because it admits estimators that are clearly inadmissible. For 
example, if Til is a consistent estimator, so is the estimator, Tn', 
defined as equal to zero for n:s IOili and equal to 7'" for n > 1010. 
Fisher therefore added the further restriction that an admissible 
estimator should, in Rao's words, be "an explicit function of the 
observed proportions only". So, if the task is to estimate a popu-
lation proportion, e, the estimator should be a consistent function 
just of the corresponding sample proportion, and it should be such 
that when the observed and the population proportions happen to 
coincide, the estimator gives a true estimate (Rao 1965, p. 283). 
This adjustment appears to eliminate the anomalous estimators. 
Fisher believed that consistency was the "fundamental criteri-
on of estimation" ( 1956, p. 141) and that non-consistent estima-

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
167 
tors "should be regarded as outside the pale of decent usage 
(1970, p. 11). In this, Neyman (1952, P 188) agreed "perfectly" 
with Fisher, and added his opinion that "it is definitely not prof-
itable to use an inconsistent estimate." 13 Fisher defended his 
emphatic view in the following way: 
as the samples arc made larger without limit, the statistic will usual-
ly tend to some fixed value characteristic of the population, and 
therefore, expressible in terms of the parameters of the population. 
If~ therefore, such a statistic is to be used to estimate these parame-
ters, there is only one parametric function to which it can properly be 
equated. If it be equated to some other parametric function, we shall 
be using a statistic which even from an infinite sample does not give 
a correct value .... (1970, p. 1 1 ) 
Fisher's claim here is that because a consistent estimator con-
verges to some parameter value, it "can properly be equated" to 
that value, and it should be equated to no other value, because, 
if the sample were infinite, it would then certainly give the 
wrong result. This is more assertion than argument and in fact is 
rather implausible in its claims. Firstly, one should not, without 
qualification, equate an unknown parameter with the value 
taken by a statistic in a particular experiment; for, as is agreed 
on all sides, such estimates may, almost certainly will be in 
error, a consideration that motivates interval estimation, which 
we discuss below. Secondly, the idea that a consistent estimator 
becomes more accurate as the sample increases, and perfectly so 
in the limit, implies nothing at all about its accuracy on any par-
tiCLdar occasion. Arguing for an estimator with this idea in mind 
would be like defending the use of a dirty measuring instrument 
on the grounds that if it were cleaner it would be better; in 
assessing a result, we need to know how good the instrument 
was in the experiment at hand, not how it might have performed 
under different conditions. 
And (rebutting Fisher's last point) just as estimates made by 
consistent estimators may be quite inaccurate and clearly wrong, 
those from non-consistent ones might be very accurate and 
13 Presumably this should read: 'estimator'. 

168 
CHAPTER 5 
clearly right. For instance, suppose x + (n - 100)x were chosen 
to estimate a population mean. This odd statistic is non-consis-
tent, for, as the sample size grows, it diverges ever more sharply 
from the population mean. Yet for the special case where n = 100, 
the statistic is equivalent to the familiar sample mean, and gives 
an intuitively satisfactory estimate. 
Efficient Estimators 
The above criteria arc clearly incomplete, because they do not 
incorporate the obvious desideratum that an estimate should 
improve as the sample becomes larger. So, for instance, a sample 
mean that is based on a sample of 2 would be 'sufficient', 'unbi-
ased' and 'consistent', yet estimates of the population mean 
derived from it would not inspire confidence, certainly not as 
much as when there are 100, say, in the sample. This consideration 
is addressed by classical statistics through the efficiency criterion: 
the smaller an estimator's variance about the parameter value, the 
more efficient it is said to be, and the better it is regarded. And 
since the variance of a sample statistic is generally inversely 
dependent on the size of the sample, the efficiency criterion 
reflects the preference for estimates made with larger samples. 
But it is not easy to establish, in classical terms, why efficien-
cy should be a measure of quality in an estimator. Fisher (1970, p. 
12) stated confidently that the less efficient of two statistics is 
"definitely inferior ... in its accuracy"; but since he would have 
strayed from classical principles had he asserted that particular 
estimates were certainly or probably correct, even within a mar-
gin of error, this claim has no straightforward meaning. Kendall 
and Stuart's interpretation is the one that is widely approved. A 
more ctTicient statistic, they argued, will "deviate less, on the 
average, from the true value" and therefore, "we may reasonably 
regard it as better" (1979, p. 7). Now it is true that ife'J and ei2 are 
the estimates delivered by separate estimators on the ith trial and 
if (j is the true value of the parameter, then there is a calculable 
probability that 1 e'I -
f) 1 < 1 e l } 
-
(j I, which will be greater the 
more efficient the first estimator is than the second. Kendall and 
Stuart translate this probability into an average frequency in a 
long run of trials, which, as we already remarked, goes beyond 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AN D ESTIMATION 
169 
logic. But even if the translation were correct, the performance of 
an estimator over a hypothetical long run implies nothing about 
the closeness of a particular estimate to the true value. And since 
estimates are usually expensive and troublesome to obtain and 
often inform practical actions, what is wanted and needed are just 
such evaluations of particular estimates. 
5.f.2. Interval Estimation 
In practice, this demand is evidently met, for estimates are nor-
mally presented as a range of numbers, for example, in the form 
e = a ± b, not as point values, which, as Neyman observed, "it is 
more or less hopeless to expect . .. will ever be equal to the true 
value" (1952, p. 159). Bayesians would qualify an interval esti-
mate by the subjective probability that it contains the true value 
(see the discussion of 'credible intervals' in Section 8.a). 
Neyman's theory of conf idence intervals, developed around 1930, 
and now dominant in the field, was intended to give a classical 
expression to this idea. 
Confidence Intervals 
Consider the task of estimating the mean height, e, of the people 
in a large population, whose standard deviation, LT, is known. A 
sample of some predetermined size, 11, is randomly selected and 
its mean, X, is noted. This mean can take many possible values, 
some more probable than others; the distribution representing this 
situation is approximately normal (the larger the population, the 
closer the approximation) with a mean equal to that of the popu-
lation and a standard deviation given by (~, = CJ 11 
~ 
The sampling distribution plots possible sample means against 
probability densities, not probabilities, and, as explained earlier, 
this signifies that the probability that x lies between any two 
points is proportional to the area enclosed by those points and the 
curve. Because the distribution is essentially normal, it follows 
that, with probability 0.95, 

170 
CHAPTER 5 
----~~--------------~L----------------=------x 
The sampling distribution of means from a population 
with mean fI and standard deviation (J, 
And this implies that, with probability 0,95, 
x - l. 96 cr :5 8:5 X + l. 96 (J , 
n 
/I 
Let 111 be the value of x in a particular experimental sample; 
since fJ and n are known, the terms 111 -
1.96 (J and m + 1.96 (J 
/1 
11 
can be computed. The interval between these two values is called 
a 95 percenl confidence interval for fJ. Clearly there are other con-
fidence intervals relating to different regions of the sampling dis-
tribution, and others, too, associated with different probabilities. 
The probability associated with a particular confidence interval is 
called its confidence coefficient. 
The probability statements given above arc simply deductions 
from the assumptions made and arc unquestionably correct; and 
what we have said about confidence intervals, being no more than 
a definition of that concept, is also uncontroversial. Controversy 
arises only when confidence intervals are assigned inductive 
meaning and interpreted as estimates of the unknown parameter. 
What we shall call the categorical-assertion interpretation and the 
slIbjecli\'e-confidence interpretation are the two main proposals 
for legitimizing such estimates. We deal with these in turn. 
The Categorical-Assertion Interpretation 
This interpretation was first proposed by Neyman and has been 
widely adopted. Neyman said (1937, p. 263) that the "practical 
statistician", when estimating a parameter, should calculate a con-

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIG NIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATIO N 
17 1 
fidence interval and then "state" that the true value lies between 
the two confidence bounds, in the knowledge that (when the con-
fidence coefficient is 0.99) "in the long run he will be correct in 
about 99 percent of all cases". The statistician's statement should 
not signify a belief in its truth, however. Indeed, Neyman (1941, 
p. 379) rejected the very idea of reasoning inductively to a con-
clusion, because he believed that "the mental process leading to 
knowledge .. . can only be deductive". Induction, for Neyman, 
was rather a matter of behaviour, and in the case of interval esti-
mates, the proper outcome was a decision "to behave as if we 
actually knew" that the parameter lies within the confidence 
bounds. 
We have already discussed this interpretation (in Section 5.d) 
in the context of significance tests and argued that typically and 
more reasonably scientists evaluate theories by degree; they do 
not, and, moreover, should not act in the way that Neyman recom-
mended. A further indication that the interpretation is wrong aris-
es from the fact that confidence intervals are not unique, as we 
explain next. 
Competing Intervals 
It is obvious from the sampling distribution of means depicted 
above that indefinitely many regions of that normal distribution 
cover 95 percent of its area. So instead of the usual 95 percent 
confidence interval located at the centre of the distribution, one 
could consider asymmetrical confidence intervals or ones that 
extend further into the tails while omitting smaller or larger strips 
in the centre. Neyman's categorical-assertion interpretation 
requires one to "assert" and "behave as if one actually knew" that 
the parameter lies in each and everyone of this multiplicity of 
possible 95 percent conf idence intervals, which is clearly unsatis-
factory, and indeed, paradoxical. 
Defenders of the interpretation have reacted in two ways, both 
we believe unsatisfactory. The first discriminates between confi-
dence intervals on the basis of their length, and claims that, for a 
given confidence coefficient, the shortest interval provides the best 
estimate. In the words of Hays (1969, p. 290), there is "naturally 

172 
CHAPTER 5 
... an advantage in pinning the population parameter within the 
narrowest possible range with a given probability". By this criteri-
on, the centrally symmetrical interval m ± 1.960;, is the preferred 
95 percent confidence interval for the population mean in the 
example cited above. The preference is based on the idea that the 
width ofa confidence interval is a measure of the 'precision' of the 
corresponding estimate, and that this is a desirable feature. Thus 
Mood (1950, p. 222), when comparing two 95 percent confidence 
intervals, stated that the longer one was inferior, "for it gives less 
precise information about the location" of the parameter. 
But it is not true that the length of a confidence interval meas-
ures its precision. For, consider the interval I a, h I as an estimate 
of e, and the interval I f(a), I(b) I as an estimate off(8). If I is a 
1-1 function, the two estimates are equivalent and must be equal-
ly informative and therefore equally precise. But while the first 
may be the shortest 95 percent confidence interval for e, the sec-
ond might not be the shortest such interval forf(e); this would be 
the case, for instance, whenf(a) = a- I. 
Another difficulty is that different sample statistics may yield 
different minimum-length confidence intervals, a fact that has 
prompted the proposal to restrict interval estimates to those given 
by statistics with the smallest possible variance. It is argued that 
although this new criterion does not guarantee the shortest possi-
ble confidence interval in any particular case, it does at least 
ensure that such intervals "are the shortest on average in large 
samples" (Kendall and Stuart 1979, p. 126). We have already crit-
icized both the long-run justification and the short-length criteri-
on, and since two wrongs don't make a right, we shall leave the 
discussion there. 
Neyman (1937, p. 282) suggested another way of discriminat-
ing between possible confidence intervals. He argued, in a man-
ner familiar from his theory of testing, that a confidence interval 
should not only have a high probability of containing the correct 
value but should also be relatively unlikely to include wrong val-
ues. More precisely: a best confidence interval, I", should be such 
that for any other interval, J, corresponding to the same confi-
dence coefficient, P(8' E J I 8) ~ p(e' E J I 8); moreover, the 
" 
inequality must hold whatever the true value of the parameter, and 
for every value 8' different from e. But as Neyman himself 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
173 
showed, there are no 'best' intervals of this kind for most of the 
cases with which he was originally concerned. 
The Subjective-Confidence Interpretation 
Neyman's categorical-assertion interpretation, contrary to its 
main intention, does, in fact, contain an element that seems to 
imply a scale by which estimates may be evaluated and qualified, 
namely the confidence coefficient. For suppose some experimen-
tally established range of numbers constituted a 90 percent confi-
dence interval for (), rather than the conventionally approved 95 or 
99 percent, we would still be enjoined to assert that () is in that 
range and to act as if we believed that to be true, though with a 
correspondingly modified justification that now referred to a 90 
percent frequency of being correct " in the long run". But if the 
justification had any force (we have seen that it does not), it would 
surely be stronger the lower the frequency of error. So the categor-
ical assertion that () is in some interval must after all be qualified 
by an index running from 0 to 100 indicating how well founded it 
is, and this is hard to distinguish from the index of confidence that 
is explicit in the subjective-confidence interpretation that we deal 
with now. 
In this widely approved position, a confidence coefficient is 
taken to be "a measure of our confidence" in the truth of the state-
ment that the confidence interval contains the true value (for 
example, Mood 1950, p. 222). This has some surface plausibility. 
For consider again the task of estimating a population mean, (). 
We know that in experiments of the type described, () is included 
in any 95 percent confidence interval with an objective probabil-
ity of 0.95; and this implies that if the experiment were performed 
repeatedly, () would be included in such intervals with a relative 
frequency that tends, in the limit, to 0.95. It is tempting, and many 
professional statisticians find it irresistible, to infer from this limit 
property a probability of 0.95 that the particular interval obtained 
in a particular experiment does enclose (). But drawing such an 
inference would commit a logical fallacy. 14 
14 This fallacy is repeated in many statistics texts. For example, Chiang 2003. 
(pp. 138 -39): "The probability that the interval contains II is either zero or one; 

174 
CHAPTER 5 
The subjective-confidence interpretation seems to rely on a 
misapplication of a rule of inference known as the Principle of 
Direct Probability (see Chapter 3), which is used extensively in 
Bayesian statistics. The principle states that if the objective, phys-
ical probability of a random event (in the sense of its limiting rel-
ative frequency in an infinite sequence of trials) is known to be r, 
then, in the absence of any other relevant information, the appro-
priate subjective degree of belief that the event will occur on any 
particular trial is also r. Expressed formally, if the event in ques-
tion is a, and P*(a) is its objective probability, and if ar describes 
the occurrence of the event on a particular trial, the Principle of 
Direct Probability says that P[ar I P*(a) = r] = r, where P is a sub-
jective probability function. 
For example, the physical probability of getting a number of 
heads, K, greater than 5 in 20 throws of a fair coin is 0.86 (see 
Table 5.1 above), that is, P*(K > 5) = 0.86. By the Principle of 
Direct Probability, 
P[(K > 5)r I P*(K > 5) = 0.86] = 0.86. 
That is to say, 0.86 is the confidence you should have that any par-
ticular trial of 20 throws of a fair coin will produce more than 5 
heads. Suppose one such trial produced 2 heads. To infer that we 
should now be 86 percent confident that 2 is greater than 5 would, 
of course, be absurd; it would also be a misapplication of the prin-
ciple. For one thing, if it were legitimate to substitute numbers for 
K, why would such substitution be restricted to its first occurrence 
in the principle? But in fact, no such substitution is allowed. For 
the above equation does not assert a general rule for each number 
K from 0 to 20; the K-tenn is not a number, but a function that 
no intermediate values are possible. What then is the initial probability of 0.95'1 
Suppose we take a large number of samples, eaeh of size /1. For each sampic we 
make a statement that the interval observed from the sample eOl1lains .LI. Some 
of our statements will be true, others will not be. According to [the equation we 
give in the text, above] ... 95 percent of our statements will be true. In reality 
wc take only one sample and make only one statement that the interval contains 
,LI. Thus [sic] we do have confidence in our statement. The mcasure of our con-
fidence is the initial probability 0.95." 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIG NIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
175 
takes different values depending on the outcome of the underly-
ing experiment. 
Mistaking this appears to be the fallacy implicit in the subjec-
tive-confidence interpretation. It is true that the objective proba-
bility of f3 being enclosed by experimentally determined 
95 percent confidence intervals is 0.95. If 11 and 12 are variables 
representing the boundaries of such confidence intervals, the 
Principle of Direct Probability implies that 
and this tells us that we should be 95 percent confident that any 
sampling experiment will produce an interval containing (J 
Suppose now that an experiment that was actually performed 
yielded 1'1 and 1'2 as the confidence bounds; the subjective-
confidence interpretation would tell us to be 95 percent confident 
that 1'1 :5 (}:5 1'2 . But this would commit exactly the same fallacy 
as we exposed in the above counter-example. For I I and 12, like K, 
are functions of possible experimental outcomes, not numbers, 
and so the desired substitution is blocked. IS 
In response, it might be said that the subjective-confidence 
interpretation does not depend on the Principle of Direct 
Probability (a Bayesian notion, anyway), that it is justified on 
some other basis. But we know of none, nor do we think any is 
possible, because, as we shall now argue, the interpretation is fun-
damentally flawed, since it implies that one's confidence in a 
proposition should depend on information that is manifestly irrel-
evant, namely, that concerning the stopping rule, and should be 
independent of prior information that is manifestly relevant. We 
address these two points next. 
The Stopping Rule 
Confidence intervals arise from probability distributions over 
spaces of possible outcomes. Although one of those outcomes 
I) Howson and Oddic 1979 pointed out this misapplication of the principle in 
another context. See also 3.f above. 

176 
CHAPTER 5 
will be actualized, the space as a whole is imaginary, its contents 
depending in part on the experimenters' intentions, embodied in 
the adopted stopping rule, as we explained earlier. Estimating sta-
tistics employed in point estimation are also stopping-rule 
dependent, because the stopping rule dictates whether or not those 
statistics satisfy the various conditions that are imposed on esti-
mators. So, for instance, the sample mean is an unbiased estima-
tor of a population mean if it is based on a fixed, predetermined 
sample size, but not necessarily otherwise. 16 
The criticism we levelled at this aspect of classical inference 
in the context of tests of significance applies here too, and we 
refer the reader back to that discussion. Tn brief, the objection is 
that having to know the stopping rule when drawing an inference 
from data means that information about the experimenters' private 
intentions and personal capacities, as well as other intuitively 
extraneous facts, is ascribed an inductive role that is highly inap-
propriate and counter-intuitive. This is, in a way, tacitly acknowl-
edged by most classical statisticians, who in practice almost 
always ignore the stopping rule and standardly carry out any clas-
sical analysis as i[the experiment had been designed to produce a 
sample of the size that it did, without any evidence that this was 
so, and even when it clearly was not. 
We take up the discussion of the stopping rule again in Chapter 
8, where we show why it plays no role in Bayesian induction. 
Prior Knowledge 
Estimates are usually made against a background of partial 
knowledge, not in a state of complete ignorance. Suppose, for 
example, you were interested in discovering the average height of 
students attending the London School of Economics. Without 
being able to point to results from carefully conducted studies, but 
on the basis of common sense and what you have learned infor-
mally about students and British universities' admission stan-
dards, you would feel pretty sure that this could not be below four 
feet, say, nor above six. Or you might already have made an 
1(, Sec, for example, Lee 1989, p. 213. 

CLASSICAL INFERENCE SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
177 
exhaustive survey of the students' heights, lost the results and be 
able to recall with certitude only that the average was over five 
feet. Now if a random sample, by chance, produced a 95 percent 
confidence interval of3' 10" ± 2", you would be required by clas-
sical principles to repose an equivalent level of confidence in the 
proposition that the students' average height really does lie in that 
interval. But with all you know, this clearly would not be a credi-
ble or acceptable conclusion. 
A classical response to this difficulty might take one of two 
forms, neither adequate, we believe. The first would be to restrict 
classical estimation to cases where no relevant information is 
present. But this proposal is scarcely practicable, as such cases are 
rare; moreover, although a little knowledge is certainly a danger-
ous thing, it would be odd, to say the least, if it condemned its pos-
sessor to continue in this condition of ignorance in perpetuity. A 
second possibility would be to combine in some way informal 
prior information with the formal estimates based on random 
samples. The Bayesian method expresses such information 
through the prior distribution, which then contributes to the over-
all conclusion in a regulated way, but there is no comparable 
mechanism within the confines of classical methodology. 
5.g 
Sampling 
Random Sampling 
The classical methods of estimation and testing that we have been 
considering purport to be entirely objective, and it is for this rea-
son that they call for the sampling distribution of the data also to 
be objective. To this end, classical statisticians require the sample 
that is used for the estimate to have been generated by an impar-
tial, physical process that ensures for each element of the popula-
tion an objectively equal chance of being selected. Here is a 
simple instance of such a process: a bag containing similar coun-
ters, each corresponding to a separate member of the population, 
and marked accordingly, is shaken thoroughly and a counter 
selected blindfold; this selection is repeated the prescribed num-
ber of times, and the population members picked out by the 

178 
CHAPTER 5 
selected counters then constitute a random sample. There are of 
course other, more sophisticated physical mechanisms for creat-
ing random samples. 
What we call the Principle (~l Random Sampling asserts that 
satisfactory estimates can only be obtained from samples that are 
objectively random in the sense indicated. 
Judgment Sampling 
The Principle of Random Sampling may be contrasted with 
another approach, which is motivated by the wish to obtain a rep-
resentative sample, one that resembles the population in all those 
respects that are correlated with the characteristic being meas-
ured. Suppose the aim were to measure the proportion of the pop-
ulation intending to vote Conservative in a forthcoming election. 
If, as is generally agreed, voting preference is related to age and 
socio-economic status, a representative sample should recapitu-
late the population in its age and social class structure; quite a 
number of other factors, such as gender and area of residence, 
would, no doubt, also be taken into account in constructing such 
a sample. A representative sample successfully put together in this 
way will have the same proportion of intending Conservative vot-
ers as the parent population. Samples selected with a view to rep-
resentativeness are also known as purposive, or judgment 
samples; thcy are not random. A kind of judgment sampling that 
is frequently resorted to in market rcsearch and opinion polling is 
known as qllota sampling, where interviewcrs are given target 
numbers ofpcople to interview in various categories, such as par-
ticular social classes and geographical regions, and invited to 
exercise their own good sense in selecting representative groups 
from each specified category. 
Some Objections to Judgment Sampling 
Judgment sampling is held to be unsatisfactory by many statisti-
cians, particularly those of a classical stripe, who adhere to the 
random sampling principlc. Three related objections are encoun-
tered. Thc first is that judgment sampling introduces an undesir-

CLASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
179 
able subjectivity into the estimation process. It does have a subjec-
tive aspect, to be sure, for when drawing such a sample, a view 
needs to be taken on which individual characteristics are correlat-
ed with the population parameter whose value is being sought, and 
which are not: a judgment must be made as to whether a person's 
social class, age, gender, the condition of his front garden, the age 
of her cat, and so forth, are relevant factors for the sampling 
process. Without exhaustively surveying the population, you could 
not pronounce categorically on the relevance of the innumerable, 
possibly relevant factors; there is, therefore, considerable room for 
opinions to vary from one experimenter to another. This may be 
contrasted with random sampling, which requires no individual 
judgment and is quite impersonal and objective. 
The second objection, which is, in truth, an aspect of the first, 
is that judgment samples are susceptible to bias, due to the exper-
imenter's ignorancc, or through the exercise of unconscious, or 
cven conscious, personal prejudices. Yates (1981, pp. 11-16) 
illustrates this danger with a number of cases where the experi-
menter's careful efforts to select representative samples were frus-
trated by a failure to appreciate and take into account crucial 
variables. Such cases are oftcn held up as a warning against the 
bias that can intrude into judgment sampling. 
Sampling by means of a physical randomizing process, on 
the other hand, cannot be affected by a selector's partiality or 
lack of knowledge. On the other hand, it might, by chance, throw 
up samples that are as unrepresentative as any that could result 
from the most ill-informed judgment sampling. This seeming 
paradox 17 is typically turncd into a principal advantage in the 
standard classical response, which says that when sampling is 
random, the probabilities of different possible samples can be 
accurately computed and then systematically incorporated into 
the inference process, using classical estimation methods. But 
jUdgment sampling-so thc third objection goes-does not lend 
itself to objective methods of estimation. 
There is another strand to the classical response, which invokes 
the idea of slratifi'ed rando/11 sampling. This involves partitioning 
17 See below, S.d, for a discussion of Stuart's description of this situation as the 
"paradox of sampling". 

180 
CHAPTER 5 
the population into separate groups, or strata, and then sampling at 
random from each. The classically approved estimate of the popu-
lation parameter is then the weighted average of the corresponding 
strata estimates, the weighting coefficients being proportional to 
the relative sizes of the population and the strata. Stratified random 
sampling seems clearly intended as a way of reducing the chance 
of obtaining seriously unrepresentative samples. But the orthodox 
classical rationale refers instead to the greater 'efficiency' (in the 
sense defined above) of estimates derived from stratified samples. 
For, provided the strata are more homogeneous than the popula-
tion, and significantly different from one another in relation to the 
quantity being measured, estimation is more 'efficient' using strat-
ified random sampling than ordinary random sampling, and so, by 
classical standards, it is better. 
This rationale is however questionable; indeed, it seems quite 
wrong. The efficiency of an estimator, it will be recalled, is a 
measure of its variance. And the more efficient an estimator, the 
narrower any confidence interval based on it. So, for instance, a 
stratified random sample might deliver the 95 percent confidence 
interval 4' 8" ± 3" as an estimate of the average height of pupils 
in some school, while the corresponding interval derived from an 
unstratified random sample (which, by chance, is heavily biased 
towards younger children) might be, say, 3' 2" ± 6". Classical stat-
isticians seem committed to saying that the first estimate is the 
better one because, being based on a more efficient estimating 
method, its interval width is narrower. But this surely misapprais-
es the situation. The fact is that the first estimate is probably right 
and the second almost certainly wrong, but these are words that 
should not cross the lips of a classical statistician. 
Some Advantages of Judgment Sampling 
Judgment sampling has certain practical advantages. A pre-elec-
tion opinion poll, for example, needs to be conducted quickly, and 
this is feasible with judgment sampling; on the other hand, draw-
ing up a random sample of the population, finding the people 
who were selected and then persuading them to be interviewed is 
costly, time consuming, and sometimes impossible, and the elec-
tion might well be over before the poll has begun. Practical COI1-

C LASSICAL INFERENCE: SIGNIFICANCE TESTS AND ESTIMATION 
181 
siderations such as these have established the dominance of quota 
sampling in market research. "Probably 90 percent of all market 
research uses quota sampling and in most circumstances it is suf-
ficiently reliable to provide consistent results" (Downham 1988, 
p. 13). 
A second point in favour of judgment and quota samples is 
that they are evidently successful in practice. Opinion polls con-
ducted by their means, insofar as they can be checked against the 
results of ensuing elections, are mostly more or less accurate, and 
market research firms thrive, their services valued by manufactur-
ers, who have a commercial interest in accurately gauging con-
sumers' tastes. 
A third practical point is that inferences based on non-random 
samples are often confidently made and believed by others; 
indeed they seem inevitable when conclusions obtained in one 
sphere need to be applied to another, as commonly happens. For 
instance, in a study by Peto et al. (1988), a large group of physi-
cians who had regularly taken aspirin and another group who had 
not showed similar frequencies of heart attacks over a longish 
period. Upon this basis, the authors of the study advised against 
adopting aspirin generally as a prophylactic, their implicit and 
plausible assumption being that the doctors taking part in the 
study typified the wider population in their cardiac responses to 
aspirin. Although the rest of the statistical procedures employed in 
the study were orthodox, this assumption was not checked by 
means of random samples taken from the population.l~ 
We consider the question of sampl ing methods again when we 
discuss Bayesian inference in Chapter 8. 
S.h 
Conclusion 
Classical estimation theory and significance tests, in their various 
forms, are still immensely influential; they are advocated in hun-
dreds of books that are recommended texts in thousands of institu-
tions of higher education, and required reading for hundreds of 
IX Smith 1983 makes the same point in relation to another study. On the argu-
ments concerning sampling in this section, see also Urbach 1989. 

182 
CHAPTER 5 
thousands of students. And the classical jargon of 'statistical 
significance', 'confidence', and so on, litters the academic jour-
nals and has slipped easily into the educated vernacular. Yet, as we 
have shown, classical 'estimates' are not estimates in any normal 
or scientific sense, and, like judgments of 'significance' and 'non-
significance', they carry no inductive meaning at all. Therefore, 
they cannot be used to arbitrate between rival theories or to deter-
mine practical policy. 
A number of other objections that we have explored in this 
chapter show, moreover, that classical methods are set altogether 
on the wrong lines, and are based on ideas inimical to scientific 
method. Principal here is the objection that all classical methods 
involve an outcome space and hence a stopping rule, which we 
have argued brings to bear on scientific judgment considerations 
that are highly counter-intuitive and inappropriate in that context. 
And classical methods necessarily introduce arbitrary elements 
that are at variance not only with scientific practice and intuition, 
but also with the objectivist ideals that motivated them. The 
founders of the classical philosophy were seeking an alternative to 
the Bayesian philosophy, which they dismissed as unsuited to 
inductive method because it was tainted by subjectivity. It is there-
fore particularly curious and telling that classical methods cannot 
operate except with their own, hefty subjective input. This was 
frankly confessed, in retrospect, by one of the founders of the 
classical approach: 
Of necessity, as it seemed to us [him and Neyman], we left in our 
mathematical model a gap for the exercise of a more intuitive 
process of personal judgement in such matters ... as the choice of 
the most likely class of admissible hypotheses, the appropriate sig-
nificance level, the magnitude of worthwhile effects and the balance 
of utilities. (Pearson 1966, p. 277) 
Classical distaste for the subjective element in Bayesian inference 
puts one in mind of those who were once accused of taking infi-
nite trouble to strain out a gnat, while cheerfully swallowing a 
camel! 

CHAPTER 6 
Statistical Inference 
in Practice: Clinical Trials 
We have thus far discussed various methodologies in terms suffi-
ciently abstract to have perhaps created the impression that the 
question as to which of them is philosophically correct has little 
practical bearing. But this is far from being the case. We illustrate 
this point in the present chapter by looking at Classical and 
Bayesian approaches to the scientific investigation of causal con-
nections, particularly in agricultural (or 'field') and medical (or 
'clinical') trials. Large numbers of such trials are under way at 
anyone time; they are immensely expensive; and their results may 
exert profound effects on farming and clinical practice. And a fur-
ther practical effect, in the case of clinical trials, is the inconven-
ience to which the participants are put and the risks to which they 
may be exposed. 
6.0 
Clinical Trials: The Central Problem 
A clinical trial is designed with a view to discovering whether and 
to what extent a particular drug or medical procedure alleviates 
certain symptoms, or causes adverse side effects. And a typical 
goal of an agricultural field trial would be to investigate whether 
a putative fertilizer increases the yield of a certain crop, or 
whether a new, genetically engineered potato has improved 
growth qualities. 
Clinical trials typically involve two groups of subjects, all of 
whom are currently sufferi ng from a particular medical condition; 
one of the groups, the test group, is administered the experimen-
tal therapy, while the other, the control group, is not; the progress 
of each group is then monitored over a period. An agricultural 
trial to compare a new variety of potato (A) with an established 

184 
CHAPTER 6 
variety (B) might be conducted in a field that is divided into 
'blocks', and then subdivided into plots, in which a seed of each 
variety is sown. The field might look like this: 
Plot 1 
Plot 2 
Block 1 
A 
B 
Block 2 
A 
B 
Block 3 
A 
B 
Block 4 
A 
B 
The question of causality that is posed in such trials presents a 
special difficulty, for in order to demonstrate, for example, that a 
particular treatment cures a particular disease, you need to know 
not only that people have recovered after receiving the treatment 
but also that those self-same people would not have recovered if 
they hadn't received it. This seems to suggest that to establish a 
causal link you must examine the results of simultaneously treat-
ing and not treating the same patients, under identical circum-
stances, something that is obviously impossible. 
An alternative to this impossible ideal might be to conduct the 
trial with groups of patients who are identical, not in eve,]! 
respect, but just in those respects that are causally relevant to the 
progress of the medical condition under study. Such causally rel-
evant influences are known as prognostic factors. Then, if a test 
group and a control group were properly matched on all the prog-
nostic factors (with the possible exception of the experimental 
treatment itself), and at the end of the trial they exhibited unequal 
recovery rates or differed in some other measure of the symptoms, 
then these variations can clearly be attributed to the experimental 
treatment. A similar type of inference would also be available, 
mutatis mutandis, in an agricultural trial, provided the seeds and 
the plants into which they develop were exposed to the same 
growth-relevant environments. This sort of inference, in which 
every potential causal factor is laid out and all but one excluded 
by the experimental information, is a form of what is traditional-
ly called eliminative induction. 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE: CLINICAL TRIALS 
185 
But the conditions for such an induction cannot be straight-
forwardly set up. For if you wished to ensure that every prognos-
tic factor will be equally represented in the experimental groups 
of a trial, you apparently need a comprehensive list of those fac-
tors. And as Fisher (1947, p. 18) pointed out, in every situation, 
there are innumerably many possible prognostic factors, most of 
which have not even been thought of, let alone tested for rele-
vance; and some of those that have been so tested might have 
been mistakenly dismissed as causally inactive. 
6.b i Control and Randomization 
To meet this difficulty, Fisher distinguished between factors that 
are known to affect the course of the disease, or the growth of the 
crop, and factors whose influence is unknown and unsuspected. 
And he claimed that the misleading effects on the inference 
process of these two kinds of potentially interfering influences 
could be neutralised by the techniques of control and randomiza-
tion, respectively. 
Control 
A prognostic factor has been 'controlled for' in a trial when it is 
distributed in equal measure in both the test and the comparison 
situations. So, for example, a clinical trial involving a disease 
whose progress or intensity is known to depend on the patient's 
age would be controlled for that prognostic factor when the test 
and control groups have similar age structures. Of particular con-
cern in clinical trials is a prognostic factor called the placebo 
effect. This is a beneficial, psychosomatic effect that arises simply 
from the reassuring feel and encouraging expectations that are 
created by all the paraphernalia of white-coated, medical atten-
tion.l The effect is controlled for in clinical trials by creating the 
I Wall (1999) presents many fascinating examples of placebo effects and 
argues convincingly that these operate through the subjects' expectations of 
improvement. 

186 
CHAPTER 6 
same expectations for recovery in both groups of patients, by 
treating them in superficially similar ways. Where two different 
treatments are to be compared, they should be disguised in such a 
way that the participants in the trial have no idea which they are 
receiving. And when there is no comparison treatment, the control 
group would receive a placebo, that is to say, a substance that is 
pharmacologically inert, yet looks and seems exactly like the test 
drug.] 
Agricultural trials are sensitive to variations in soil quality and 
growing conditions. Fisher (1947, p. 64) advised controlling for 
these factors by planting the seeds in soil "that appears to be uni-
form, as judged by [its] surface and texture ... or by the appear-
ance of a previous crop". And the plots on which the planting 
takes place should be compact, in view of "the widely verified 
fact that patches in close proximity are commonly more alike, as 
judged by the yield of crops, than those which are further apart". 
And when seeds are sown in plant-pots, the soil should be thor-
oughly mixed before it is distributed to the pots, the watering 
should be uniform and the developing plants should be exposed to 
the same amount of light (ibid. , p. 41 ). 
Randomization 
So much for the known prognostic factors. What of the unknown 
ones, the so-called' nuisance variables', whose influences on the 
course of an experiment have not been controlled for? These, 
Fisher said, can only be dealt with through 'randomization'. A 
randomized trial is one in which the experimental units are 
assigned at random to the trial treatments. So, for example, in a 
randomized agricultural trial designed to compare the perform-
ance of two types of potato, the plots on which each is grown are 
selected at random. And when testing the efficacy of a drug in a 
randomized clinical trial, patients are allocated randomly to the 
test and control groups. 
2 In trials where the test treatment is not a drug. but some other sort of medical 
or psychological intervention. the placebo takes a correspondingly different 
form. 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE: CLINICAL TRIALS 
187 
This is not the place to discuss the thorny question of what 
randomness really is. Suffice it to say that advocates of random-
ization in trials regard certain repeatable experiments as sources 
of randomness, for example, throwing a die or flipping a coin, 
drawing a card blindly from a well-shuffled pack, or observing the 
decay or non-decay in a given time-interval of a radioactive ele-
ment. Random number tables, which are constructed by means of 
such random processes, are also regarded as providing effective 
ways to perform the randomization. If, on the other hand, experi-
menters formed the experimental groups by allocating patients, 
say, as the spirit moved them, the randomization rule would not 
have been respected, for the allocation process would then not 
have been objectively random in the sense just indicated. 
Fisher's randomization rule is widely viewed as a brilliant 
solution to the problem of nuisance variables in experimental 
design. In the opinion of Kendall and Stuart ( 1983, pp. 120-21), 
it is "the most important and the most influential of [his] many 
achievements in statistics". Certainly it has been influential, so 
much so, that clinical and agricultural trials that are not properly 
randomized are frequently written off as fatally flawed, and regu-
latory bodies will usually refuse to license drugs that have not 
been tested in randomized trials. 
We need to examine the far-reaching claims that are made for 
the virtues of randomization, particularly in view of the fact, 
which we shall shortly explain, that applying it may be costly, 
inconvenient and ethically challenging. We shall in fact argue that 
the standard defences of the procedure as an absolute necessity 
are unsuccessful and that the problem of nuisance variables in tri-
als cannot be solved by its means. In Chapter 8, we argue that 
although randomization may sometimes be harmless and even 
helpful, it is not a sine qua non, not absolutely essential. We shall 
maintain that the essential feature of a trial that permits a satisfac-
tory conclusion as to the causal efficacy of a treatment is the pres-
ence of adequate controls. 
Two main arguments for randomization are propounded in 
the literature. The first, which is based on the classical statisti-
cal idea that significance tests are the central inferential tool, 
claims that such tests are valid only if the experiment was ran-
domized. The second argument, while also advanced by those of 

188 
CHAPTER 6 
a classical outlook, evidently appeals to a modified form of 
eliminative induction. 
6.c I Significance-Test Defences of Randomization 
Fisher was concerned by the fact that the comparison groups in a 
clinical trial might be badly mismatched through the unequal dis-
tribution of one or more of the infinitely many possible, unknown 
nuisance variables. For, in the event of such a mismatch, you 
might be badly misled if, for example, you concluded definitely 
that the group having the greater recovery rate had received the 
superior treatment. Corresponding concerns arise with field trials. 
Fisher's response was to say that although we cannot know for 
certain that the groups are perfectly matched in regard to every 
prognostic factor, the randomization process furnishes us with 
objective and certain knowledge of the probabilities of different 
possible mismatches, knowledge that is required for a valid test of 
significance. And of course, Fisher favoured such tests as a way 
of drawing conclusions from experimental results. 
[T]he full procedure of randomisation [is the method] by which the 
validity of the test of significance may be guaranteed against corrup-
tion by the causes of disturbance which have not been eliminated [by 
being controlled]. (Fisher 1947, p. 19) 
Fisher's reason for regarding randomization as a necessary 
feature of clinical trials has been widely accepted amongst classi-
cally minded statisticians. For example, Byar et al. (1976, p. 75): 
"It is the process of randomization that generates the significance 
test, and this process is independent of prognostic factors, known 
or unknown" (our italics). This argument will not cut the mustard 
with Bayesians, who do not acknowledge significance tests as 
valid forms of inductive reasoning. But as we shall argue, it is 
incorrect even in the classical context. 
The Problem of the Reference Population 
Fisher claimed that significance tests could only be applied to 
clinical and agricultural trials if these were randomized. It is 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE: CLINICAL TRIALS 
189 
therefore surprising that expositions of the standard significance 
tests employed in the analysis of trial results, such as the t-test, the 
chi-square test, and the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, barely allude to 
the proviso. Take the case of the t-test appl ied to a clinical trial 
whose goal was to determine whether or not a particular treatment 
has a beneficial effect on some medical disorder. In the trial, a 
certain 'population' of people who are suffering from the condi-
tion in question is divided between a test and a control group by 
the classically required randomization method. Suppose that the 
trial records some quantitative measure of the disease symptoms, 
giving means of XI and x2' respectively, in the test and control 
groups. The difference XI - x2 is likely to vary from experiment to 
experiment, and the associated probability distribution has a cer-
tain standard deviation, or 'standard error', that is given by 
~
-
-
0
2 
0
2 
SEC X - X ) = 
. '-- + _ 2 
'2 
n, 
nl
' 
where 01 and 02 are the popUlation standard deviations,3 and 
where n I and n2 are, respectively, the sizes of two samples. I f the 
null hypothesis affirms that the treatment has no average effect, a 
test-statistic that may be employed in a test of significance is 
X,-
Xl 
Z= -_ 
SE(x, - X) ' 
The situation is complicated because the two standard deviations 
are usually unknown, in which case it is recommended that they 
be estimated from the standard deviations in the corresponding 
samples. And provided certain further conditions are met, the sta-
tistic that is then proposed for use in the test of significance of the 
null hypothesis is the I-statistic obtained from Z by substituting 
the corresponding sample standard deviations for 01 and 02' 
This and similar significance tests, as well as related estimat-
ing procedures, are directed to detecting and estimating differ-
ences between population parameters, and their validity therefore 
J These are hypothetical standard deviations. That is. 01 (respectively, 0 " ) is the 
standard deviation that the population would have if all its members were treat-
ed with the test treatment (respectively, the placebo). 

190 
CHAPTER 6 
depends on the experimental samples being drawn at random 
from the population in question. But which population is that? 
The randomization step provides a possible answer, and a pos-
sible explanation for why it is involved in the testing process. For, 
by randomizing the subjects across the experimental groups, each 
of the groups is certain to be a random selection from the subjects 
participating in the trial. This explanation implies that the refer-
ence population comprises just those patients who are involved in 
the trial. But this will not do, for the aim of a trial is to determine 
not just whether the treatment was effective for those who happen 
to be included in the trial but whether it will benefit others who 
were left out, as well as unknown sufferers in faraway places, and 
people presently healthy or yet unborn who will contract the dis-
ease in the future. But in no trial can random samples be drawn 
from hypothetical populations of notional people. 
Bourke, Daly, and McGilvray (1985, p. 188) addressed the 
question of the reference population slightly differently but they 
too saw it resolved through the randomization step. They argued 
that the standard statistical tests may be properly applied to clini-
cal trials without "the need for convoluted arguments concerning 
random sampling from larger populations", provided the experi-
mental groups were randomized. To illustrate their point they con-
sidered a case where the random allocation of 25 subjects 
delivered 12 to one group and 13 to the other. These particular 
groups, they affirmed, "can be viewed as one of many possible 
allocations resulting from the randomization of 25 individuals 
into two groups of 12 and 13, respectively. They noted the exis-
tence of 5,200,300 different possible outcomes of such a random-
ization and proposed this set of possible allocations as the 
reference population; the null hypothesis to which the signifi-
cance test is applied, they suggested, should then be regarded as 
referring to that hypothetical population. 
But this suggestion is not helpful. First, it is premised on the 
fiction of a premeditated plan only to accept groups resulting 
from the randomization that contain, respectively, 12 and 13 sub-
jects, with the implication that any other combinations that might 
have arisen would have been rejected. 4 Secondly, while the refer-
4 The numbers of subjects, 11 1 and 112, in each of the groups must, strictly, be fixed 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE: CLINICAL TRIALS 
191 
ence population consists of five million or so pairs of groups, the 
sample is just a single pair. But as is agreed all round, you get very 
little information about the mean of a large population from a 
sample of 1. Finally, as Bourke et al. themselves admitted, they do 
not overcome the problem we identified above, for statistical 
inference in their scheme "relates only to the individuals entered 
into the study" and may not generalize to any broader category of 
people. Achieving such a generalization, they argued, "involves 
issues relating to the representativeness of the trial group to the 
general body of patients affected with the particular disease being 
studied". But the path from "representative sample" to "general 
body of patients"- two vague notions-cannot be explored via 
significance tests and is left uncharted; yet unless that path is 
mapped out, the randomized clinical trial can have nothing at all 
to say on the central issue that it is meant to address. 
Fisher's Argument 
When Fisher first advanced the case for randomization as a nec-
essary ingredient of trials he did so in somewhat different terms. 
Instead of trying to relate the significance test to populations of 
sufferers, he thought of it as testing certain innate qualities of a 
medical treatment or, in the agricultural context, where Fisher's 
main interest lay, innate potentials of a plant variety. 
We may illustrate the argument through our potato example, 
which slightly simplifies Fisher's (1947, pp. 41--42) own example. 
Consider the possibility that, in reality, the varieties A and B have 
the same genetic growth characteristics and let this be designated 
the null hypothesis. Suppose, too, that one plot in each block is 
more fertile than the other, and that this apart, no relevant differ-
ence exists between the conditions that the seeds and the resulting 
plants experience. If pairs of different-variety seeds are allocated 
in advance for a valid I-test, for reasons we discussed earlier (S.d). One way of 
combining this and the randomization requirement would be to select pairs of 
subjects at random and then allocate the clements of the pairs at random, one to 
the test and the other to the control group. When the number of subjects is even, 
11 1 and 112 will be equal, and when odd, they will differ by one. This may be what 
Bourke, Daly, and McGilvray had in mind. 

192 
CHAPTER 6 
at random, one to each of a pair of plots, there is a guaranteed, 
objective probability of exactly a half that any plant of the first 
variety will exceed one of the second in yield, even if no intrinsic 
difference exists. The objective probability that r out of n pairs 
show an excess yield for A can then be computed, a simple test of 
significance, such as we discussed in Chapter 5, applied, and a 
conclusion on the acceptability or otherwise of the null hypothe-
sis drawn. 
All this depends on the objective probabilities that the ran-
domization step is supposed to guarantee. But this guarantee in 
turn depends on certain questionable, suppositions, for example, 
that none of the innumerable environmental variations that 
emerged after the random allocation introduced a corresponding 
variation in plant growth. For if the experiment had been exposed 
to some hidden growth factor, the null-hypothesis probabilities 
might be quite different from those assumed above, nor could we 
know what they are. 
Fisher (1947, p. 20) recognized this as a difficulty, but argued 
that it could be overcome: "the random choice of the objects to be 
treated in different ways would be a complete guarantee of the 
validity of the test of significance, if these treatments were the last 
in time of the stages in the physical history of the objects which 
might affect their experimental reaction" (italics added). And any 
variation that occurred after this, carefully located, randomization 
step, he then claimed, "causes no practical inconvenience" (1947, 
pp. 20-21), 
for subsequent causes of differentiation, if under the experimenter's 
control ... can either be predetermined before the treatments have 
been randomised, or, if this has not been done, can be randomised on 
their own account: and other causes of differentiation will be either 
(a) consequences of differences already randomised, or (b) natural 
consequences of the differences in treatment to be tested, of which on 
the null hypothesis there will be none, by definition, or (c) effects 
supervening by chance independently from the treatments applied. 
In other words, no post-randomization effects could disturb the 
probability calculations needed for the significance test, for such 
effects would either be the product of differences already random-
ized and hence would be automatically distributed at random, or 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE CLINICAL TRIALS 
193 
they would be chance factors, independent of the treatment, and 
therefore subject to a spontaneous randomization. 
But Fisher is here neglecting the possibility of influences 
(operating either before or after the random allocation) that are 
not independent of the treatments. For example, a certain insect 
might benefit plant varieties to an equal degree when these are 
growing separately, but be preferentially attracted to one of them 
when they are in the same vicinity. Or the different varieties in the 
trial might compete unequally for soil nutrients. There are also 
possible disturbing influences that could come into play before 
the plants were sown. For instance, the different types of seed 
might have been handled by different market gardeners, or stored 
in slightly different conditions, and so on. Factors such as these 
might, unknown to the experimenters, impart an unfair advantage 
to one of the varieties, and their nature is such that they cannot be 
distributed at random, either spontaneously or through the trial's 
deliberate randomization. Fisher (1947, p. 43) was therefore 
wrong in his view that randomization "relieves the experimenter 
from the anxiety of considering and estimating the magnitude of 
the innumerable causes by which the data may be disturbed." 
The natural response to this objection is to say that while one 
or more of the innumerable variations occurring during an exper-
iment might possibly affect the result, most are very unlikely to do 
so. For example, the market gardener's hair colour and the doc-
tor's collar size are conceivable, but most implausible as influ-
ences on the progress of an agricultural or clinical trial. ft seems 
reasonable therefore to ignore factors like these in the experimen-
tal design, and this is also the official position: 
A substantial part of the skill of the experimenter lies in the choice 
of factors to be randomised out of the experiment. If he is careful, he 
will randomise out [d istribute at random] all the factors which are 
suspected to be causally important but which are not actually part of 
the experimental structure. But cvery experimenter necessarily neg-
lects some conceivably causal factors; if this were not so, the ran-
domisation procedure would be impossibly complicated. (Kendall 
and Stuart 1983, p. (37) 
In accordance with this doctrine, when designing a trial to study 
the effect of alcohol on reaction times, Kendall and Stuart 

194 
CHAPTER 6 
explicitly omitted the subjects' eye colour from any randomiza-
tion, on the grounds that the influence of this quality was "almost 
certainly negligible". They cited no experimental results in sup-
port of their view, presumably because there are none. But even if 
there had been a trial to which they could have appealed, certain 
conceivable influences on its outcome must also have been set 
aside as negligible. Hence, it would be futile to insist that an influ-
ence must only be considered negligible in the light of a properly 
randomized trial designed to determine this, for that would open 
up the need for an infinite regress of trials. This is why Kendall 
and Stuart (p. 137) concluded that the decision whether to "ran-
domize out a factor" or ignore it "is essentially a matter of judge-
ment".5 
What Kendall and Stuart demonstrated is that randomization 
has to be confined to factors that the experimental designers judge 
to be of importance, and that this judgment is necessarily a per-
sonal one, which cannot be based solely on objective considera-
tions. This conclusion is of course completely at odds with the 
classical methodology underlying Fisher's argument. So, far from 
rescuing Fisher's defence of randomization, Kendall and Stuart 
unwittingly knocked another nail in its coffin. 
6.d 
The Eliminative-Induction Defence of 
Randomization 
This defence, at its strongest, claims that randomization performs 
for the unknown prognostic factors the same service as controls 
perform for the known ones; that is to say, the procedure guaran-
tees that both the known and the unknown prognostic factors in a 
trial will be equally distributed across the experimental groups. rf 
, It should be mentioned in passing that Kendall and Stuart's example is not well 
chosen. for in their experiment. the different doses of alcohol are allocated ran-
domly to the subjects. and this means that any characteristic to which the sub-
jects are permanently attached. like the colour of their eyes. is, contrary to their 
claim. automatically randomized. But their point stands. for there arc other 
examples they could have used-the eye colour of those who administer the 
alcohol to the subjects is one. 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE CLINICAL TRIALS 
195 
such an assurance were available, it would then be a straightfor-
ward matter to infer causal responsibility for any discrepancies 
that arise in the course of thc trial between the experimental 
groups. 
These are some expressions of the defence: "Allocating 
patients to treatments A and B by randomization produces two 
groups of patients which are as alike as possible with respect to 
all their [prognostic] characteristics, both known and unknown" 
(Schwartz et aI., 1980, p. 7; italics added). Or as Giere (1979, p. 
296) emphatically put it: randomized groups "are automatically 
controlled for A LL other factors, even those no one suspects." 
The argument, however, usually takes a more modest form. 
For example, Byar et at. (1976, pp. 74-80; our italics) say that 
randomization "tends to balance treatment groups in . . . prognos-
tic factors, whether or not these variables are known." Tanur et al. 
(1989, p. 10; our italics) maintain that it "usually will do a good 
job of evening out all the variables- those we didn't recognize in 
advance as well as those we did recognize." And Gore (1981, p. 
1559; our italics) expresses the idea more precisely by saying that 
randomization is "an insurance in the long run against substantial 
accidental bias between treatment groups", indicating that "the 
long run" covers large trials with more than 200 subjects. In other 
words, in the view of these commentators, although randomiza-
tion does not give a complete assurance that the experimental 
groups will be balanced, it makes such an outcome very probable, 
and the larger the groups, the greater that probability. 
This latter claim is certainly credible, judging by the frequen-
cy with which it is voiced. Nevertheless, we argue that it is mis-
taken, unless significantly modified. And this modified position, 
while compatible with Bayesian thought, is inimical to classical 
inferential theory. 
Bearing in mind that the argument under examination makes 
claims about the unkm)H·11 prognostic factors operating in a trial, 
we may consider a number ofpossibilities regarding their number 
and nature. The simplest possibility is that there are no such fac-
tors, in which case, the probability that the trial throws up 
unmatched groups is clearly zero. The next possibility is that there 
is a single unknown factor-call it X-that is carried by some of 
the patients. The randomized groups will be substantially 

196 
CHAPTER 6 
unmatched on X with a certain definite probability, XII ' say, and this 
probability clearly diminishes as the sample size, 11, increases. 
There might, of course, be a second factor, Y, also carried by 
some of the patients. The chance of one of the groups created in 
the randomization step containing substantially more Y-patients 
than the other also has a definite value, YII , say. And the probabil-
ity that the groups are unmatched on at least one of the two fac-
tors might then be as much as XII + Y/7 -
XIIYII , if they are 
independent. And because we are dealing with the unknown, it 
must be acknowledged that there might be innumerable other fac-
tors; hence the probability of a substantial imbalance on some 
prognostic factor might, for all we know, be quite large, as 
Lindley (1982, p. 439) has pointed out. Nor are we ever in a posi-
tion to calculate how large, since, self-evidently, we do not know 
what the unknown factors arc. 
We have so far considered only unknown factors that are, as it 
were, attached to patients. What about those that might be inde-
pendent of the patient but connected to the treatment? We are here 
thinking of possible, unknown prognostic factors that are acciden-
tally linked to the treatment in this particular trial, so that they 
could not be regarded as an aspect of the treatment itself. For 
example, suppose the test and control patients were treated in sep-
arate surgeries whosc different environments, through some hid-
den process, either promoted or hindered recovery; or imagine 
that the drug, despite the manufacturers' best efforts, included a 
contaminant which compromised its effectiveness; or . . . (one 
simply needs a rich enough imagination to extend this list indefi-
nitely). For all we know, one or more such factors are active in the 
experimental situation; and if that were in fact so, the probability 
that the groups are imbalanced would, of course, be one. 
So what can we say with assurance about the objective proba-
bility of the randomized experimental groups in a clinical trial dif-
fering substantially on unknown prognostic factors? Merely this: 
it lies somewhere in the range zero to one! It follows that the main 
defence of randomization in trials-that it guarantees well-
matched groups, or ensures that such groups are highly proba-
ble-is untrue. 
Those who advance either of the claims that we have just 
shown to be faulty do so in the belief that drawing conclusions 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTIC E: CLINICAL TRIALS 
197 
from the results of a clinical trial would bc facilitated by a guar-
antee that the comparison groups are balanced, or very probably 
balanced on every prognostic factor. Take thc stronger of thcse 
claims, which is in fact rarely maintained and clearly indefensible. 
ft has at least the virtue that ifit were true, then the conditions for 
an eliminative induction would be met, so that whatever differ-
ences arose between the groups in the clinical trial could be infal-
libly attributed to the trial treatment. On the other hand, the less 
obviously faulty and more popular claim cannot exploit elimina-
tive induction. For, the premise that the experimental groups were 
prohahly balanced does not imply that differences that arise in the 
clinical trial were probably due to the experimental treatment, 
unless Bayes's theorem were brought to bear, but that would 
require the input of prior probabi I ities and the abandonment of the 
classical approach. 
We shall, in Chapter 8, see how Bayesian inference operates in 
clinical research, in the course of which we shall show that ran-
domization, while it may sometimes be valuable, is not absolute-
ly necessarily. 
6.e 
Sequential Clinical Trials 
There are two aspects of the controlled, randomized trials we have 
been considering that have caused concern, even amongst classi-
cal statisticians. The first is this. Suppose that the test therapy and 
the comparison therapy (which may simply be a placebo) are not 
equally effective and that this becomes apparent at the end of the 
trial, through a differential response rate in the experimental 
groups. This would mean that some of the patients had been treat-
ed with an inferior therapy throughout the trial. Clearly the fewer 
so treated the better. So the question arises whether a particular 
trial is suited to extracting the required information in the most 
efficient way. 
The second concern is prompted by the following considera-
tion: as we showed in an earlier chapter, any significance test that 
is applied to the results of a trial requires the experimenter to 
establish a stopping rule in advance. The stopping rule that is nor-
mally used, or assumed to have been used, fixes the number of 

198 
CHA PTER 6 
patients who will enter the trial. Then, if for some reason, the trial 
were discontinued before the predetermined number was reached, 
the results obtained at that stage would, as Jennison and Turnbull 
(1990, p. 305) note, have to be reckoned quite uninformative. 
Intuitively, however, this is wrong; in many circumstances, quite a 
lot of information might seem to be contained in the interim 
results of a trial. Suppose, to take an extreme example, that a sam-
ple of 100 had been proposed and that the first 15 patients in the 
test group completely recover, while a similar number in the con-
trol group promptly experience a severe relapse. Even though the 
trial as originally envisaged is incomplete, this evidence would 
incline most people strongly in favour of the test treatment and 
would make them reluctant to continue the trial, fearing that a fur-
ther 35 or so patients would be denied the apparently superior 
treatment. 
It might be imagined that the problem could be dealt with by 
performing a new significance test after each new experimental 
reading and then halting the trial as soon as a 'significant' result 
is obtained. But, in fact, this sort of continuous assessment is not 
possible, for each significance test would be based on the assump-
tion that the number of patients treated at that stage of the trial 
was the number envisaged in the stopping rule for the entire trial, 
which of course is not the case. A kind of clinical trial in which 
sequences of such quasi-significance tests may be validly used 
has, however, been developed and we examine these now. 
Sequential clinical trials were designed to minimize the num-
ber of patients that need to be treated and to ensure that "random 
allocation should cease if it becomes reasonably clear that one 
treatment has a better therapeutic response than another" 
(Armitage 1975, p. 27). Such trials enable tests of significance to 
be applied even when the sample size is variable; they allow 
results to be monitored as they emerge; and in many cases, they 
achieve a conclusion with fewer data than a fixed-sample design 
would allow. 
The following is a simple sequential trial, which we have 
taken from Armitage 1975. Appropriately matched pairs of 
patients arc treated in sequence either with substance A or sub-
stance B (one of which might be a placebo). The treatments are 
randomized, in the sense that the element of any pair that receives 

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE CLINICAL TRIALS 
199 
A, respectively B, is determined at random, We shall assume that 
A and B are indistinguishable to the patients and that the medical 
personnel administering them are also in the dark as to how each 
patient was treated (the trial is therefore both 'blind' and 'double-
blind'). For each pair, a record is made of whether, relative to 
some agreed criterion, the A - or the B-treated patient did better. 
The results are assumed to come in sequentially and to be moni-
tored continuously. 
Results are recorded for each pair as either A doing better than 
B, or B doing better than A; we label these results simply A and 
B, respectively. In the diagrams below, the difference between the 
number of As and the number of Bs in a sample is plotted on the 
vertical axis; the horizontal axis represents the number of com-
parisons made. The zigzag line, or 'sample path', starting from 
the origin, represents a possible outcome of the trial, correspon-
ding to the 14 comparisons, ABAAAABAAAAAAA. 
(f) 
OJ 
20 
10 
U 
Number of 
11 OP'-------+-:::?>o~--t------+---_+---___I 
~t 
~co 
U x 
l.U 
-10 
-20 
40 
50 
SEQUENTIAL PLAN a 
The wedge-shaped system of lines in sequential plan a was 
designed to have the following characteristics: if the drugs are 
equally effective (the null hypothesis), then the probability of the 
sample path first crossing one of the outer lines is 0.05. If the 

200 
CHAPTER 6 
20 
10 
(J) 
~ 
Number of 
a5« ! 1 
0 ~'--__ +--___ -+_-<E-__ +-___ 
-+p_r_ef_e_re_nc_e_s-l 
~CQ 
() 
x 
UJ 
-10 
-20 
SEQUENTIAL PLAN b 
sample path does cross one of these lines, sampling is stopped and 
the null hypothesis rejected. Tfthe sample path first crosses one of 
the inner lines, the sampling is stopped too, the result declared 
non-significant, and the null hypothesis accepted. The inner lines 
are constructed, in this example, so that the test has a power of 
0.95 against a particular alternative hypothesis, namely that the 
true probability of an A-treated patient doing better than a B-treat-
ed patient is 0.8. 
The sequential test based on plan a is, in Armitage's terminol-
ogy, 'open', in the sense that the trial might never end, for the 
sample path could be confined indefinitely within one of the two 
channels formed by the two pairs of parallel lines. Plan b repre-
sents a 'closed' test of the same null and alternative hypotheses. 
Tn the latter test, if the sample path meets one of the outer lines 
first, the null hypothesis is rejected, and if one of the inner lines, 
the hypothesis is accepted. This closed test has a similar signifi-
cance level and power to the earlier, open one, but differs from it 
in that at most 40 comparisons are required for a decision to be 
reached. 
The above sequential plans were calculated by Armitage on 
the assumption that as each new datum is registered, a new signif-

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE CLINICAL TRIALS 
201 
icance test, with an appropriate significance level, is carried out. 
(As we pointed out, these are quasi-significance tests, since they 
presume a fixed sample size when, in fact, the sample is growing 
at every stage. ) The significance level of the individual tests is set 
at a value that makes the overall probability of rejecting a true null 
hypothesis 5 percent. This is just one way of determining sequen-
tial tests, particularly favoured by Arm i tage (1975), but there are 
many other possible methods leading to different sequential plans. 
The sequential tests might also vary in the frequency with which 
data are monitored; the results might be followed continuously as 
they accumulate or examined after every new batch of, say, 5 or 
10 or 50 patients have been treated (these are 'group sequential 
trials'). Each such interim-analysis policy corresponds to a differ-
ent sequential test. 
The existence of a multiplicity of tests for analysing trial 
results carries a strange, though by now familiar implication: 
whether a particular result is 'significant' or not, whether a 
hypothesis should be rejected or not, whether or not you would be 
well advised to take the medicine in the expectation of a cure, 
depend on how frequently the experimenter looked at the data as 
they accumulated and which sequential plan he or she followed. 
Thus a given outcome from treating a particular number of 
patients might be significant if the experimenter had monitored 
the results continuously, but not significant if he had waited to 
analyse the results until they were all in, and the conclusion might 
be different again if another sequential plan had been used. This 
is surely unacceptable, and it is no wonder that sequential trials 
have been condemned as "a hoax" (Anscombe 1963, p. 38 1). As 
Meier (1975, p.525) has put it, "it seems hard indeed to accept the 
notion that J should be influenced in my judgement by how fre-
quently he peeked at the data while he was collecting it." 
Nevertheless, the astonishing idea that the frequency with 
which the data have been peeked at provides information on the 
effectiveness of a medical treatment and should be taken account 
of when evaluating such a treatment is thoroughly entrenched. 
Thus the Food and Drug Administration, the drugs licensing 
authority in the United States, includes in its Guideline (1 988, p. 
64) the requirement that "all interim analyses, formal or informal, 
by any study participant, sponsor staff member, or data monitor-

202 
CHAPTER 6 
ing group should be described in full .... The need for statistical 
adjustment because of such analyses should be addressed. 
Minutes of meetings of the data monitoring group may be useful 
(and may be requested by the review division)". But the intentions 
and calculations made by the various study participants during the 
course of a trial are nothing more than disturbances in those peo-
ple's brains. Such brain disturbances seem to us to carry as much 
information about the causal powers of the drug in question as the 
goings-on in any other sections of their anatomies: none. 
6.1 
Practical and Ethical Considerations 
The principal point at issue in this chapter has been Fisher's the-
sis, so widely adopted as an article of faith, that clinical and agri-
cultural trials are worthless if they are not randomized. But as we 
have argued, the alleged absolute need for such trials to be ran-
domized has not been established. In Chapter 8, we shall argue 
that a satisfactory approach to the design of trials and the analy-
sis of their results is furnished by Bayes's theorem, which does not 
treat randomization as an absolute necessity. 
It would not, of course, be correct to infer that randomization 
is necessarily harmful, nor that it is never useful-and we would 
not wish to draw such a conclusion-but removing the absolute 
requirement for randomization is a significant step which lifts 
some severe and, in our view, undesirable limitations on accept-
able trials. For example, the requirement to randomize excludes as 
illegitimate trials using so-called historical controls. Historical 
controls suggest themselves when, for example, one wishes to 
find out whether a new therapy raises the chance of recovery from 
a particular disease compared with a well-established treatment. 
In such cases, since many patients would already have been 
observed under the old regime, it seems unnecessary and extrav-
agant to submit a new batch to that same treatment. The control 
group could be formed from past records and the new treatment 
applied to a fresh set of patients who have been carefully matched 
with those in the artificially constructed control group (or histor-
ical control). But the theory of randomization prohibits this kind 
of experiment, since patients are not assigned with equal proba-

STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN PRACTICE: CLINICAL TRIALS 
203 
bilities to the two groups; indeed, subjects finding themselves in 
either of the groups would have had no chance at all of being cho-
sen for the other. 
There is also sometimes an unattractive ethical aspect to ran-
domization, particularly in medical research. A new treatment, 
which is deemed worth the trouble and expense of an investiga-
tion, has often recommended itself in extensive pilot studies and 
in informal observations as having a reasonable chance of 
improving the condition of patients and of performing better than 
established treatments. But if there were evidence that a patient 
would suffer less with the new therapy than with the old, it would 
surely be unethical to expose randomly selected sufferers to the 
established and apparently or probably inferior treatment. Yet this 
is just what the theory of randomization insists upon. No such eth-
ical problem arises when patients receiving the new treatment are 
compared with a matched set of patients who have already been 
treated under the old regime. 
6.9 
Conclusion 
We have reviewed the main features of classically inspired 
designs for clinical and agricultural trials, particularly the alleged 
requirement for treatments to be randomized over the experimen-
tal units. Our conclusion is that neither of the two standard argu-
ments for the randomization principle is effective and that the 
principle is indefensible as an absolute precondition on trials, 
even from the classical viewpoint. In Chapter 8, we shall argue in 
detail that a Bayesian approach gives a more satisfactory treat-
ment of the problem of nuisance variables and furnishes intuitive-
ly correct principles of experimental design. 


CHAPTER 7 
Regression Analysis 
We are often interested in how some variable quantity depends on 
or is related to other variable quantities. Such relationships are 
often guessed at from specific values taken by the variables in 
experiments. As we pointed out earlier (in 4i), infinitely many dif-
ferent, and conflicting relationships are compatible with any set of 
data. And yet, despite the immense multiplicity of candidate the-
ories or relationships, scientists are rarely left as bewildered as 
might be imagined; in fact, they often become quite certain about 
what the true relationships are and feel able to predict hitherto 
unobserved values of the variables in question with considerable 
confidence. How they do this and with what justification is the 
topic of this chapter (which largely follows Urbach 1992). 
7.a I Simple Linear Regression 
How to infer a general relationship between variable quantities 
from specific observed values is a problem considered in practi-
cally every textbook on statistical inference, under the heading 
Regression. Usually, the problem is introduced in a restricted 
form, in which just two variables are involved; the methods devel-
oped are then extended to deal with many-variable relationships. 
When it comes to examining underlying principles, which is our 
aim, the least complicated cases are the best and most revealing; 
so it is upon these that we shall concentrate. 
Statisticians treat a wider problem than that alluded to earlier, 
by allowing for cases where the variables are related, but because 
of a random 'error' term, not in a directly functional way. With 
just two variables, x and y, such a relationship, or regression, may 
be represented as y = f(x) + E, where E is a random variable, 

206 
C HAPTER 7 
called the 'error' term. The simplest and most studied regres-
sions-known as simple linear regressions-are a special case, in 
which y = ex + f3x + E, ex and f3 being unspecified constants. In 
addition, the errors in a simple linear regression are taken to be 
uncorrelated and to have a zero mean and an unspecified vari-
ance, (J 2, whosc valuc is constant over all .T. We shall call regres-
sions mceting these conditions linear, dropping the qualification 
'simple', for brevity. 
Many different systems have becn cxplored as reasonable can-
didates to satisfy the linear regression hypothesis. The following 
are typical examples from the textbook literature: the relationship 
between wheat yield, y, and quantity of fertilizer applied, x 
(Wonnacott and Wonnacott 1980); the measured boiling point of 
water, y, and barometric pressure, x (Wcisberg 1980); and the 
level of people's income, y, and the extent of their cducation, x 
(Lewis-Beck 1980). 
The lincar regression hypothesis is depicted below (Mood and 
Graybill 1963, p. 330). The vertical axis represents the probability 
densities ofy for given values of x. The bell-shaped eurves in the 
y. pry I x)-plane illustrate the probability density distributions ofy 
for two particular values of x; the diagonal line in the 
x,y-plane is the plot of the mcan ofy against x; and the variance of 
the density distribution curves, which is the same as the error vari-
ance, (J2, is constant-a condition known as 'homoscedasticity' . 
The linear regression hypothesis leaves open the values of the 
three parameters ex, /3, and (J, which need to be estimated from 
pry Ix) 
r---------7-+----7~--~~----~-----x 
E(y Ix) = ()( + (3x 
y 

REG RESSION ANALYSIS 
207 
data, such data normally taking the form of particular x, y readings. 
These readings may be obtained in one of two ways. In the first, 
particular values of x (such as barometric pressures or concentra-
tions of fertilizer) are pre-selected and then the resulting ys (for 
instance the boiling point of water at each of the pressure levels or 
wheat yields at each fertilizer strength) arc read off. Alternatively, 
the xs may be selected at random (they could, for example, be the 
heights of random members of a population) and the correspon-
ding ys (for example each chosen person's weight) then recorded 
as before. In the examples discussed here, the data willmostiy be 
of the former kind, with the xs fixed in advance; none of the criti-
cisms we shall otfer will be affected by this restriction. 
We are considering the special case where the underlying 
regression has been assumed to take the simple linear form. For 
the Bayesian, this means that other possible forms of the regres-
sion all have probability zero, or their probabilities are sufficient-
ly close to zero to make no difference. In such special (usually 
artificial) cases, a Bayesian would continue the analysis by 
describing a prior, subjective probability distribution over the 
range of possible values of the regression parameters ex, /3, and 
a, and would then conditionalise on the evidence to obtain a cor-
responding posterior di stribution (for a detailed exposition, sec. 
for instance, Broemeling 1985). But classical stati sticians regard 
such distributions as irrelevant to science, because of their subjec-
tive component. The classical approach tries to put its objectivist 
ideal into effect by seeking the linear regression equation possess-
ing what is called the ' best fit' to the data, an aim also expressed 
as a search for the 'best estimates' of the unknown linear regres-
sion parameters. There are also classical procedures for examin-
ing the assumption of I inear regression, which we shall review in 
due course. 
7.b 
The Method of Least Squares 
The method of least squares is the standard classical way of estimat-
ing the constants in a linear regression equation and "historically has 
been accepted almost universally as the best estimation technique 
for linear regression models" (Gunst and Mason 1980, p. 66). 

208 
CHAPTER 7 
The method is this. Suppose there are n x,y readings, as 
depicted in the graph below. The vertical distance of the ith point 
from any straight line is labelled ei and is termed the 'error' or 
'residual' of the point relative to that line. The straight line for 
which Le 2 is minimal is called the least squares line. lfthe least 
I 
A 
A 
squares line is y = ex+ f3x, then ex and f3 are said to be the least 
squares estimates of the corresponding linear regression coeffi-
cients, (X and {3, and the line is often said to provide the 'best fit' 
to the data. The idea is illustrated below. 
L--------------------------------------------X 
X, 
The least squares line, that is, the line for which 'Ie/ is minimum. 
The least squares estimates, ex and ~, are given as follows, 
where x and yare, respectively, the mean values of the X i and Yi 
in the sample (proving these formulas is straightforward and we 
leave this to the reader): 
A 
L(y-V)(x.-X) 
3 -
I' 
I 
{-
L(X_X)2 
I 
ex = 5' -Fix. 
These widely used formulas, it should be noted, make no assump-
tions about the distribution of the errors. Note, too, that the least 
squares principle does not apply to (J2, the error variance, which 
needs to be estimated in a different way (sec below). 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
209 
7.c 
Why Least Squares? 
It is said almost universally by classical statisticians that if the 
regression of y on x is linear. then least squares provides the best 
estimates of the regression parameters. The term 'best" in this 
context intimates some epistemic significance and suggests that 
the least squares method is for good reason preferable to the infi-
nitely many other conceivable methods of estimation. Many sta-
tistics textbooks adopt the least squares method uncritically. but 
where it is defended. the argument takes three forms. First. the 
method is said to be intuitively correct. and secondly and thirdly. 
to be justified by the Gauss-Markov theorem and by the 
Maximum Likelihood Principle. We shall consider these lines of 
defence in turn. 
Intuition as a Justification 
The least squares method is often recommended for its "intuitive 
plausibility" (Belsley et al. 1980. p. I). Yet the intuitions typi-
cally cited do not point unequivocally to least squares as the 
right method for estimating the parameters of a I inear regression 
equation; at best. they are able to exclude some possible alterna-
tive methods. For example. the idea that one should minimize the 
absolute value of the sum of the errors. 1 Lei I. is often dismissed 
because. in certain circumstances. it leads to intuitively unsatis-
factory regression lines. In the case illustrated below, the method 
would result in two, quite different lines for the same set of data. 
Although both lines minimize 1 Lei I, Wonnacott and Wonnacott 
(p. 16) judge one of them, namely h. to be "intuitively ... a very 
bad one". 
The trouble here is that the criterion of minimum aggregate 
error can be met by balancing large positive errors against large 
negative ones, whereas for an intuitively good fit of data to a line. 
all the errors should be as small as possible. This difficulty would 
be partly overcome by another suggested method. namely, that of 
minimizing the sum of the absolute deviations, L 1 ei I. But this too 
is often regarded as unsatisfactory. For example, Wonnacott and 
Wonnacott rejected the method unequivocally, and signalled their 

210 
CHAPTER 7 
y 
y 
L-------------------x 
L-------------------x 
(0) 
(b) 
Two lines both satisfying the condition that I 'Le,2 I is minimized. 
emphatic disapproval of thc mcthod by giving it thc acronym 
MAD. But this highlights a weakness of arguments that are based 
on intuition, namely, that people often disagree over the intuitions 
themselves. Thus, unlike the Wonnacotts, Brook and Arnold 
(1985, p. 9) found the MAD method perfectly sane; indeed, they 
regarded it as "a sensible approach which works well", their sole 
reservation being the practical one that "the actual mathematics is 
difficult when the distributions of estimates are sought". (As we 
shall see in the next section, statisticians require such distribu-
tions, in order to derive confidence intervals for predictions based 
on an estimatcd regression equation.) 
On the othcr hand, Brook and Arnold saw in the least squares 
method an intuitively unsatisfactory featurc. This is that particu-
larly large deviations, since they must be squared, "may have an 
unduly large influence on the fitted curve" ( 1985, p. 9). They refer 
with approval to a proposal for mitigating this supposed draw-
back, according to which the estimation should proceed by mini-
mizing the sum of a lower power of the crrors than their squares, 
that is, by minimizing L I ei I", with p lying somewhere bctween I 
and 2. The authors propose p = 1.5 as a "reasonable compromise", 
but they do not explain why the mid-point value should accord so 
well with reason; to us it seems merely arbitrary, despite its air of 
Solomonic wisdom. But against this proposal, they point out the 
same practical difficulty that they observed with the MAD 
method of estimation, namely that "it is difficult to determine the 
exact distributions of the resulting estimates", and so--for this 
purely pragmatic reason--they revert to p = 2. 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
211 
The deviations whose squares are minimized in the least 
squares method appear in a graph as the vertical distances of 
points from a line. It might be thought that a close fit between line 
and points could be equally well secured by applying the least 
squares principle to the perpendicular distances of the points from 
the line, or to the horizontal distances, or, indeed, to distances 
measured along any other angle. Why should the vertical devia-
tions be privileged above all others? 
Kendall and Stuart defended the usual least squares procedure, 
based on vertical distances, on the vague and inadequate grounds 
that since "we are considering the dependence of y on x, it seems 
natural to minimize the sum of squared deviations in the y-direc-
tion" ( 1979, p. 278; ital ics added). But this by itself is insufficient 
reason, for many procedures that we find natural are wrong; 
indeed, Kendall and Stuart's famous textbook offers numerous 
'corrections' for what they view as misguided intuitions. 
Brook and Arnold advanced an apparently more substantial 
reason for concentrating on vertical deviations from the regres-
sion line; they claimed that "when our major concern is predict-
ing y from x, the vertical distances are more relevant because they 
represent the predicted error" (1985, p. 10; italics added). For 
most statisticians the main interest of regression equations does 
indeed lie in their ability to predict (see Section 7.e below). But 
predictions concern previously unexamined values of the vari-
ables; the predicting equation, on the other hand, is built up from 
values that have already been examined. It is misleading therefore 
to say that "vertical distances [of data points] are more relevant 
because they represent the predicted error"; in fact, they do not 
represent the errors in predictions of previously unexamined 
points. 
The following seems a more promising argument for minimiz-
ing the squares of the vertical distances. Suppose the units in 
which y was measured were changed, by applying a linear trans-
formation, y' = my + n, m and 11 being constants. The transformed 
regression equation would then bey'= a' + f):'( + E, where a' = 
ma + nand (J' = mf3. Ehrenberg (1975) and others (e.g., Bland, 
1987, p.I92) have pointed out that if the best estimate of a is B, 
the best estimate of a ' should be ma + n; correspondingly for (3'. 
If 'best' is defined in terms of a least squares estimation method 

21 2 
CHAPTER 7 
that is based on vertical distances, then this expectation is satis-
fi ed, a fact that advocates rightly regard as a merit of that 
approach. However, the same argument could be made for a least 
squares method based on horizontal distances, so it is inconclu-
sive. More seriously, the argument is self-defeating, for unl ess lin-
ear transformations could be shown to be special in some 
appropriate way, non-linear transformations of)' should also lead 
to correspondingly transformed least squares curves; but this is 
not in general the case. Indeed, it is practically a universal rule in 
classical estimation-
though maximum likelihood estimation is 
an exception (see below)-that if (1 is its optimal estimate of ct, 
then f(a ) is suboptimal rclative tof(a): in other words, classical 
estimators are generally not 'invariant'. 
Weisberg ( 1980, p. 214) illustrated this rule with some data on 
the average brain and body weights of different animal species. 
The least squares line for the data (expressed logarithmically) was 
calculated to be log(br) = 0.93 + O.7510g(bo). Weisberg then uscd 
this equation to estimate (or predict) the log(brain weight) of a so 
far unobserved species whose mean body weight is 10 kg, obtain-
ing the valuc 1.68 kg (0.93 + O. 7510g(1 0) = 1.68). Weisberg 
regarded this as a satisfactory prediction, for one rcason, because 
it is unbiased and so satisfics a classical criterion for 'good' esti-
mation (see Chapter 5). Now, from the prediction, it seems natu-
ral to infer that 47.7 kg (47. 7 being the anti logarithm of 1.68) 
would be a satisfactory prediction for the average brain weight of 
the species. Yet Weisberg described that conclusion as "na'ive", 
because estimates of brain weights derived in this way are "biased 
and will be, on the average, too small". 
But it seems commonsensical and not at all naive to ca ll for 
estimates to be invariant under functional transformation ; indeed, 
this view is often endorsed in classical texts (for example by 
Mood and Graybill, p. 185) when maximum likelihood estimation 
is under discussion and invariance is offered as one of the proper-
ties of that approach which particularly commend it. 
So much for intuitive arguments for least squares. They are 
at best inconclusive, and most classical statisticians beli eve a 
more telling case can be made on the basis of certain objective 
stati stical properties of least squares estimates, as we shall 
describe. 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
213 
The Gauss-Markov Justification 
The objective properties we are referring to are those of unbi-
asedness, relative efficiency, and linearity, each of which is pos-
sessed by the standard least squares estimators of the linear 
regression parameters. The unbiasedness criterion is well estab-
lished in all areas of classical estimation, though, as we have 
already argued, with questionable credentials. The criterion of 
relative efficiency as a way of comparing different estimators by 
their variances is also standard; least squares estimates are the 
most efficient amongst a certain class of estimators, a point we 
shall return to. Linearity, by contrast, is a novel criterion that was 
specially introduced into the regression context. It is simply 
explained: the estimates, a. and /3, of the two linear regression 
parameters, are said to be linear when they are weighted linear 
combinations of the v, that is, when a = La V and /3 = Lb v. A 
,/ { .  
l~ I 
V 
I 
comparison with the formulas given above confirms that least 
squares estimates arc linear, with coefficients 
h = 
X,-X 
I 
c 
and 
( \' 2 
1 
"'" 
. I 
-
~ 
-xx 
n 
I 
...... , where c = I(, -:x )2. 
c 
. I 
a. 
I 
We now come to the Gauss-Markov theorem, which is the 
most frequently cited "theoretical justification" (Wonnacott and 
Wonnacott, p. 17) for the method of least squares. The theorem 
was first proved by Gauss in 182 I, Markov's name becoming 
attached to it because, in 1912, he published a version of the proof 
which Neyman believed to be an original theorem (Seal 1967, p. 
6). The theorem states that within the class ollinem; unbiased 
estimators olf3 and ex. least squares estimators have the smallest 
variance. 
In Chapter 5 we explored the arguments advanced for unbi-
asedness and relative efficiency as criteria for estimators. Even 
those who are unconvinced by our objections against them would 
still have to satisfy themselves that linearity was a reasonable 

2 14 
CHAPTER 7 
requirement, before calling on the Gauss-Markov theorem in sup-
port of least squares estimation. Often, this need seems not to be 
perceived, for instance by Weisberg ( 1980, p. 14), who said, on the 
basis of the Gauss-Markov theorem, that "if one believes the 
assumptions [of linear regression], and is interested in using lin-
ear unbiased estimates, the least squares estimates are the ones to 
use"; he did not attend to the question of whether the "interest" in 
linear estimators which he assumed to exist amongst his readers 
is reasonable. Seber (1977, p. 49), on the other hand, did describe 
linear estimators as "reasonable", but gave no supporting argu-
ment. 
The only justification we have seen for requiring estimators to 
be linear turns on their supposed "simplicity". "The property of 
linearity is advantageous", say Daniel and Wood (1980, p. 7), "in 
its simplicity". Wonnacott and Wonnacott restricted themselves to 
linear estimates "because they are easy to compute and analyse" 
(p. 31). But simplicity and convenience are not epistemological 
categories: the sin/plest and easiest road might well be going in 
the 'vvrong direction and lead you astray. 
Mood and Graybill did not appeal to simplicity but referred 
mysteriously to "some good reasons why we would want to 
restrict ourselves to linear functions of the observations Yi as esti-
mators" ( 1963, p. 349); but they compounded the obscurity of 
their position by adding that "there are many times we would not", 
again without explanation, though they probably had in mind 
cases where some data points show very large deviations from the 
presumed regression line or in some other way appear unusual 
(we shall deal separately with this concern in 7.fbelow). 
The limp and inadequate remarks we have reported seem to 
constitute the only defences which the linearity criterion has 
received, and this surely suggests that it lacks any epistemic basis. 
Mood and Graybill confirmed this impression when they admit-
ted that since "it will not be possible to examine the 'goodness' of 
the [least squares] estimator g, relative to all functions . . . we 
shall have to limit ourselves to a subset of all function s" (p. 
349; italics added). As an example of such a subset they cited 
linear function s of the v and then showed how, according to the 
• 
I 
Gauss-Markov theorem, the method of least squares excels 
within that subset, on account of its minimum variance. But 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
215 
how can we tell whether least squares estimation is not just the 
best of a bad lot? 
The Gauss-Markov argument for using a least squares estima-
tor is that within the set of linear unbiased estimators, it has min-
imal variance. The argument depends, of course, on minimum 
variance being a desirable feature. But this presents a further dif-
ficulty. For, whatever that minimum variance is in any particular 
case, there would normally be alternative, biased and/or non-lin-
ear estimators of the parameters, whose variance is smaller. And 
to establish least squares as superior to such alternative methods, 
you would need to show that the benefit of the smaller variance 
offered by the alternatives was outweighed by the supposed disad-
vantage of their bias and/or non-linearity. But this has not been 
shown, and we would judge the prospects for any such demonstra-
tion to be dim. 
We conclude that thc Gauss-Markov theorem provides no 
basis for the least-squares method of estimation. Let us move to 
the third way that the method is standardly defended. 
The Maximum Likelihood Justification 
The maximum likelihood estimate of a parameter 0, relative to 
data d, is the value of 0 which maximizes the probability P(d I OJ. 
Many classical statisticians regard maximum likelihood estimates 
as self-evidently worthy, and rarely offer arguments in their 
defence. Hays is an exception. He argued that the maximum like-
lihood principle reflects a "general point of view about infer-
ence", namely, that "true population situations should be those 
making our empirical results likely; if a theoretic situation makes 
our obtained data have very low prior likelihood of occurrence, 
then doubt is cast on the truth of the theoretical situation" ( 1969, 
p. 214; italics removed). And Mood and Graybill pointed to cer-
tain "optimum properties" of maximum likelihood estimates, 
principally that they are inv~ariant under functional transforma-
tion, so that, for example, if fJ is the maximum likelihood estimate 
of 0, thenj(8) is the maximum likelihood estimate off(fJ), provid-
ed the function has a single-valued inverse. These do not consti-
tute adequate defences. Indeed, there can be no adequate defence, 
because the maximum likelihood method of estimation cannot be 

216 
CHAPTER 7 
right in general. This is clear from the fact, to which we alluded 
before, that any experimental data will be endowed with the max-
imum probability possible, namely, probability I, by infinitely 
many theories, most of which will seem crazy or blatantly false. 
In order to apply the maximum likelihood method to the task 
of estimating (1 and f3 in a linear regression equation, the form of 
the error distribution must be known, for only then can the prob-
ability of the data relative to specific forms of the regression be 
calculated and compared. Least squares, by contrast, can be 
applied without that knowledge. It turns out that when the regres-
sion errors are normally distributed, the maximum likelihood esti-
mates of (1 and f3 are precisely those arrived at by least squares, a 
fact that is often claimed to provide "another important theoreti-
cal justification of the least squares method" (Wonnacott and 
Wonnacott, p. 54). 
Those who regard this as a justification clearly assume that the 
maximum likelihood method is correct, and that it furnishes rea-
sonable estimates; they then argue that since least squares and 
maximum likelihood coincide in the specific case where thc 
errors are distributed normally, the least squares principle gives 
reasonable estimates in general. Although we have done so, it is 
unneccssary to take a view on the merits of maximum likelihood 
estimation to appreciate that this argumcnt is a non sequitur; you 
might just as well argue that because you get the right answer with 
o and I, x3 is a good way of estimating x2. 
Summary 
The classical arguments in favour of least squares estimation of 
linear regression parameters are untenable. That based on intu-
ition is inconclusive, vague, and lacking in epistemological force. 
The Gauss-Markov justification rests on thc linearity criterion, 
which itself is unsupported. And the maximum likelihood defence 
is based on a fallacy. 
The two theoretical defences of least squares are standardly 
cited together as if they were mutually reinforcing or complemen-
tary. Tn fact, the reverse is the casco For while the Gauss-Markov 
justification presupposes that estimators must be unbiased, the 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
217 
maximum likelihood principle does not. Ind ee~ it sometimes 
del ivers biased estimates, as for example, in the casc at hand: the 
I 
" 
maximum likelihood estimate of 0 2 is-
L (v. - ex - f3xY But 
n 
I 
I 
when the regression of y on x is linear, this estimate is biased and 
11 
needs to be increased by the factor--2 to unbias it. (It is this 
/1-
modified estimate, labelled [} that is always employed in classical 
expositions. ) 
The two main 'theoretical' defences of least squares estima-
tion are therefore separately defective and mutually destructive. 
But all this does not mean that the least-squares method is 
entirely wrong. Its great plausibility does have an explanation, a 
Bayesian explanation. For it can be shown that when you restrict 
the set of possible regressions to the I inear, and assume a normal 
distribution of errors and a uniform prior distribution of probabil-
ities over parameter values, the least squares and the Bayes solu-
tions coincide, in the sense that the most probable value of the 
regression parameters and their least squares estimates are identi-
cal. When the assumption of a uniform distribution is relaxe~ the 
same result follows, though it is reached asymptotically, as the 
size of the sample increases (Lindley and EI-Sayyad 1968). 
7.d 
Prediction 
Prediction Intervals 
Fitting a regression curve to data is often said to have as its main 
practical purpose the prediction of so far unobserved points. We 
will consider predictions of v values from pre-selected values of 
x, which is a prediction problem widely considered in statistics 
texts. Such predictions would be straightforward if one knew the 
true regression equation, as well as the form of the error distribu-
tion. For then the distribution of Yo' the .v corresponding to some 
particular x O' would also be known, thus enabling one to calculate 
the probability with which )'0 would fall within any given range. 
Such a range is sometimes called a prediction interval. 

218 
CHAPTER 7 
The problem is that the regression parameters are usually 
unknown and have to be estimated from data. To be sure, if those 
estimates were qualified by probabilities, as they would be after a 
Bayesian analysis, you could still calculate the probability relative 
to the data that Yo lay in any specified range. But this option is 
closed to classical statistics, which procceds from a denial that 
theories (parameter values, in the present case) do have probabil-
ities, except in special circumstances that do not prevail in the 
regression problems we are considering. 
Prediction by Confidence Intervals 
The classical way round this difficulty is to make predictions 
using confidence intervals, by a method similar to the one already 
discussed (in Chapter 5). First, an experiment is imagined in 
which a fixed set ofxs, XI ' ... , xm' is chosen. A prearranged num-
ber, n (:2! 111), of x, v readings is then made. A I inear regression of v 
on x is assumed ~nd a and fi are the resulting least squares esti-
mates of the corresponding regression parameters. A new x value, 
xo' is now considered, with a view to predicting the corresponding 
Yo. On the linear regression assumption, Yo is a random variable 
given by v = a + /Jx + E, with constant variance, a 2. The follow-
-" 0 
0 
ing analysis requires the error terms to be normally distributed. A 
new random variable, 1I, with variance 0 
2, is now defined as 11 = 
II 
\' - ex - /3x . The random variable, f, is then considered, wherc 
"' 0 
0 
all _ !~1 - 2 
f = 
" 
a-a 
11 
II 
(J 
The ratio -
is independent of a, being determined just by XI' . .. , 
a II 
\", x()' and 11, so f can always be computed from the data. Because 
f has a known distribution (the f-distribution with 11 - 2 degrees of 
freedom), standard tables can be consulted to find specific values, 
fl and f2, say, which enclose, say, 95 percent of the area under the 
distribution curve. This means that with probability 0.95, fl :s; f:s; f2, 
from which it follows (Mood and Graybill 1963, pp. 336-37) that 
P(o. + nx - Atl :s; y . :s; a. + f3x + At2) = 0.95, 
,.J () 
0 
() 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
219 
where A is a complicated expression involving n, x, x (the mean 
of x l' ... ,XIII' xo>, and o. The terms lX, p, A, and Yo ~re all random 
variables that can assume different values depending on the result 
of the experiment described earlier. If Ct.', /'J', and A' are the val-
ues taken by the corresponding variables in a particular trial, the 
interval I lX' + P'xo - A' t J , a' + /3' Xo + A't21 is a 95 percent confi-
dence interval for Yo' As we noted in our earlier discussion, other 
confidence intervals, associated with other probabilities, may bc 
described too. 
On the classical view, a confidence interval supplies a good 
and objective prediction of Yo' independent of subjective prior 
probabilities, with the confidence coefficient (95 percent in this 
case) measuring how good it is. Support for that view is some-
times seen (for instance by Mood and Graybill 1963, p. 337) in 
the fact that the width of any confidence interval for a prediction 
increases with Xo - x. So according to the interpretation we are 
considering, if you wished a constant degree of confidence for all 
predictions, you would have to accept wider, that is, less precise 
or less accurate intervals, the further you were from x. This, it is 
suggested, explains the "intuition" that "we can estimate most 
accurately ncar the 'centre' of the observed val ues of x" (Kendall 
and Stuart 1979, p. 365). No doubt this intuition is widely shared 
and is reasonable, provided, of course, that we have presupposed 
a linear regression, and the explanation given is a point in favour 
of the confidence interval approach. However, it is insufficient to 
rescue that approach from the radical criticisms already made. As 
we explained earlier, the two standard interpretations of confi-
dence intervals~-the categorical-assertion interpretation and the 
subjective-confidence interpretation-are both incorrect. Hence, 
confidence intervals do not constitute estimates; for the same rea-
sons, they cannot properly function as predictions. That means 
that the declared principal goal of regression analysis-- predic-
tion--cannot be achieved by classical means. 
Making a Further Prediction 
Suppose, having 'predicted' y for a given X , its true value is 
disclosed, thus augmenting tl~; data by an additional point, and 

220 
CHAPTER 7 
suppose you now wished to make a further prediction of Yo', cor-
responding to xo'. It is natural to base the second prediction on the 
most up-to-date estimates of the linear regression coefficients, 
which should therefore be recalculated using the earlier data plus 
the newly acquired data point. 
Mood and Graybill in fact recommended such a procedure, but 
their recommendation did not arise, as it would for a Bayesian, 
from a concern that predictions should be based on all the relevant 
evidence. Instead, they said that if the estimated regression equa-
tion were not regularly updated in the light of new evidence, and 
if it were used repeatedly to make confidence-interval predic-
tions, then the basis of the confidence intervals would be under-
mined. For those confidence intervals are calculated on the 
assumption that a, E and a are variable quantities, arising from 
the experiment described earlier (in the previous subsection), and 
"if the original estimates arc used repeatedly (not allowed to vary) 
the statement may not be accurate" (Mood and Graybill 1963, p. 
337). 
But Mood and Graybill's idea of simply adding the new 
datum to the old and re-estimating the regression parameters 
does not solve the problem. For although it ensures variability 
for the parameter estimates, it fixes the original data points, 
which arc supposed to be variable, and it vari es fl , which 
should be fixed. Thi s means that the true distribution of t, upon 
which the confidence interval is based, is not the one described 
above. The questi on of what the proper I-distribution is has 
not, so far as we are aware, been addressed. But until it is, clas-
sical statisticians ought properly to restrict themselves to sin-
gle predictions, or else change their methodology, for this 
inconvenient, unintuitive, and regularly ignored restriction 
does not arise for the Bayesian, who is at liberty to revise esti-
mates with steadily acc umulating data: indeed, there is an obli-
gation to do so. 
7.e 
Examining the Form of a Regression 
The classical way of investigating relationships between variables 
is, as we have described, to assume some general form for the 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
221 
relationship and then allow the data to dictatc its particular shape 
by supplying values for the unspecified parameters. Tn their start-
ing assumption, statisticians show a marked preference for linear 
regressions, partly on account of the conceptual simplicity of such 
regressions and partly because their properties with respect to 
classical estimation techniques have been so thoroughly explored. 
But statistical relationships are not necessarily nor even normally 
linear ("we might expect linear relationships to be the exception 
rather than the rule"-
Weisberg 1980, p. 126); and any data set 
can be fitted equally well (however this success is measured) to 
infinitely many different curves; hence, as Cook (1986, p. 393) 
has said, "some reassurance [that the model used is "sensible"] is 
always necessary". 
But how is that reassurance secured, and what is its character? 
The latter question is barely addressed by classical statisticians, 
but the former, it is widely agreed, can be dealt with in one or 
more of three ways. First, certain aspects of possible models, it 
is said, can be checked using significance tests. There is, for 
example, a commonly employed test of the hypothesis that thc 
(3-parameter of a linear regression is zero. This employs a t-test-
/3 
~ 
statistic with n -- 2 degrees of freedom: t = -~-
, where s(()) is the 
s(()) 
standard error of p, which can be estimated from the data. Another 
test is often employed to check the homoscedasticity assumption 
of the linear regression hypothesis, that is, the assumption that a 
is independent of x. Such tests are of course subject to the stric-
tures we made on significance tests in general, and consequently, 
in our view, they have no standing as modes of inductive reason-
ing. But even if the tcsts were valid, as their advocates maintain, 
they would need to be supplemented by othcr mcthods for evalu-
ating regression models, for the familiar reason that the conclu-
sions that may be drawn from significance tests are too weak for 
practical purposes. Learning that some precise hypothesis, say 
that f3 = 0, has been rejected at such-and-such a sign ificance levcl 
is to learn very little, since in most cases it would already havc 
been extremely unlikely, intuitively speaking, that the parameter 
was exactly zero. In any case, most practitioners require more 
than this meagre, negative information; they wish to know what 

222 
CHAPTER 7 
the true model actually is. The methods to be discussed in the next 
two subsections are often held to be helpful in this respect. They 
deal first with the idea that the preferred regression model or 
models should depend on prior knowledge; and secondly with 
techniques that subject the data to detailed appraisal, with a view 
to extracting information about the true model. 
Prior Knowledge 
Hays (1 969, p. 551) observed that "when an experimenter wants 
to look into the question of trend, or form of relationship, he has 
some prior ideas about what the population relation should be 
like. These hunches about trend often come directly from theory, 
or they may come from the extrapolation of established findings 
into new areas." 
Such hunches or prior ideas about the true relationship are 
often very persuasive. For example, in studying how the breaking 
load (b) varies with the diameter (d) of certain fibre segments, 
Cox (1 968, p. 268) affirmed that as the diameter vanishes, so 
should the breaking load; Seber (1 977, p. 178) regarded this as 
"obvious". More often, prior beliefs are less strongly held. For 
example, Wonnacott and Wonnacott, having submitted their data 
on wheat yields at different concentrations of fertiliser to a linear 
least-squares analysis, pointed out that the assumption of lineari-
ty is probably fal se: "it is likely that the true relation increases ini-
tially, but then bends down eventually as a 'burning point' is 
approached, and the crop is overdosed" (p. 49; italics added). 
Similarly, Lewis-Beck observed that although a linear relation 
between income and number of years of education appears satis-
factory, judged from the data, "it seems likely that relevant vari-
ables have been excluded, for factors besides education 
undoubtedly influence income" ( 1980, p. 27; italics added). 
Other statisticians express their uncertainty about the general 
model in less obviously probabilistic terms, such as "sensible" 
and "reasonable on theoretical grounds" (Weisberg 1980, p. 126), 
and "plausible" (Atkinson 1985, p. 3); while Brook and Arnold 
talked of "theoretical clues . . . which point to a particular rela-
tionship" (1985, p. 12; italics added); and Sprent (1 969, p. 120), 
stretching tentativeness almost to the limit, said that an "experi-

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
223 
menter is often in a position ... to decide that it is reasonable to 
assume that certain general types of hypothesis ... may hold, 
although he is uncertain precisely which". 
One further example: Cox (1968, p. 268) argued that if, in the 
case of the breaking load and the diameter of fibres, the two lines 
b ex. d and log b ex. log d fit the data equally well, then the "second 
would in general be preferable because ... it permits easier com-
parison with the theoretical model load ex. (diameter)2". This is a 
very circumspect way of recommending a regression model and 
would seem to be no recommendation at all unless the "theoreti-
cal model" were regarded as likely to be at least approximately 
true. That this is the implicit assumption seems to be confirmed 
by Seber's exposition (1977, p. 178) of Cox's view, in which he 
commended the model slightly less tentatively, saying that it 
"might be" a "reasonable assumption". 
One might expect the natural uncertainty attaching to the gen-
eral model to be revised, ideally diminished, by the data, so pro-
ducing an overall conclusion that incorporates both the prior and 
posterior information. This is how a Bayesian analysis would 
operate. A Bayesian would interpret the various expressions of 
uncertainty uniformly as prior probabilities and then use the data 
to obtain corresponding posterior probabilities, though if the dis-
tribution of prior beliefs is at all complicated, the mathematics 
may become difficult or even intractable. 
In the classical case, the difficulty is not merely mathematical 
or technical, but arises from a fundamental flaw. For, in the first 
place, the prior evaluation of a model in the light of plausible the-
ories and previous data seems not, as a rule, to be objectively 
quantifiable, as the classical approach would demand; certainly 
none of the authors we have quoted offers any measure, objective 
or otherwise, of the strength of their hunches. Secondly, even if 
the reasonableness of a theory could be objectively measured, 
classical statistics offers no way of combining such measures with 
the results of standard inference techniques (significance testing, 
confidence-interval estimation, and so forth) to achieve an aggre-
gate index of appraisal. 
The difficulty of incorporating uncertainty about the model 
into standard classical inferences is apparent from a commonly 
encountered discussion concerning predictions. Typical exposi-

224 
CHAPTER 7 
tions proceed by first assuming a linear relation. The apparatus of 
confidence intervals is next invoked as a way of qualifying pre-
dictions with a degree of confidence. [t is then explained that the 
linearity assumption is often doubtful, though perhaps roughly 
correct over the relatively narrow experimental range, and hence 
that one should not expect predictions from an equation fitted by 
least squares to be quite accurate (for example Weisberg 1980, p. 
126; Seber 1977, p. 6; Gunst and Mason 1980, pp. 56-63; 
Wonnacott and Wonnacott 1980, p. 49). 
But instead of measuring this uncertainty about the model and 
then amalgamating it with the uncertainty reflected in the confi-
dence interval, so as to give an overall level of confidence in a 
prediction, classical statisticians merely issue warnings to be 
"careful not to attempt to predict very far outside the [range cov-
ercd by the data]" (Gunst and Mason, p. 62), and to "be reluctant 
to make predictions [ except for] . .. new cases with predictor vari-
ables not too different from [those] . . . in the construction sam-
ple" (Weisberg, p. 2 15). But these vague admonitions do not 
signify how such caution should be exercised (should one hold off 
from predicting altogether, or tremble slightly when hazarding a 
forecast, or what?). 
There is also the question of how close X li should be to thc X 
values in the data, before the corresponding Yli can be predicted 
with assurance. This is always given an arbitrary answer. For 
example, Weisberg, in dealing with the case where y is linearly 
related to two predictor variables x and ? , suggested, with no the-
oretical or epistemological sanction, that a "range of validity for 
prediction" can be determined by plotting the data values of X and 
? and drawing "the smallest closcd figure that includes all thc 
points" (p. 216). Making such a drawing turns out to be difficult, 
but Weisberg considered that "the smallest volume ellipsoid con-
taining these points" (p. 216) would be a satisfactory approxima-
tion to the closed figure. However, he is uneasy with the proposal 
since, in the example on which he was working, there was "a sub-
stantial area inside the [ellipsoid] ... with no observed data" (p. 
217) and where, presumably, he felt prediction is unsafe. 
Weisberg's demarcation between regions of safe and risky predic-
tions and his suggested approximation to it have some plausibili-
ty, but they seem quite arbitrary from the classical point of view. 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
225 
Classical statisticians are caught in a cleft stick. If they take 
account of plausible prior beliefs concerning the regression 
model. they cannot properly combine those beliefs with the clas-
sical techniques of inference. On the other hanci if they use those 
techniques but eschew prior beliefs, they have no means of select-
ing, arbitrary stipulation apart, among the infinitely many regres-
sion models that are compatible with the data. 
Data Analysis 
A possible way out of this dilemma is to abandon the imprecise, 
unsystematic, and subjective appraisals described in the previous 
section and rely solely on the seemingly more objective methods of 
'data analysis', though most statisticians would not go so far, pre-
ferring to avail themselves of both techniques. Data analysis, or 
'case analysis', as it is often calleci is an attempt to discriminate in 
a non-Bayesian way between possible regression models, through a 
close examination ofthe individual data points. There are three dis-
tinct approaches to data analysis, which we shall consider in turn. 
i Impeding scatter plots. The simplest kind of data analysis 
involves visually examining ordinary plots of the data (,scatter 
plots') in an informal way. The procedure was authoritatively 
endorsed by Cox (1968, p. 268 )-"the choice [of relation] will 
depend on preliminary plotting and inspection of the data"; and it 
was "strongly recommended" by Kendall and Stuart (1979, p. 
292), because "it conveys quickly and simply an idea of the ade-
quacy of the fitted regression lines". Visual inspection is widely 
employed in practice to augment the formal process of classical 
estimation. Weisberg (p. 3), for instance, motivated a linear 
regression analysis of certain data on the boiling points of water 
at different atmospheric pressures by referring to the "overall 
impression of the scatter plot ... that the points generally, but not 
exactly, fall on a straight line". And Lewis-Beck (p. IS) claimed 
that "visual inspection of [a certain] ... scatter plot suggests the 
relationship is essentially linear". 
Weisberg (p. 99) argued that the data of Diagram I showed a 
pattern that "one might expect to observe if the simple linear 

226 
CHAPTER 7 
regression model were appropriate". On the other hand, Diagram 
2 "suggests . .. [to him] that the analysis based on simple linear 
regression is incorrect, and that a smooth curve, perhaps a quad-
ratic polynomial, could be fit to the data ... ". Although the data 
are different in the two cases, they give the same least squares 
lines, as the diagrams below illustrate. 
DIAGRAM! 
DIAGRAM 2 
Probably most scientists would agree with the various judgments 
that statisticians make on the basis of visual inspections of scatter 
diagrams. But how are such judgments arrived at'? It could be, 
indeed, it seems likely, that a closc analysis would reveal a 
Bayesian mechanism, but it is hard to imagine how any of the 
standard classical techniques could be involved in either explain-
ing or justifying the process, nor do classical statisticians claim 
they are. The whole process is impressionistic, arbitrary, and sub-
jective. 
ii Outliers. Another instructive data pattern is illustrated in 
Diagram 3. One of the points stands much further apart from the 
least squares line than any other and this suggests to Weisberg (p. 
99) that "simple lincar regression may be correct for most of the 
data, but one of the cases is too far away from the fitted regres-
sion line". Such points are called outliers. 
Outl iers are defined, rather imprecisely, as "data points [with] 
... residuals that are large relative to the residuals for the remain-
der of the observations" (Chatterjee and Price 1977, p. 19). (The 
residual of a data point is its vertical di stance from a fitted line or 
curve.) As is often noted, a point may be an outlier for three dis-
tinct reasons. First, it could be erroneous, in the sense that it 

REGRESSION ANA LYSIS 
227 
outlier 
15 
./ 
residual--_. " 
the least squares line 
10 
5 
DIAGRAM 3 
resulted from a recording or transcnptlOn error or from an 
improperly conducted experiment; an outlier could also arise 
because the assumed regression model is incorrect; on the other 
hand, the model might be correct and the outlier be simply one of 
those relatively improbable cases that is almost bound to occur 
sometimes. Suppose that careful checking has more or less 
excluded the first possibility, does the outlier throw any light on 
whether an assumed regression equation is correct or not? This is 
a question to which classical statisticians have applied a variety of 
non-Bayesian methods, though, as we shall argue, without any 
satisfactory result. 
Some authors, for example Chatterjee and Hadi, seem not to 
take seriously the possibility that the linear least-squares line is 
wrong, when they note that an outlier in their data, if removed, 
would hardly affect the fitted line and conclude from this that 
"there is little point in agonizing over how deviant it appears" 
(1986, p. 381). But this conclusion is unjustified, and was not 
endorsed by Chatterjee when he previously collaborated with 
Price. 
Chatterjee and Price's (1977) approach may be illustrated with 
their own example. Their data consisted of 30 x,y readings, the 
nature of which need not concern us. They applied the linear least 
squares technique to the readings, obtaining an upwardly sloping 
regression line. They next examined a number of data plots, first 
y against x, then residuals against x, and finally the residuals 
against) (Yi is the point on the fitted line corresponding to x). 
Four of the points in their data stood out as having particularly 

228 
CHAPTER 7 
large residuals; moreover, a visual inspection of the various plots 
made it "clear [to the authors] that the straight line assumption is 
not confirmed" (p. 24), though it "looks acceptable" in the mid-
dle of the x range. On this informal basis, Chatterjee and Price 
concluded tentatively that the true line has a zero gradient and that 
y is independent of x. They checked this conjecture by dropping 
the four outliers, computing a new least-squares line and then 
examining the revised plots of residuals. This time they found no 
discernible pattern; from a casual inspection "the residuals appear 
to be randomly distributed around [the line] e[residual] = 0" (p. 
25). Unfortunately, the conclusion from all this is disappointingly 
weak. It is that the regression with zero gradient "i s a satisfacto-
ry model for analyzing the ... data, after the deletion ofthef(JlIr 
points" (p. 25; italics added). But this says nothing about the true 
relation between x and y. Indeed, the authors acknowledged that 
this question was still open by then asking: "what of the four data 
points that were deleted?" They repeated the truism that the points 
may be "measurement or transcription errors", or else "may pro-
vide more valuable information about the . . . relationships 
between y and x". We take the latter to mean that the line derived 
from the data minus the outliers might be wrong, perhaps, it 
should be added, wi Idly so (of course, it might be right, too). 
Whether the fitted line is right or wrong, and if wrong, what the 
true line is, are questions that Chatterjee and Price simply left to 
further research: "it may be most valuable to try to understand the 
special circumstances that generated the extreme responses" (p. 
25). In other words, their examination of the data from different 
points of view has been quite uninformative about the true regres-
sion and about why some of the points have particularly large 
residuals relative to the linear least-squares line. 
Chatterjee and Price called theirs an "empirical approach" to 
outliers, since it takes account not just of the sizes of the residu-
als but also of their patterns of distribution. They disagreed with 
those who use significance tests alone to form judgments from 
outliers since, in their view, "[i]t is a combination of the actual 
magnitude and the pattern of residuals that suggests problems" (p. 
27). But although significance tests take little account of the pat-
tern of the results, compared with the empirical approach, they are 
more in keeping with the objectivist ideals of classical statistics 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
229 
and offer more definite conclusions about the validity of hypoth-
esized regression equations. 
Weisberg is a leading exponent of the application of signifi-
cance tests in this context. His method is to perform a linear least-
squares analysis on the data set minus one point (in practice this 
would be an outlying point) and then to use a significance test to 
check the resulting regression equation against the removed point. 
To see how this 'outlier test' is carried out, suppose the fitted line 
derived from the data, minus the ith point, has parameters a . and 
A 
t 
/3 i . The assumption that this is the true line will be the null 
hypothesis in what follows. Let ~Vi be the y value corresponding to 
Xi on the null hypothesis line. 
Y 
Yi 1-----------. 
Y, 1-- ---------,7(' 
least squares line 
constructed 
without Xi 'Y i 
L-_
______ 
-L __________ X 
Provided the data were properly collected and recorded, it is 
natural to expect that the larger the discrepancy between ,Vi and Yi, 
the less would be one's confidence that the line drawn is correct. 
This idea is given classical clothes through a corresponding sig-
nificance test. Weisberg's test uses as test-statistic a particular 
function of ,vi - ,Vi and other aspects of the data-
this has the 
{-distribution with 11 - 3 degrees of freedom. I f the {-value record-
ed for a data set, relative to a particular point (Xi' y) in that set, 
exceeds the test's critical value, then the null hypothesis would be 
rejected at the corresponding level of significance. 

230 
CHAPTER 7 
But fixing the appropriate critical value is interestingly prob-
lematic and shows up the pseudo-objectivity and ineffectiveness 
of the whole procedure. It is required in significance testing to 
ensure that the null hypothesis would be falsely rejected with 
some pre-designated probability, usually 0.05 or 0.01. Now 
Weisberg's test could be conducted in a spectrum of ways. At one 
end of the spectrum you could decide in advance to perform just 
one significance test, using the single datum corresponding to a 
pre-speci fied X i (call this the first testing plan). At the other 
extreme, the plan could be to check the significance of every data 
point. As Weisberg points out, if the test were, as a matter of pol-
icy, restricted to the datum with the largest t-value, one would in 
effect be following the second testing plan. 
Suppose you selected a significance level of 0.05. This would 
be classically acceptable, provided the first plan was adopted and 
the test applied just to a single, pre-selected point. But if the sec-
ond plan was adopted, and the same significance level chosen, the 
overall probability of rejecting the null hypothesis, if it wcre true, 
would be a multiple of 0.05, that multiple depending on the num-
ber of points in the data set. You would, in this case, then have to 
reduce the significance level of the individual tests, in order to 
bring the overall significance level to a classically acceptable 
level. (In Weisberg's example, involving 65 data points, the sec-
ond testing plan would need to use a significance level of 0.00077 
for the individual tests.) 
So whether a particular I-value is significant and warrants the 
rejection of a null hypothesis is sensitive to how the person per-
forming the significance test planned to select data for testing. 
But, as we have stressed before, such private plans have no epis-
temic significance, and without justifiable, public rules to fix the 
most appropriate plan, the present approach is subject to person-
al idiosyncrasies that are at odds with its supposed objectivity. 
Weisberg (p. 116) docs in fact propose a rule for choosing a 
testing plan, namely, that the one involving a single significance 
test, should be adopted only "if the investigator suspects in 
advance" that a particular case will fail to fit the same regression 
line as the others. But what should the experimenter do if, having 
decided to adopt this plan, the anticipated outlier unexpectedly 
fitted the pattern and some of the other points were surprisingly 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
231 
prominent outliers') And why should informal and untested "sus-
picions" have any standing in this area? 
Weisberg introduced and illustrated his rule with his data on 
the average brain (hr) and body weights (ho) of different specics 
of mammals, which show man as the most prominent outlier in a 
plot oflog(hr) against log(bo). Weisberg (p. 130) argued that since 
"interest in Man as a special case is a priori", the outlier test 
should employ the largcr significance level, corresponding to the 
first testing plan. On this basis the datum on man was significant 
and so Weisberg concluded that "humans would bc dcclared to 
havc brain weight that is too large to be consistcnt [sic] with the 
[log-linear) model for the data". But if therc had been no prior 
"interest in Man", the datum would not have been significant and 
Weisberg would have reached the opposite conclusion. 
Weisberg's example, morcover, does not even conform to his 
own rule: man is not picked out because of an earlier "suspicion" 
that he is an exception to the log-linear rule, but because ofa prior 
"intcrest" in Man as a special case. No explanation is given for 
this change, though we conjecture that it is madc because, first, 
from a visual inspection of the data, Man seems clearly to be an 
exception to a log-linear rule; secondly, if the smaller significance 
level, corresponding to the second testing plan, were employed in 
Weisberg's outlier test, Man would not be significant and the lin-
ear rule would, counter-intuitively, have to be accepted; and third-
ly, there is no plausible reason to suspect Man a priori of being an 
exception to a log-linear rule-hence, no reason to employ the 
larger critical value in the significance test. This may perhaps 
explain why Weisberg changed his rule to suit these circulll-
stances, but clearly it provides no justification. 
It seems undeniable that the distribution patterns of data, 
including the presence of outliers, often tell us a great deal about 
the regression, but they seem not to speak in any known classical 
language. It is perhaps too early to say for certain that the Illedi-
um of communication is Bayesian, since a thorough Baycsian 
analysis of the outlier notion is still awaited. The form that that 
analysis will take is perfectly clear, however. As with every other 
problem concerning the evaluation of a theory in the light of evi-
dence, it will involve the application of Bayes's theorem. Thus, 
for a Bayesian, regression analysis is not divided into separate 

232 
CHAPTER 7 
compartments operating distinct techniques, each requmng its 
own justification; there is just one principle of inference, leading 
to one kind of conclusion. 
iii h~fluel1tial points. Another data pattern that statisticians 
often find instructive is illustrated in Diagram 4 (Weisberg, p. 99). 
least squares line 
j ~ 
15 
residual 
10 
influential 
5 
point 
DIAGRAM 4 
The isolated point on the right has a nil residual, so the con-
siderations of the previous section give no reason to doubt the lin-
ear least squares line. But the point is peculiar in that the 
estimated line depends very largely on it alone, much more so 
than on any of the other data. Such points are called' influential'. 
Diagram 4 shows an extreme case of an influential data point; it 
is extreme because without it no least squares solution even 
exists. There are less pronounced kinds of influence which statis-
ticians also regard as important, where particular data points or a 
small subset of the data "have a disproportionate influence on the 
estimated [regression] parameters" (Belsley et al. 1980, p. 6). 
Many statisticians regard such influential points as deserving 
special attention, though they rarely explain why; indeed, large 
textbooks are written on how to measure "int1uence", without the 
purpose of the project being adequately examined. All too often, 
the argument proceeds thus: "these [parameter estimates] . . . can 
be substantially influenced by one observation or a few observa-
tions; that is, not all the observations have an equal importance in 
least squares regression ... It is, Iherej(Jre, important for an ana-
lyst to be able to identify such observations and assess their 
effects on various aspects of the analysis" (Chatterjee and Hadi 

REGRESSION ANA LYSIS 
233 
1986, p. 379; italics added). Atkinson (1986, p. 398) and Cook 
(1986, p. 393) give essentially the same argument, which is clear-
ly a non sequitur, without the further and no doubt implicit 
assumption that conclusions obtained using influential points are 
correspondingly insecure. Weisberg (p. 100) is one of the few who 
states this explicitly, when he says that "[ w]e must distrust an 
aggregate analysis that is so heavily dependent upon a single 
case". Belsley et al. (1980, p. 9) say roughly the same but express 
it in a purely descriptive mode: "the researcher is likely to be 
highly suspicious of the estimate [of the slope of a regression 
line]" that has been obtained using influential data. 
But why should we distrust conclusions substantially based 
on just a few data points? Intuitively, there are two reasons. The 
first is this: the true regression curve passes through the mean, or 
expected value, of y at each x. In describing our best guess as to 
that curve, and hence our best estimate of those means, we are 
guided by the observed points. But we are aware that any of the 
points could be quite distant from the true regression line, either 
because the experiment was badly conducted or because of an 
error in recording or transcribing, or simply because it is one of 
those rare and improbable departures from the mean that is 
almost bound to occur from time to time. Sharp departures of a 
point from its corresponding mean are relatively improbable, but 
if such a discrepancy actually arose and the datum was, more-
over, influential, the conclusion arrived at would be in error by a 
corresponding margin. Our intuition is that the more likely a 
reading is to be discrepant in the indicated sense, and the more 
influential it is, the less certain would one be about the regres-
sion. The second intuitive reason for distrusting conclusions that 
are partly derived from influential data applies when they are 
separated from the rest of the data by a wide gap, as for example 
in Diagram 4; intuitively we feel that in the range where there are 
few or no data points, we cannot be at all sure of the shape of the 
regression relation. 
A programme of research that was initiated in the early 1970s 
aims to explicate these intuitions in classical (or at any rate, non-
Bayesian) terms and to develop rules to guide and justify them. 
This now flourishing field is called ' influence methodology', its 
chief object being to find ways of measuring influence. 

234 
CHAPTER 7 
The idea governing the measurement of influence is this. You 
should first estimate a regression parameter using all the data, 
and then re-estimate it with a selected data point deleted, noting 
the difference between the two estimates. This difference is then 
plugged into an ' influence function' or, as it is sometimes called, 
a 'regression diagnostic' , to produce an index of how influential 
the deleted point was. To put this programme into effect, you 
need first to decide on the parameters whose estimates are to be 
employed in the influence measure. If the regression has been 
assumed linear with a single independent variable, you could 
choose from among the three parameters, a , {3, and a , as well as 
from the infinity of possible functional combinations of these. 
Secondly, a measure of influence is required, that is, some func-
tion of the difference noted above and (possibly) other aspects of 
the data; the choice here is similarly vast. Finally, there has to be 
some way of using particular values of an influence measure to 
judge the reliability of the data point or of the regression 
assumptions. 
Many influence functions have been proposed and suggestions 
advanced as to the numerical value such functions should take 
before the reading concerned is designated ' influential'. But these 
proposals and suggestions seem highly arbitrary, an impression 
confirmed by those working in the field. For instance, the author 
of a function known as Cook's Distance admitted that "[f]or the 
most part the development of influence methodology for linear 
regression is based on ad hoc reasoning and this partially accounts 
for the diversity of recommendations" (Cook 1986, p. 396). 
Arbitrariness and adhocness would not be a feature of thi s area 
if a relation had been established between a point's influence as 
defined by a given measure and the reliability or credibility of a 
fitted line or curve. No such relation has been established. 
Nevertheless, recommendations on how to interpret levels of 
influence are sometimes made. For example, Velleman and 
Welsch (1981) felt that "val ues [of their preferred function) 
greater than I or 2 seem reasonable to nominate ... for special 
attention"; but they fai led to say what special attention is called 
for, nor why. 
Many of those most active in this area acknowledge the appar-
ent absence of any objective epistemic constraints when it comes 

REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
23S 
to interpreting influence measures. For example, Welsch (1986, p. 
405), joint author of another influence function, conceded that 
"[e]ven with a vast arsenal of diagnostics, it is very hard to write 
down rules that can be used to guide a data analysis. So much is 
really subjective and subtle". And Velleman (1986, p. 413), who 
has already been quoted, talked of "the need to combine human 
judgment with diagnostics", without indicating how this judgment 
operates, is justified, or coheres with the rest of classical statistics. 
A full Bayesian analysis of influential data has yet to be under-
taken. It would, we are sure, endorse many of the intuitions that 
guide non-Bayesian treatments, but unlike these, the path it 
should take and its epistemic goal are clear; using Bayes's theo-
rem, it would have to trace the effects of uncertainty in the accu-
racy of readings and of relatively isolated data points on the 
posterior probabilities of possible regression models. The techni-
cal difficulties facing such a programme arc formidable, to be 
sure (and these difficulties are often referred to by critics wishing 
to cast doubt over the whole Bayesian enterprise), but the difficul-
ties that any Bayesian analysis of regression data faces arise only 
from the complexity of the situation and by no means reflect on 
the adequacy of the methodology. The three-body problem in 
physics provides an instructive analogy; this problem has so far 
resisted a complete solution in Newtonian terms and may, for all 
we know, be intrinsically insoluble, but nobody thinks that 
Newton's laws are in the least discredited because of the mathe-
matical difficulties of applying them in this area. 
By contrast with a Bayesian approach, the programme of 
influence methodology based on classical ideas runs into trouble 
not simply because of intractable mathematics but, we suggest, 
because it has no epistemically relevant goal. This explains why 
the rules and techniques proposed arc arbitrary, unjustified, and 
ad hoc; it is hard to see how they could be otherwise. 
7.f 
Conclusion 
In earlier chapters, we catalogued various aspects of classical 
methods of testing and estimation that show that they are unsuited 
to the tasks of inductive inference for which they were invented. 

236 
CHAPTER 7 
Those same shortcomings, not surprisingly, surface too when 
regression problems are at issue. However, some new difficulties 
are also revealed. For instance, extra criteria for estimation are 
required, which have led to the plausible, but classically indefensi-
ble, least squares principle. There are also extra sources of subjec-
tivity, for instance, in selecting the regression model, both when 
taking account of 'prior knowledge' and when judging models by 
informally inspecting scatter plots. They are also present in the 
process of checking models against outliers and influential data. 
This subjectivity frequently passes unnoticed. Thus Wonnacott and 
Wonnacott ( 1980, p. 15) set themselves firmly against judging the 
gradient and intercept of a regression line "by eye", on account of 
its subjectivity-"we need to find a method that is objective"; but 
without batting an eyelid at their inconstancy, they allow personal 
judgment and the visual inspection of scatter plots to play a crucial 
part in determining the overall conclusion. 
Unlike the hotchpotch of ad hoc and unjustifiable rules of 
inference that constitute the classical approach, Bayes's theorem 
supplies a single, universally applicable, well-founded inductive 
rule which answers what Brandt (1986, p. 407) calls the "most 
important ... need for integration of this [influence methodolo-
gy] and many other aspects of [classical] regression and model 
fitting into a coherent whole". 

CHAPTER 8 
Bayesian Induction: 
Statistical Theories 
Bayesian induction is the computation via Bayes's theorem of a 
posterior probability, or density distribution from a corresponding 
prior distribution, on receiving new information. The theorem 
does not discriminate between deterministic and statistical theo-
ries, and so affords a uniform treatment for both, in contrast to the 
hotchpotch of non-Bayesian methods that have been invented to 
suit different circumstances. In an earlier chapter we considered 
how non-Bayesian and Bayesian approaches compared when they 
were applied to deterministic hypotheses. Here we make a similar 
comparison in relation to statistical theories. 
8.0 
The Question of Subjectivity 
The prior distribution from which a Bayesian analysis proceeds 
reflects a person's beliefs before the experimental results are 
known. Those beliefs are subjective, in the sense that they are 
shaped in part by elusive, idiosyncratic influences, so they are 
likely to vary from person to person. The subjectivity of the prem-
ises might suggest that the conclusion of a Bayesian induction is 
similarly idiosyncratic, subjective and variable, which would con-
flict with a striking feature of science, namely, its substantially 
objective character. 
A number of attempts have been made to reconcile Bayesian 
methodology with scientific objectivity. For example, it has been 
argued that the difficulty may be stemmed at source by repudiat-
ing subjective in favour of purely objective prior probabilities on 
which all scientists might rationally agree. But the fact is that sci-
entists often take very different views on how credible particular 
theories are, especially in the early stages of an investigation. And, 

238 
CHAPTER 8 
more seriously, although the idea that scientific theories possess 
unique, objectively correct, inductive probabilities is eminently 
appealing, it has so far resisted determined efforts at a satisfacto-
ry analysis, except in the special cases of tautologies and contra-
dictions, and there is now a wide consensus that no such analysis 
is possible. 
A second approach tries to exploit certain limit theorems of 
Bayesian inductive theory. These are theorems (treated in detail in 
the next chapter) to the effect that under certain, mild conditions, 
for instance, that there is agreement on which hypotheses, if any, 
have zero prior probability, different Bayesian agents will, in the 
limit, as data accumulate without bounds, agree in their posterior 
views, whatever their subjective prior opinions were. But, remark-
able as they are, the limit theorems are of little utility in the present 
context. For onc thing, since they deal only with the properties of 
the posterior probability function in the limit, as the amount of data 
increases to infinity, they say nothing at all about its character after 
any actual and hence finite amount of data; they are therefore inca-
pable of acting in either a normative or an explanatory role. 
There is a third approach, which is the one we favour. It does 
not seck to account for a global identity of opinion, nor for a con-
vergence to such an identity once some specified amount of data 
is available, neither of which seem to be universal facts of science. 
The approach recognizes that scientific opinions often do con-
verge, often indeed, very quickly, after relatively little data. And it 
appeals to Bayes's theorem to provide an explanatory framework 
for this phenomenon, and to give specific explanations for specif-
ic circumstances. We believe that such explanations should be 
judged case by case, and that when this is done, the judgments 
will usually be favourable. 
Two cases which crop up frequently in the literature of statis-
tical inference, as well as in practical research, and which we con-
sidered earlier in connexion with the frequentist approach, are the 
estimation firstly, of the mean of a normal population, and sec-
ondly, of a binomial proportion. We will show that in both these 
estimation tasks, Bayesian reasoners, even when their prior opin-
ions are very different, are forced into ever-closer agreement in 
their posterior beliefs as the data accumulate. And, more signifi-
cantly, we will see that this convergence of opinion is fairly rapid. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
239 
Estimating the Mean of a Normal Population 
We used this customary example in Chapter 5 to present the ideas 
of classical interval estimation. In the example, the population 
whose mean is to be estimated is already known to be normal and 
known to have standard deviation a. The assumption of such 
knowledge is more or less realistic in many cases, for instance, 
where an instrument is used to measure some physical quantity. 
The instrument would, as a rule, deliver a spread of results if used 
repeatedly under similar conditions, and experience shows that 
this variability, or error distribution, often approximates a normal 
curve. Making measurements with such an instrument would then 
be practically equivalent to drawing a random sample of observa-
tions from a normal population of possible observations whose 
mean is the unknown quantity and whose standard deviation was 
established from previous calibrations. 
Let e be a variable that ranges over possible values of the pop-
ulation mean. We shall assume for the present that prior opinion is 
represented by a density distribution over e that is also normal, 
with a mean of f.1o and a standard deviation of ao' In virtually no 
real case would the prior distribution be strictly normal, for physi-
cal considerations usually impose limits on a parameter's possible 
values, while normal distributions assign positive probabilities to 
every range. So for instance, the average height of a human popu-
lation could neither be negative, nor above five thousand miles. 
Nevertheless, a normal distribution often provides a mathematical-
ly convenient idealization of sufficient accuracy. Assuming a nor-
mal distribution simplifies this illustration of Bayesian induction 
at work, but as we show later, the assumption may be considerably 
relaxed without substantially affecting the conclusions. 
Suppose a random sample of size n and mean x has been 
drawn from the population. The posterior distribution of e, rela-
tive to these data, turns out to be normal, like the prior, and its 
mean, ,UII ' and its standard deviation, 0" , are given by: 
nxa 2 + {loa o 2 
I 
n 
I 
u = ---
------- and 
0 
+ -
'II 
na 2 + a -2 
a-
0 2 
a02
' 
I) 
II 
These results, which are proved by Lindley, 1965, for example, 
are illustrated below. 

240 
CHAPTER 8 
posterior distribution 
prior distribution 
flo 
The precision of a distribution is defined as the reciprocal of 
its variance. So the second of the above equations tells us that the 
precision of the posterior distribution increases with the precision, 
(J 2, of the population whose mean is being estimated. By the 
same token, the precision of a measured value increases with that 
of the measuring instrumcnt (whose precision is the reciprocal of 
the variance of its error distribution). The more precise an esti-
mate the less uncertainty there is about the parameter's value, and 
the natural wish to diminish uncertainty accounts for the appeal of 
the efficiency criterion that classical statisticians have imposed, 
for inadequate reasons (see S.f above), on their estimators. 
The above equations also show that as n increases, ,u", the 
mean of the posterior distribution, tends to X, the mean of the 
o 
sample. Similarly, (J 2 tcnds to CJ--=- , a quantity that depends on the 
" 
n 
sample and on the population but not on the prior distribution. 
This means that as the sample is enlarged, the contribution of the 
prior distribution, and so of the subjective part of the inference, 
lessens, eventually dwindling to insignificance. Hence two people 
proceeding from different normal prior distributions would, with 
sufficient data, converge on posterior distributions that were arbi-
trarily close. Moreover-and this is the crucial point for explain-
ing the objectivity of the inference-the objective information 
contained in the sample becomes the dominant factor relatively 
quickly. 
We can show how quick the convergence of opinion may be by 
an example where the aim is to estimate the mean of a normal 
popUlation whose standard deviation is already known to be 10. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
24 1 
And we consider the case in which one person's normal prior dis-
tribution over the population mean is centred on 10, with a stan-
dard deviation of 10, while another's is centred on 100, with a 
standard deviation of 20. This difference represents a very sharp 
divergence of initial opinion, because the region that in the view 
of the first person almost certainly contains the true mean is prac-
tically certain not to contain it as far as the second is concerned. 
But even so profound a disagreement as this is resolved after rel-
atively few observations. The following table shows the means 
and standard deviations of the posterior distributions of the two 
people, relative to random samples of various sizes, each sample 
having a mean of 50. 
Sample size 
Person 1 
Person 2 
n 
,un 
a 
jUn 
(J 
n 
n 
---
-_ . . 
0 
10 
10 
100 
20 
1 
30 
7.1 
60 
8.9 
5 
43 
4.1 
52 
4.4 
10 
46 
3.0 
5 I 
3.1 
20 
48 
2.2 
5 I 
2.2 
100 
50 
1.0 
50 
1.0 
We deliberately chose an extreme example, where the prior 
di stributions scarcely overlap. The first line of the table, corre-
sponding to no data, represents thi s initial position. Yet we see that 
a sample of only 20 brings the two posterior distributions very 
close, while a sample of 100 renders them indistinguishable. Not 
surprisingly, the closer opinions are at the start, the less evidence 
is needed to bring the corresponding posterior opinions within 
given bounds of similarity. I Hence, although the Bayesian analy-
sis of the case under consideration must proceed from a largely 
subjective prior distribution, the most powerful influence on its 
conclusion is the objective experimental evidence. We shall see 
that the same is more generally true. 
I See, for instance, Pratt et al. 1965, Chapter 1 I. 

242 
CHAPTER 8 
Estimating a Binomial Proportion 
Another standard problem in inferential statistics is how to esti-
mate a proportion, for instance, of red counters in an urn, or of 
Republican sympathisers in the population, or of the physical 
probability of a coin turning up heads when it is flipped. Data are 
collected by randomly sampling the urn or the population, with 
replacement, or by flipping the coin, and then noting for each 
counter sampled whether it is red or not, and for each person sam-
pled his or her political sympathies, and for each toss of the coin 
whether it landed heads or tails. If, as in these cases, there are just 
two possible outcomes, with probabilities 8, and I - 8, constant 
from trial to trial, then the data-generating process is known as a 
Bernoulli process and 8 and 1 - 8 are called the Bernoulli param-
eters, or the binomial proportions. The outcomes of a Bernoulli 
process are conventionally labelled 'success' and 'failure'. 
The Bayesian method of estimating a Bernoulli parameter 
from given experimental results starts, of course, by describing a 
prior distribution, which we shall assume to have the form of a so-
called beta distribution. This restriction has the expository advan-
tage of simplifying the calculation of the corresponding posterior 
distribution. The restriction is not in fact a severe one, for beta 
distributions take on a wide variety of shapes, depending on the 
values of two positive-valued parameters, u and v, enabling you to 
choose a beta distribution that best approximates your actual dis-
tribution of beliefs. And as we shall see, with sufficient data, pos-
terior probabilities are not much affected by even quite big 
changes in the corresponding priors, so that inaccuracies in the 
specification of the prior will then not have a significant effect. 
A random variable x is said to have the beta distribution if its 
density is given by 
P(x) 
8(u, v) X,,-I (I - x)' I 
o 
O<x<1 
elsewhere. 
The parameters u and v are both greater than 0, and 8(u, v) = 
qu + v) 
-
- -- . We do not need to spell out the gamma function in 
qu)qv) 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
243 
detail here, except to note that when w is a positive integer that 
r = (w - I)! (with O! defined as I). When VI' is non-integral, the 
value of the gamma function can be obtained from tables in math-
ematical handbooks. The following diagram illustrates some beta 
distributions for various values of u and v. 
6 
5 
~ 
.~ 4 
Q) 
-0 
.~ 3 
:0 
ro 
.g 2 
a: 
o 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
SOME BETA DISTRIBUTIONS 
The mean and variance of a beta distribution are given by: 
u 
. 
(;;';)( ~;,) 
variance = 
. 
mean = 
ll+V 
u+v+! 
If the prior distribution over the Bernoulli parameters is of the 
beta form, Bayes's theorem is particularly easy to apply. For sup-
pose a random sample of n observations derived from a Bernoulli 
process shows s successes andffailures, it then turns out that the 
posterior distribution is also of the beta form, with parameters 
11' = U + s and v' = v + f Hence, the mean of the posterior 
11 + S 
s 
distribution is 
. This tends to - , as the number of trials 
lI+v+n 
n 
increases to infinity; and the variance of the posterior distribution 
tends, though more slowly, to zero. 2 Thus, like the earlier exam-
2 See, for example, Pollard 1985, Chapter 8. 

244 
C HA PTER 8 
pic, the influence of the prior distribution upon the posterior dis-
tribution steadily diminishes with the size of the sample, the rate 
of diminution being considerable, as simple examples, which the 
reader may construct, would show. 
Credible Intervals and Confidence Intervals 
Parameter estimates are often reported in the form of a range of 
possibilities, e.g., 8 = 8* ± E. This has a natural Bayesian inter-
pretation, namely, as a set of values possessing a high probabil-
ity of containing the true value of 8. In general, if? denotes the 
probability that () lies between a and h, then the interval (a, h) 
is said to be a 100? percent credible interval for 8. Bayesians 
recommend credible intervals as useful summaries of posterior 
distributions. 
We may illustrate the idea with our first example, where we 
were concerned to estimate the mean of a normal population. We 
showed that in the circumstances hypothesized, a sufficient 
amount of data determined a posterior distribution with a mean 
equal to the sample mean, X, and a standard deviation, CJIl equal 
o 
CJ 
to 
. Since the distribution is normal, the range x ± 1.96 . r 
~ 
vn 
contains 8 with probability 0.95, and so constitutes a 95 percent 
credible interval. 
Of course, there are other 95 percent credible intervals corre-
sponding to different areas of the posterior distribution, for instance, 
the infinite range of values defined by () > x ~ 1.640 , and inter-
~ 
1/ 
vals that extend further into the tails of the posterior di stribution 
while omitting a more or less narrow band of values around its cen-
tre. There is sometimes a discussion about which of these intervals 
should be "chosen" (for example by Lindley, 1965, Volume 2, pp. 
24-25), which we believe to be misconceived, for strictly speaking, 
one should not choose an interval, because a choice implies a com-
mitment in excess of that permitted by the 0.95 probability that all 
these intervals share. All 95 percent credible intervals are 011 a par 
from the inductive or scienti fic point of view. 
Bayesian credible intervals resemble the confidence intervals 
of classical statistics. Indeed, ill the particular case before us, the 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
245 
95 percent credible interval depicted in the diagram and the 95 
percent confidence interval that is routinely favoured (the short-
est one) coincide. Yet the two types of interval are crucially differ-
ent. The first states the probability, relative to the evidence, that e 
lies within the interval. The second says nothing about the proba-
bility of e, nor does it express any degree of uncertainty about e 
in non-probabilistic terms, as its defenders, unsuccessfully claim 
that it does. Credible intervals provide an intelligible interpreta-
tion and a rational explanation for the intuitions underlying clas-
sical confidence intervals. 
B.b ! The Principle of Stable Estimation 
The estimates delivered in our two examples are, as we showed, 
very insensitive to variations in the prior distributions. However, 
since the priors assumed in the examples were restricted, in the 
first case, to normal and in the second, to beta distributions, the 
question arises whether this insensitivity persists when these 
restrictions are relaxed. That it does is the burden of the Principle 
of Stable Estimation, due to Edwards, Lindman and Savage 1963, 
a practically useful aspect of a more general result proved by 
Blackwell and Dubins 1962. 
The idea is this. Consider a parameter e, with a prior probabil-
ity density distribution u( e), and the corresponding posterior dis-
tribution, relative to some data x. u(e I x). We will denote by 
1<v(e I x) the posterior distribution that would be induced if the 
prior were uniform. B is a credible interval based on w(e I x) , 
which is such that 
J w~
l ~desaJw~ l~d~ 
73 
/J 
where jj is the complement of B, and a is 10-4 or less (that is, B 
is a 99.99 percent or higher credible interval). Consider secondly, 
the variation of the actual prior distribution within the interval 
B, which the second condition says should be small; more specif-
ically, this condition stipulates that there be positive numbers cp 
(whose actual value is immaterial in this context) and (3, the latter 
< 0.05, such that for all e in B 

246 
CHAPTER 8 
cp :::; u(e) :::; (1 + (3)cp. 
Finally, consider the variation of the prior distribution outside 
B. The third condition stipulates that the prior should be 
"nowhere astronomically big compared to its nearly constant val-
ues in B". More specifically, for some positive number 6 < 1000 
and for all (j 
u(e) :::; 6cp. 
Edwards, Lindman, and Savage then show that under these 
conditions, the true posterior distribution and the one calculated 
on the hypothesis of a uniform prior are approximately the same. 
Moreover, the approximation is greater, the smaller a, (3, and 6. 
Hence, whatever the prior beliefs of different people, so long as 
they meet the said conditions, the principle ensures that their pos-
terior beliefs are all roughly the same. 
In practice, the stated conditions of the Stable Estimation prin-
ciple are ordinarily quite accessible, and one can check whether 
they hold in any particular case. This is done by first calculating 
the posterior distribution that would obtain if the prior were uni-
form ,3 then examining a 99.99 percent credible interval (the area 
shaded in the diagram) to see whether the range of variation of the 
true prior within the interval is as small as the principle requires, 
and finally checking outside the interval that the actual prior is 
never larger than the average value within it by more than the pre-
scribed amount. 
The Principle of Stable Estimation assures us that the relative 
independence of Bayesian estimates from the prior distributions, 
which we noted in our two examples, is not confined to priors 
belonging to particular families of distributions. The principle 
also tells us that provided the sample is sufficiently large, you do 
not need to describe the prior distribution with great accuracy or 
precision in order to arrive at a Bayesian estimate that is both 
3 Sincc a uniform distri bution is only dcfincd over an interval that is bounded at 
both cnds. this will involve setting limits to the values that the parameter could 
have. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
247 
Posterior based on 
uniform prior 
True prior 
~ 
~ Shaded region 
~ 
covers most of 
~ rP_o_st_e_rio_r ______ ~ 
STABLE ESTIMATION 
APPLIES 
~--~~~~~~~--
Practical Application of the Principle of Stable Estimation (Phillips 1973) 
accurate and precise. This answers the objection that is sometimes 
raised against Bayesian estimation that it can rarely get off the 
ground because of the practical difficulties of accurately ascer-
taining one's own or other people's prior belief distributions. 
S.c I Describing the Evidence 
An experimental result is a physical state; on the other hand, sci-
entific evidence is a linguistic statement, and a question that aris-
es is: which aspects of the physical state should go into the 
evidence statement'? A complete description would be infinitely 
long and clearly impossible. Nor is it desirable even as an abstract 
ideal to include every aspect of an experimental result in the evi-
dence, for some aspects are plainly irrelevant. For instance, the 
colour of the experimenter's shoes when sowing plant seeds 
would not normally be worth recording if the genetic structure of 
the plant were the issue. Evidence need not refer to irrelevant 
details such as these, but, as we showed in 5.f, it should omit no 
detai ls that are relevant. 
In this context, a fact is relevant to a hypothesis if knowing it 
affects how the hypothesis is appraised; when the method of 
appraisal is Bayesian, this means that the relevance of a fact is 
determined by whether it alters the probabilities of any of the 
hypotheses of interest. We may illustrate this notion of evidential 

248 
CHAPTER 8 
relevance with the simple, but representative problem of estimat-
ing a coin's physical probabilities oflanding heads and tails, using 
evidence obtained from flipping it a number of times. Let us say 
the coin was flipped 10 times, producing 6 heads and 4 tai Is. The 
table below lists several possible descriptions of such a result and 
several circumstances in which it might have been obtained. 
TABLE 8.1 
Possible descriptions of the result 6 heads, 4 tails obtained in 
various cOin-tossing trials 
e/ : 6 heads 
e 2: 6 heads, 4 tails, in a trial designed to end after 10 toss-
es of the coin 
e3 : 6 heads, 4 tails, in a trial designed to end after 6 heads 
appear 
e 4: The sequence TTHTH HHHTH 
e,: The sequence TTHTHHHHTH obtained in a trial 
designed to terminate when the experimenter is called 
for lunch 
eo : 6 heads, 4 tails 
The first description gives a very thin account of the experi-
ment, not even revealing how many tails it produced, information 
that is clearly relevant, and because of this omission, its evidential 
value is small and hard to quantify. A Bayesian inference from the 
evidence statement would require not only a prior distribution 
over (J (the coin's physical probability of landing heads), but also 
one over 11 , the number of times the coin was tossed. It is unnec-
essary to enter further into this complicated case, save to note that 
unlike the classical approach, and more plausibly we think, the 
Bayesian does not necessarily find e I uninformative. 
The second description, e1 , tells us the number of heads and 
tails in the result and gives the stopping rule that governed the 
experiment. We can use this directly in Bayes's theorem to calcu-
. 
d' .. 
I 
p (el e) p '(JII S' 
I 
late the postenor Istnbutlon p(e e) = -
-- -
(,/' 
Lnee t le 
pre) 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION STATISTICAL THEORIES 
249 
number of times the coin was flipped was predetermined accord-
ing to thc stopping rule, the likelihood function and the probabil-
ity of the evidence are given in familiar fashion by thc formulas: 
I 
P(e21 8) = "C,W( I - 8)" . rand pee) = I"C,W( 1- 8)"- 'P( 8)d8 
o 
where r denotes the number of heads and n the number of coin 
tosses, which in our present example are 6 and 10, respectively. 
The binomial factor "C" being a function of rand n only, is inde-
pendent of 8, and so cancels out of Bayes's theorem. Clearly any 
other description of the experimental outcome for which P( e2 I 8) = 
KW (l - 8)" , yields the same posterior distribution, provided K 
is independent of 8. This is the case with e l , which states a differ-
ent stopping rule, and with e4 , which lists thc precise sequence of 
heads and tails in the outcome. In the former case, K = "IC,_ I' 
as we showcd in 5.d, and in the latter K = I. Hence, the Bayesian 
conclusion is unaffected by whether the experimenter intended to 
stop after n tosses of the coin or when r heads appeared in the 
sample or, indeed, whether the experiment was performed without 
a stopping rule. As we noted in Chapter 5, this is not so in the clas-
sical scheme. 
The next experimental description, c" illustrates a case where 
the rule to stop the trial depends on some external event rather 
than on any feature of the sample. If I states that the experiment 
was designed to stop as soon as lunch was ready, then c, is equiv-
alent to the conjunction I & e4 . So, in applying Bayes's theorem, 
we need to consider the probabilities P(l & e 4 I 8), which can also 
be cxprcsscd as P(ll e4 & 8 )P(e41 8). If I is probabilistically inde-
pendent of 8 in the presence of e 4' as wc havc argucd that it is, 
then P(e5
1 8) has the form KW(l - 8)" " where K is a constant, 
relative to 8. And so, as we observed above, this constant cancels 
from Bayes's theorem, which then delivers the same posterior dis-
tribution for c, as for e 4' implying that the stopping rule is induc-
tively irrelevant. It clearly should be, though the classical 
philosophy denies this, as we showed in Chapter 5. 
Data arc normally presented without mention of the stopping 
rule, as in en' which merely reports the number of heads and tails 
produced in the trial. This poses a problem, for the probability of 
such a result does depend on the stopping rule, and if pre I 8) 

250 
CHAPTER 8 
cannot be computed neither Bayes's theorem, nor a classical test 
of significance can be applied. The difficulty is usually met by 
calculating the probabilities as !fthe sample size had been fixed 
in advance. In the present case, this means that pre I 8) would be 
reckoned as equal to "C/j' (I - BY - '. This seems arbitrary and 
wrong, but is in fact justi fied in a Bayesian (though not a classi-
cal ) analysis, for the result r heads, n - r tails must have occurred 
as some particular sequence, and whatever that sequence was, its 
probability, conditional on B, is 8' (1 - e)" ', and we may correct-
ly use this as the input for Bayes's theorem. But as we pointed out 
before, we obtain thereby the same posterior distribution for e as 
we do when the calculation is based on the possibly incorrect 
assumption of a fixed-sample stopping rule. 
We have argued that the stopping rule is irrelevant in any 
inductive inference, and the Bayesian endorsement of this view 
and the classical denial of it seem to us decisive arguments in 
favour of the one and against the other. But before resting our 
case, we should visit a couple of arguments that may appear to 
show that in fact the Bayesian is wrong to take no account of the 
stopping rule. 
To illustrate the first, consider the stopping rule we mentioned 
earlier, in which the trial is planned to stop as soon as lunch is 
ready, and suppose the purpose of the trial is to use a random sam-
ple to estimate the mean height of a group of chefs who are 
preparing the meal while the trial is progressing. Now if tall chefs 
cook faster than short ones, the time taken before the random 
sampling stops depends on the unknown parameter and so con-
tains relevant information about it, which should be reflected in 
any Bayesian analysis. However, despite a possible initial impres-
sion to the contrary, this does not endorse the classical position 
concerning the stopping rule, for it does not imply that the exper-
imenter's subjective intention or plan to stop the trial at a particu-
lar point had any inductive significance; all that was relevant in 
this contrived and unusual case was the objective coincidence of 
lunch being ready at the same moment as the experiment stopped. 
A second argument that is made from time to time is thi s: a 
Bayesian who fails to announce in advance the circumstances 
under which a trial will be stopped could decide to continue to 
sample for as long as it takes to reach any desired posterior proh-

BAYESIAN INDUCTION STATISTICAL THEORIES 
251 
ability for any hypothesis, however remote from the truth it might 
be. And according to Mayo (1996, pp. 352-7), for example, the 
determined Bayesian will assuredly succeed in this eventually, 
that is, in the limit as the sampling is repeated to infinity, or, as 
Mayo puts it, by "going on long enough".4 Mayo suggests that this 
putative property allows the Bayesian to "mislead", and vitiates 
any Bayesian estimate. 
But in fact, neither Mayo nor anyone else has demonstrated 
that Bayesian conclusions drawn from the results of such try-and-
try-again experiments would be misleading, or spurious, or in any 
way wrong. And unless such demonstrations are forthcoming, 
there is no case whatever for the Bayesian to answer. 
Moreover, the main premise of the objection is wrong, for, as 
Savage (1962) proved, the application of Bayes's theorem does not 
guarantee supportive evidence for any hypothesis, however long 
the sampling is continued, and in fact, as Kadane et al. (1999, 
Chapters 3.7 and 3.8) have shown, the probability of eventually 
obtaining strongly supportive evidence for a false theory is small. 
How small this probability is depends on the prior probability of 
the hypothesis and on the degree of confirmation sought for it. 
Sufficiency 
The Bayesian concept of relevant information is that E is relevant 
to 8 if and only if the posterior distribution of 8 given E is differ-
ent from its prior distribution. Of the items of evidence e~ to er, in 
the above table, the last contains the least amount of information 
and yet, as we showed, it is just as informative about 8 as the oth-
ers. So the information about the various stopping rules in those 
pieces of evidence is, in a Bayesian sense, inductively irrelevant. 
Classical statistics employs the idea of relevant information too, 
approaching it through its concept of sufficient statistics. It will 
be recalled from Chapter 5 that a statistic t is defined as sufficient 
for 8, relative to data x, when P(x I 1) is independent of 8, this 
being interpreted as t containing all the information in x that is 
4 Of course, in practical reality, the sampling could never be continued very long 
at all, let alone be taken to the limit. 

252 
CHAPTER 8 
relevant to e. Here, x and t are random variables, and the suffi-
ciency definition refers to all the possible values they take in the 
experimental outcome space. Since the latter is determined by the 
stopping rule, the classical requirement that inferential statistics 
be sufficient underlines the centrality of the stopping rule in clas-
sical inference. 
We argued that e4 : the sequence TTHTHHHHTH and en: 6 
heads. 4 tails contain the same information about fl. Yet if the 
number of coin tosses were 10,000, rather than 10, the same argu-
ment might not hold. For if some pattern were detected in the 
sequence, for example, if all the heads preceded all the tails, or if 
the first half of the sequence showed a large preponderance of 
tails and the second half of heads, there would be evidence that 
the coin 's centre of gravity had shifted, which would be missed if 
one relied simply on the number of heads and tails. The lesson 
here is that the scientist should examine evidence in as much 
detail as is feasible, so as not to overlook significant information. 
The possibility that the order of the heads and tails might be evi-
dentially significant did not emerge in our earlier discussion, 
because we, in effect, treated such variant hypotheses as having 
zero probability. But this was a simplification and in practice, the 
open-minded scientist would not usually take this most extreme 
attitude to unlikely hypotheses. 
B.d 
! Sampling 
In order to derive a posterior distribution for a parameter from 
sample data, one needs to compute the likelihood terms that fig-
ure in Bayes's theorem. Likelihoods are also required in classical 
inferences. And since these inferences are supposed to be objec-
tive, the likelihoods they employ must also be, to which end clas-
sical statisticians generally call for experimental samples to be 
created by means of a physical randomizing device, in order to 
ensure that every element is endowed with precisely the same 
objective probability of being included in the sample. This means 
that a sample drawn haphazardly, or purposively, in the manner 
we described in 5.g, would be uninformative and unacceptable for 
the purpose ofa classical estimation, while the very same sample, 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION STATISTICAL THEORIES 
253 
had it been generated by a random process, would have been per-
fectly alright. This contrast sounds paradoxical, and indeed, Stuart 
(1962, p. 12) described it as a "paradox of sampling" and as a bit-
ter pi II that must be swallowed, in the interests of what he regard-
ed as the only valid estimation methods, namely those of classical 
inference. 
In fact, Bayesian inference is also sensitive to the sampling 
method, and as we show, there is nothing paradoxical about this, 
since the way that the data were collected may indeed carry use-
ful information. Suppose, for example, that in order to estimate 
the proportion fJ of As in a population, a sample of 1 (to cut the 
argument to the bare bones) was drawn and that this was an A; and 
suppose that the selected element also possesses some other char-
acteristic, B. The goal might be to discover what proportion of the 
population intends to vote for a particular political party, and the 
sample might consist of an individual who does so intend, and 
who is noted to be above the age of 60. The posterior distribution 
in the light of this information is given by 
P(fJ lAB) 
P( fJ) 
P(AB I fJ) 
P(A B) 
peA I fJB) 
PCB I fJ ) 
x 
peA I B) 
P(B)
' 
The sample could have been gathered in a number of ways. For 
example, it might be the result of a random draw from the entire 
population, or alternatively, from just that portion of the popula-
tion containing Bs. If the latter, then P(B) = P(B I fJ) = 1. If the 
former, the equality between P(B) and P(B I fJ) holds only if Band 
fJ are probabilistically independent, in which event, the two sam-
pling methods lead to the same Bayesian conclusion. But this is a 
particular case, and as a general rule the inductive force of a given 
sample is not independent of the selection procedure. (See S.d 
above, and Korb 1994.) 
This is intuitively right, we suggest, because the number of Bs 
contained in a random sample that was collected with the pur-
pose of estimating fJ is also a measure of the overall proportion 
of Bs. If the latter is probabilistically dependent on fJ, it will con-
vey some information about that parameter too. On the other 
hand, if you deliberately restricted the sample to Bs, the fact that 
it contains only elements of that type would carry practically no 

254 
CHAPTER 8 
information about their frequency in the population; hence, that 
potential source of knowledge about e would be unavailable. 
Bayesian and classical positions agree then that the sampling 
method as well as the sample is inductively relevant. But they do 
not agree on the role of random samples. The classical position is 
that only random samples that are created using a physical ran-
domizing mechanism can be infonnative, making the inconven-
ient demand that other sorts of sample should not be used. 
Bayesian induction, on the other hand can operate satisfactorily 
using what we described in Chapter 5 as purposive or judgment 
sampling. 
B.e i Testing Causal Hypotheses 
The most widely used statistical methodology for testing and 
evaluating causal hypotheses, particularly in medical and agricul-
tural trials, was invented by Fisher and is rooted in classical pro-
cedures of inference. It will be recalled from our discussion in 
Chapter 6 that the novelty of Fisher's approach was to require a 
process known as randomization. We have argued that despite the 
weight of opinion that regards it as a sine qua non, the randomiz-
ing of treatments in a trial does not do the job expected of it and 
moreover, that in the medical context, it can be unnecessary, 
inconvenient, and unethical. We present here (following Urbach 
1993) an outline ofa Bayesian way of testing causal hypotheses, 
which is soundly based and we believe, intuitively more satisfac-
tory than the Fisherian method. 
Consider the matter through a medical example. Suppose a 
new drug were discovered which, because of its structural similar-
ity to an established cure for depression, seems likely also to be 
an effective treatment for that condition. Or suppose that the drug 
had given encouraging results in a pilot study involving a small 
number of patients. (As we said earlier, without some indication 
that the drug is likely to be effective, a large-scale trial of an 
experimental drug or treatment is indefensible, either economical-
ly or ethically.) A trial to test the drug's efficacy would normally 
take the following form. Two groups of sufferers would be consti-
tuted. One of them, the test group, would receive the drug, while 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
255 
the other, the control group would not. In practice, the experiment 
would be more elaborate than this; for example, the control group 
would receive a placebo, that is, a substance which appears indis-
tinguishable from the test drug but lacks any relevant pharmaco-
logically activity; and patients would not know whether they were 
part of the drug group or the placebo group. Moreover, a fastidi-
ously conducted trial would ensure that the doctor too is unaware 
of whether he or she is administering the drug or the placebo (tri-
als performed with this restriction are said to be double blind). 
Further precautions might also be taken to ensure that any other 
factors thought likely by medical experts to influence recovery 
were equally represented in each of the groups. It is then said that 
these factors have been controlled for. 
Why such a complicated experiment? Well, the reason for a 
comparison, or control group is obvious. We are interested in the 
causal effect of the drug on the chance of recovery; so we need to 
know not only how patients react when they are given the drug, 
but also how they would respond in its absence, and the condi-
tions in the comparison group are intended to simulate the latter 
circumstance. The requirement to match or control the groups, in 
certain respects, is also intuitive; but although always insisted 
upon, it is never derived from epistemological principles in the 
standard, classical expositions. However, selective controls in 
clinical trials do have a rational basis. It is provided by Bayes's 
theorem, as we shall now explain. 
Clinical Trials: a Bayesian Analysis 
To simplify our exposition, we will consider a particular trial in 
which, for illustration, 80 percent of a specified number of test-
group patients have recovered from the disease in question, while 
the recovery rate in the control group is 40 percent: call this the 
evidence, e. Ideally, we would like to be able to conclude that 
these percentages also approximate the probabilities of recovery 
for similar people outside the trial. This hypothesis, which is rep-
resented below as H", says that the physical probability of recov-
ery (R) for a person who has received the drug is around 0.80, and 
for someone who has not received the drug it is around 0.40, 

256 
C HAPTER 8 
provided they also satisfy certain conditions, L, M and N, say. 
These conditions, or what we earlier called prognostic factors, 
might, for example, specify that the patient's age falls in a certain 
range, that he or she has reached a certain stage of the illness, and 
so forth. (In the formulations below, Drug and ~Drug denote the 
conditions of the drug's presence and absence, respectively.) For 
H to explain e, we also need to be able to assert that the condi-
a 
tions L, M and N were satisfied by the subjects in both of the 
experimental groups, and that the test group received the drug, 
while the control group did not; this is the content of ~r So the 
hypothesis claiming that the drug caused the observed discrepan-
cy in recovery rates is the combination H" & HI]' which we label 
H and call the drug hypothesis: 
(H) 
H,,: P(R I L, M, N, Drug) = 0.80 & P(R I L, M, N, ~Drug) 
= 0.40 
HI]: Patients in the experimental groups satisfy conditions L, 
M and N. 
But the drug hypothesis is not the only one capable of explain-
ing the experimental findings. Another explanation might attrib-
ute them to a psychosomatic effect induced by a greater level of 
optimism amongst the test group patients than amongst those in 
the control group. Let H;, signify the hypothesis that under con-
ditions L, M and N, the drug has no effect on the course of the dis-
ease, but that an optimistic attitude (0) promotes recovery. By 
parallel reasoning, the hypothesis that explains the evidence as a 
psychosomatic, confidence effect is the combination of H;, and 
H;], whieh we label H': 
H ;,: P(R I L, M, N, 0) = 0.80 & P(R I L, M, N, ~O) = 0.40 
(H') 
H;, : Test group patients satisfy L, M, N, 0; control group 
patients satisfy L, M, N, ~o. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
257 
The Bayesian method addresses itself to the probabilities of 
hypotheses and to how those probabilities are updated via Bayes's 
theorem in the light of new information. Let us sec how this 
updating works in the present case. To start with, and for the pur-
pose of exposition, we shall suppose that Hand H' are the only 
hypotheses with any chance of being true. In that event, Bayes's 
theorem takes the following form: 
1 
P(H I e) = --pre I HjP(H')' 
1 +
-----
pre I H)P(H) 
The question is how to design the experiment so as to maximize 
the probability of the drug hypothesis for some given e. We see 
from the above equation that the only components that can be 
manipulated to this end arc P(H) and P(H'), and that the smaller 
the latter and the larger the former, the better. Now, if the two 
components of the hypotheses arc independent-a reasonable 
premise, which also simplifies our argument-then P(H) = 
P(H,, )P(HIJ ) and P(H') = P(H!JP(H~). The goal of minimizing 
P(H ') now comes down to that of minimizing P(H~J And again, 
since only P(H I)) can be changed by adjusting the experimental 
conditions, it is this component of P(H) that should be maximized. 
Now H 't! states, amongst other things, that patients in the test 
group were confident of recovery, while those in the control group 
were not. We can reduce the probability of this being the case-
reduce P(H ~), that is-by applying a placebo to the control 
group; for if the placebo is well designed, patients will have no 
idea which experimental group they were in, so that a number of 
factors that would otherwise create different expectations of 
recovery in the two groups would be absent. In many cases, the 
probability of H 'I) could be reduced further by ensuring that even 
the doctors involved in the trial cannot distinguish the treatment 
from the placebo; such trials are, as we said earlier, called 'dou-
ble blind' . By diminishing P(H'/)) in these various ways, the prob-
ability of H , for a given e, is increased. 
The drug hypothesis would, as we pointed out, also be made 
more probable by adopting appropriate measures to raise P(HIJ ). 
that is to say, measures that increase the chance that the factors 

258 
CHAPTER 8 
which the drug hypothesis says are relevant to recovery (namely, 
L, M and N) are represented equally in the two groups. Now sup-
pose one of those factors was virulence of the disease, or the 
strength of the patient, or the like, which may be hard to measure 
but which doctors may well be able, through long experience, to 
intuit. And suppose we left it to these doctors to construct the 
comparison groups. It would not he surprising if the resulting 
groups contained unequal numbers of the more vulnerable 
patients. For doctors should be and generally are guided by the 
wish to secure the best treatment for their patients, in accordance 
with the Hippocratic Oath,5 and if they also entertained prior 
views on the trial treatment's efficacy, they would be inclined to 
distribute patients among the trial groups according to particular 
medical needs, rather than with impartiality. And there may be 
other unconscious or even conscious motivations amongst exper-
imenters that could lead them to create test groups with an inbuilt 
bias either in favour or against the test treatment.° This is where 
randomized allocation can playa role, for it is a mechanism that 
excludes the doctor's feelings and thoughts from the process of 
forming the experimental groups and thereby makes balanced 
groups more probable. 
We have simplified this exposition by considering a single 
alternative to the drug hypothesis. There will normally be many 
alternatives, each contributing an element to the denominator, 
which would then include as summands other terms of the form: 
Pee I H")P(H") = Pee I H",,&H'{;) P(H",)P(H"I)- again, assum-
ing independence. Each of these terms relates to specific, hypo-
thetical prognostic factors, and each needs to be minimized in 
order to maximize the posterior probability of H, the drug hypoth-
, Hippocrates (died 380 360 H.C.) was the author of the eponymous oath by 
which doctors committed themselves to certai n professional standards. 
Graduates ill some medical schools today formally take a modernized version of 
that oath. The classical formulation enjoins doctors, amongst other things, to 
keep their patients "from harm and injustice". A form that is currently approved 
by the American Medical Association makes the doctor promise "that you will 
exercise your profcssion solely for the curc of your patients". 
(, Kadane and Seidcnfeld (1990) cite the possibilities of bias arising because the 
experimenter was thc inventor of the test treatment, with a personal stake in its 
success, or was kecn to make a splash in the acadcmic literature by announcing 
a surprising result. 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
259 
esis; as we explained, this is done is by matching the experimen-
tal groups in ways that are suited to reducing P(H '~J 
But not every conceivable factor can be matched across the 
groups; nor is a comprehensive matching in any sense either need-
ed or desirable. For, consider a possible prognostic factor whose 
causal influence is described in the hypothesis H'~, and suppose 
that hypothesis to be very improbable; in that event, the whole of 
the corresponding term in Bayes's theorem would already be 
extremely small, and so the advantage of reducing it further by 
applying appropriate controls would be correspondingly small. 
And in most cases, that small advantage would be outweighed by 
the extra cost and inconvenience of the more elaborate trial. For 
example, though one could introduce a control to reduce the prob-
ability that the clinicians treating the two groups had different 
average shoe sizes, such a precaution would only negligibly affect 
the posterior probability of the drug hypothesis, since shoe size is 
so immensely unlikely to int1uence the outcome of the trial. 
In summary, the Bayesian theory explains why the experimen-
tal groups in clinical trials need to be matched in certain respects, 
and why they need not be matched in every respect. It agrees with 
common sense in affirming that the chielconcern when designing 
a clinical trial should he to make it /{nlike~v that the experimental 
groups differ 011 fClctors that are like Iv to affect the outcome. 
Designs that achieve such a balance between groups are termed 
"haphazard" by Lindley, 1982a, p. 439, though we prefer to think 
of them as adequately matched or controlled. 
With this rule in mind, it is evident that a randomized alloca-
tion of subjects to treatments might sometimes be useful in clini-
cal trials as a way of better balancing the experimental groups, 
insofar as it stops those making the allocation from doing so on 
the basis, for example, of how sick the patient is. But randomized 
allocation is not absolutely necessQ/}'; it is no sine qua non; it is 
110t the only or even alHYIYs the best way olconstructing the treat-
ment groups in a clinical trial. 
Clinical Trials without Randomization 
Bayesian and classical prescriptions for clinical trials differ in two 
respects of practical importance. First, a Bayesian analysis per-

260 
CHAPTER 8 
mits the continuous evaluation of results as they accumulate, 
thus allowing a trial to be halted as soon as the effectiveness or 
otherwise of the experimental treatment becomes apparcnt. It 
will be recalled that, by contrast, when classical principles are 
strictly observed, a clinical trial that has been brought to an 
unscheduled stop cannot even be interpreted, whatever the 
results recordcd at that stage. And sequential clinical trials, 
which were specially invented in order to allow interim analyses 
of trial results using the classical techniques are ineffective, as 
we argued in Chapter 6. 
The second difference relates to the formation of the com-
parison groups in a clinical trial. On the Bayesian view, thc essen-
tial desideratum is that the groups be adequately matched on 
likely prognostic factors. Freed from the absolute need to random-
ize, Bayesian principles affirm, what its rival denies, that decisive 
information about a medical treatment can be obtained from trials 
that use, for example, a historical control group, that is to say, a 
number of patients who have already received an alternative ther-
apy or no therapy at all. Such groups may be constructed by 
means of information derived from medical records and, provided 
they are adequately matched on prognostic factors with a test 
group (which may also be of the historical type), an informative 
comparison is allowed. 
Historically controlled trials are widely dismissed as inher-
ently fallacious by classically minded medical statisticians, who 
regard concurrent, randomized trials as the "only way to assess 
new drugs" (Mc Intyre 1991). But this view is not only indefen-
sible on epistemic grounds, it is daily refuted in medical prac-
tice, where doctors' knowledge and expertise is accumulated in 
part by continual, informal comparisons of current and former 
patients. 
Even some classical statisticians (such as Byar et al. 1990) 
concede that historical comparison groups may be preferable in 
certain circumstances, particularly where a randomized trial 
would expose critically ill patients in a control group to a useless 
placebo, while others are given a promising, experimental treat-
ment. Byar and h is colleagues claimed that the standard trial 
structure should be suspended when there is "a justifiable expec-
tation that the potential benefit to the patient will be sufficiently 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION STATISTICAL THEORIES 
261 
large to make interpretation of the results of a non-randomized 
trial unambiguous". But they do not say what process of inference 
could deliver the unambiguous interpretation of results. No clas-
sical significance test can be intended, since Byar makes the 
familiar classical claim, which we discussed in Chapter 6, that "it 
is the process of randomization that generates the significance 
test". Nor does any other tool of classical inference seem to be 
available. It is more likely that Byar et at. are here allowing them-
selves an informal Bayesian interpretation, for they say that a his-
torically controlled trial is acceptable only if the trial treatment 
has a strong prior credibility: "the scientific rationale for the 
[trial] treatment must be sufficiently strong that a positive result 
would be widely expected". 
The admissibility in principle of historically controlled trials is 
not just an interesting theoretical implication of the Bayesian 
view, but is of considerable practical significance too. Firstly, 
such trials call for fewer new subjects, which is of particular 
importance when rare medical conditions arc the subject of study. 
And smaller trials are generally cheaper. Secondly, historical 
comparison groups do not expose subjects to ineffective placebos 
or to what clinicians expect will turn out to be inferior compari-
son treatments, considerations that address natural ethical con-
cerns, and mitigate the reluctance commonly found amongst 
patients to participate in trials. 
Historically controlled trials are however, not easy to set up. 
The comparison groups can only be formed with the aid of thor-
ough medical records of past patients, more detailed than the 
records that are routindy kept, and more accessible. To this end, 
Berry 1989 proposed the establishment of national databases con-
taining patients' characteristics, diagnoses, treatments and out-
comes, which could be open to the public and contributed to by 
every doctor. Some modest work along these lines has been done. 
Unfortunately, the widely held, though erroneous opinion that his-
torical controls are intrinsically unacceptable or impossible has 
discouraged efforts to overcome the purely practical obstacles that 
stand in the way of effective historically controlled trials. Here is 
a case where the mistaken principles of classical methodology are 
harmful. 

262 
CHAPTER 8 
Summary 
Bayes's theorem supplies coherent and intuitive guidelines for 
clinical and similar trials, which contrast signif icantly with clas-
sical ones. One striking difference between the two approaches is 
that the second simply takes the need for controls for granted, 
while the first explains that need and, moreover, distinguishes in 
a plausible way between factors that have to be controlled and 
those that do not. Another difference is that the Bayesian approach 
does not make the random allocation of subjects to treatments a 
universal, absolute requirement. We regard this as a considerable 
merit, since we have discovered no good reason for regarding a 
random allocation as indispensable and several good reasons for 
not so regarding it. 
8.f 1 Conclusion 
The Bayesian way of estimating parameters associates different 
degrees of confidence with different values and ranges of values, 
as classical statisticians sought to do, though as we have seen, 
they were unsuccessful in this. It makes such estimates through a 
single principle, Bayes's theorem, which applies to all inferential 
problems. Hence, the Bayesian treatment of statistical and deter-
ministic theories is the same and is underwritten by the same 
philosophical idea. 
Bayesian estimation also chimes in well with our intuitions. It 
accounts for the intuitively plausible sufficiency condition and 
for the natural preference for max imum precision in estimators, 
while finding no place for the criteria of ' unbiasedness' and 
'consistency', which, we have argued, are based on error. The 
Bayesian method also avoids a perverse feature of classical meth-
ods, namely, a dependence on the outcome space and hence on 
the sUbjective stopping rule. 
There is a subjective element in the Bayesian approach which 
offends some, but which, we submit, is wholly realistic. Perfectly 
sane scientists with access to the same information often do eval-
uate theories differently. Newton and Leibniz differed sharply on 
gravitational theory; Einstein's opinion of Quantum theory in its 

BAYESIAN INDUCTION: STATISTICAL THEORIES 
263 
Copenhagen interpretation was at variance with that of most of 
his colleagues; for many years, distinguished astronomers defend-
ed the Big Bang theory, while equally distinguished colleagues 
defended with equal vigour the competing Steady State theory, 
and similar divergences of view continue to occur in every branch 
of physical science, in medicine, biology and psychology. 
Bayesian theory anticipates that many such divergences will be 
resolved as probabilities are revised through new evidence, but it 
also allows for the possibility of people whose predispositions 
either for or against certain theories arc so pronounced and dis-
tinct from the norm that their opinions remain eccentric, even 
after a large mass of relevant data has accumulated. You might 
take the view that such eccentrics are pathological, that every the-
ory has a single value relative to a given body of knowledge, and 
that responsible scientists ought not to let personal, subjective fac-
tors influence their beliefs. But then you would have to face the 
fact that this view is itself a prej udice, because despite an 
immense intellectual effort, no one has produced a coherent 
defence of it, let alone a proof. 
After decades when Bayesian ideas and methods were 
despised and rejected, their merits arc now coming to be widely 
acknowledged, even by orthodox statisticians, so much so that 
many are willing to put Bayesianism and Frequentistism on a par. 
But this is not an outcome that we regard as satisfactory. Our 
arguments have been that the first is well founded and the second 
not, and that the second should give way to the first. Blasco 
(2001 , p. 2042) provides an example of the even-handedness that 
we reject. Writing on "The Bayesian controversy in animal breed-
ing", he argues that in practice there is no need to take sides: 
If the animal breeder is not interested in the philosophical problems 
associated with induction. but in tools to solve problems, both 
Bayesian and frequentist schools of inference are well established 
and it is not necessary to justify why one or the other school is pre-
ferred. Neither of them now has operational difficulties. with the 
exception of some complex cases .... To choose one school or the 
other should bc related to whether there are solutions in one school 
that the other does not offer. to how easily the problems are solved 
and to how comfortable the scientist feels with the particular way of 
expressing the results. 

264 
CHAPTER 8 
But we have argued that what Blasco calls "the philosophical 
problems associated with induction" ought to be of interest to the 
practical scientist, for although frequentist and Bayesian tools 
give superficially similar results, and recommend superficially 
similar trials in some cases, they also make crucially different rec-
ommendations in others. We have shown that frequentist tools do 
not solve any problems. The conclusions they license ("the best 
estimate of thc unknown parameter, e, is such and such"; "such 
and such is a 99 percent confidence interval for fJ"; "ho is reject-
ed at the 5 percent level", etc.) have no inductive significance 
whatever. True, one can often draw frequentist conclusions "easi-
ly", but this is of no account and does not render them scientifi-
cally meaningful. True, many scientists feel "comfortable" with 
frequentist results, but this, we suggest, is because they are misin-
terpreting them and endowing them with a meaning they cannot 
possibly bear. 

CHAPTER 9 
Finale: Some General Issues 
9.0 ! The Charge of Subjectivism 
The theory of inductive inference, or inductive logic as we feel 
entitled to call it, that we have presented here is sometimes called 
the subjective Bayesian theory, 'subjective' primarily because it 
imposes no constraints on the form of the prior probabilities in 
Bayes's Theorem calculations. Many both inside and outside the 
Bayesian camp think this results in a theory inadequate to its pre-
sumed purpose of furnishing an objective account of inductive 
inference, since these priors will necessarily have to be 'subjec-
tive', and subjectivity should have no place in scicntific inference. 
Those who have read the earlier chapters will recall that our 
view is that all this is incorrect. Firstly, some subjective element 
exists in all scientific appraisal and it is a merit of this theory that 
where it occurs it is signalled explicitly, not concealed from view. 
Secondly, what we have in this theory is in fact a perfectly objec-
tive logic of inductive inference, whose 'premises' can be just 
those prior probabilities, with Bayes's Theorem as the inference 
engine generating a valid conclusion: the posterior distribution. 
As we pointed out, the situation is wholly analogous to deductive 
logic, where the logic is the inference engine: you choose the 
premises, and the engine generates the valid conclusions from 
them. De Finetti characteristically puts the position very well: 
We strive to make judgments as dispassionate, reflective and wisc as 
possible by a doctrine that shows where and how they intcrvcnc and 
lays bare possible inconsistencics bctwcen judgments. There is an 
instructive analogy bctween [deductive] logic, which convinces one 
that acceptance of some subjective opinions as 'certain' entails the 
certainty of others, and the theory of subjective probabilities, which 
similarly connects uncertain opinions. ( 1972, p. 144) 

266 
C HAPTER 9 
Nevertheless, it cannot be proved that there are no further accept-
able constraints which we have simply missed or ignored which 
might substantially reduce or even in suitable cases eliminate the 
degrees of freedom in the selection of prior distributions. Indeed, 
the history of the Bayesian theory is to a considerable extent the 
history of attempts to find such constraints, and we shall end by 
looking at the principal ones. 
9.0.1 The Principle of Indifference 
A constraint additional to those we presented in Chapter 3, and 
defined consistency with respect to, has been of great historical 
importance, and even today we still find its claim to inclusion 
strongly pressed. Called by Keynes the Principle of Indifference, 
it is a prima facie highly plausible symmetry principle enjoining 
that a symmetric relationship between the members of a partition 
should be respected by a correspondingly symmetric a priori dis-
tribution of probabilities. More precisely: equal parts of the pos-
sibili(v space should receive eqlla! probabilities relative to a null 
state olbackground inlormation. 
Not only did this principle, and to some people it still does, 
seem intuitively compelling: it also turned out to have impressive 
methodological power (as we shall see, more so even than its 
advocates immediately realised). Thomas Bayes was the first to 
use it to prove a deep and important result in statistics, the so-
called' inversion' of Bernoulli's Theorem. Recall from Chapter 2 
that James Bernoulli had proved a fundamental theorem about, in 
modern notation, a possibility space Q consisting of n-fold 
sequences s of Os and I s, a class of events defined in Q including 
all events of the form 'there is a I at the ith index' (also describ-
able in the language of random variables by a formula 'X[= I', 
where the Xi are 11 {O, Il-valued random variables defined on Q), 
and a probability function assigning objective probabilities to 
these events such that 'Xi = I' has the same probability p inde-
pendently of i, and the events 'XI = x I', ...... , 'X:, = XII', Xi = 0 or 
I, are independent. Bernoulli's result was that for any small E > 0, 
the probability that the absolute value of the difference between 
the relative frequency (I1
J )1:Xi of Is (up to n) andp is less than E 
tends to I as n tends to infinity. 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
267 
People, including Bernoulli himself, wanted to interpret this 
result as licensing an inference that the probability is very large, 
for large enough 11 , that p is close to the observed relative fre-
quency. Unfortunately, no such inference is licensed. Bernoulli's 
Theorem is a result about a probability distribution charac-
terised by a real-valued parameter p: hence p is not itself not a 
random variable to which probabilites are attached. To 'invert' 
Bernoulli's theorem requires defining a more extensive possibil-
ity space Q', a class C of propositions defined in Q', and a prob-
ability function P defined on C, in which 'p = r ± S is an event 
in C, i.e. in which p is a random variable. 
This is just what Bayes attempted to do, and to a great extent 
succeeded in doing, and thereby came up with the first rigorous-
ly obtained posterior distribution for a statistical hypothesis, in 
this case about the value of p, now explicitly considered as a ran-
dom variable. Here is a brief sketch, in more modern notation than 
Bayes used, of how to perform the calculation. In fact, it is a fair-
ly straightforward application of Bayes's Theorem, in which the 
I ikel ihood, i.e. the probabi I ity of the data, r 1 sand 11 - r Os, con-
ditional on p, is given by the function nc, p'(1 - p)" -', and the 
prior probability of p determined by the Principle of Indifference 
as the uniform distribution with density lover the unit interval 
[0,1] (in othcr words, it is simply assumed that the prior probabil-
ity of the Bernoulli model, of constant probability and independ-
ence, is I; Bayes's own example was carefully crafted so that the 
assumption is not made explicit). Thus the conditional probabili-
ty density is, by Bayes's Theorem, proportional to 
f(p I I) = "C,p'(1 - p)" , 
But since f(p I r) is a continuous probability density it must inte-
grate to 1. Hence we must have 
I 
)(Xi = r) = II C) p'(1 - p)" 'dp 
" 
p' (\ _ 17)" 
r 
f(p I r) = '-
1 -
---
~p r(l _ p)n Idp 

268 
CHAPTER 9 
We have been here before (in Chapter 3). This density is a beta-
density with parameters r, n - r (see Chapter 8), whose mean is 
(r + \) / (i1 + 2), which obviously tends to r/n. The variance is (r 
+ \)(/1 - r + 1) / (/1 + 2)2(/1 + 3), which tends to 0 as n increas-
es, and so the posterior probability of p lying in an arbitrarily 
small interval around r / 11 tends to 1. Bayes seemed to have done 
what Bernoulli 's Theorem could not do: tell us that it is over-
whelmingly probable that in a large sample p, now explicitly a 
random variable over the enlarged possibility-space including not 
only the possible outcomes of the X; but also the possible values 
of the binomial probability, is approximately equal to the 
observed relative frequency. As a matter of historical accuracy we 
should note that this was not Bayes's own method of derivation: 
he used a geometrical construction, in the manner of Newton's 
Principia, instead of the analytical calculation (Laplace was the 
first to use the integral formulas). 
Of course, Bayes's posterior distribution is itself implictly con-
ditional upon another assumption, namely that the process is a 
Bernoulli process, but since Bernoulli himself assumed much the 
same thing it is unfair to charge Bayes with making additional mod-
elling assumptions. The important innovation here is the use of the 
Principle of Indifference to determine the prior distribution of p, 
though even the Principle itself was one that in a general way 
Bernoulli also endorsed, under the name of the Principle (if' 
Insufficient Reason. At any rate, in this example and in any others 
in which the hypothesis-parameter takes values in a bounded inter-
val, the Principle of Indifference appears to yield a fully determi-
nate posterior distribution. often something else too. Continue with 
the Bayes example and consider the probability P(J\, .. I = I / LX; = r), 
where the sum is from I to 11. By the rule for conditional probabil-
ities this is equal to the ratio P(X; = ,. + I) / P(LX; = r). where the 
first sum is to 11 + 1 and the second to n. Using the reasoning above 
we can see that this ratio is equal to 
f pi , 1 (I - p )" - 'dp 
(I) 
" , f pl( I - p)" rdp 
" 
which is equal to (r + 1)/ (11 + 2). (I) is historically famous; it is 
known as the Rule oj" Succession. Clearly, as n grows large, the 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
269 
conditional probability that the next observation will reveal a I 
given that there have been r in the previous n observations tends 
to the observed relative frequency r / 11. Thus, not only should you 
adjust your degree of belief in a head falling at the next toss to the 
observed relative frequency of heads; this result tells you exactly 
how you should adjust it. 
The Rule of Succession was also put to less mundane uses. 
Keynes, in a memorable passage, wrote that 
no other formula in the alchemy of logic [logic, note] has exerted 
more astonishing powers. For it has established the existence of God 
from total ignorance, and it has measured with numerical precision 
the probability that the sun will rise tomorrow. (Keynes 1921, p. 89) 
Indeed, it was Laplace himself who used the Rule to compute the 
odds on the sun's rising the next day, given that it had risen 
1,826,213 days (by Laplace's calculation) days, to be 1,826,214 to 
one. Soon the Rule was seen as a justification for general enumer-
ative induction, adjusting your confidence in any future event 
according to the frequency with which you have observed it in the 
past. The problem of induction, which Hume had declared with 
the most telling arguments (see Howson 2000 for an extended dis-
cussion) to be insoluble, seemed half a century later to be solved. 
Hume had argued that all ' probable arguments' from past obser-
vations to future predictions are necessarily circular, presuppos-
ing what they set out to provc. In appearing to show that all that 
was required was, on the contrary, a complete lack of commitment 
between the possible alternatives, the Principle of Indifference 
looked like the answer to Humean sccpticism. Indeed, this is 
exactly how Bayes's result was seen by his executor and friend 
Richard Price, who argued in his introduction to Bayes's Memoir 
that it contained the answer to Hume's sceptical arguments. 
Nemesis took some time to arrive, but arrive it eventually did, 
in the form of an increasing level of criticism and simple recipes 
for generating apparently paradoxical results from the Principle. 
Here is a modern example. It is expressed in the context of for-
malised logical language. The purpose of this is to show that the 
underlying problem is not, as it is often held to be (this standard 
defence was first resorted to by Keynes), the fault of imprecise 
definition. Consider two languages L / and L 2 in the usual modern 

270 
CHA PTER 9 
logical symbolism, with the identity symbol = included, as is 
usual, as a logical constant in both languages. Suppose L, and L, 
possess just one predicate symbol Q, the difference between the 
two languages being that L, has two individual names, symbolise 
them a and b, while Lo has none. Now it is a remarkable fact that 
the propositions 
Sf: There is at least one individual having Q 
S,: There are exactly two individuals 
can be formulated by exactly the same formal sentences in each 
language. At their simplest, these are 
S',: 3xQ(r) 
S'c: 3x3y[('( '" y) & Itz(z = x v z = y)]. 
Suppose our background information is conveyed by S .~. If we 
stipulate that a and b name distinct individuals there are four 
L ,-atomic possibilities given S 'c' viz both have Q, a has Q and b 
doesn't, b has Q and a doesn't, neither has Q). In L c there are just 
three, since with respect to L, the individuals are indistinguish-
able. The Principle of Indifference would seem to demand that, 
conditional on S'l' the probability of S', is 3/4 if we are talking in 
L" but 2/3 if we are talking in L] (the stipulation that a and b name 
distinct individuals is there for simplicity of calculation: the non-
identity of the probabilities persists, though the precise values dif-
fer from this example, if it is dropped). 
The standard defence against this sort of example is that since 
L, makes more refined discriminations, one should choose that 
and not the apparently coarser-grained L l as the basis of any 
application of the Principle ofindifference. The defence does not, 
however, succeed, for a number of reasons. Firstly, and perhaps 
surprisingly, it is simplv not trlle that a language ,vith individual 
names necessari~v makes .finer distinctions than one without. 
Modern physics famously supplies striking counterexamples. 
Thus paired bosons-particles with spin equal to one in natural 
units-are indistinguishable according to quantum mechanics; 
this means that the coupled system (tensor product) of two such 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
271 
particles has only three eigenstates of spin, corresponding to both 
particles having spin up (in a given direction), both having spin 
down, and one having spin up and the other spin down, giving 
exactly the same quantum statistics as Lc' (Sudbery 1986, pp. 
70- 74; the quantum mechanical predictions for bosons and fermi-
ons, which have even more dramatic statistics, are highly con-
firmed, raising the problem of how particles can in principle seem 
to be incapable of individuation, while at the same time remain-
ing a plurality. Fortunately, this is a puzzle for the metaphysics of 
physics, not for us.) Less exotically, pounds in bank accounts are 
also indistinguishable in the same way: it makes no sense to say 
that there are four distinct ways in which two pounds can be dis-
tributed between two accounts. In these sorts of cases, therefore, 
there simply is no finer-grained reality than that described by L l' 
Secondly, the objection begs the question: why should one 
choose the finer partition? We are interested in seeing Bayesian 
probability in a logical perspective; indeed, we feel that it is only 
in such a perspective that it makes sense (where, of course, it 
makes a lot of sense). But logic does not dictate that one should 
choose the finer partition. Logic does not dictate that one ought to 
do anything at all, for that matter. But certainly not that. 
Thirdly, and devastatingly, the Principle of Indifference gives 
different answers for equally fine partitions. It asserts that equal 
parts of a possibility-space Q should receive the same a priori 
probability in the absence of any discriminating information. 
Here there is implicit reference to a metric according to which 
parts of Q are judged equal. Where Q is a continuum the metric 
is induced by a mapping onto an interval of real numbers, with its 
standard Euclidean metric (if Q is itself an interval of real num-
bers the identity map is one such map). Such spaces are of course 
typical of those studied in mathematical statistics, but they have 
the property that the choice of metric can be made in di fferent, but 
equivalent, ways. In fact, there is an infinity of different mappings 
of Q into the real numbers such that the induced distance between 
two points in Q depends on which mapping is employed. Thus 
equality of distance, which the Principle of Indifference exploits 
in continuous spaces, is strongly non-invariant. 
Consider, for example, the space [0, I] of possible values of p 
that we considered in connection with Bayes's famous result. The 

272 
C HA PTER 9 
mappIng p 
p l is a continuous differentiable bijection of 
[0,1] onto itself. The Principle of Indifference applied to the 
p-representation tells us that there is a probability of 112 of p not 
exceeding 1/2. But since p is vp' the probability of p not exceed-
ing 112 is, by the probability calculus, the same as the probability 
of p ' not exceeding 1/4, and so that must be 1/2. But the Principle 
of Indifference applied to p ' tells us that the probability that p' 
does not exceed 114 is 1/4. So we have a contradiction, and a real 
one this time. The objection that there is a unique 'natural ' repre-
sentation in the set of real numbers can be dism issed: firstly, it 
begs the question, and secondly, it is not even borne out in the 
ordinary practice of science. As Jeffreys points out, it is not 
uncommon for different representations to be used in different 
contexts; for example, some methods of measuring the charge on 
the electron give e, others e 2 (\ 961, p. 120). 
As a postscript to this discussion of the Principle of 
Indifference we should recall that for large samples the form of 
the prior di stribution is not of particular importance as long as it 
is not too extreme: as we saw earlier, for large random samples the 
posterior distribution for a parameter will typically converge 
within a small interval of its maximum-likelihood estimatc inde-
pendently of the exact form of the prior, so long as the latter is not 
too extreme (a proof of this result is given in Lindley 1965, pp. 
128, 129). Thus the posterior distribution for Bayes's binomial 
parameter p will be concentrated within a small interval of the 
observed relative frequency (the maximum-likelihood estimator 
of p ) even without assuming the uniform prior distribution. 
Whether the anxiety that Bayes is known to have felt about using 
the Principle of Indifference (though he did not call it that) 
might have been mitigated if he had known of this result is not 
known, but it is doubtful: we are not allowed very often the lux-
ury of large amounts of data, and for most problems the form of 
the prior will affect the posterior. Bayes wanted a prior that 
reflected an even-handed ignorance, whatever the sample size, 
and that problem, if it is a problem-
we shall argue that it is 
not-
is not solved, though it might on occasion be mitigated, by 
asymptotic considerations. 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
273 
9.a.2 Invariance Considerations 
The Principle of Indifference is a symmetry principle stating that 
logical symmetries should be reflected, in thc absence of any dis-
criminating information, in unifo rm a priori probability distribu-
tions. The trouble, as we have seen, is that in continuous spaces 
there are too many symmetries for anyone uniform distribution to 
reflect. Such is logical life. Unfortunately, the Bayesian theory 
was historically based on the Principle of Indifference: the princi-
ple conferred on the theory a supposed status as an objective the-
ory of inductive inference. Without it, as we can see in the case of 
Bayes's derivation, prior probabilities occur in effect as undeter-
mined parameters in the calculation of the posterior distribution. 
Many Bayesians became preoccupied with the question of 
whcther there is any way of salvaging enough of the substance of 
the principle to make the enterprisc of an objective probabilistic 
inductive logic worthwhile. 
One line of enquiry was conducted by Harold Jeffreys, who 
investigated which rules, if any, did not yield inconsistencies in 
the way the Principle of Indifference did under transformations of 
a continuum-valued hypothesis space like the transformation 
from p to p' above. Jeffreys was a physicist as well as a proba-
bilist, writing in the first half of the twentieth century, and the 
problem of finding a rule which can be invariantly (more accu-
rately, covariantli) expressed in any co-ordinate system was a 
familiar one in the physics of general relativity, receivi ng its 
mathematical solution in the theory of tensors. Jeffreys found 
examples which seemed prima facie suitable for prior probabili-
ties: the best-known is the rule which can be used wherever there 
is a statistical model for the observed variate X expresscd in a 
density f(x I fJl' ... ,8,). I f there is just one unknown parameter 8 
then this rule assigns as the prior probability p(8) the function 
V/(H) , or the square root of the Fisher inj(mnation2, which is 
I /\n equat ion is covariant if it has the same form under all co-ordinate transfor-
mation (the terms COIWT in such a way that an identity between thcm true in one 
co-ordinatc system is truc in all: tcnsor cquations famously have this property). 
2 In thc multiparamcter case the Fisher information is the matrix (A),; = (jJ L I d8,/, 
i,j = I ..... k. Jeffreys's rule assigns the square root of its determinant as the prior 
probability density. 

274 
C HAPTER 9 
defined as the expected value, with respect to X of -
()l/ ()(p, 
where L is the logarithm (natural or otherwise; it doesn't matter) 
off(y; I e) ; note that as a result of the differentiation, the expected 
value may not depend on e. By elementary calculus the densities 
prep) and pre), where is some continuous bijection of e, are relat-
ed by the identity 
pre) = I dep/d8 1 prep)· 
Hence where the rule for assigning a prior density is given by 
p (8) = $(8) 
for some functional term $ (8), it is covariant just in case it satis-
fies the transformation condition 
$ (8) = I dep/d8 1 $ (ep). 
It is not difficult to show that $(ep) = v l(e) does indeed transform 
in just this way, and hence is consistent with respect to arbitrary 
coordinate transformations. 
The Jeffreys rule is far from the only covariant rule for gener-
ating prior distributions, though it has received a good deal of 
attention because some of the priors it generates have been sug-
gested independently. There are technical problems with it, how-
ever, principal among which are that (a) the expectation does not 
always exist, and (b) among the priors that the rule generates are 
so-called improper distributions, that is to say distributions which 
do not integrate to lover their respective ranges (- ex) to + ex; and 
o to (0) as the probability axioms demand they should. Notable 
examples of improper distributions are the prior densities gener-
ated by it for the mean and standard deviation parameters of a nor-
mal model, which are a constant (uniform) and proportional to 
(J I (log-uniform) respectively3. A good deal has been written 
) Another feature that some Bayesians take to be problematic is that the rule, 
depending as it does on the entire outcome space of the experiment, vio lates the 
Likelihood Principle (see S.d above). 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
275 
about the status of improper prior distributions, more than we 
could or should go into here, but some brief comments are in 
order. Improper distributions might be, and often are, introduced 
as no more than convenient approximations to proper ones within 
what is thought to be the likely probable error (the prior propor-
tional to CJ 1 is approximately that given by the log Cauchy distri-
bution), so long as due care is taken in computations involving 
them to maintain overall consistency (see, for example, Lee 1997, 
p.44). That is not the case here, however, where they are deduced 
a priori, and where the fact that they conflict with the standard 
probability axioms might suggest that the rule is an ad hoc device 
meriting a certain dcgree of scepticism. 
Perhaps this conclusion is premature, since it has been shown 
that there is a plausible way of amending the axioms which con-
sistently accommodates improper distributions, which is to take a 
conditional probability as primitive. The mathematician Alfred 
Renyi and the philosopher Karl Popper at about the same time 
(between 1945 and 1955) independently developed versions of 
the probability calculus based on a primitive conditional probabil-
ity function, in which one can in principle have unbounded cumu-
lative distribution functions so long as the conditional 
probabilities they define remain finite (that is, they can be nor-
malised) (Renyi 1955, p. 295). This development is of consider-
able interest, without doubt, even though neither Popper's nor 
Renyi's axiomatisation has been generally adopted (there is per-
haps more reason to adopt Renyi's system since it is the closest 
mathematically to the standard Komogorov axioms, and because 
Renyi was able to prove the conditions under which his condition-
al functions arc representable as quotients of finite measures 
(1955, p. 292), which is of course how they are introduced in the 
standard formalism}. 
However, even if there are acceptable ways of taming improp-
er distributions, that would still leave entirely open the question 
why the Jeffreys rule, or any other invariant rule, should be adopt-
ed. The choice of any rule would, one would think, need to be jus-
tified, and in terms of the logical interpretation we are advocating 
that means that it has to be justified as a general condition on fair 
betting odds. The Principle of Indifference looked at first as if it 
might have a justification of this type, but as it happened it turned 

276 
C HAPTER 9 
out to be inconsistent. The only justification for Jeffreys's rul e 
that he himself gave was-apart from its demonstrable consisten-
cy under transformations of the parameters-its ability to deliver 
what he considered to be independently desirable priors for cer-
tain parameters, in particular-granted the acceptability of 
improper di stributions along the lines mentioned above-for a 
normal mean and standard deviation separately (but not jointly, 
since the joint density is proportional to a 2, which is not the 
product, as intuitively it should be, of that of the mean by itself 
and that of the standard deviation by itself) and, to a lesser extent, 
a binomial probability (JefIreys 1961, p. 182; p. 184). But in 
every other respect it seems lacking, a situation not helped by the 
lack of uniqueness in its invariance property. 
9.0.3 Informotionlessness 
Underlying the attractiveness of the Principle of Indifference is 
the idea that it allows the data to .speaklor itself by not in any way 
prejudging the parameter or hypothesis that the data carries infor-
mation about. Unfortunately, this view is rather obviously unten-
able. A uniform prior distribution, as we have seen, is uniform 
across the elements of a particular classif ication-scheme, for 
example as determined by the values of a random variable. It 
therefore says that each clement of a basic partition determined by 
this scheme is equally probable a priori. But any other distribution 
also gives probabilities of these cells a priori . So all prior distri-
butions 'say' something not implied by the observational data 
alone. In other words, there is no a priori distribution that lets the 
data speak for itself. 
Reinforcing this conclusion is the fact, noted in Section 9.a.2, 
that in continuous spaces we can redescribe the 'elementary pos-
sibilities' in terms of another, equivalent, classif ication scheme in 
such a way that the original uniform distribution transforms into 
a highly non-uniform one. Suppose that a quantity x is non-nega-
tive, for example. An attitude of prior epistemic neutrality might 
seem to demand that no one possible value should be regarded as 
more likely than any other; or in other words, that a uniform dis-
tribution is appropriate. But of course there is no proper uniform 
density on the non-negative line. Worse, a completely neutral atti-

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
277 
tude would also seem to demand even-handedness with respect to 
thc possible different orders of magnitude of x, those intervals of 
x determined by the different powers of ten or some other base 
number. In this case, by the same reasoning, the log-uniform den-
sity proportional to x I is the appropriate one, for this is exactly 
the density that gives intervals of successive powers equal values. 
And we have yet another contradiction. 
There are no inj(Jrmationless priors, and the quest for them is 
the quest for the chimera. On the other hand, it might be argued 
that that quest is arguably little more, if indeed any more, than a 
quest for o~jectivity in the definition of prior (or indeed any other) 
probabilities. Whether objectivity really is the unquestionable 
desideratum it is cracked up to be is an issue we shall come back 
to later (we shall argue that it is not), but certainly most of the 
people who have scientific applications of the Bayesian formal-
ism as their methodological goal think that it is. Foremost among 
these so-called O/~jective Bayesiam' are (or rather were; one died 
shortly before the end of the new millennium, the other shortly 
after) Jeffreys and Jaynes, who explicitly endorsed Jeffreys's gen-
eral viewpoint and extended some of his methods. Jaynes 
demanded that prior distributions be objective in the sense that 
they are "independent of thc personality of the user" (1968, p. 
117), which he elaborates into the condition that 
in two prohleJ1/s where tve have the same prior injcJ/"fI/afion, we 
should assign the same probabilities. 
But how? Jaynes's answer is to appeal not to the criterion of in for-
mationlessness, which is one which, we have seen, cannot be sat-
isfied, but to one of minimum information: we should choose the 
prior containing thc least information beyond our prior data, or 
making the leVl'est assumptions beyond that data (1957, p. 623). 
He argues that this demand can be satisfied in a uniquely determi-
nate way if the background data are of a suitable form, and even 
where there are no background data. The method that achieves 
this is, he claims, that of maximum entropy. Jaynes draws here on 
thc seminal work of Claude Shannon in information theory. 
Shannon showed that if p = (PI' ... ,PII ) is a probability distribu-
tion taking only finitely many values (i.c. it is the distribution of 

278 
CHAPTER 9 
a random variable X taking n values with those probabilities), 
then a very plausible set of conditions on a numerical measure 
of the uncertainty H(p) attaching to p determines H(p) to be the 
entropy -XpJogp;. unique up to choice of base for the logarithm, 
which is maximised by the uniform distribution n- I, and min-
imised by the distribution which attaches the value 1 to a single 
point. The uncertainty is thus a function of the distribution itself, 
satisfying the intuitively satisfactory property that the more 
evenly spread out the distribution, the greater the uncertainty 
attaching to it. 
Given suitable prior information k we should, according to 
Jaynes, take the prior distribution over X to be that which max-
imises the entropy subject to the constraints reprcscnted by k. 
Maximising H subject to k means of course that k has to express 
conditions on p itself. In Jaynes's examples the constraints usual-
ly take the form of expectation values 'derived' from very large 
sets of observations (as arise frequently in experimental physics; 
other types of constraint might be independence assumptions, 
conditions on marginal distributions, etc.), and it is well-known 
that for constraints of this form there is always a unique solution 
to the maximisation problem (in fact, a unique solution is guaran-
teed for any set of linear constraints, of which expectations are 
one type4 ). 
It might be objected that outside physics there are few prob-
lems amenable to solution this way- where because of the very 
large numbers involved the data can be represented directly as 
conditions on the prior p. But recall that Bayes's virtual invention 
of the Bayesian theory as a theory of posterior probabilities was 
intended to solve the theoretical problem of determining an exact 
epistemic probability distribution given sample data, no matter 
how large the sample. Thus the prior use of data to furnish con-
straints on a probability distribution raises the question whether 
the maximum-entropy method might be in contlict with condi-
tionalisation (given the latter's own conditions of validity; see 
Chapter 3), a question that others have raised, together with exam-
ples where it does seem to be (sec Seidenfeld ) 979, Shimony 
4 A unique solution is guaranteed for any closed convex set of constraints. 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
279 
1985), and which seems not to have been satisfactorily answered 
by advocates of maximum entropy. To say, as Jaynes does, that 
maximum-entropy is a method for selecting prior distributions, 
not posterior ones where conditionalisation is the acknowledged 
tool, rather sidesteps the problem. 
That is one question. Another arises in the context of no non-
trivial prior information, i.e. no constraints at all other than 
describing a finite range of values which the data can in principle 
take (so the constraint set is simply of the form IP(r:) = I). the 
entropy-maximisi ng distribution is the uniform distribution. This 
might seem-disregarding the problem mentioned above-to 
amount to a vindication of the Principle of Indifference, since that 
was postulated on a state of prior ignorance. But it is easy to see 
that equally it can be regarded as bequeathing to the method of 
maximum entropy all its most intractable problems, for it implies 
that we shall get incompatible uniform distributions as maximum-
entropy solutions with respect to different ways of representing 
the space of 'elementary' possibilities (as with the different pos-
sibility spaces of L/ and L: above). 
Nor can the problem be simply shunted off to one side as a 
peripheral problem associated with an extreme and arguably 
rather unrepresentative type of background information. It 
becomes of central importance when one considers the apparent-
ly purely technical problem of extending the Shannon entropy 
measure to continuous distributions p = p(x). The 'obvious' way 
of doing this, i.e. by taking H to be the integral 
-Jp (Y)/ogp (x)dx. 
has the serious drawbacks of not being guaranteed to exist and, 
where it exists, being description-relative: it is not invariant 
under change of variable (because it is the expected value of a 
density and hence is dimensional, since it is probability per unit 
x). The form chosen by virtually all maximum entropy theorists 
(including Jaynes) to extend H to the continuum, which is 
invariant under coordinate transformations, is the functi onal of 
two variables 
I(p.q) = Jp(r:)log[p(x) I q(Y)}dx. 

280 
CHAPTER 9 
for some other density q(y) (Jaynes 1988, p. 124). I (p,q) is some-
times called the cross-entropy, sometimes the information in p 
given q (Jaynes simply calls it the entropy). Where the range of X 
is finite and p(x) and q(x) are discrete distributions with q(¥j a 
uniform distribution I(p,q) reduces to the ordinary entropy5. In 
addition, since I(p,q) is never negative, the task is now to min-
imise a functional rather than, in the case of H. to maximise one. 
Adopting I rather than H may solve the mathematical prob-
lems, but it leads to a rather obvious interpretative problem: what 
is q(y)? The answer is implicit in the fact that where there is no 
background information other than that the range of X lies in a 
bounded interval, the I-minimising density is p(x) = q('() up to a 
constant factor. In other words, as Jaynes himself pointed out, q(x) 
virtually has to be interpreted as a density corresponding to 
(almost) complete ignorance (1968, p. 125), an answer which, as 
he concede~ appears to lead straight back into the no-go area of 
the Principle of Indifference. Notice that since q(x) is now neces-
sarily present in every problem where there is a continuous 
hypothesis-space (as for example there is with most parameter-
estimation problems in statistics), the problem of confronting 
ignorance distributions is no longer confined to a class of cases 
which can be conveniently written off as merely academic. 
It is a testament to Jaynes's ingenuity (and mathematical skill) 
that he was able to propose a way out of the impasse, and a novel 
way of formulating the Principle of Indifference which seems to 
offer at least a partial solution to the problem of transformations. 
This is his method oj'transj'ormation groups. The idea here is that 
a definite solution (in q(x) may be revealed by considering 
equivalent representations of the problem, a class which does 
not, Jaynes argued, necessarily permit all logico-mathcmatically 
equivalent representations of the hypothesis- or parameter-space 
to be counted as equivalent. More specifically, investigation of 
the problem may well reveal the only degrees of freedom implic-
it in its statement are those generated by the action of some trans-
formation group, or class of transformation-groups. To take an 
example that Jaynes himself uses, suppose that the sampling dis-
j There are several derivations from first principles of I(p.q) as a measure of rel-
ative information whether p and q are discrete or continuolls. 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
281 
tribution of an observable variable is known except for a scale 
parameter a 6. We are not completely ignorant about since by 
assumption we know that it is a scale parameter; but that is all we 
know. In that case, according to Jaynes, the problem of determin-
ing the distribution of a remains the same problem under arbi-
trary choices of scale, and these form a group, the group of 
transformations cp = aa. a > O. Hence the target distribution q(a) 
must be invariant under the action of that group. Moreover, since 
all we know is that a is a scale parameter, that group determines 
all the degrees of freedom permitted by the problem: it is not per-
missible to demand invariance under taking logarithms, for 
example. 
The following simple argument now shows that q is uniquely 
determined by this condition. Firstly, by the probability calculus 
and elementary differential calculus the prior densities q(a) and 
h(cp) are related by the equation (dcp / da)h(cp) = q(a), by 
ah(aa) = q(a). 
The assumption of scale-invariance means that the scale-
shift from to leaves the form of the prior unchanged: hand q are 
exactly the same function on their common domain, the set of 
positive real numbers. Substituting h(. ) = q(. ) accordingly, we 
obtain 
aq(aa) = q(a) 
Setting (J = I we have aq(a) = q(l) for all a > (), and hence we 
infer that q(a) cxa I. In other words, we have, up to proportion-
(; A parameter of a sampling distribution is called a scale parameter if the data 
transfclI'Illation taking ,1' to.Y = n' for a constant c has the effect of changing the 
likelihood function so that the likelihood of), on ,1' is the same as that of c), on x 
(to avoid the problem that the likelihood function is defined only up to a multi-
plicative constant, the function rcferred to here is the so-called standardised, i.e. 
normalised, likelihood, which is any version L(), 1.1') divided by L(1c 1.1)d},). ), is 
a locatio/1 parameter if the transformation x = l' + (' gives Ic + (' the likelihood 
on x corresponding to that of on .1'. Familiar examples of each type of parameter 
are the standard deviation of a normal distribution (scale parameter), and the 
mean (location parameter), 

282 
CHAPTER 9 
ality, determined the form of the (improper) prior density to be 
log-uniform (in fact, this density is invariant under a much larger 
class of transformations; namely, all those of the form ax", a > 0, 
b", Op 
This usc of the statement of the problem to determine the 
precise extent to which priors should reflect ignorance suggest-
ed to Jaynes that in other problems where the Principle of 
Indifference merely yields inconsistencies his own method 
might be successful. The most celebrated of these was 
Bertrand's celebrated, or rather notorious, inscribed triangle 
problem. This is the problem of determining the probability that 
a 'randomly' drawn chord to a circle will have a length less than 
the length L of the side of the inscribed equilateral triangle (of 
course, there is an uncountable infinity of inscribed triangles, 
but they are all congruent). The paradox arises because there are 
different, but equivalent, ways of specifying a chord of a given 
length. Here are three Bertrand considered (the exposition fol-
lows Gillies 2000, pp. 37- 39): (I) where the midpoint of the 
chord occurs on a radius (5); (2) the angle between an end-point 
of the chord and the tangent at that point (5]); and (3) the posi-
tion, in polar coordinates say, of the midpoint in the circle (5). 
5" 5] and 51 determine different possibi lity-spaces: (I) all the 
points on the radius; (2) the angles from 0 to Jr, and (3) the set 
{(dt): 0 ~ r ~ R, 0 ~ 2Jr}, where R is the length of the radius. 
Subsets T" T] and Tl of 5 ,. 5:; and S, respectively correspond to 
the event, call it C. that the chord-length is less than L. T, is the 
set of points on a radius between its perpendicular intersection 
with a side of the inscribed triangle and its intersection with the 
circumference of the circle; T:; is the 60° angle between the tan-
gent and the nearest side of the inscribed triangle whose vertex 
is at the tangent: and Ti is the set of points in the interior circle 
of radius R12. Both members of the pairs (5, T) have a 'natural' 
I 
I 
measure m; induced by their geometrical structure: in the first, 
length, in the second, angular measure, and in the third, area 
7 Scalc-invariance has also been used to explain why the leading digit 11 in the 
measurements in signi f'icant figures of many naturally occurring magnitudes 
often has the logarithmic distribution log(( 1 + /I) / 11) (a regularity known as 
Bell{rml :I' Law; see Lee 1997, pp. 100-02). 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
283 
measure. The Principle of Indifference decrees that relative to 
each such pair the probability of C is equal to m,(T) I m/Sj 
Thus, the probability of C relative to the first pair (S/, T/) is 1/2, 
relative to the second is 1/3, and relative to the third is 114. Thus 
we have Bertrand s Paradox: relative to three different, appar-
ently equivalent, ways of describing the problem, we get three 
different values. 
According to Jaynes, however, Bertrand's problem does admit 
a unique solution, ~. He proposes that we view the problem in the 
context of somebody, say Jaynes, throwing longish straws ran-
domly so that they intersect the circumference of a circle inscibed 
on a plane surface. Suppose f(x,}) is the probability-density that 
the midpoint ofthe chord lies at the point (l,y) in or on the circle 
(assumed to be centred at the origin). Nothing in the problem 
specifies the origin, the orientation of the coordinates, or the size 
of the circle, so according to Jaynes this tells us that f should be 
translation, rotation and scale-invariant. Rotational invariance 
implies that f depends on (x,y) through v'(x:!+y') only. 
Transforming to polar coordinates, the joint probability density 
p (f; 8) must therefore be rf(rJ, () ::; r::; R, () ::; f} ::; 2n. Now consid-
er a scale transformation r' = w; a ::; 0, which we can think of as 
blowing up or shrinking the original circle. Suppose it is shrunk, 
i.e. a ::; I. The probabi lity densities p(r) and p' (r') are related in the 
usual way by 
p'(r') dr'ldr = pM 
(i) 
We cannot immediately invoke scale invariance to identify the two 
density functions p and p', since they have different domains, [O,aR] 
and [O,R] respectively. What we can do, though, is to restrict r to 
[O,aR] by conditioningp on the information that r lies in [O,aR], and 
then equate the resulting conditional density with p'. This is what 
Jaynes does, and differentiates the resulting equation with respect 
to a to obtain a differential equation whose solution is 
f(r) = qr'l 212rrR " 
where () ::; q. Finally, Jaynes shows that translation-invariance 
uniquely determines q = I, givingf(rJ = 1 /2nRr (however, as he 

284 
C HA PTER 9 
points out, translation-invariance is by itself so strong a condition 
that it already determines the result). Thus the required probabil-
ity density is uniform, and the probability that the chord is less 
than the length of the inscribed triangle is 1- (1/2rrR)r I~lrd8 
which is easily seen to be equal to ~, i.e. to the first of the solu-
tions above. Not only, apparently, is the solution uniquely deter-
mined, but it is one which, as Jaynes noted with satisfaction when 
he carried out experiments of actually throwing straws into a cir-
cle, was observed to "an embarrassingly low value of chi-
squared" (1 973, p. 487). 
Jaynes conceded that not all the examples where the Principle 
of Indifference breaks down yield to this sort of attack: he cites 
the well-known wine/water problem (von Mises 1939, p. 77) as 
one which docs not. But even his solution of the Bertrand prob-
lem raises serious questions. According to Jaynes, the method of 
transformation groups consists of noting those aspects of the 
problem which are left unspecified, and then requiring invariance 
of the prior under the corresponding groups of transformations 
(1968, p.1 28, 1973, p.430). But note that in Jaynes's own state-
ment of Bertrand's chord problem, which actually specifies an 
individual, .I, throwing straws into a circle inscribed on a plane 
surface, there is no mention of the relative speed of.J and the cir-
cle. Suppose that they are in uniform motion with velocity v, and 
that the coordinate frames of J and the circle are coincident when 
J notes the midpoint of the chord. It foll ows from the equations of 
the Lorentz transformation that the circle in the frame taken to be 
at rest (say, J's) is an ellipse in the moving frame, with eccentric-
ity v (in units of c = I), and minor axis in the direction of motion. 
Thus there is no longer rotational symmetry for J, since ,. is short-
ened in J's frame by the factor [(1 - ,,2)cos2(:1 + sin20] 12. The 
problem seems no longer so well-posed, at any rate for J. 
Jaynes would no doubt reply that it was intended that the cir-
cle be at rest (at any rate up to what is observationally detectable) 
with respect to J. But according to Jaynes 's own criterion, chang-
ing any characteristic not actually specified in the statement of the 
problem should count as giving an equivalent problem, and the 
relative speed of J and circle was not mentioned in his reformula-

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
285 
tion of Bertrand's problem. Even if it were fixed by some addi-
tional stipulation, that would still never succeed in reducing all the 
degrees of freedom to a manageable number, since they are in 
principle infinite. Why shouldn't arbitrary variations in space-
time curvature be included in the list, or even arbitrary coordinate 
transformations, which are not mentioned either? Of course, one 
could simply state the 'permitted' transformations at the outset, 
but even if they generate a unique solution it will be tantamount 
to invoking the sort of personal decision that the idea of objective 
priors was intended to replace: 
if the methods arc to have any relevance to science, the prior distri-
bution must be completely "objective", in the sense that it is inde-
pendent of the personality of the user ... The measure of success ... 
is just the extent to which we are able to eliminate all personalistic 
elements and create a completely "impersonalistic" theory. (1968, p. 
117) 
Jaynes's entropy-based methodology was an attempt to bypass 
the problems facing the Principle of Indifference: instead, the 
problem of determining the distribution q('t} merely meets them 
all again head-on. They arc not to be by-passed so easily. Recall 
Jaynes's claim that, because it maximises uncertainty, the max-
imum entropy distribution, where it exists, makes the fewest 
commitments or assumptions beyond those in the data. Even 
granted the equation of entropy with uncertainty this assertion 
rather obviously begs the question, and is certainly incapable of 
proof, or even moderately convincing supporting argument, 
because on any reasonable understanding of the terms involved 
it is false. A flat distribution maximises uncertainty, but it com-
mits its user to certain views about the probability of every out-
come, or neighbourhood of every outcome if it is continuous. 
As far as its probabi listie content is concerned, therefore, it 
makes exactly as many commitments as any other distribution. 
This conclusion is, of course, just a reprise of our verdict on the 
search for informationless priors (there arc none, because every 
distribution contains just as much probabilistic information as 
any other). Unfortunately, it has yet to be drawn by some 
authoritative Bayesians: 

286 
CHAPTER 9 
Even when a scientist holds strong prior beliefs about the value of a 
parameter, nevertheless, in reporting his results it would usually be 
appropriate and most convincing to his colleagues if he analyzed the 
data against a reference prior [a reference prior is a prior distribution 
which is slowly varying and dominated by the likelihood function in 
the region where the latter takes its largest values]. He could then say 
that, irrespective of what he or anyone else believed to begin with, 
the prior distribution represented what someone who a priori knew 
very little about should believe in the light of the data. (Box and Tiao 
1973, p. 22.) 
There do admittedly exist alleged proofs that the maximum 
entropy method is uniquely determined by plausible assumptions; 
indeed, there is "quite an industry", to quote Paris (1994, p. 79). 
But closer investigation reveals that there is often (much) more to 
these conditions than meets the eye. For example, Paris and 
Vencovska's (200 I) apparently innocent 'renaming principle' 
implies that, with a constraint set asserting that with probability 
one there are n elementary possibilities, each should receive prob-
ability lin (and we are back with the Principle of Indifference in 
yet another guise); another of their conditions is that if the con-
straint contains only conditional probabilities of a given c and b 
given c, and the unconditional probability of c, then a and b 
should be independent given c, a very strong condition reminis-
cent of the default-negation rule in logic programming. 8 
There is one other aspect of maximum entropy that we should 
mention before leaving the subject, though this concerns exclu-
sively the Minimum Information Principle under the very differ-
ent interpretation as an updating rule, from Jaynes's. On this 
interpretation, q(.r:) is the prior probability and p(x) the posterior 
updated on the constraints relative to which I is minimised. This 
conveniently sidesteps the problems with Jaynes's use of maxi-
mum entropy/minimum I as a determiner of prior distribitions. 
With the I-minimising p(x:) treated as a new way of generating a 
x A theorem of Williamson, about separating sets of variables in a constraint 
graph, implies that the maximum entropy solution for the constraints above auto-
matically renders a and h conditionally indcpcndent given c (2005, p. 86). This 
underlines how far the maximum entropy mcthod transforms null information 
into positive information. 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
287 
posterior probability relative to q(x)'s prior, and the minimum-
information principle thereby transformed into an updating rule, 
things look altogether more promising. For a start, the Principle 
subsumes both Bayesian and Jeffrey conditionalisation: minimis-
ing l(p.q) subject to a shift from q(e) to pre) = p yields the latter: 
p('() = q(x I e)p + q(x I - e)(1 - p) 
(we get the appropriate general form when the shift occurs simul-
taneously on the members of an arbitrary finite partition; for a full 
discussion see Will iams 1980). Where the contraint is that q(e) = 1, 
we obtain Bayesian conditionalisation: p(x) = q(x I e). 
These facts provide another defence of conditionalisation, 
Bayesian or Jeffrey, depending on the constraints. Ifwe grant that 
l(p.q) can be interpreted as a distance measure in distribution 
space between p and q, then minimising l(p.q) for fixed p means, 
on this view, selecting as one's new distribution that which is as 
close to p as possible subject to the constraints. Thus conditional-
isation becomes justified as the selection of the distribution clos-
est to the prior. There are several problems with this defence, 
however. One is that I(p.q) is no ordinary distance measure since 
it is not symmetric. Another is that there are alternative metrics 
which do not endorse conditionalisation in this way. A deeper 
objection is that it simply begs the question why one should 
choose the closest measure to p, particularly as the shift on e 
might be very considerable. Shore and Johnson (1980) prove that 
the information-minimising measure is the only one satisfying a 
list of what they term consistency constraints, but one of these is 
the assumption that the task is to extremise a functional (why 
should this be a consistency condition?), while another turns out 
to be a strong independence condition (and rather similar to the 
independence condition of Paris and Vencovska discussed in the 
preceding paragraph) which is certainly not a mere consistency 
constraint and, as Uffink points out with supporting examples, 
may in the appropriate circumstances be very unreasonable (1995, 
pp. 245- 247; Uffink 's article also contains an excellent critical 
discussion of Jaynes's use of Maximum Entropy). Given the other 
problematic features of conditionalisation we pointed to in 
Chapter 3, we feel that in linking its fortunes to the principle of 

288 
CHA PTER 9 
minimum information no real advance has been madc in justify-
ing its adoption as an independent Bayesian principle. 
9.0.4 Simplicity 
No examination of ways of trying to impose 'objective' con-
straints on prior probabilities is complete without a discussion of 
a criterion of ancient pedigree: simplici(v. Relativised to the 
Bayesian way oflooking at things, the idea is that greater relative 
simplicity of an explanatory or predictive theory should be 
reflected in its having a higher prior probability. But the criterion, 
while plausible, has its problems. One is lack ofunivocality: there 
are different ways in which we judge things simple, and these are 
not all equivalent, and some are highly description-relative. For 
example, the equation of a circle with radius k centred at the ori-
gin has the equation x 2 + y 2 = k2 in Cartesian co-ordinates, but 
the apparently much simpler equation r = k in polar coordinates. 
Tn general there are many different ways of characterising the 
main principles of a theory, whose choice may depend on a vari-
ety of factors, and which may seem more or less simple depend-
ing on the application to hand. 
But there is a more objective, less language-dependent sense 
of simplicity, which also appears to playa role in at least some 
areas of science, and that is simplicity in an Occam's razor-sense 
(Occam 's famous methodological principle was 'entities are not to 
be multiplied without necessity' ), which has a precise mathemat-
ical expression asje,vness o/"independent adjustable parameters. 
This certainly strikes a respondent chord with scientists: one of 
the considerations telling against the current Standard Model of 
subatomic physics is that it contains no fewer than 20 adjusted 
parameters. Jeffreys's modified Galileo law (4.i above), which no-
onc would accept in preference to Galileo's own, has the form of 
Galileo's law with k additional adjustable parameters evaluated at 
the data points t l , . . . ,!k' A simpler form which fi ts the data as 
well is not only more elegant and mathematically tractable but 
also, we feel, more Iike~J! on that account to he true. In that case, 
why not adopt as an independent rule that hypotheses with fewer 
adjustable parameters should receive greater prior probability? 
This is what Jeffreys himself advocated, calling the rule the 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
289 
Simplicity Postulate (1 961, pp. 46- 50). It may not determine prior 
probabilities uniquely, but it docs act as an objective constraint on 
thcm where it is applicable. 
Rather surprisingly, some have argued that such a principlc is 
actually inconsistent. Poppcr was probably the first to make this 
claim (l959a, pp. 383-·84), and Forster and Sober in a series of 
papers in effect repeat Popper's argument. This is that since a 
polynomial relation of degree n is also one of every higher degree 
111>n, with the coefficients of all terms of degree greater than n set 
equal to zero, the lower-degrcc hypothesis cannot have a larger 
probability than any of higher degree, sincc the first entails the 
second and probability must respect entailmcnt (Sober and 
Forster 1994). For examplc, a straight line y = I11X + c is also a 
parabola with the coefficient ofx2 sct equal to O. 
The argument is, however, easily rebuttcd by noting that the 
interest is usually in tcsting against each other not compatiblc but 
incompatible hypotheses, for cxample whether the data are better 
explained by the existing hypothesis or by adding a new parameter 
in the form of a nonzero coefficient to a highcr-degree term 
(Howson 1988a). Thus, to use Forster and Sober's notation, sup-
pose U N is the set of all linear models and QUA D thc set of all 
quadratic ones. In testing whether the true model is a J inear one ML 
or a quadratic one MQ the tester is not testing UN against QUAD; 
since they have common elements it would bc like testing M j 
against Me The test is between UN and QUAD* where QUAD* 
contains all the models in QUAD which are not in LIN. While 
P(UN) is necessarily no greater than P(QUAD) by the probability 
calculus, P(UN) can consistcntly be greater than P(QUAD*). 
Jeffreys himself regarded discriminating between such disjoint 
families as UN and QUAD* in curve-fitting problems as a clas-
sic arena for the Simplicity Postulate, pointing out that the penal-
ty of being able to fit the data exactly by means of a plcntiful 
enough supply of free parameters is over(itting: 
lfwe admitted the full n [parameters] ... we should change our law 
with every observation. Thus the principle that laws have some valid-
ity beyond the original data would be abandoned ( 196 1, p. 245) 
Indeed, "the simplest law is chosen because it is the most likely to 
give correct predictions" (Jeffreys 1961, p.4). Since the promotion 

290 
CHAPTER 9 
of predictive accuracy is Forster and Sober's own declared aim, 
their charge that Jeffreys's restriction of the simplicity ordering to 
disjoint polynomial families is an "ad hoc maneuver" which 
"merely changes the subject" (1994, p. 23; their italics) is simply 
incorrect. 
Forster and Sober make a further curious claim. The hypothe-
sis that some relationship is a particular degree of polynomial 
asserts that it is some (unspecified) member of the corresponding 
family of curves, and hence computing its posterior probability 
means computing the posterior probability, and hence the likeli-
hood, of that family. On this point Forster and Sober claim that 
it remains to be seen how [Bayesians] ... arc able to make sense of 
the idea that families of curves (as opposed to single curves) possess 
well-defined likelihoods. (1994, p. 23) 
This is strange, because the ability to make sense of the idea is 
guaranteed in the Bayesian theory, whereas, ironically, Forster 
and Sober's charge is rather accurately brought against their own 
account: in any theory restricted to considering likelihoods there 
is no comparable body of first principles which generates likeli-
hoods offamilies (disjunctions) of hypotheses. Even 'the father of 
likelihood', R.A. Fisher, conceded that it makes no sense to talk 
of the likelihood of a disjunction (he described it as like talking 
about the "stature of Jackson or Johnson" (1930, p. 532). In the 
Bayesian theory the likelihood ofa disjoint family {hi} of curves 
(determined, say, by a discrete parameter) with respect to data e is 
easily obtained via the probability calculus in terms of prior prob-
abilities and the likel ihoods of each member of the family 
XP(e I h,JP(h) 
L({h)le) 'X P(e lvh) = 
2:(h) 
(where vhi is the dis-
junction of the hi' In the continuous case the sum is replaced by 
integration where the integrals are defined. Consider, to take a 
simple example, the hypothesis that the data x are normally dis-
tributed with standard deviation around some unknown value t. 
The likelihood is equal to JV(2Jr(J2)- lexp[- (1 /2(J2)(x - t)2]f(t)dt. 
wheref(t) is the prior density and the integration is over the range 

FINA.LE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
291 
of values of t. The prior may of course be subjective, but that still 
does not make the likelihood ill-defined; on the contrary, formal-
ly speaking it is perfectly well defined. 
While, pace Forster and Sober, there is no technical problem 
with a Simplicity Postulate, we doubt that simplicity, in itself and 
divorced from the consideration of how it is related to the scien-
tist's background information, is or should be regarded as a crite-
rion of any great importance in guiding theory-choice. While a 
dislike of too many adjustable parameters is often manifested by 
scientists, it arguably depends on the merits of a particular case, 
and a closer examination usually reveals that it is considerations 
of plausibilizv, not simplicity in itself, that ultimately determine 
attitudes. Indeed, it is easy to think of circumstances where the 
simplest hypothesis consistent with the data would be likely to be 
rejected in favour of a more complex one: for example, even 
before the data are investigated in some piece of economic fore-
casting, models with very few parameters would be regarded with 
great suspicion precisely because there is an equally strong belief 
in a (large) multipl icity of independent causes. 
This is not to say that nothing definite can be said in favour of 
a here-and-now preference for theories with fewer parameters. For 
example, it can easily be shown that, other things being equal, 
hypotheses with fewer parameters get better confirmed by pre-
dicted observational data: a certain amount of the data is absorbed 
merely in evaluating the parameters, leaving the remainder to do 
the supporting-or not-of the resulting determinate hypothesis 
(Howson 1988b, pp. 388-89). But 'other things being equal' here 
means that the two hypotheses have roughly equal prior probabil-
ities. This is an important point in the context of the perennial 
'accommodation versus prediction' debatc, since what it points to 
are circumstances where the accommodating hypothesis is more 
highly confirmed than the independently predicting one, namely 
where the prior probability of the latter is sufficiently low com-
pared with that of the former (this is shown in detail in Howson, 
op. cit.). Everything, in other words, over and above fit with the 
data is a matter of prior judgments of plausibility. 
And this seems true even at a very intuitive level. A curve of 
high degree in some 'natural' co-ordinate system would be 
thought by most people to be more complex than one of low 

292 
C HA PTER 9 
degree. But suppose a highly complex relationship y(x) is thought 
to hold between two observable variables x and y. Draw an arbitrary 
straight line through the curve intersecting it at k points ('(i'Y). i = 
I, ... , k . Now empirically determine the values y (x) for the select-
ed ~\. Suppose that, within the bounds of error, Yi = y ('(). Would 
you regard the straight line as being confirmed by these data rather 
than the favoured hypothesis? No. Ultimately, the criterion count-
ing above all is plausibility in thc light of background knowledge; 
to the extent that simplicity is a criterion, it is to the extent that it 
supervenes on prior plausibility, not the other way round. 
There does however remain the legitimate methodological 
concern that too plentiful a use of adjustable parameters to fit cur-
rent data ever more exactly invites the risk of future overfitting, 
"as a model that fits the data too closely is likely to be tracking 
random errors in the data" (Myrvold and Harper 2002, p. 137). 
But then again, a very poor fit to present data with 11 parameters 
suggests that it may be necessary to introduce an (n + I )th. It is 
all a question of balance. It might be thought that this rather mod-
est conclusion sums up all that can usefully be said on the matter, 
but Forster and Sober, scourges of Bayesianism, claim that a the-
orem of Akaike shows that there is actually a great deal more that 
can be said, and of a mathematically precise character. To exam-
ine this claim we need f irst a precise notion of lit to the data of a 
hypothesis with 111 free parameters determining (it is the 'disjunc-
tion' of all of them) a corresponding family hll/ of specific 
hypotheses, which we shall take to be characterised by the density 
pry I q) with q an adjustable parameter-vector of dimensionality m. 
For any given data x let max (m) be that member of h which has 
r 
11/ 
maximum likelihood on x, i.c. the hypothesis whose parameters 
are the maximum-likelihood estimates 8('() determined by the 
data x. Let us, for the sake of argument, follow Forster and Sober 
and regard this as the hypothesis in hll/ which best fits x . Now let 
max,(m) be the log-likelihood of xm on x. Note that formally 
max,(m) is a function of x. Let p* be the true probability distri-
bution of the possible data generated by the observations. Forster 
and Sober take the joint expectation E ~ . E *Jlog p(yl(}('()} comput-
ed relative to p* to measure the predictive accuracy of hll/' Again, 
for the sake of argument let us agree, though we shall have some-
thing to say shortly about this use of expectations. 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
293 
The next step is the dramatic one. According to Sober and 
Foster, Akaike has shown how to construct a numerically precise 
estimate (~l the degree to which additional parameters 'vvill over-
fil. For Akaike showed that under suitable regularity conditions 
l(max)m) -
/11 for the actual data x is an unbiased estimate of the 
predictive accuracy of hill' as defined above. Akaike's result, often 
known as AIC for 'Akaike Information Criterion', thus appears to 
tell us that in estimating the predictive accuracy of a hypothesis 
with m free parameters from the current data, we must subtract 
from its current goodness of fit a penalty equal to In. In other 
words, other things being equal (current fit), we do better from the 
point of view of future predictive success to choose the simpler 
hypothesis. 
What should we make of this? One thing we are not question-
ing is the connection with information theory. Akaike also showed 
that AIC is an estimate of the discrepancy between probability 
distributions as measured by the Kullback-Leibler measure of dis-
tance between a model and the 'true' distribution, a measure 
which we have already encountered in the discussion earlier of the 
Principle of Minimum Information (hence 'Akaike Information 
Criterion'). This is eminently discussible, in particular because (i) 
the Kullback- Leibler measure is not actually a true distance (it is 
not symmetric), and (ii) there are other discrepancy measures in 
distribution space, for example variation distance, but the Akaike 
criterion fails to estimate these, that is, it is not robust over dis-
crepancy measures. But that is not our present concern. That con-
cern is that Sober and Forster see ArC as justifying the claim that 
on average simpler models are predictively more accurate than 
complex ones. We shall now say why we think there are serious 
grounds for questioning this claim. 
Firstly, there is the question of how well the 'suitable regular-
ity conditions' arc sati sfied in typical problems of scientific theo-
ry choice; the conditions are actually rather restrictive (see 
Kieseppa 1997 for a fuller discussion). Secondly, this account suf-
fers from an acute version of the reference-class problem. 
Suppose r usc as many parameters as is necessary to obtain a per-
fect fit to the data within some polynomial family. The resulting 
hypothesis h is a member of the singleton family {h}, which is a 
family with no adjustable parameters and which has excellent fit 

294 
CHAPTER 9 
to the current data. According to the Akaike criterion no other 
family can do better than {h}. But this is absurd, because we know 
that h will overfit, and indeed is exactly the type of hypothesis 
whose merited killing-off this analysis was developed to justify. 
There is an extensive literature on Forster and Sober's advoca-
cy of the Akaike criterion, and they themselves do attempt to 
answer this rather devastating objection. We do not think they suc-
ceed, but there is another type of objection to their enterprise 
which we believe to be just as undermining. An unbiased esti-
mate, recall, is characterised in terms of its expected value. The 
use of estimates based on their expected values is usually justified 
in terms of an asymptotic property: the sample average converges 
probabilistically to the expectation under suitable conditions. This 
is the content of a famous theorem of mathematical probability 
known as Chebychev's Inequality, and Bernoulli 's theorem is a 
famous special case of it, where the expected value of the sample 
average (relative frequency) is the binomial probability. But as we 
saw, you cannot straightforwardly infer that probabi lity from an 
observed relative frequency; indeed, the only way you infer any-
thing from the relative frequency is via the machinery of Bayesian 
inference, and there is none of that here. Moreover, it is easily 
shown that there is an uncountable infini(v of unbiased estimates 
of any given quantity, all differing from each other on the given 
data. How can they all be reliable when they contradict each 
other'? And to compound the problem still further is the fact that 
the quantity being estimated by the Akaike criterion is yet anoth-
er expectation! 
Frequentists usually respond to the question raised by the mul-
tiplicity of unbiased estimators by saying that one should of 
course choose that with minimum variance; if the variance is very 
small then--so the argument goes-one is more justified in using 
that estimator. But even were one to grant that, there is no guar-
antee that the Akaike estimator is minimum variance, let alone 
small. Even if it were small, that would still leave the question of 
how likely it is that this value is the true one, for which, of course, 
one needs the Bayesian apparatus of posterior probabi I ities. 
Perhaps surprisingly, there is a Bayesian analogue of Akaike's 
criterion, due to Schwarz and known as BIC (Bayesian 
Information Criterion). BIC replaces the penalty m in Akaike's 

FINA LE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
295 
estimator by the quantity (1/2)mlog n, where n is the number of 
independent observations, but is otherwise the same: 
l(max,(m)) - (1 /2)mlog n 
BIC 
But the justification of BIC, as might be expected, is very differ-
ent from that of AIC: BIC selects the model which maximises 
posterior probability as the data grows large without bound 
(Schwarz 1978, p. 462). Under fairly general conditions the pos·· 
tcrior probability takes its character from the behaviour of the 
likelihood function for a sufficiently large indcpendent sample, a 
fact which cxplains the presence of the likelihood term in BIC. 
That sounds good, but unfortunately BIC has its own attendant 
problems, principal among which is that its justification is asymp-
totic, giving the model with the highest posterior probability but 
only in the limit as the data extends. But we do not live at asymp-
totes. It is a simple matter to choose other sequences depending on 
the data which have the same limit properties, but which are all very 
different on any finite sample. Again, there is nothing like a guar-
antce from BIC that using it at any given point in the accumulation 
of data we are on the right track. From a purely theoretical point of 
view, howcver, BIC does, in a way that AIC does not, offer an intel-
ligible and straightforward justification of the intuition that too-pre-
cise fitting to the data means overfitting which means that it is 
unlikely that the result will survive a long enough run of tests. Thus 
Jeffreys's claim that 'the simplest law .. . is the most likely to give 
correct predictions' is clearly underwritten by BIC, at any rate 
asymptotically. AIC, by contrast, merely tells us that expected fit is 
improved, according to an unbiased estimator, by reducing the num-
ber of free parameters, and as we have seen it in fact tells us noth-
ing about how much more likely a simple theory is to be true. 
And now we are back on familiar ground, where the choice 
between two accounts of why simple hypothcses are meritorious 
is at bottom just the choice between a frequenti st, classical vicw 
of statistical inference as against a Bayesian. It has been the bur-
den of this book that only the Bayesian offers a coherent theory of 
valid inductivc inference, and that, despitc its suggestive termi-
nology, of unbiased ness, sufficiency, consistcncy, significance 
and the like, the classical thcory is in fact shot through with sys-

296 
CHAPTER 9 
tematic question-begging. The discussion of these two superfi-
cially similar but in reality very different justifications of simplic-
ity underlines that view. 
AIC and BIC are actually not the only approaches to trying to 
justify simplicity-considerations in terms of some more tangible 
methodological goal, though these deal with rather different con-
ceptions of simplicity. One, due to Solomonoff and others, appeals 
to Kolmogorov complexity theory. Assume that hypotheses assign 
probabilities to possible data strings. We can suppose without loss 
of generality that both hypotheses and data are coded as finite 
strings of Os and I s. The complexity of any such string is defined 
to be the length of the shortest computer program which will gen-
erate it. The fact that such program-lengths across different 'uni-
versal' programming languages (like LISP, PROLOG, JAVA etc.) 
can be proved to be uniformly bounded by a constant means that 
the definition is to that extent relatively language-independent. 
Suppose a data sequence of length n is observed, and that P is the 
true distribution of the data. Let the error in predicting the next 
member of the sequence between P and any other hypothesised 
distribution, P " be the square of the difference between the two 
probabilities on that member conditional on the data. Solomonov 
showed under quite general conditions that if a certain prior distri-
bution A ('the universal enumerable semi-measure') is employed, 
which is also a prior distribution weighting complex sequences 
lower than simpler ones according to the complexity criterion 
above, then the expected value of the error convergcs to zero (li 
and Vitanyi 1997). But now we have yet another criterion justified 
in terms of an expected value, and everything we said earlier about 
the Akaike criterion applies here equally. ~ 
9.b 
Summary 
Simplicity is a snare, in our opinion, in whatever formal guise. 
Ultimately, it is plausihility that is the issue, and this does not 
always harmonise with what the a priori theorist takes as his or 
" [n fact, model selection criteria of the sort we have mentioned (and others) are 
extensively used (see, for example, Burnham and Anderson 2002). 

FINALE SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
297 
her ideal of simplicity. The same general observation also, in our 
opinion, undercuts the quest for objective priors in general. Our 
view, which we have stated several times already (but see that as 
no reason to stop!) and believe the most natural way of interpret-
ing the Bayesian formalism, is that the latter is simply a set of 
valid rules for deriving probabilistic consequences from proba-
bilistic premises. If you want accurate conclusions you should 
make your assumptions as accurate (in your own eyes) as you 
can. But the objectivity of the enterprise consists in the objec-
tive validity with which you draw conclusions from those 
assumptions. 
In this view the quest by many for 'objective' prior distribu-
tions is not only unnecessary but misconceived, a conclusion is 
reinforced by the problems which arise in pursuing that quest, and 
which seem to be resolvable only by the sorts of ultimately sub-
jective decision that makes the enterprise self-defeating. People, 
even those possessing the same background information, and 
even experts, may still have different opinions, pace Jaynes. 
Trying to force this, in our view entirely legitimate, diversity of 
opinions into a single uniform one is misguided Procrustean ism, 
and would have deleterious consequences for the progress of sci-
ence were it to be legislated for. 
It is, in addition, certainly not sensible to throwaway relevant 
information, yet this is in effect just what is recommended by 
those who tell us that we should always use reference priors wher-
ever possible, or give the simplest hypotheses the highest a priori 
probability. But none of this means that the Bayesian theory with-
out 'objective' priors effectively imposes no constraints at all (as 
has often been charged). On the contrary, the consistency con-
straints represented by the probability axioms are both stringent 
and very objective, as stringent and objective as those of deduc-
tive logic. And in a theory of valid inference that is not only as 
good as it gets, but quite good enough. 
9.c 
The Old-Evidence Problem 
Or is it good enough? There will always be people who object to 
any theory, and the Bayesian theory is no exception to this rule. 

298 
C HAPTER 9 
We have tried to deal with the objections which wc feel merit seri-
ous discussion. We shall end, however, with one that doesn't, but 
we shall take a look at it nonetheless because it is often seriously 
advanced as the most serious objection to using the theory of per-
sonal probability in any methodological role. 
It goes as foll ows. The Bayesian theory is supposed to reflect 
patterns of accepted reasoning from data in terms of the way the 
data change one's probabilities. One type of such reasoning is 
assessing the impact of cvidence on a hypothesis of data obtained 
before the hypothesis was first proposed. The stock example is the 
anomalous precession of Mercury's perihelion, discovered 
halfway through the nineteenth century and widely regarded as 
supporting Einstein's General Theory of Relativity (GTR) which 
was discovered (by Einstein himself) to predict it in 1915. Indeed, 
this prediction arguably did more to establish that theory and dis-
place the classical theory of gravitation than either of its other two 
dramatic contemporary predictions, namely the bending of light 
close to the sun and the gravitational red-shift. But according to 
nearly all commentators, starting with Glymour 1980, this is 
something which in principle the Bayesian theory cannot account 
for, since e is known then Pre) = I and it is a simple inference 
from the probability calculus that P(h I e) = P(h); i.e., such evi-
dence cannot be a ground/hr changing one :s' belielin h. 
Despite all this, the 'old evidence' objection' is not in fact a 
serious problem for the Bayesian theory; indeed, it is not a prob-
lem at all, certainly in principle. What it really demonstrates is a 
failure to apply the Bayesian formulas sensibly, and to that extent 
the 'problem' is rather analogous to inferring that 3/2 = x/x = I 
from the fact that 3x = 2x if x = 0. To see clearly why we need 
only note an elementary fact about evidence, which is that data 
do not constitute evidencefor or against a hypothesis in isolation 
F om a body of" ambient information. To talk about e being evi-
dence relevant to h obviously requires a background of fact and 
information against which e is judged to be evidence. A large 
dictionary found in the street is not in itself evidence either for or 
against the hypothesis that Smith killed Jones. Relative to the 
background information that Jones was killed with a heavy 
object, that the dictionary belonged to Smith, and that blood 
found on the dictionary matches Jones's, it is. In other words, 

FINA LE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
299 
'being evidence for' connotes a three-place relation, between the 
data, the hypothesis in question, and a body k of background 
information. The evidential weight of e in relation to h is 
assessed by how much e changes the credibility of h, in a posi-
tive or negative direction, given k. 
Clearly, a condition of applying these obvious criteria is that k 
does not contain e. Otherwise, as the old-evidence 'problem' 
reminds us, e could not in principle change the credibility of h: 
requiring that k not contain e, before judging its evidential import 
relative to k is merely like requiring that the car engine is not 
already running in any test to see whether a starter motor is work-
ing properly. Granted that, we can see that the old-evidence 'prob-
lem' really is not a problem, merely an implicit reminder that if e 
is in k then it should first be deleted, as far as that can be done, 
before assessing its evidential weight. I 
It is often objected against thi s that there is no uniform 
method for deleting an item of information from a database k, 
and often it seems that there is no way at all which does not rep-
resent a fairly arbitrary decision. For example, the logical content 
of the set {a,b} is identical to that of {a,a --;. b}. where a and b 
are contingent propositions, but simply subtracting a from each 
will leave two different sets of consequences; b will be in the first 
and not the second, for example, if the sets are consistent. Much 
has been made of this problem, and some have been led to 
believe that the task is hopeless. Fortunately, this is far from the 
truth. Suzuki (2005) has shown that there are consistent proba-
bilistic contraction functions which represent the deletion of e 
from k relative to plausible boundary conditions on such func-
tions (these conditions are furnished by the well-known AGM 
(Alchourr6n -G~irdenfors -Makinson) theory of belief-revision; 
see Suzuki op. cit. for references). The exhibition of a particlilar 
I Given the routine dismissal of the counterfactualmove in the literature, read-
ers may be surprised to learn that it is in fact standard Baycsian procedure. Once 
any piece of evidence is 'learned' it becomes 'old', and according to those who 
advance the 'old evidence problem' as an objection to the Bayesian methodolo-
gy, it should no longer confirm any hypothesis (indeed, conditionalising on e 
automatically takes its probability to I). So to regard any evidence, once known, 
as confirming one has to go counterfactual. 

300 
CHAPTER 9 
probability function representing the deletion of e will in gener-
al reflect the way the agent her/himself views the problem, and it 
is completely in line with the personalistic Bayesian theory 
adopted in this book that the request for an objective account of 
how this should be done is simply misplaced. Nevertheless, it can 
often be expected that the constraints imposed by the background 
information will practically determine the result, and this is cer-
tainly true for the example which prompted the discussion, the 
observation of the precession of Mercury's perihelion, as we 
shall now show. 
The discussion follows Howson 2000, p.194. We start, appro-
priately, with Bayes's Theorem, in the form: 
P(h I e) = 
p + Pre I ~h)(l - p) 
p 
Pre I h) 
where as before h is GTR, e is the observed data on Mercury's 
perihelion (including the error bounds), p = P(h), and P is like the 
agent's probability function except that it does not 'know' e. 
Following category theory, we could call P the 'forgetful functor' , 
meaning in this case that it has 'forgotten' e. We shall now show 
that, despite this idea sounding too vague to be useful, or even, 
possibly, consistent, the data of" the problem are sufficient to 
determine all the terms in the equation above. at any rate to with-
in fairly tight bounds. 
Firstly, we have by assumption that h, together with the resid-
ual background information which P is assumed to 'know', 
entails e, so pre I h) = I by the probability axioms independent~v 
of" any particular characteristic of" P. Thus the equation above 
becomes 
P 
P(h I e) = ------
p + pre I ~h)(l - p) 
and now we have only p and P(e I ~h) to consider. If we were to 
expand out pre I ~h) we would find that it is a constant less than 
1 multiplied by a sum whose terms are products pre I h)P(h), 

FINALE: SOME GENERAL ISSUES 
301 
where hi are alternatives to h. Recall now the assumption, reason-
ably appropriate to the situation in 1915, that the only serious 
alternative to GTR was Classical Gravitation Theory (CGT), 
meaning that it is the only hi apart from h itself such that P(h) is 
not negligible. Now we bring in the additional assumption that P 
does not 'know' e. Judged on the residual background informa-
tion alone, the fact that e is anomalous relative to CGT means 
therefore that pre I -h) will be vety small, say E. 
We are now almost there, with just p itself to evaluate. 
Remember that this too is to be evaluated on the residual back-
ground information. Without any of the confirming evidence for 
h, including e, this should mean that p, though small by compari-
son with P(CGT), which is correspondingly large (e is now not an 
anomaly for CGT, since by assumption e does not exist), is not 
negligible. It follows that, because of the very large likelihood 
ratio in favour of h combined with a non-negligible if small prior 
probability, P(h I e) is much larger than p = P(h), and we see that 
h is correspondingly highly confirmed bye, even though e is 
known. The 'old evidence' problem is solved. 
9.d 
Conclusion 
Our view, and we believe the only tenable view, of the Bayesian 
theory is of a theory of consistent probabilistic reasoning. Just as 
with the theory of deductive consistency, this gives rise automat-
ically to an account of valid probabilistic inference, in which the 
truth, rationality, objectivity, cogency or whatever of the premis-
es, here prior probability assignments, are exogenous considera-
tions, just as they are in deductive logic. Not only are these 
features outside the scope of the theory, they are, for the reasons 
we have given, incapable of being given any coherent or sustain-
able interpretation in any case. 
This is not to say that what we have presented herc is the last 
word. Modesty alone would preclude this, but it is almost cer-
tainly anyway not true: the model of uncertain reasoning in this 
account is a crude and simple one, as crude and simple as the 
usual models of deductive inference. But it has also the explana-
tory strengths of these models which, crude as they are, still 

302 
CHAPTER 9 
dominate and mould discussions of deductive reasoning, and will 
continue to do so, in one version or another, for the foreseeable 
future. Which is saying a great deal. Enough, indeed, to end this 
book. 

Bibliography 
Akaike, H. 1973. Information Theory and an Extension of the Maximum 
Likelihood Principle. In Second International Symposium 0/ 
Inlormation Theory, cds. B.N. Petrov and F Csaki (Budapest: 
Akademiai Kiad6), 267-28l. 
Anscombe, Fl. 1963. Sequential Medical Trials. Journal ol the 
American Statistical Association, Volume 58, 365-383. 
Anscombe, Fl., and R.l. Aumann. 1963. A Definition of Subjective 
Probability. Annals o/Mathematical Statistics, Volume 34, 199-205. 
Armitage, P. 1975. Sequential Medical Trials. Second edition. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Atkinson, A.C. 1985. Plots, Trans/ormations, and Regression. Oxford: 
Clarendon. 
---. 1986. Comment: Aspects of Diagnostic Regression Analysis. 
Statistical Science, Volume I, 397--402. 
Babbage, C. 1827. Notice Respecting some Errors Common to many 
Tables of Logarithms. Memoirs o(the Astronomical Society, Volume 
3,65-67. 
Bacon, F 1994 [1620]. Novum Organum. Translated and edited by P. 
Urbach and l. Gibson. Chicago: Open Court. 
Barnett, V 1973. Comparative Statistical In/erence. New York: Wiley. 
Bartha, P. 2004. Countable Additivity and the de Finetti Lottery. British 
Journal/hr the Philosophv o/Science, Volume 55, 301-323. 
Bayes, T. 1958 [1763]. An Essay towards Solving a Problem in the 
Doctrine of Chances. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Societv, Volume 53, 370--418. Reprinted with a biographical note by 
G.A. Barnard in Biometrika (1958), Volume 45, 293-315. 
Belsley, D.A., E. Kuh, and R.E. Welsch. 1980. Regression Diagnostics: 
Identifi'ing In/luential Data and Sources of Collinearitv. New York: 
Wiley. 
Bernoulli, D. 1738. Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis. 
Commentarii academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitanae, 
Volume V, 175-192 
Bernoulli, l. 1713. Ars Conjectandi. Basiliae. 

304 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Berry, D.A. 1989. Ethics and ECMO. Statistical Science, Volume 4, 
306-310. 
Blackwell, D., and L. Dubins. 1962. Merging of Opinions with 
Increasing Information. Annals oj'Mathematical Statistics, Volume 
33, 882-87. 
Bland, M. 1987. An Intmduction to Medical Statistics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Blasco, A. 200 I. The Bayesian Controversy in Animal Breeding. Journal 
oIAnimal Science, Volume 79, 2023-046. 
Bovens, L. and S. Hartmann. 2003. Bayesian Epistemology. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Bourke, G.J., L.E. Daly, and 1. McGilvray. 1985. interpretation and Us'es 
oj'Medical Statistics. 3rd edition. St. Louis: Mosby. 
Bowden, B,Y 1953. A Brief History of Computation. In Faster than 
Thought, edited by B.Y Bowden. London: Pitman. 
Bradley, R. 1998. A Representation Theorem for a Decision Theory with 
Conditionals. Synthese, Volume 116, 187-229. 
Brandt, R. 1986. 'Comment' on Chatterjee and Hadi (1986). Statistical 
Science, Volume 1, 405-07. 
Broemeling, L.D. 1985. Bayesian Analysis oj'Linear Models. New York: 
Dekker. 
Brook, R.J. and G.C Arnold. 1985. Applied Regression Analysis and 
Experimental Design. New York: Dekker. 
Burnham, K.P. and D.R. Anderson. 2002. Model Selection and 
Multimodellnferellce: A Practicallnfimnation- Theoretical Approach. 
New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Byar, D.P et al. (seven co-authors), 1976. Randomized Clinical Trials. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 74-80. 
Byar, D.P et al. (22 co-authors). 1990. Design Considerations for AIDS 
Trials. New England Journal oj'Medicine, Volume 323, 1343-48. 
Carnap, R. 1947. On the Applications of Inductive Logic. Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, Volume 8, 133 148. 
Casscclls w., A. Schoenberger, and T. Grayboys. 1978. Interpretation by 
Physicians of Clinical Laboratory Results. New England Journal oj' 
Medicine, Volume 299, 999-1000. 
Chatterjee, S., and A.S. Hadi. 1986. Influential Observations, High 
Leverage Points, and Outliers in Linear Regression. Statistical 
Science, Volume I, 379--416. 
Chatterjee, S., and B. Price. 1977. Regression A n azvs is by Example. New 
York: Wiley. 
Chiang, CL. 2003. Statistical Methods oj' Analysis. World Scientific 
Publishing. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
305 
Cochran, w.G. 1952. The X2 Test of Goodness of Fit. Annals of 
Mathematical Statistics, Volume 23, 315-345. 
---. 1954. Some Methods for Strcngthening thc Common X2 Tests. 
Biometrics, Volume 10, 417-451. 
Cook, R.D. 1986. Comment on Chatte~iee and Hadi 1986. Statistical 
Science, Volume 1, 393-97. 
Coumot, A.A. 1843. Exposition de la Thcorie des Chances et des 
Probabilitcs. Paris. 
Cox, D.R. 1968. Notes on Some Aspects of Regression Analysis. 
journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Volume 131 A, 265-279. 
Cox, R.T. 1961. The Algebra of Probable Inference. Baltimore: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Cramer, H. 1946. Mathematical Methods of Statistics. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Daniel, c., and FS. Wood. 1980. Fitting Equations to Data. New York: 
Wiley. 
David, FN. 1962. Games, Gods, and Gambling. London: Griffin. 
Dawid, A.P. 1982. The Well-Calibrated Bayesian. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, Volume 77, 605-613. 
Diaconis, P., and S.L. Zabel!. 1982. Updating Subjective Probability. 
journal of the American Statistical Association. Volume 77, 
822-830. 
Dobzhansky, T. 1967. Looking Back at Mendel's Discovery. Science, 
Volume 156, 1588-89. 
Dorling, J. 1979. Bayesian Personalism, the Methodology of Research 
Programmes, and Duhem's Problem. Studies in Historv and 
Philosophy ofSciel1ce, Volume 10, 177-187. 
---. 1996. Further Illustrations of the Bayesian Solution of Duhem's 
Problem. http://www.princeton.edu/~bayeswaylDorling/dorling.html 
Downham, .I., cd. 1988. issues in Political Opinion Polling. London: The 
Market Research Society. Occasional Papers on Market Research. 
Duhem, P. 1905. The Aim and Structure ofPhvsical Theon'. Translated 
by P.P. Wiener, 1954. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Dunn, 1M., and G. Hellman. 1986. Dualling: A Critique of an Argument 
of Popper and Miller. British Journal/or the Philosophy of Science. 
Volume 37, 220-23. 
Earman, J. 1992. Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian 
Confirmation Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Edwards, A.L. 1984. An Introduction to Lineal' Regression and 
Correlation. Second edition. New York: Freeman. 
Edwards, A. W.F 1972. Likelihood. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

306 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
---. 1986. Are Mendel's Results Really Too Closc? Biological 
Reviews ol the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 61, 
295-312. 
Edwards, W 1968. Conservatism in Human Information Proccssing. In 
Formal Representation ol Human ./udgment. B. Kleinmuntz, cd., 
17-52. 
Edwards, W , H. Lindman, and L.J. Savage. 1963. Bayesian Statistical 
Inference for Psychological Research. P.I)'ch%gical Review, 
Volume 70, 193-242. 
Ehrenberg, A.S.C. 1975. Data Reduction: Analvsing and Interpreting 
Statistical Data. London: Wiley. 
FDA. 1988. Guideline/or the Format and Content ol the Clinical and 
Statistical Sections olNelv Drug Applications. Rockville: Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration. 
Fellcr, W 1950. An introduction to Probability TheOlY and its 
Applications, Volume I. Third edition. New York: Wiley. 
Feyerabend P. 1975. Against Method. London: New Left Books. 
Finetti, B. de. 1937. La prevision; ses lois logiques, ses sourccs subjec-
tives. Annale.l· de I'lnstitut Henri Poincare, Volumc 7, 168. 
Reprinted in 1964 in Engl ish translation as 'Foresight: Its Logical 
Laws, its Subjective Sources', in Studies in Subjective Probability, 
edited by H.E. Kyburg, Jr., and H.E. SmokIer (Ncw York: Wiley). 
---. 1972. Probability. Induction. and Statistics, New York: Wiley. 
---. 1974. Themy olProbability. Volume I. New York: Wiley. 
Fisher, R.A. 1922. On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical 
Statistics. Philosophical Transactions oj' the Royal Society oj' 
London. Volume A222, 309-368. 
---. 1930. Inverse Probability. Proceedings ol the Camhridge 
Philosophical Society, Volume 26, 528 535. 
---. 1935. Statistical Tests. Nature. Volume 136,474. 
---. 1936. Has Mendel 's Work Been Rediscovered? Annals ol 
Science, Volume 1, 115-137. 
---. 1947 [1926]. The Design ol E'periments. Fourth edition. 
Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. 
---. 1956. Statistical Methods and Statisticallnlerence. Edinburgh: 
Oliver and Boyd. 
"--. 1970 [1925]. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. 
Fourteenth edition. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. 
Freeman, P.R. 1993. The Role of P-valucs in Analysing Trial Results. 
Statistics in Medicine, Volumc 12, 1433 459. 
Gabbay, D. 1994. What Is a Logical System? What Is a Logical S~vstem?, 
ed. D. Gabbay, Oxford: Oxford University Prcss, 179-217. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
307 
Gaifman, H. 1964. Concerning Measures in First Order Calculi. israel 
Journal of Mathematics, Volume 2. 1-18. 
- --. 1979. Subjective Probability, Natural Predicates, and Hempel's 
Ravens. Erkenntnis, Volume 14, 105-159. 
Gaifman, H., and M. Snir. Probabilities over Rich languages. Testing and 
Randomness. Journal of Symbolic Logic 47, 495-548. 
Giere, R. N. 1984. Understanding Scientific Reasoning. Second edition. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart. 
Gigerenzer, G. 1991. How to Make Cognitive Illusions Disappear: 
Beyond Heuristics and Biases. European Review of Social 
Psvchology, Volume 3,83-115. 
Gillies, D.A. 1973. An Objective Theorv of Probabilitv. London: 
Methuen. 
- '--. 1989. Non-Bayesian Confirmation Theory and the Principle of 
Explanatory Surplus. Philosophy o{Science Association 1988, edit-
ed by A. Finc and J. Loplin. Volume 2 (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh 
University Press), 373- 381. 
----. 1990. Bayesianism versus Falsificationism. Ratio, Volume 3, 
82- 98. 
- --. 2000. Philosophical Theories of Probahility. London: 
Routledge. 
Girotto, V, and M. Gonzalez. 200 I. Solving Probabilistic and Statistical 
Problems: A Matter of Information Structure and Question Form. 
Cognition, Volume n, 247-276. 
Glymour, e. 1980. The(JlY and Evidence. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
Good, I.J. 1950. Prohabilitv and the Weighing of Evidence. London: 
Griffin. 
- --. 1961. The Paradox of Confirmation. British Journal fhr the 
Philosophy o(Science, Volume I I. 63-64. 
1965. 
The 
Estimation oj Probabilities. 
Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
- '--. 1969. Discussion of Bruno de Finetti's Paper 'Initial 
Probabilities: A Prerequisite for any Valid Induction'. Svnthese, 
Volume 20. 17-24. 
- -- . 1981 . Some Logic and History of Hypothesis Testing. In 
Philosophical r(J/lndations o( Economics, edited by .I.e. Pitt 
(Dordrecht: Reidel). 
- --. 1983. Some History of the Hierarchical Bayes Methodology. 
Good Thinking. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
95- 105. 

308 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Goodman, N. 1954. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. London: Athlone. 
Gore, S.M. 1981. Assessing Clinical Trials: Why Randomize'! British 
Medical journal, Volume 282, 1958- 960. 
Grunbaum, A. 1976. Is the Method of Bold Conjectures and Attempted 
Refutations justifiably the Method of Science? British journal fCJr 
the Philosophy (JjScience, Volume 27, 105- 136. 
Gumbel, E.J. 1952. On the Reliability of the Classical Chi-Square Test. 
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, Volume 23, 253- 263. 
Gunst, R.F., and R.e. Mason. 1980. Regression Analvsis and its 
Application. New York: Dekker. 
Hacking, I. 1965. Logic of Statistical Inlerence. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
---. 1967. Slightly More Real istic Personal Probability. Philosophv 
of 5;cience, Volume 34, 311-325. 
---. 1975. The Emergence of Probability. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Halmos, P. 1950. Measure TheOl)'. New York: Van Nostrand. 
Halpern, J.y. 1999. Cox's Theorem Revisited. j ournal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research, Volume 11,429 435. 
Hays, WL. 1969 [1 963]. Statistics. London: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Hays, WL., and R.L. Winkler. 1970. Statistics: Probabilitv, inference, 
and Decision, Volume I. New York: Holt, Rinehart. 
Hellman, G. 1997. Bayes and Beyond. Philosophv of Science, Volume 
64. 
Hempel, e.G. 1945. Studies in the Logic of Confirmation. Mind, 
Volume 54, 1- 26, 97- 12 1. Reprinted in Hempel 1965. 
---. 1965. A,\jJecls of Scientific Explanation. New York: The Free 
Press. 
--- . 1966. Philosophy of Nalural Science. Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Hodges, J.L., Jr., and E.L. Lehmann. 1970. Basic Concepts of 
Probabilitl' and Statistics. Second edition. San Francisco: Holden-
Day. 
Horwich, P. 1982. Prohabilitv and Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
---. 1984. Bayesianism and Support by Novel Facts. British journal 
for the Philosophy ()fSciel1ce. Volume 35, 245- 251 . 
Howson, e. 1973. Must the Logical Probability of Laws be Zero? British 
jOl/rnalfiJl' the Philosophy of Science. Volume 24, 153-163. 
Howson, e., cd. 1976. Method and Appraisal in the Physical Sciences. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
309 
---. 1987. Popper, Prior Probabilities, and Inductive Inference. 
British Journal/hr the Philosophy of Science, Volume 38, 207-224. 
--. 1988a. On the Consistency of Jeffreys's Simplicity Postulate, 
and its Role in Bayesian Inference. Philosophical Quarterlv, Volume 
38,68- 83. 
--- . 1988b. Accommodation, Prediction, and Bayesian Confirmation 
Theory. PSA 1988. A. Fine and.l. Leplin, eds., 381 - 392. 
---. 1997. Logic With Trees. London: Routledge. 
---. 2000. Hume:~ Problem: Induction and the Justification of 
Belief Oxford: Clarendon. 
---. 2002. Bayesianism in Statistics. Bayes :\. Theorem, ed. R. 
Swinburne, The Royal Academy: Oxford University Press, 39-71. 
Hume, D. 1739. A Treatise of Human Nature, Books I and 2. London: 
Fontana. 
---. 1777. A n Enquir~v Concerning Human Understanding. Edited 
by L.A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Jaynes, E.T. 1968. Prior Probabilities. institute of Electricaf and 
Electronic Engineers Transactions on Systems Science and 
(vbernetics, SSC-4, 227-241. 
---. 1973. The Well-Posed Problem. Foundations of Physics, 
Volume 3, 413- 500. 
--. 1983. Papers on Probability, Statistics, and Statistical Physics, 
edited by R. Rosenkrantz. Dordrecht: Reidel. 
---. 1985. Some Random Observations. Synthese, Volume 63, 
115- 138. 
---. 2003. Probabilitv Theorv: The Logic of Science. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Jeffrey, R.C. 1970. 1983. The Logic of Decision. Second edition. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
---. 2004. Subjective Probabili~v: The Real Thing. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Jeffreys, H. 1961. Theory of Probability. Third edition. Oxford: 
Clarendon. 
Jennison, c., and B. W. Turnbull. 1990. Statistical Approaches to Interim 
Monitoring: A Review and Commentary. Statistical Science, Volume 
5,299- 317. 
Jevons, W.S. 1874. The Principles of Science. London: Macmillan. 
Joyce, J.M. 1998. A Nonpragmatic Vindication of Probabilism. 
Philosophy ()fScience, Volume 65, 575- 603. 
---. 1999. The Foundations of Causal Decision Theory. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

310 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Kadane, 1., et al. 1980. Interactive Elicitation of Opinion for a Normal 
Linear Model. journal of" the American Statistical Association. 
Volume 75, 845- 854. 
Kadane, .l.B., M.l. Schervish, and T. Seidenfeld. 1999. Rethinking the 
Foundations o(Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kadane, lB. and T. Seidenfeld. 1990. Randomization in a Bayesian 
Perspective. j ournal 0/ Statistical Planning and Inference, Volume 
25, 329-345. 
Kant, I. 1783. Prolegomena to any FUlllre Metaphysics. Edited by L.w. 
Beck, 1950. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Kempthorne, O. 1966. Some Aspects of Experimental Inference. 
journal o/the American Statistical Association. Volume 61, 11--34. 
- ---. 1971. Probability, Statistics, and the Knowledge Business. In 
fOllndations of Statistical Inference. edited by VP. Godambe and 
D.A. Sprott. Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston of Canada. 
-- --. 1979. The Design and Analysis 0/ E'periments. Huntington: 
Robert E. Krieger. 
Kendall, M.G., and A. Stuart. 1979. The Advanced Theory o/Statistics. 
Volume 2. Fourth edition. London: Griffin. 
-
-
. 1983. The Advanced Theory o/Statistics. Volume 3. Fourth edi-
tion. London: Griffin. 
Keynes, l.M. 1921. A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan. 
Kieseppa, LA. 1997. Akaike Information Criterion, Curve-fitting, and 
the Philosophical Problem of Simplicity. British JournalJiJr the 
Philosophy o/Science, Volume 48, 21-48. 
Kitcher, P. 1985. Vaulting Ambition. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press. 
Kolmogorov, A.N. [950. rCJUndations of the Theory of" Probability. 
Translated from the German of 1933 by N. Morrison. New York: 
Chelsea Publishing. Page references are to the 1950 edition. 
Korb, K.B. 1994. Infinitely Many Resolutions of Hempel's Paradox . [n 
Theoretical Aspects of" Reasoning abow Kllol1'ledge, 13849, edited 
by R. Fagin. Asilomar: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Kuhn, T.S. [970 [1 962]. The Structure of"Scielllific Revolutions. Second 
edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Kyburg, H.E., Jr., and E. Smokier, eds. 1980. Studies ill Subjective 
Probability. Huntington: Krieger. 
Lakatos, L 1963. Proofs and Refutations. Brilish Journal .lor the 
Philosophv 0/ Science, Volume 14, 1-25, 120- 139, 221-143, 296, 
432. 
- --' . 1968. Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research 
Programmes. Proceedings of" the Aristotelian Societv. Volume 69, 
149-186. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
311 
---. 1970. falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research 
Programmes. In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by 
I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
---. 1974. Popper on Demarcation and Induction. In The Philosophy 
of Karl Popper, edited by PA. Schilpp. La Salle: Open Court. 
---. 1978. Philosophical Papers. Two volumes. Edited by 1. Worrall 
and G. Currie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Laplace, PS. de. 1820. Essai Philosophique sllr les Prohabilites. Page 
references arc to Philosophical Essay 011 Probabilities, 1951. New 
York: Dover. 
Lee, PM. 1997. Bayesian Statistics. Second edition. London: Arnold. 
Lewis, D. 1981. A Subjectivist's Guide to Objective Chance. In Studies 
in Inductive Logic and Probabili(l', edited by R.c:. Jeffrey, 263-293. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Lewis-Beck, M.S. 1980. Applied Regression. Beverley Hills: Sage. 
Li, M. and PB.M. Vitanyi. 1997. All Introduction to Ko/mogorov 
Complexity Theorv and its Applications. Second edition. Berlin: 
Springer. 
Lindgren, B.W. 1976. Statistical 
TheOl~v. Third edition. New York: 
Macmillan. 
Lindley, D.V 1957. A Statistical Paradox. Biometrika, Volume 44, 
187-192. 
---. 1965. Introduction to Probability and Statistics, from a 
Bayesian Viewpoint. 
Two 
volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
---. 1970. Bayesian Analysis in Regression Problems. In Bayesian 
Statistics, edited by D.L. Meyer and R.O. Collier. Itasca: FE. 
Peacock. 
----. 1971. Bayesian Statistics: A Review. Philadelphia: Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 
---. 1982. The Role of Randomization in Inference. Philosophy of 
Science Association, Volume 2, 431-446. 
---. 1985. Making Decisions. Second edition. London: Wiley. 
Lindley, D.V, and G.M. EI-Sayyad. 1968. The Bayesian Estimation of a 
Linear functional Relationship. Journal of' the Roml Statistical 
Societv, Volume 30B, 190-202. 
Lindley, D.V, and L.D. Phillips. 1976. Inference for a Bernoulli Process 
(a Bayesian View). American Statistician, Volume 30,112-19. 
Mackie,1.L. 1963. The Paradox of Confirmation. British Journalj(J/' the 
Philosophy of Science, Volume 38, 265-277. 

312 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Mcintyre, I.M.e. 199 L Tribulations for Clinical Trials. British Medical 
journal, Volume 302, I 099~ 1100. 
Maher, P. 1990. Why Scientists Gather Evidence. British journal/or the 
Philosophy olScience, Volume 41 , 103~ 119. 
---
1990. Acceptance Without Belief. PSA 1990, Volume I, eds. A. 
Fine, M. Forbes, and L. Wessels, 381 ~392. 
--- 1997. Depragmatized Dutch Book Arguments. Philosophy ol 
Science, Volume 64, 291-305. 
Mallet, J W 1880. Revision of the Atomic Weight of Aluminium. 
Philosophical Transactions, Volume 17 1, I 003~035. 
--- . 1893. The Stas Memorial Lecture. In Memorial Lectures deliv-
ered hejhre the Chemical Society 1893-1900. Published 190L 
London. Gurney and Jackson. 
Mann, H.B., and A. Wald. 1942. On the Choice of the Number of 
Intervals in the Application of the Chi-Square Test. Annals ()f 
Mathematical Statistics, Volume 13, 306 -317. 
Mayo, D.G. 1996. Error and the Grml'th of Experimental Knowledge. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Medawar, P. 1974. More Unequal than Others. New Statesman, Volume 
87,50~5L 
Meier, P. 1975. Statistics and Medical Experimentation. Biometrics, 
Volume 31, 511 ~529. 
Miller, D. 199 L On the Maximization of Expected Futility. PPE 
Lectures, Lecture 8. Department of Economics: University of 
Vienna. 
Miller, R. 1987. Bare~laced Messiah. London: Michael Joseph. 
Mises, R. von. 1939 [1928]. Probahility, Statistics. and Truth. First 
English edition prepared by H. Geiringer. London: Allen and Unwin. 
--- . 1957. Second Engl ish edition, revised, of Probahility, Statistics 
and Tmth. 
--- . 1964. Mathematical TheolY ol Probabili~v {lnd Statistics. New 
York: Academic Press. 
Mood, A. M. 1950. Introduction to the Theon; of Statistics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
MOOlL A.M., and EA. Graybill. 1963. Introduction to the Theorv of 
Statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Musgrave. A. 1975. Popper and 'Diminishing Returns from Repeated 
Tests' , Australasian journal olPhilosophy, Volume 53, 248~253. 
Myrvold, We. and WL. Harper. 2002. Model Selection and Scientific 
Inference. Philosophy ol Science. Volume 69, S 124~ 134. 
Neyman, J 1935. On the Two Different Aspects of the Representative 
Method: the Method of Stratified Sampling and the Method of 
Purposive Selection. Reprinted in Neyman 1967, 98-- 14 L 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
313 
-
- - - . 1937. Outline of a Theory of Statistical Estimation Based on the 
Classical Theory of Probability. Philosophical Transactions oj the 
Royal Societv. Volume 236A, 333-380. 
-
- - -. 1941. Fiducial Argument and the Theory of Confidence 
Intervals. Biometrika, Volume 32, 128--150. Page references are to 
the reprint in Neyman 1967. 
-
- -. 1952. Lectures and Conferences on Mathematical Sialistics and 
Probahilitv. Second edition. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 
-
-
-. 1967. A Selection oj Ear~v Statistical Papers oj J Neyman. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Neyman, J., and E.S. Pearson. 1928. On the Use and the Interpretation 
of Certain Test Criteria for Purposes of Statistical Inference. 
Biometrika, Volume 20, 175240 (Part I), 263-294 (Part II). 
- -
-
. 1933. On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical 
Hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions oj the Royal Society, 
Volume 231A, 289-337. Page references are to the reprint in 
Neyman and Pearson's Joint Statistical Papers (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1967). 
Pais, A. 1982. Subtle is the Lord. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Paris, 1. 1994. The Uncerlain Reasoner:1' Companion. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Paris, J. and A. Vencovska. 200 I. Common Sense and Stochastic 
Independence. Foundations oj Bayesianisl11, cds. D. Corfield and J. 
Williamson. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 203- 241. 
Pearson, E.S. 1966. Some Thoughts on Statistical Inference. In The 
Selected Papers oj E.5. Pearson, 276-183. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Pearson, K. 1892. The Grammar oj Science. Page references are to the 
edition of 1937 (London: Dent). 
Peto, R., et 01. 1988. Randomised Trial of Prophylactic Daily Aspirin in 
British Male Doctors. British Medical Journal, Volume 296, 
3 13-331. 
Phillips, L.D. 1973. Bayesian Sialislics for Social Scielltisls. London: 
Nelson. 
- ---. 1983. A Theoretical Perspective on Heuristics and Biases in 
Probabilistic Thinking. In Analysing and Aiding Decision. edited by 
Pc. Humphreys, O. Svenson, and A. Van. Amsterdam: North 
Holland. 
Pitowsky, I. 1994. George Boole's Conditions of Possible Experience 
and the Quantum Puzzle. Brilish Journal trw Ihe Philosophy oj 
Science, Volume 45, 95- 127. 

314 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Poincare, H. 1905. Science and Hvpothesis. Page referenccs are to the 
edition of 1952 (Ncw York: Dover). 
Polanyi, M. 1962. Personal Knowledge. Second edition. London: 
Routledge. 
Pollard, W 1985. Bayesian Statistics jhr Evaluation Research: An 
Introduction. Bevcrly Hills: Sage. 
Polya, G. 1954. Mathematics and Plausihle Reasoning. Volumes I and 
2. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Popper, K.R. 1959. The Propensity Interpretation of Probability. British 
Journal/hI' the Philosophy of Science. Volume 10, 25--42. 
---. 1959a. The Logic ofScienti/lc DiscoverT. London: Hutchinson. 
---. 1960. The Poverty of Historicism. London: Routledge. 
---. 1963. Conjectures and Re/illations. London: Routledge. 
~.---. 1972. Objective KmHv/edge. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
---. 1983. A Proof of the Impossibility of Inductivc Probability. 
Nature, Volume 302, 687-88. 
Pratt, J. W 1962. On the Foundations of Statistical Inference. Journal of 
the American Statistical Associatioll. Volume 57, 269-326. 
1965. 
Bayesian Interpretation of Standard Infercncc 
Statcments. Journal of the Royal Statistical Socielv. 278, 169-203. 
Pratt, J.W, H. Raiffa, and R. Schlaifer. 1965. Introduction to Statistical 
Decision Theon'. 
Prout, W 1815. On thc Rclation Bctwccn thc Spccific Gravities of 
Bodies in Their Gascous Statc and thc Wcights of Their Atoms. 
Annals of Philosophy, Volumc 6, 321-330. Rcprinted in Alembic 
Club Reprints, No. 20, 1932,25-37 (Edinburgh: Olivcr and Boyd). 
Prout, W. 1816. Correction of a Mistake in the Essay on thc Relations 
Between the Specific Gravities of Bodies in Their Gaseous State and 
the Weights of their Atoms. Annals 0/ Philosophy, Volumc 7, 
111-13. 
Putnam, H. 1975. Collected Papers, Volumc 2. Cambridge: Cambridgc 
Univcrsity Press. 
Ramsey, FP 1931. Truth and Probability. In Ramsey. The Foundations oj' 
Mathematics and Other Logical Essa\'s (London: Routledge). 
Rao, e.D. 1965. Linear Statistical Inference and its Applications. New 
York: Wiley. 
Renyi, A. 1955. On a New Axiomatic Theory of Probability. Acta 
A1athematica Academiae Scientiarul11 Hungaricae, Volumc VI, 
285-335. 
Rosenkrantz, R.D. 1977. Ill/erence. Method. and Decision: Towards a 
Bayesian Philosophy a/Science. Dordrecht: Reidel. 
Salmon, We. 1981. Rational Prediction. British Journal jc)r the 
Philosophv of Science. Volume 32, 115-125. 

BIBLIOGRA PHY 
315 
Savage, L.1. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley. 
---. 1962. Subjective Probability and Statistical Practice. In The 
Foundations of Statistical In/Crence, edited by G.A. Barnard and 
D.R. Cox (New York: Wiley). 9-35. 
---. 1962a. A Prepared Contribution to the Discussion of Savage 
1962, 88- 89, in the same volume. 
Schervish, M., T. Seidenfeld and 1.B. Kadane. 1990. State-Dependent 
Utilities. Journal of the American Statistical Association, Volume 85 , 
840-847. 
Schroeder, L.D., D.L. Sjoquist, and P.E. Stephan. 1986. Understanding 
Regression Analysis. Beverly Hills: Sage. 
Schwarz, G. 1978. Estimating the Dimension of a Model. Annals of 
Statistics, Volume 6, 46 1--464. 
Schwartz, D., R. Flamant and 1. Lcllouch. 1980. Clinical Trials [L'essay 
therapeutique che:: I 'hommej. New York: Academic Press. 
Translated by M.J.R. Healy. 
Scott, D. and P. Krauss. 1966. Assigning Probabilities to Logical 
Formulas. Aspects of/nductive Logic, cds. J. Hintikka and P. Suppes. 
Amsterdam: North Holland, 219-264. 
Seal, H.L. 1967. Thc Historical Development of the Gauss Linear 
Model. Biometrika, Volume 57, 1-24. 
Seber, G.A.F. 1977. Linear Regression Ana"vsis. New York: Wiley. 
Seidenfeld, T. 1979. Philosophical Problems of Statistical Inference. 
Dordrecht: Reidel. 
---. 1979. Why I Am Not an Objective Bayesian: Some Reflections 
Prompted by Rosenkrantz. 
TheO/~v and Decision, Volume 11 , 
413-440. 
Shimony, A. 1970. Scientific Inference. In Pittsburgh Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science. Volume 4, edited by R.G. Colodny. 
Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press. 
---. 1985. The Status of the Principle of Maximum Entropy. 
S~1'nthese . Volume 68, 35- 53. 
--. 1993 [1988]. An Adamite Derivation of the Principles of the 
Calculus of Probability. In Shimony, The Search fhl' a Naturalistic 
~f!(J/-td Vie.I', Volume I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 
151-1 62. 
Shore, J.E. and R.W. Johnson. 1980. Axiomatic Derivation of the 
Principle of Maximum Entropy and the Principle of Minimum 
Cross-Entropy. IEEE Transactions on Infimnatiof} Them:1' 26: I, 
26-37. 
Skynns, B. 1977. Choice and Chance. Belmont: Wadsworth. 
Smart, W.M. 1947. John Couch Adams and the Discovery of Neptune. 
Occasional Notes of'the Royal Astronomical Societv, No. 11. 

316 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Smith, T.M. 1983. On the Validity of Inferences from Non-random 
Samples. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Volume 146A, 
394-403. 
Smullyan, R. 1968. First Order Logic. Berlin: Springer. 
Sober, E. and M, Forster. 1994. How to Tell When Simpler, More 
Unified, Or Less Ad Hoc Theories Will Provide More Accurate 
Predictions. British Journal/hr the Philosophy (~f Science, Volume 
45, 1- 37. 
Spielman, S. 1976. Exchangeability and the Certainty of Objective 
Randomness. Journal of Philosophical Logic, Volume 5, 399--406. 
Sprent, P1969. Models in Regression. London: Methuen. 
Sprott, W..l.H. 1936. Review of K. Lewin 's A Dynamical Theory of 
Personality. Mind, Volume 45, 246- 251. 
Stachel, .I. 1998. Einstein:1' Miraculous Year: Five Papers Ihat Changed 
the fc[(;e of Physics. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Stas, .l.S. 1860. Researches on the Mutual Relations of Atomic Weights. 
Bulletin de I Acadcmie Royale de Belgique, 208- 336. Reprinted in 
part in Alembic Cluh Reprints, No. 20, 1932 (Edinburgh: Oliver and 
Boyd),41--47. 
Stuart, A 1954. Too Good to Be True. Applied Statistics. Volume 3, 
29-32. 
"---. 1962. Basic Ideas ofScienfijic Sampling. London: Griffin. 
Sudbery, A. 1986. Quantum Mechanics and the Particles oj' Nature. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Suzuki, S. 2005. The Old Evidence Problem and AGM Theory. Allnals 
of the Japan Association for Philosophy oj'Science, 120. 
Swinburne, R.G. 1971. The Paradoxes of Confirmation: A Survey. 
American PhilosophicaL Quarterlv, Volume 8, 318 329. 
Tanur, 1M .. et al. 1989. Statistics: A Gliide to the Unknown. Third 
Edition. Duxbury Press. 
Teller, P 1973. Conditionalisation and Observation. Srllthese. Volume 
26,218- 258. 
Thomson, T. 1818. Some Additional Observations on the Weights of the 
Atoms of Chemical Bodies. Annals of Philosoph.\'. Volume 12, 
338- 350. 
Uffink, J. 1995. Can the Maximum Entropy Method be Explained as a 
Consistency Requirement? Studies ill the His/on-and Philosophy of 
Modern Pln'sics, Volume 268, 223- 261 . 
Urbach, P. 1981. On the Uti lity of Repeating the 'Same Experiment'. 
Australasian./o!/J'I1al oj'Philosopliy, Volume 59, 151- 162. 
---, 1985 . Randomization and the Design of Experiments. 
Philosophy of Science, Volume 52, 256 273 . 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
317 
--- -. 1987. Francis Bacon~' Philosophy oj Science. La Salle: Open 
Court. 
-
-
- . 1987a. Clinical Trial and Random Error. New Scientist, Volume 
116, 52- 55. 
--- . 1987b. The Scientific Standing of Evolutionary Theories of 
Society. The LSE Quarter(v, Volume I, 23- 42. 
- -
- . 1989. Random Sampling and the Principles of Estimation. 
Proceedings olthe Aristotelian Societv, Volume 89, 143-164. 
-
-
- . 1991. Bayesian Methodology: Some Criticisms Answered. 
Ratio (New Serie~), Volume 4, 170- 184. 
---- . 1992, Regression Analysis: Classical and Bayesian. British 
lournalfor the Philosophy oj Science, Volume 43, 311-342. 
-
-
- . 1993. The Value of Randomization and Control in Clinical 
Trials. Statistics in Medicine, Volume 12, 1421- 431. 
Van Fraassen, B.C. 1980. The Scientific Image, Oxford: Clarendon. 
-
-
- . 1983. Calibration: A Frequency Justification for Personal 
Probability, In R.S. Cohen and L. Laudan, eds., Physics, Philosophy, 
and P~ychoana(v.l'is (Dordrecht: Reidel), 295- 321. 
-
-
- , 1984. Belief and the Will. Journal of Philosophy, Volume 
LXXXI, 235- 256. 
--~-~'- . 1989. Laws and Svmmelry. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Velikovsky, I. 1950. Worlds in Collision. London: Gollancz. Page refer-
ences are to the 1972 edition, published by Sphere. 
Velleman, PF. 1986. Comment on Chatterjee, S., and Hadi, A.S. 1986. 
Statistical Science, Volume 1, 412- 15. 
Velleman, P.F., and R.E. Welsch. 1981. Efficient Computing of 
Regression Diagnostics. American Statislician, Volume 35, 
234- 242. 
Venn, J. 1866. The Logic ojChance. London: Macmillan. 
Vranas, PB.M. 2004. Hempel's Raven Paradox: A Lacuna in the 
Standard Bayesian Solution. British Journal Jhr the Philosophyof' 
Science, Volume 55, 545·-560. 
Wall, P. 1999. Pain: The Science oj Suffering. London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson. 
Watkins, J. WN. 1985. Science and Scepticism. London: Hutchinson and 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
---
. 1987. A New View of Scientific Rationality. In Rational 
Change in Science, edited by J. Pitt and M. Pera. Dordrecht: Reidel. 
Weinberg, S. and K. Goldberg. 1990. Statistics Jhr the Behavioral 
Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Weisberg, S. 1980. Applied Linear Regression. New York: Wiley. 

318 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Welsch, R.E. 1986. Comment on Chatterjee, S., and Hadi, A.S. 1986. 
Statistical Science. Volume 1,403-05. 
Whitehead, 1. 1993. The Case for Frequentism in Clinical Trials. 
Statistics in Medicine, Volume 12, 1405-413. 
Williams, PM. 1980. Bayesian Conditionalisation and the Principle of 
Minimum Information. British Journal fc)r the Philosophy 0/ 
Science. Volume 31 , 131-144. 
Williamson, 1. 1999. Countable Additivity and Subjective Probability. 
British Journal fhr the Philosophy 0/ Science, Volume 50, 401-416. 
Williamson, J. 2005. Bayesian Nets and Causality: Philosophical and 
Computational Foundations. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Williamson, J. and D. COffield. 2001. Introduction: Bayesianism into the 
Twenty-First Century. In Corfield, D. and Williamson, 1., cds., 
Foundations of Bayesian ism (Dordrecht: Kluwer). 
Wonnacott, T.H., and R.J. Wonnacott. 1980. Regression: A Second 
Course in Statistics. New York: Wiley. 
Wood, M. 2003. Making Sense 0/ Statistics. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Yates, F. 1981. Sampling Methodsfor Censuses and Surveys. Fourth edi-
tion. London: Gliffin. 

Index 
Abraham, Max, 7 
Adams, John Couch, 121, 124 
Adams Principle, 59 
additivity condition, 18 
ad hoc, 122 
adhocness criteria, as unsound, 
123-25 
ad hoc theory, 11 9, 120, 121, 122, 
125 
agricultural field trials, 183-84 
Airy, Sir George, 124 
Akaike, H., 292 -94 
Akaikc Information Criterion 
(A IC), 293, 295 
Armitage, P., 198, 200-0 I 
Arnold, G .c., 210, 211, 222 
Atkinson, A.C., 233 
atomic weight measurements, 
108-110, 11 2- 13 
axiom of continuity, 27 
axiom of countable additivity, 27 
critique ot~ 27- 29 
Babbage, Charles, 98 
Bacon, Francis, 121, 122, 126 
Barnett, V, 166 
Bartha, P., 29 
base-rate fallacy, 24 
Bayes, Thomas, 20, 76, 266-68, 
272, 278 
Memoir, xi, 269 
Bayes factor, 97 
Bayesian conditionalisation, 
80-82, 85 
Bayesian convergence-of-opinion 
theories, 28 
Bayesian induction, 237 
limit theorems of, 238 
and posterior probability, 238 
Bayesian Information Criteria 
(BIC),294-95 
BayesianismlBayesian theory, 30 I 
on clinical trials, 255- 260 
confirmation in, 97, 99 
credible intervals in, 244 
and deductive inference, 79-80 
as epistemic, 50 
estimating binomial proportions 
in, 242-43 
evidential relevance in, 
247- 25 1 
and family of curves, 290 
and frequentism, 263-64 
and influence points, 235 
and inductive inference, 79 
and least squares method, 217 
and objectivity, 237-38, 273 
old-evidence objection, 298--99 
and posterior probabilities, 54, 
241 ,278 
and Principle of Indifference, 
273 
prior distribution in, 246-47 
and prior probabilities, 129- 130 
and regression analysis, 23 1-32 
on relevant information, 251 
revival of, 8 
and sampling method, 253- 54 
on scientific investigation, 127 

320 
and stopping rules, 160- 61 , 
250-51 
subjectivity in, 237, 241 , 262, 
265 
sufficiency in, 164 
and testing causal hypotheses, 
254-55 
and updating rules, 80- 81 
versus classical approach 
to inductive reasoning, xi-xii 
to statistical inference, 295 
Bayesian probability, 45 
and hypotheses, 75- 76 
and problem of logical 
omniscience, 75 
Bayes's theorem, 8, 99, 114, 236, 
237,262,265,267,299-300 
and Bernoulli parameters, 243 
on confirmation of theory, by 
consequences, 93- 94 
for densities, 38 
first form, 20-21 
on posterior and prior 
probabilities, 92, 11 3, 108-09 
and randomization, 202 
second form, 21 
third form , 21 
Belsley, D.A., 233 
Bernoulli, James, 8, 40, 42, 266, 
268 
Ars Conjecrundi, 39 
Bernoulli parameters, 242, 243 
Bernoulli process, 242, 268 
Bernoulli sequences, 42 
Bernoulli 's Theorem, 266- 67, 294 
inversion of, 266 -67 
Bernoulli trials, 4748 
Berry, D.A., 26 1 
Bertrand's Paradox, 283 
beta distributions, 242 
betting quotients, 53 
binomial distribution, 39-40 
bivalent statistical tests, 6 
bivariate normal distribution, 38 
Blackwell, D., 245 
Bland, M., 150 
Blasco, A., 263- 64 
Boolean algebra, 14 
INDEX 
and propositional language, 15 
Bourke, G.J., 190, 191 
Bradley, F.H , 59 
Bovens, L., II I 
Brandt, R., 236 
Brook, RJ., 210, 211, 222 
Bucherer, Alfred, 7 
Byar, D.P., 188, 195,260- 61 
Caratheodory Extension Theorem, 
74 
Carnap, Rudolf, 8, 74, 164 
categorical-assertion 
interpretation, 171 
chance-based odds, 53-54 
Chatterjee, S., 227-28 
Chebychev's Inequality, 294 
chi-square statistic, 137 
chi-square test, 137140 
problem of~ 139-140 
Church, Alonzo, 50, 62 
classical estimates, objections to, 
182 
Classical Statistical Inference, 131 
Classical Theory of Probability, 35 
classic law of large numbers, 56 
clinical trials 
Bayesian analysis, 255- 59 
Bayesian versus classical 
prescriptions, 259-260, 262 
central problem, 183-85 
control in, 185- 86 
historically controlled, 260-61 
randomization in, 186-87 
sequential, 198- 20 I 
without randomization. 260 
Cochran,W.G .. 140 
Cohen, A.M .. 62 
composite hypotheses, testing, 
161 62 
Comrie, L.J., 98 
conditional distributions, 37-38 
conditionalisation, 84-85, 287 

INDEX 
conditional probabi I ities, 16 
conditional probability axiom, 37 
Condorcet, Marquis dc, 55 
confidence coefficient, 170, 173 
confidence intervals, 169- 17 1, 
218-19,244- 45 
competing, 171 -72 
and stopping rule, 176 
subjective--confidence 
interpretation, 173- 75 
consequences, as confirmi ng 
theory, 9396 
consistency 
deductive, 63-66, 73- 74 
mathematical concept o f~ 63 
of probability axioms, 63 
consistent estimators, 166- 68 
continuous distribution, 3 1 
Cook, R.D., 221 , 233 
Cook's Distance, 234 
Coumot, A.A., 49, 132 
Cournot's Pri nciple, 49 
covariant rule 
for generating prior 
distributions, 273 ·74 
problems with, 274 
Cox, R.T., 76, 85- 87, 98, 222, 
223,225 
Cox-Good argument, 85 
CramEr, H., 153 
credible intervals, 244 
and confidence intervals, 
comparing, 244-45 
critical region, choice of: 14849 
Daly, L.E., 190 
Daniel, c., 214 
data analysis, 225 
and scatter plots, 225--26 
data patterns, influentia l points in, 
232 
data too good to be true, I 16-· 18 
Dawid, A.P., 66 
deductive consistency, 63- 66, 73 
local character of, 73·-74 
deductive inference, 79 
analogy to probabilistic 
inference, 79- 80 
32 1 
deductive logic, constraints in, 66 
de Finetti, Bruno, 8,28-29, 52, 62, 
63,67, 71 , 73, 74,265 
on exchangeability, 88-89 
de Moivre, Abraham, 40, 41 
Dianetics, 120 
distribution fu nctions, 30 3 I, 34 
and density functions, 32 
distributions 
binomial, 39- 40 
bivariate normal, 38 
conditional, 37- 38 
continuous, 3 I 
normal, 32, 33 
uniform, 3 1 
Dobzhansky, T., 11 8 
Dorling, Jon, 8, 107, 110, 114, 11 7 
double-blind trials, 255 
Downham, V, 18 1 
Dubins, L., 245 
Duhem, P., 105 
Duhem problem, 103, 107,119 
Bayesian resolution of, 110, 114 
Dutch Book Argument, 52, 83 
Dutch Book Theorem, 62, 71 
dynamic modus ponens, 83, 84 
Earman, .I., 57 
Edwards, w., 245 
efficient estimators, 168-69 
Ehrenberg, A.S.C., 211 
Einstein, Albert, 7 ·8, 103, 262, 
298 
probabilism of, 7- 8 
eliminative induction, 184 
epistemic probability, 25, 51 , 6 L 
88 
formalism oC as model, 61 
utility-bascd account, 57 
critique of, 57- 58 
and valuing of consequences, 
57-59 

322 
Equivalcncc Condition, 100, 102 
estimatcs 
classical, objection to, 182 
and prior knowledgc, 17677 
estimating binomial proportion, 
242 
estimating mean, of a normal pop-
ulation, 239- 241 
Estimation Thcory, 163 
estimators 
consistent, 166-68 
efficient, 168 -69 
sufficient, 164 
unbiased, 165-66 
exchageability, 90 
exchangcable random quantities, 
88 
expected values, 32-- 33 
experiments, and repeatability, 160 
fair betting quotients, 67- 68, 73 
and probability axioms, 62 
fair odds, 54 
falsifiability, 103 
problems for, 104 -05 
Falsificationism, 2 
Feyerabcnd, Paul, 2 
Fisher, R.A., xi,S 6,9,49, 118, 
133, 140, 148, 290 
on clinical trials, 185- 86 
on estimators, 166-67 
on randomization, 18688, 
191 --93, 202 
on refutation of statistical 
theories, 150 
on significance tests, 188 
on sufficient statistics, 142 
Fisherian significance tcsts, 133, 
141,143 
Fisher information, 273 
formal languages, and 
mathematical structurcs, 75 
Forster, M., 289-94 
Frecman, P.R., 15556 
Frequcntism, 131 
Freud, Sigmund, 103 
Fundamental Lemma, 148 
Gaitinan, H., 74 
INDEX 
Galileo, 55, 128, 129, 288 
Gauss, le.E, 213 
Gauss- Markov theorem, 209, 
213-15 
generalization, from experiments, 
96 
General Thcory of Relativity 
(GTR),298 
Gierc, R.N., 195 
Gigercnzer, G., 23 
Gillies, D.A., 160 
Glymour, e., 298 
G6del, Kurt, 62, 73 
Goldberg, K., 153 
Good, 1.1., 85, 140 
goodness-of-fit test, 137 
Gore, S.M., 195 
Gossett, W.S., 133 
Graybill, EA., 212, 214, 215, 
220 
Hacking, L 61 
Hadi, A.S., 227 
Hartmann, S., III 
Harvard Mcdical School Test, 22 
lessons of, 25 
Hays, w.L., 139, 172, 215, 222 
Hempel, e.G., 100, 126 
Hcrschel, Sir John, 124 
HcrseheL William, 121 
homascedasticity, 206 
Horwich, P, 103 
Howson, e., 128 
Hubbard L. Ron, 120, 122 
Humc, David, 1- 2,79,80,269 
hypotheses 
auxiliary, 113,1 16, 119 
composite, testing of, 161 - 62 
observation in confirmation of~ 
91- 92 

INDEX 
posterior probability of, 92 93, 
97 
varied evidence for, 126 
improper distributions, 274- 75 
independent evidcnce, 125 
indicator function, 67 
induction, problem of, 1-2, 269 
inductive inference, thcory ot~ 265 
inductive probability 
objcctivist interpretation, 8 
subjcctivist interpretation, 8 
influencc functions, 234 
influcnce measuring, 234-35 
influcnce mcthodology, 234 
influence/influential points 
and Bayesianism, 235 
in data patterns, 232 
and insecure conclusions, 233 
informationless priors, 
impossibility of, 276-77 
inscribed triangle problcm, 282 
intcrval estimation, 169 
Jaynes, E.T., 8, 76, 277- 286, 297 
Jeffrey, R.C., 85 
decision theory, 59 
Jeffrcy conditionalisation, 82, 85 
Jeffrey 's rule, 83, 85, 274- 76 
Jcffreys, Harold, 8, 76, 128, 272, 
273, 277, 288, 289-290, 295 
Jennison, c., 198 
Jevons, WS. , 7, 98 
Johnson, R. W , 287 
judgment sampl ing, 178 
advantagcs of, 180 8 J 
objections to, 178- 79 
Kadanc, 1., 251 
Kant, Immanuel, I 
Kaufmann, Walter, 7 
Kclly, 1., 29 
Kcndall, M.G., 139, 166, 168--69, 
187, 193-94, 211 , 225 
Kcynes, J.M., 266, 269 
Kinetic Thcory, 132 
Kollektiv, 50, 77, 90 
and behavior of limits, 50 
Kolmogorov, A.N., 27, 49, 296 
Korb, K.B., 103 
Krauss, P., 74 
Kuhn, T.S., 105, 106, 107 
Kullback- Leiblcr measure of 
discrepancy, 293 
Kyburg, H .E., 144, 147 
323 
Lakatos, I., 9, 62, 105-08, 114-1 5, 
11 9, 122 
Laplace, P.S. de, 20, 54, 76, 268, 
269 
least squares, in regression, 209 
least squares line, 208 
least squares method, 207-208 
and Bayesianism, 217 
Gauss- Markov justification, 
213- 16 
intuitive arguments for, 209-21 2 
maximum likclihood 
justification, 215- 17 
and vertical dcviations, 211-12 
Icast squares principle, 236 
Lcibniz, G.W, 115, 262 
NOl/veal/x E.I'sais, 5 I 
Le Vcrrier, Urbain, 12 I 
Lewis, David, 59, 83 
The Principal Principle, 77 
Lewis-Beck, M.S., 222, 225 
Likelihood Principle, 78, 156 
likelihood ratio, 155 
limit, in probability, 46 47 
Lindenbaum algebra, 15 
Lindgren, B.W, 151 
Lindlcy, D.V., 76, 128, 154, 196, 
239 
Lindley 's Paradox, 154-56 
Lindman, H., 245-46 
linear regrcssion, and statistics, 
221 
logical falsehood, 13 
logical truth, 13 

324 
logic of uncertain inference, 51 
L6wenheim, Leopold, 62 
MAD method of estimation. 210 
Maher. P., 57, 127 
Mallet,lW., 109, 112, 114 
Markov, Andrey, 213 
mathematical statistics, 30, 32 
maximum- entropy method, 
278- 79,285- 86 
Maximum Likelihood Principle, 
209 
Mayo, D.G., 25 1 
McGil vray, J., 190 
mean value, 33 
measure- theoretic framework, of 
probability, 27 
Medawar, Peter, 120, 122 
Meier, P.. 20 I 
Mendel,G.J., 1, 5, 117, 123. 140, 
153 
method of least squares, 207-01; 
method of transformation groups, 
280. 284 
Miller, R., 127 
minimal- sufficient statistic, 142 
Minimum Information Principle. 
286 
Mood, A.M, 2 12, 2 14, 215, 220 
Musgrave, A .. 96 
Neptune. discovery of~ 124 
Newton, Sir Isaac, 262 
Principia, 268 
Newton 's laws, 4, 6, 121 
Neyman, Jerzy. 6, 9, 49, 141 , 143, 
152,155, 16 1, 167, 169,2 13 
categorical assertion 
interpretation, 171 
on confidence intervals, 172-73 
Neyman- Pearson significance 
tests, 26, 143--48, 156 
and decisions to act, 151-52 
null hypotheses in, 144 
INDEX 
and sufficient statistics, 149 
Nieod, Jean, 100 
Nicod's Condition, 100 
fai lure of, 102 
No Miracles Argument, 26 
normal distributions, 32. 33 
normal distribution function, 34 
null hypothesis, 5- 6, 133, 143 
choice of, 156 
grounds for rejecting, 140, 
149- 150, 155 
and likelihood ratio, 155 
testing of, 133- 35,137-38,141, 
148 
Objective Bayesians, 277 
objective priors, 296-97 
objective probability, 25, 45, 88 
and frequency, 45--46. 77 
objectivist ideal, of theory, 9 
critique of~ 9 
observations, as fallible, 104··05 
Occam's razor. 288 
odds 
chance based, 53-54 
fair, 53- 54 
probability based, 53 
old-evidence problem, 298-99 
outcome space, 133 
outliers, 226 · 28 
and significance tests, 228- 23 1 
P(a), meaning of, 15 
Paradox of Confirmation. 99 
Paris, J., 64, 65, 70-7 1,286, 287 
Pearson, Egon, 6, 9, 49, 141 , 155, 
16 1 
Pearson, KarL 133. 138 
Peto. R., 18 1 
philosophy of science, 91 
placebo effect, 185 
Planck, Max, 7 
Pitowsky, 1., 45 
PoincarE, Henri, 6- 7, 76 

INDEX 
point estimation, 163 
Polanyi, Michael, 105 
Popper, Karl R., xi, 9, 46, 54. 96, 
106, 119, 122, 127, 129, 132, 
275,289 
on confirmation, 99 
on falsification/falsifiability, 
2-3, 5,103- 04.105,132 
on problem of induction, 2-3 
on scientific method, 3--4 
posterior probabilities, 242 
in Bayesianism, 54, 241 
precision of a distribution, 240 
prediction 
by confidence intervals, 2 18- 19 
and prior knowledge, 222-25 
and regression, 217 18, 220 
prediction interval, 217 
Price, Richard, 269 
Price. Thomas. xi, 227 
The Principal Principle, 77 
Principle of Direct Probability, 77, 
174, 175 
Principle of Indifference, 266-69, 
273, 275 · 76, 279- 2S0. 282, 
284 ·86 
paradoxical results from, 
269- 272 
Principle of Insuffic ient Reason, 
26S 
Principle of Random Sampling, 
178 
Principle of Stable Estimation, 
245- 26 
Principle of the Uniformity of 
Nature, 2 
prior probabilities, 129- 130 
probabilistic independence, 35- 36 
probabilistic induction, 6 
probability 
and additivity principle, 69 
and quotient definitions, 
connections between, 68 
Bayesian. 45 
classical definition, 35 
conditional, 46 
325 
and domains of propositions, 15 
epistemic, 25, 51,61 , 88 
limiting relative frequency in. 
46- 47 
logical interpretation of, 74-75 
and measure- theoretic 
framework, 27 
objective, 25,45, 88 
and propositional logic, 69 
soundness considerations, 27 
probability axioms, 16, 45 
and coherence, 72 
as consistency constraints, 63 
and deductive consistency, 63 
epistemic interpretation, 45 
and personal probability, 76- 77 
probability calculus, 13, 15, 70 
and algebra of propositions, 75 
and consistency constraints, 7 1 
domain of discourse, 13 
fundamental postulates, 16 
interpretations of, 88 
theorems of, 16-2 2 
probability densities, 31 - 32 
probability function, 70 
probability logic 
and collective conditions, 66 
constraints in, 66 
and deductive logic, 72 
and fair bets, 66 
and sanctions for violations of 
rules, 72- 73 
probability- system, 14 
Problem of Induction, 1- 2 
prognostic factors, 184 
programmes 
degenerating, 107 
progressive, 106 
Prout, William, 108- II S 
quota sampling, 178, lSI 
Ramsey, Frank, 8, 51, 63, 80, 82 
'Truth and Probability', 57 

326 
randomization, 190, 193- 94 
arguments for, 187- 88 
and Bayes's theorem, 202 
critique of, 187 
eliminative-induction defense 
of, 194-95 
ethical concerns, 203 
practical concerns, 202 
and significance tests, 188- 190 
unknown factors in, 195- 96 
randomized tests, 147 48 
randomized trial, 186 
controlled, concerns about, 
197-98 
random quantity, ill betting, 67 
random sampling, 177---79 
random sequence, 50 
random vairables, 29- 30, 33 
Rao, CD., 166 
Ravens Paradox, 99 
reference population, 190 
regression, 205 
examining form of, 220--21 
least squares in, 209 
linear, 206-297, 221 
and prediction, 220 
simple linear, 206- 07 
regression analysis, 39 
and Bayesianism, 231 - 32 
regression curve, and prediction, 
21718 
regression models 
and prior knowledge, 222- 25 
and scatter plots, 225- 26 
regression to the mean, 39 
relevant information 
in Bayesianism, 251 
in classical statistics, 251 
Renyj, Alfred, 275 
repeatability, in experiments, 160 
representative sample, 178 
Rosenkrantz, R.D., 102 
Rule of Succession, 268- 69 
sampling 
judgment, 178, 180- 8 1 
quota, 178, 181 
random, 177--78 
representative, 178 
stratified random, 180 
sampling method, and 
Bayesianism, 153- 54 
Savage, L.J., 55, 57 -59, 76, 
245-46,251 
critique of, 60 
scatter plots, 225- 26 
Schervish, M_, 58- 59 
Schwarz, G., 294 
INDEX 
scientific evidence, describing, 
247-251 
scientific inference, patterns of, 
93-94 
scientific method, 3 -4 
scientific realism, 26 
scientific reasoning, 4 
scientific theory 
and empirical evidence, gap 
between, 1,4 ·5 
probabilistic, 5 
Scott, D., 74 
Seber, G.A.F, 222, 223 
Second Incompleteness Theorem, 
73 
Shakespeare, William 
Macheth ,98 
Shannon, Claude, 128, 277, 279 
sharp probability va lues, 62 
Shimony, Abner, 76 
Shore, J.E., 287 
significance levels, and inductive 
support, 153 54 
significance tests, 6, 25-26 
and decisions to act, 151--52 
Fisherian, 133, 141. 143 
int1uenees on, 156 
Neyman- Pearson, 26, 143-49, 
151-52,156 
and outliers, 228- 23 1 
and randomization, 198-99 
size of, 147 
and stopping rule, J 57 
simplicity, of predictive theory, 
288,291 , 296 

INDEX 
Simplicity Postulate, 289, 291 
Skolem, M.B .. 62 
Skyrms. B.. 66 
small-world versus grand· world 
acts, 58 
Snir, M., 74 
Sober, E., 289- 294 
Solomonotl~ 296 
Sorites, 62 
Spielman, S .. 90 
Sprcnt. P., 222 
standard deviation, 33 
Stas,J.S., 109, 114 
statistical hypothcses, and 
fa lsifiability, 132 
statistical inference, 9 1 
Stone's Theorem. 14 
stopping rule, 157, 160 
and Bayesianism, 250 
irrelevance of. 250 
and subjective intention. 159 
St. Petersburg problem, 54-55 
stratified random sampling, 180 
Strong Law of Large Numbers, 43. 
47 
Stuart, A., 135, 14 1, 166, 168- 69, 
187. 193, 21 I, 225, 253 
sutTicient estimators, 164 
sufficient statistics, 141-42, 
25 1-52 
Suzuki, 299 
Tanur. J.M .. 195 
Tarski, Alfred. 62 
Teller, Paul, 83 
test-statistic, 133 
choosing, 136 
theorem of total probability. 18 
theories 
auxi Iiary. 105- 06, I 13 
objectivist ideal, 9 
probability of, effect of 
observation on, 114 
under-determination, 128 
Thompson, Thomas, 108 
Thomson, J.J., 109 
327 
Total Ev idence Requirement, 164 
Turnbull, B.W., 198 
Utfink, Jos, 287 
unbiased estimators, 165- 66 
uniform distribution, 31 
Uniformly Most Powerful (UMP) 
tests, 16 1-62 
Uniformly Most Powerful and 
Unbiased (UMPU) tests, 161 - 62 
updating rules, 80-8 1, 83 
utility-revolution, 56, 57 
variable quantities, relationships 
between. 205-06 
Velikovsky, I., 116, 122 
Worlds in Collision. 11 9 
Velleman, P.E, 234- 35 
Vencovsk·, A., 286, 287 
von M ises, Richard, 46, 50, 78, 
90 
Watkins, J.W.N., 104 
Weak Law of Large Numbers, 39, 
41-43 
Weinberg, S., 153 
Weisberg, S., 212, 214, 224, 225. 
226, 229-231, 233 
Welsch, R. E., 234· 35 
Whitehead .I., 159 
Winkler, R.L., 139 
Wonnacott, R . ./., 209. 210. 222, 
236 
Wonnacott, T. H., 209. 210, 222, 
236 
Wood. M., 2 14 
Yates, F.. 179 
zero- expectation bets, 56 
zero- expected-gain condition, 
54- 55 

