Scientiﬁ c Freedom
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Scientiﬁ c Freedom
The Elixir of Civilization
Donald W. Braben
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Copyright © 2008 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or 
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through 
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at 
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best 
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the 
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied 
warranties of merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created 
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies 
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional 
where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any 
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or 
other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please 
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the 
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, 
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Braben, D. W.
 Scientiﬁ c freedom : the Elixir of civilization / Donald W. Braben.
  p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-470-22654-4 (pbk.)
1. Research. 2. Action research. I. Title.
 Q180.A1B645 2008
 303.48′3—dc22
 
2007030912
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

To Thomas Edward and Christopher Jack
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

vii
Contents
List of Posters 
ix
Preface 
xi
Introduction 
1
Chapter 1
The Damocles Zone 
17
Chapter 2
Scientiﬁ c Freedom and Transformative Research 
32
Chapter 3
Mismanagement by Objectives: The Need for Fresh Approaches 
39
Chapter 4
Searching for Planck’s Successors 
67
Chapter 5
Universities for the Twenty-First Century: The Case for a 
Fifth Revolution 
81
Chapter 6
Venture (or Transformative) Research: How It Works in Practice 
101
Chapter 7
The Venture Research Harvest 
114
Bibliography 
173
Index 
178
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

List of Posters
Poster 1: Charles Townes and the Laser 
5
Poster 2: The Twentieth-Century Planck Club 
7
Poster 3: The Wizard’s Warning 
8
Poster 4: Global Warming: A Coherent Approach 
12
Poster 5: The Sword of Damocles and the Damocles Zone 
18
Poster 6: Economic Growth 
41
Poster 7: R&D Investments 
42
Poster 8: An Even-Handed Universe? A Tale of Two Experiments 
44
Poster 9: The A. Patron Prize for Science 
55
Poster 10: Science in War and Peace: The Atomic Bomb; Secrecy 
or Freedom of Research 
60
Poster 11: The UK’s Byzantine Research Councils 
77
Poster 12: European Magna Charta, Bologna, 1988—Fundamental 
Principles 
92
ix
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Poster 13: University Governance: An Intelligent Approach to 
Dirigisme 
94
Poster 14: Elementary and Secondary Education in England 
97
Poster 15: Outline Proposal for a New Type of University 
99
Poster 16: An Environment for Transformative Research 
105
Poster 17: The Pythagorean Theorem: A Beautiful Proof 
131
Poster 18: Letter from the Author to Edsger W. Dijkstra, 
March 19, 1987 
133
Poster 19: Collective Problem Solving According to Ants 
135
Poster 20: Poliakoff and supercritical ﬂ uids 
152
x 
LIST OF POSTERS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Preface 
 The genesis of this book began in December 2005 when a U.S. National 
Science Board Task Force was meeting in Santa Fe, New Mexico to discuss 
transformative research. Nina Fedoroff, the Task Force chairperson, suggested 
over lunch that I might like to consider writing an essay on how an organiza-
tion might go about setting up a transformative research initiative. I have 
somewhat extended that remit, but I hope that the book also goes some way 
to meeting Nina ’ s original speciﬁ cation. I am also immensely grateful to her 
for the invitation to join the Task Force and fully to participate in its extensive 
deliberations. Other Task Force members, Michael Crosby, Douglas Randall, 
and Jerry Pollack, were also especially helpful. 
 I am most grateful to Claudio Vita - Finzi, fellow founder - member of the 
 “ never say die ” club, and an enthusiastic supporter over the years. John Allen, 
Peter Cotgreave, Irene Engle, Ross Gayler, Nigel Keen, Iain Steel, Ken Seddon, 
and Isa Zalaman have been unfailing sources of advice and much appreciated 
encouragement. Nina Fedoroff, Claudio Vita - Finzi, and Isa Zalaman also made 
many helpful comments on the early drafts for which I am grateful. 
 I would also like to express my gratitude to David Price, Duncan Wingham, 
and my many other friends in the Earth Sciences Department at University 
College, London, where I am a visiting professor. My weekly visits to the 
department ’ s research seminars are invariably stimulating, and for a few hours 
each week they make it possible for me to pretend that I am a normal 
academic. 
xi
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xii 
PREFACE
 As ever, I am grateful to my wife Shirley, and to David Braben, Peter and 
Lisa Braben, and Jenny and David Lightfoot, who have provided invaluable 
feedback in addition to their usual love and affection.
 D on B raben 
 Theydon Mount, Epping 
 Essex, United Kingdom 
 don.braben@btinternet.com 
 July 2007 
 By the same author: 
 To Be a Scientist: The Spirit of Adventure in Science and Technology 
 Pioneering Research: A Risk Worth Taking         
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Introduction 
 New products, new industries, and more jobs require continuous additions to 
knowledge of the laws of nature, and the application of that knowledge to practi-
cal purposes.   .  .  .   This essential, new knowledge can be obtained only through 
basic scientiﬁ c research. Science can be effective in the national welfare only as 
a member of a team, whether the conditions be peace or war. But without sci-
entiﬁ c progress no amount of achievement in other directions can insure our 
health, prosperity, and security as a nation in the modern world. 
 — Vannevar Bush,  Science — The Endless Frontier , Report to the 
US President, 1945, p. 5.  
 Thinking has always been humanity ’ s greatest strength. That abstract ability 
separates us from the rest of the animal kingdom and has brought us to our 
present dominance. Like skipping in children, it is innate; it does not have to 
be taught. Civilizations have prospered or failed as our thirst for knowledge 
has been tolerated or suppressed. Remarkably, however, until the European 
Renaissance humanity ’ s progress had been glacial, and centuries might pass 
before a detached observer might have noticed signiﬁ cant changes to global 
population or ways of life. The Renaissance then stirred the human spirit, and 
later created the conditions that launched the Industrial Revolution, ﬁ rst in 
Britain, and then rapidly elsewhere. Slowly at ﬁ rst we began to harvest our 
understanding of Nature and to use it for the greater good — material and 
intellectual. The result was that by the end of the twentieth century the average 
productivity of every man and woman had increased more than a 100 - fold in 
1
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2 
INTRODUCTION
real terms since the Renaissance. Global population also increased rapidly, but 
material wealth in the industrialized nations more than kept pace. 
 This prodigious progress came from our growing ability to harvest the fruits 
of humanity ’ s intellectual prowess — scientiﬁ c endeavor, as it is usually called. 
Material wealth continued to accelerate through most of the last century 
despite ﬁ nancial crashes and global wars. But then gradually, around about 
1970, signs of major change began to emerge. Science ’ s very success had unsur-
prisingly led to a steady expansion in scientists ’  numbers. That could not con-
tinue indeﬁ nitely, of course, and the inevitable crunch came when there were 
more than could adequately be funded. This was not only a numbers problem —
 the unit costs of research were also increasing. The funding agencies should 
have seen this coming, but they did not. Indeed, as I shall explain, many today 
do not accept this version of events, and are thereby contributing to one of 
the greatest tragedies of modern times. This perhaps surprising statement 
arises because the agencies ’ virtually universal response to the crisis was to 
restrict the types of research they would fund. Thus, to use a truly horrible 
word, they would  prioritize , and focus funding on the most attractive objec-
tives — that is, objectives the agencies  perceived to be the most attractive. Thus, 
for the ﬁ rst time since the Renaissance, the limits of thinking began to be sys-
tematically curtailed. 
 The new policies  * would seem to have been phenomenally successful. 
Modern life is enriched by vast and expanding ranges of astounding technolo-
gies. Communications, entertainment, food production, leisure, travel, and 
many other aspects of modern life have been transformed. Closer inspection 
would reveal, however, that most of this bounty stems from generic scientiﬁ c 
discoveries made decades ago, a source that seems to have dried up in recent 
years. Consequently, our intellectual account is becoming overdrawn at a time 
when the demands on it are increasing. There is no shortage of initiatives 
aiming to deal with such problems as global warming, population growth, and 
terrorism, but one vital factor is usually overlooked. 
 Imagine for a moment that you are invited to list humanity ’ s basic material 
needs. It would probably contain the obvious things such as food, water, heat, 
light, health, and security, but it might fail to mention the air we breathe simply 
because that vital ingredient can usually be taken for granted. Scientiﬁ c 
freedom could indeed be placed in that latter category before 1970 or so 
because research policies then were usually based on laissez - faire. However, 
we have moved on, as they say. Nowadays, interference is the norm. However, 
as few funding agencies seem to have noticed, if current policies had applied 
at the beginning of the twentieth century, say, the world would now be a much 
harsher place. Today, far from being an inconvenience conﬁ ned to feather-
bedded academics, their consequences are approaching  “ the operation was a 
success but the patient died ” category, and will affect the very foundations of 
our civilization. 
 * An analysis was presented in my  Pioneering Research: A Risk Worth Taking ( 2004 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
3
 Such abstract qualities as freedom are difﬁ cult or impossible to deﬁ ne. 
Freedom ’ s loss may be easier to recognize, but it does not necessarily lead to 
chains. Increasingly nowadays, freedom is a  managed commodity, but the con-
sequences are subtle and varied. Indeed, at least for the time being, it is pos-
sible for almost everyone to live happily and productively within the current 
bounds. That is also generally the case in the sciences except for one essential 
factor. Those exceptionally rare scientists whose revolutionary work can open 
new horizons can do so only if they have total freedom. The routes to new 
types of knowledge can be deceptively disguised, and may appear to ordinary 
mortals as unimportant byways leading nowhere. There must be no ﬁ lters 
whatsoever on what they do, therefore, however well intended. Furthermore, 
their work is vital to future prosperity. In an increasingly complex and popu-
lous world, any attempt to limit it will lead us down the path to stagnation and 
pain. 
 Scientiﬁ c progress comes in a vast number of ways, ranging from the appar-
ently spontaneous comprehension of a new facet of Nature ’ s behavior * as 
typiﬁ ed by Albert Einstein ’ s research on relativity, say, to the prolonged and 
often agonizing study of a perplexing phenomenon as typiﬁ ed by Max Planck ’ s 
work that led to the discovery of energy quantization. But if discoveries are 
to become part of the scientiﬁ c lexicon, they must be endorsed by the scientiﬁ c 
community, and that can often be problematic. However, leaving social prob-
lems aside for the moment, research for most scientists is indeed 99% perspira-
tion with maybe 1% ﬂ ashes of inspiration that hopefully culminate in the 
complex pieces coming together to form a coherent picture, at least in the 
investigator ’ s mind. 
 Max Planck was one of the most inﬂ uential scientists of the twentieth 
century, and therefore an appropriate role model for the story recounted 
here. In 1933, he wrote a typically succinct comment on the problems facing 
researchers who perceive serious ﬂ aws in accepted wisdom and know what to 
do about them:
 No doctrinal system in physical science, or indeed perhaps in any science, will 
alter its content of its own accord. Here we will always need the pressure of outer 
circumstances. Indeed the more intelligible and comprehensive a theoretical 
system is the more obstinately it will resist all attempts at reconstruction or 
expansion. And this is because in a synthesis of thought where there is an all -
 round logical coherence any alteration in one part of the structure is bound to 
upset other parts also. For instance, the main difﬁ culty about the acceptance of 
 * I have long used the word  “ Nature ” as if to describe a being. My use has no religious or mystical 
signiﬁ cance, but is shorthand for the universe and every aspect of everything in it. We have made 
some progress, but our understanding of that inﬁ nitely faceted system is still in its infancy. We are 
not casual observers, of course, as Nature embraces the entirety of our very existence. Nature is, 
therefore, my affectionate and respectful anthropomorphism for a system that is the constant 
preoccupation of every scientist. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4 
INTRODUCTION
the relativity theory was not merely a question of its objective merits but rather 
the question of how far it would upset the Newtonian structure of theoretical 
dynamics. The fact is that no alteration in a well - built synthesis of thought can 
be effected unless strong pressure is brought to bear from outside. This strong 
pressure must come from a well - constructed body of theory which has been 
ﬁ rmly consolidated by the test of experimental research. It is only thus that we 
can bring about the surrender of theoretical dogmas hitherto universally accepted 
as correct. 
 — Max Planck,  Where is Science Going ? Ox Bow Press,  1933 , pp. 44 – 45. 
 These words are as valid today as when Planck wrote them a lifetime ago, and 
reveal something of the dilemma he faced when he began his remarkable 
career some 50 years earlier. But the issues he identiﬁ es are still relevant. 
Indeed, they seem invariant and timeless. 
 One would hope, therefore, that research - funding organizations would have 
Planck ’ s thinking in mind whenever they were contemplating new policies. 
Until about 1970, that effectively would seem to have been the case.  * However, 
one must always be careful with generalizations. Not surprisingly, there is a 
voluminous literature, but it is concerned mostly with the qualities of freedom 
enjoyed by the profession as a whole. It deals with rights to freedom and aca-
demics ’ responsibilities to their various sponsors — society, government, indus-
try, charities, and philanthropists — but the extent to which  individuals can 
acquire or lose freedom is rarely discussed. Change in the academic world is 
often slow, so that my cited date is the peak of a broad distribution. Before 
1970 or so, tenured academics with an individual turn of mind could usually 
dig out modest sources of funding to tackle any problem that interested them 
without ﬁ rst having to commit themselves in writing. Afterward, unconditional 
sources of funds would become increasingly difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd. Today, they are 
virtually nonexistent. 
 The way forward for ambitious young researchers was once clear, therefore. 
All they had to do was to acquire the necessary qualiﬁ cations, and then to ﬁ nd 
a tenured appointment. To say the least, that was not easy, but not substantially 
more difﬁ cult than it would be today. However, having served their apprentice-
ship, they were free. They may have had to overcome the inevitable peer 
pressure if their plans were controversial, but  their peers did not have power 
of veto  — see Poster  1 .   Written applications were necessary if expensive equip-
ment or large teams were required, but tenured researchers with modest needs 
would meet few obstacles. One ’ s dedication and talent would usually be sufﬁ -
cient to silence the critics if the problem chosen were controversial, or if 
progress appeared to be lacking.
 * Leon M. Lederman, when he was president - elect of the American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science said that funding for academic research was adequate in 1968, which year he 
described as the peak of a  “ golden age ” of American science (Lederman  1991 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
5
 Poster 1: Charles Townes and the Laser  
 Charles Townes was awarded his PhD in physics at the California Institute 
of Technology in 1939, and went on to join the Bell Laboratories, then 
located in Greenwich Village on Manhattan Island. Soon after, the Bell 
management directed him to help develop radar - guided bomb - aiming 
systems as part of the US war effort. This intense work on radar and micro-
waves, as he describes it, led to his career ’ s work on molecular spectroscopy. 
Similar war work had been done at the nearby Columbia University in New 
York, so when at the end of the war Bell suggested, as they say, that he 
should focus his work on subjects of interest to the company, he decided in 
1948 that he would pursue his own interests, and accepted an appointment 
as associate professor of physics at Columbia. 
 For some time, he had been trying to make intense beams of submilli-
meter radiation, rather than the centimeter or more wavelengths that he 
had been working with. Eventually, he conceived a possible method to 
generate photon  “ avalanches ” using excited ammonium molecules. But he 
could not get it to work. As he relates in his book (Townes  1999 ):
 [After] we had been at it for two years, Rabi and Kusch, the former and 
current chairman of the department — both of them Nobel laureates for work 
with atomic and molecular beams, and both with a lot of weight behind their 
opinions — came into my ofﬁ ce and sat down. They were worried. Their 
research depended on support from the same source as did mine. *  “ Look, ” 
they said,  “ you should stop the work you are doing. It isn ’ t going to work. 
You know it ’ s not going to work. We know it ’ s not going to work. You ’ re 
wasting money. Just stop! ” 
 But Townes had come to Columbia on tenure, so he knew he couldn ’ t be 
ﬁ red for incompetence or ordered around. Nevertheless, the awesome 
weight of Rabi ’ s reputation in particular — a one - time senior member of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology ’ s legendary Radiation Laboratory 
set up by Vannevar Bush to develop wartime radar — must have been daunt-
ing. Such top brass cannot be deﬁ ed lightly, and showing extraordinary 
courage, this junior faculty member stood his ground, and respectfully told 
his exalted colleagues that he would continue. Two months later (in April 
1954), his experiment worked, and the maser (microwave ampliﬁ cation by 
stimulated emission of radiation) was born. Three years after that Arthur 
Schawlow, Townes ’ postdoc at Columbia, had moved to the Bell Laborato-
ries, and their collaboration led to the optical version of the maser — the 
laser. Townes was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1964 for these 
discoveries [shared with Aleksander Prokhorov and Nikolai Basov (USSR), 
who developed the maser and laser independently]. Schawlow was awarded 
the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1981 for his work on laser spectroscopy.   
 * Their support came from a Joint Services contract managed by the Army Signal Corps. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6 
INTRODUCTION
 As Planck says, researchers who claim that an accepted dogma is seriously 
ﬂ awed have a duty to persuade the scientiﬁ c community that their alternative 
is better. Planck was indeed his own severest critic in this respect as serious 
researchers often are. As he would have been the ﬁ rst to point out, the status 
quo should not be changed lightly. He was, in his own words, a reluctant revo-
lutionary. In Planck ’ s time, academic research was essentially unmanaged, 
whether by objectives or otherwise. There was no central direction or coordi-
nation. The issues involved were largely scientiﬁ c. That is no longer the case. 
Now that the new policies are ﬁ rmly established, for the ﬁ rst time in science ’ s 
long history researchers must submit their proposals in writing to an appropri-
ate agency. Spontaneity has been lost. The funding agencies subject these 
proposals to an arcane set of tests (peer review) designed to ﬂ ag what they 
perceive as the best, expecting thereby that the rest will probably be lost. 
 These well - intentioned changes have created lumbering bureaucracies to 
ensure compliance. They have also inhibited exploration outside the main-
streams and challenges to convention. This is most unfortunate because the 
great discoveries that transformed the twentieth century came out of the blue. 
 There was no demand for them. One might suggest that the Manhattan Project 
and the Human Genome Project are among examples to the contrary, but the 
unexpected discoveries on which they were based had come much earlier. 
Their successes are monuments to organised creativity and depended on 
exquisite ﬁ ne - tuning of existing knowledge and orchestration of resources on 
unprecedented scales rather than on new science per se. However, scientists 
today with radical turns of mind — the successors to Planck et al. (see Poster 
 2 ) — are unlikely to get funded because their ideas are unlikely to impress a 
committee  before they have been conﬁ rmed. Consequently, there has been a 
dearth of major scientiﬁ c discoveries in recent decades. We are living off the 
seedcorn.
  Poster 2: The Twentieth - Century Planck Club    
 The twentieth century was strongly inﬂ uenced by the work of a relatively 
small number of scientists. A short list might include Planck, Einstein, 
Rutherford, Dirac, Pauli, Schr ö dinger, Heisenberg, Fleming, Avery, Fermi, 
Perutz, Crick and Watson, Bardeen, Brattain, and Shockley, Gabor, Townes, 
McClintock, Black, and Brenner (see Table 1). However, I give this list only 
to indicate something of the richness of twentieth - century science. I wrote 
it in a few minutes, and it obviously has many important omissions. Other 
scientists would doubtless have their own. If the criteria for inclusion were 
based on success in creating radically new sciences, or of stimulating new 
and generic technologies, a fuller list could easily run to a couple of 
hundred. 
 I will refer to the extended list as the  Planck Club or alternatively as 
 Planck et al . for the remainder of the book.  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
7
 However, issues much wider than research are at stake. In everyday life we 
rely, usually unquestioningly, on humanity ’ s basic needs being available at 
affordable prices so that we can get on with our lives at our own pace. For 
those of us living in the industrialized countries — say, the 20 or so richest states 
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) —
 we can usually take them for granted. But global population is steadily increas-
ing. In addition, many millions in China and India, for example, deemed 
hitherto not to have such needs are now beginning to assert their rights to 
them. Demand for some vital resources — oil, copper,  *   and water — is increas-
ing rapidly. Many doomsayers take the Malthusian line. Earth ’ s resources are 
strictly limited, they say, and we are all going to hell in a handcart. 
 They are wrong, because they reckon without humanity ’ s apparently bound-
less command of the intellectual dimension. Thanks to that precious gift, and 
despite the havoc of world wars, ﬁ nancial crashes, and a threefold rise in popu-
lation, per capita economic growth  † soared in the twentieth century, reaching 
a peak, coincidentally perhaps, around about 1970. It then began a steady 
decline. Unfortunately, however, that decline is now being masked by unprec-
edented rises in residential and other property values dubbed by  The Econo-
mist as perhaps the biggest bubble in history (see Chapter 3).  Bubbles usually 
collapse more quickly than they inﬂ ate, and who knows what the effects will 
be. Humanity is indeed blessed with the ingenuity necessary for survival, but 
much of this priceless asset will be wasted if we smother it with consensus. See 
Poster  3 .
 * The Economist ’ s  metal index published on March 22, 2007 — which includes aluminum, copper, 
lead, nickel, tin, and zinc — was at its highest level for 16 years. 
 † During the twentieth century, the average real - terms productivity of every person on the planet 
increased 4.3 - fold despite a 3 - fold increase in population. 
 This book seeks to extend the debate to anyone who takes a serious interest 
in global affairs — industrialists, academics, legislators, consumers. Sadly, 
however, even though the fruits of research are essential for modern life, the 
media seem to conﬁ ne their interest to speciﬁ c  discoveries ; research as an 
 enterprise is generally ignored, and  research policies have even less appeal 
apparently, if that is possible. This indifference would seem to have a simple 
explanation. Since the Renaissance, the policy on academic research has gen-
erally been  not  to have a policy. Patronage and sponsorship have always been 
important, but their agendas were diverse and they often backed creative 
talent for its own sake. Society ’ s reward was a remarkably steady trickle of 
astonishing miracles. But times have changed; funding agencies ’ mission state-
ments (or other expressions of purpose) are now de rigueur, and often cast in 
stone. This situation has long been the case for researchers in the industrial 
sector, but that is to be expected. Industrialists must know where they are 
going. Now, academics, too, are almost invariably subject to externally imposed 
constraints. Unfortunately, these dramatic changes seem to have passed the 
media by, so would - be reformers are starved of the oxygen of publicity. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8 
INTRODUCTION
  Poster 3: The Wizard ’ s Warning   *       
 Once upon a time, I dreamed about a meeting about a hundred years ago 
at which a wizard addressed a large gathering of industrial and scientiﬁ c 
leaders. He announced that he would use his 20/20 foresight to describe the 
powerful discoveries that would enrich the coming twentieth century. 
 “ However, your language does not yet contain the words I need to describe 
the future, ” he said, so he put a spell on the audience that conjured visions 
of energy quantization, relativity theory, atomic and nuclear structure, 
quantum mechanics, and molecular biology to give some impressions of the 
sciences that might shortly come. With mounting excitement, he outlined 
some of the magical technologies that might stem from them: magnetic 
resonance imaging and a wealth of other medical diagnostics, lasers, nuclear 
power, computers, telecommunications, and genetic manipulation. The 
audience was quite literally spellbound. They had expected him to talk 
about developments in electrical and steam power, hydraulics, and oil and 
coal technologies. What they heard was totally unexpected. When the 
wizard had ﬁ nished, someone asked what we had to do to make these fan-
tastical things happen. His reply was equally stunning:  “ Nothing, ”  he said. 
His voice began to quiver with emotion:  “ Humanity has been given the 
priceless gift of creativity, but it ’ s vital that you understand how it works. 
Creativity is the essence of the human spirit, and ﬂ owers best when it ’ s 
unconstrained. If you try to control it for your own ends you must learn 
that you can get only what you ask for. The unexpected will not arise. You 
are not wizards. ” These last words came in an intense growl. Then he dis-
appeared, and I woke up. 
 I dreamed about the wizard again recently. He told me that he had given 
similarly prescient lectures every hundred years since 1600 when Francis 
Bacon and a few others began to appreciate the value of organized scientiﬁ c 
research. Before that, the scientiﬁ c world had been more or less stagnant 
for a long time, so there was nothing new to herald. His lecture on the 
twenty - ﬁ rst century was clearly long overdue, and I asked him when next 
he would be speaking to us. His answer was depressing:
 I will give no more lectures until humanity regains its sense of wonder. As 
you know, my foresight is perfect, but I ’ m not allowed to reveal anything 
about the major discoveries that await you. The sole purpose of my centennial 
addresses has been to inspire, to conjure for the best of you subconscious 
images of what your creative talents are currently capable of. The rest is up 
to you. Unfortunately, your leaders have now decided that wonder is inefﬁ -
cient because it cannot be controlled, quantiﬁ ed, or targeted. You must con-
solidate what you think you know, of course, but nowadays that is all you are 
doing. Humanity ’ s powers of foresight have always been puny, so you ’ ll get 
nowhere unless you listen to what I am trying to tell you and back those rare 
individuals whose vision transcends need.   
 * Based on an editorial by the author published in  The Scientist on September 27, 2004. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
9
 Never say die, as my good friend says, so I will outline what we should do 
about our currently bizarre predicament and who should do it. For once, 
ﬁ nance is not the major issue. The initial cause of the funding crisis was the 
mushrooming numbers of researchers and the high levels of inﬂ ation applying 
to scientiﬁ c equipment, an inﬂ ation being pushed ever higher by the pressures 
arising from enforced competition. Today, however, no realistic increase in 
public funding could provide for every demand. Instead, funding agencies 
should inject fresh air into their somewhat stagnant thinking and break away 
from their slavish adherence to priorities and consensus. The ﬁ nancial cost of 
liberating a small proportion of the scientiﬁ c enterprise — say, for transforma-
tive research initiatives — would be barely noticeable. 
 However, the rules by which governments and others oblige them to operate 
are too rigid. Accountability for every cent means that the return on every 
cent must be justiﬁ ed. The result is short - termism. * Special - interest groups in 
such ﬁ elds as the environment or ethics usually seem to ﬁ nd effective ways of 
making their views known. Unfortunately, the collateral damage inﬂ icted on 
the governance of science has generally gone unnoticed because the  recipients 
of public and other funds are unlikely to complain, and for the rest, who takes 
notice of sour grapes? But poor harvests will affect us all, and we must ﬁ nd 
ways of raising the proﬁ le of these issues if we are to restore the vital role 
played by freedom in research. 
 Jared Diamond ( 2005 ), in his  Collapse , tells the fascinating story of how 
civilizations choose to fail or survive. His study covers many centuries and 
explores the sudden collapse of a wide variety of small or localized societies 
that were  “ especially clear illustrations, ” as he puts it, of the problems that 
may befall larger societies today. Easter Island is perhaps the best known. 
Polynesians arriving on this remotest of Paciﬁ c islands around 900  a . d . 
found it hospitable and covered in dense forest. However, drawing on a wide 
range of archaeological and forensic science, Diamond concludes that the 
forest ﬁ nally disappeared by about 1600 to provide the most extreme example 
of forest destruction in the Paciﬁ c. 
 This deforestation came about largely because the islanders needed 
trees for the construction and transport of an escalating number of huge 
stone statues that played an essential role in the islanders ’ religious and social 
lives. Unfortunately, the island ’ s ecology is totally dependent on trees, and 
demand for them eventually outstripped Nature ’ s supply. Without trees, 
migrating birds could not nest and a vital food supply vanished. Without trees, 
the islanders could not build long - range canoes, and so deep - sea ﬁ sh, dolphins, 
porpoises, and tuna became inaccessible. Loss of trees also led to increased 
soil erosion and poor crop yields. Diamond estimates that by 1774 when 
 * I discussed these problems with Akio Morita when he was Sony ’ s chairman some years ago. He 
replied with a story about an ocean liner that had just hit the rocks. The captain and his senior 
ofﬁ cers were playing poker in his cabin. An engineer knocked on his door with news that the ship 
was sinking fast.  “ Go away, ” said the captain.  “ Can ’ t you see we ’ re playing for high stakes? ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10 
INTRODUCTION
Captain Cook visited the island, its once prosperous population had declined 
by about 70% since its peak between 1400 and 1600, and relates that Cook 
described the islanders as  “ small, lean, timid, and miserable. ” What had hap-
pened? We do not know for sure, of course, but Diamond asks (on p. 426): 
 “ What did the Easter Islander who cut down the last palm tree say as he was 
doing it? ”  
 Diamond ( 2005 ) goes on to explain the fate of other civilizations, and to 
discuss the relevance of his story to humanity ’ s survival today. He concludes 
(on p. 522) with some reasons for hope:
 We don ’ t need new technologies to solve our problems; while new technologies 
can make some contribution, for the most part we  “ just ” need the political will 
to apply solutions already available. Of course, that ’ s a big  “ just. ” But many 
societies did ﬁ nd the necessary political will in the past.  
 Diamond rigorously covers the material aspects of his story, but in my opinion 
he does not deal with its intellectual dimensions with the same meticulous 
attention to detail. For Easter Island, for example, it is likely that one or two 
dissenting voices would always have been railing about the madness of trying 
to cover the island with statues. But who would have listened? Statue building 
was apparently the principal mode of competition among the island ’ s dozen 
or so factions. If one faction withdrew from the statue - building race, it would 
effectively be throwing in the towel. The leadership might have pointed out 
that the island still had a viable number of trees and a much larger number of 
saplings. We do not have to worry, therefore, their leaders might have said, the 
saplings will grow in due course and more than replace the trees we take. 
Without a forum and with no power base, the dissenters would have been 
marginalized and ignored. 
 In other circumstances, the leaders might have been right, but unfortunately 
the island is normally subject to very strong winds. An exceptionally strong 
gale could destroy the entire tree cover if it had already been seriously depleted, 
and the saplings would suddenly be left with no cover and soils reduced by 
erosion. Tree cover would most likely have come to a catastrophic end, there-
fore, rather than dwindling away imperceptibly as Diamond surmises. My 
conjecture is that their actions had caused the island ’ s ecology to become 
precariously and uncontrollably balanced; that is, they had pushed it into what 
we might call the Damocles Zone (see Chapter  1 ). Once tree cover had fallen 
below a certain critical level, the islanders ’ fate would have been sealed. They 
could then have done little or nothing to prevent it. I cannot offer hard evi-
dence, of course, but if competition  is paramount, how could the islanders have 
mustered the political will to solve their looming problem before it became 
too late? 
 Is Diamond ’ s sanguinity justiﬁ ed? The political will to  “ apply solutions ” 
is an essential condition, of course. However, full conﬁ dence would be 
justiﬁ able only if actions were based on a  coherent understanding of all 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
11
the political, social, and scientiﬁ c inputs involved. Otherwise, actions would 
be no more effective than wishful thinking. In any case, the political will 
alone may not be sufﬁ cient, especially if we defer essential action on crucial 
problems for so long that the conditions leading to collapse  become impossible 
to avoid . With a coherent understanding, every conceivable contributing 
factor will have been identiﬁ ed and hopefully, therefore, we can develop the 
antennae to give early warning of possible problems and the ﬂ exibility required 
for those that take us by surprise. Poster  4 gives an illustration. The signals 
may not be to everyone ’ s liking, of course. Indeed, that will rarely be the case. 
But unlike my imagined dissenters on Easter Island, we fortunately do have 
a locus for those capable of seeing the writing on the wall and diagnosing 
solutions. It is called the  university . For many centuries, that institution has 
often deﬁ ed the establishment and has always stood ready to offer guidance 
and advice, but the recent changes undermine its independence and 
potential.
 It is possible that my message may be seen as elitist and of interest only to 
those very few scientists who might be putative members of a twenty - ﬁ rst 
century Planck Club. That interpretation would be wrong. One of the themes 
here is that almost every serious researcher is at some time in a career capable 
of taking those fateful steps that might lead to a great discovery or the creation 
of penetrating new insight. They might then need to draw on vast reserves of 
courage and determination, and perhaps also a little luck if they are to make 
progress. At any one time, of course, the proportion of researchers ready to 
seize that possibly once - in - a - lifetime opportunity will be very small, so if they 
are prevented from doing so the democratic pressure they can exert is insig-
niﬁ cant. This is becoming a huge problem. It will only be solved if the beneﬁ -
ciaries — that is, the general public — take an interest and do something about 
it. It is their, that is  your future that is at stake. 
 The book is structured as follows. Chapter  1 introduces the formidable 
Damocles Zone, and outlines how we can avoid it. The Sword of Damocles is, 
of course, a fable, but the consequences of moving into that eponymous Zone 
can be all too real. That is because, despite the signs to the contrary, the world 
is very strange. Virtually every process on which life is based and indeed every 
dynamic process in the air, earth, oceans, or the universe itself is ultimately 
ﬁ nely balanced. Collapse and instability are never far away. However, for most 
of us, and for most of the time, that is not what we actually observe. The world 
is generally a pleasant and predictable place only because of the feedback 
mechanisms that usually tame the instabilities. My conjecture is that at the 
highest social levels creativity provides the vital feedback that keeps societies 
and civilizations healthy. Crushing it, as was done during the Dark Ages, for 
example, pushes us into that fateful Damocles Zone and makes us highly vul-
nerable. Today, our current obsession with so - called efﬁ ciency and account-
ability is hardly consistent with promoting creativity, but in sharp contrast to 
the Dark Ages we have expanding populations with increasing expectations. 
We  must take more care or suffer the consequences. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12 
INTRODUCTION
 Poster 4: Global Warming: A Coherent Approach  
 The atmosphere is host to a wide range of complex processes that a large 
number of climate modelers worldwide are struggling to understand. 
However, it is not an isolated entity. One boundary is in intimate contact 
with a similarly complex but much larger body — Earth — that is about one 
million times more massive. The other separates us — humanity — from the 
rest of the universe. Thus arises one of the twenty - ﬁ rst century ’ s most baf-
ﬂ ing questions: Are our activities affecting the planet? 
 The atmosphere ’ s ﬁ rst terrestrial contact is largely with the oceans — 300 
times more massive and covering about two - thirds of Earth ’ s surface. Trans-
port of heat, water, gases, and particulates across the ocean – atmosphere 
interface plays a key role in the global climate system. The oceans transport 
huge quantities of heat — from the equator to the poles, for example — and 
play crucial roles in the global carbon cycle. Biological effects are also 
important. Marine microbes are responsible for about a half of Earth ’ s 
production of carbon and nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen, and 
their cycling can affect atmospheric concentrations of CO 2 . As a further 
illustration of these complexities, in 2006 it was unexpectedly discovered 
that the migration of marine animals may make important contributions to 
global warming (Kunze et al.  2006 ). Biologically generated turbulence can 
signiﬁ cantly affect the transport of heat and nutrients, and air – sea gas 
exchanges. We understand few of these complex processes. 
 Thermal processes within Earth itself are highly complex. Earth ’ s mag-
netic ﬁ eld originates in convection currents within the outer (molten iron) 
core. The radius of the inner, solid - iron core seems to be increasing. Thus, 
there are liquid – solid phase changes that necessarily involve the exchange 
of large amounts of latent heat of which we understand very little. The 
temperature of the core, for example, is uncertain to about 1000 ° C. Earth ’ s 
magnetic ﬁ eld has declined about 20% in the last hundred years, and it is 
possible that we are seeing the prelude to one of the periodic magnetic - pole 
ﬂ ips that occur on average about every million years. The atmosphere is 
therefore being subject to unknown but probably substantial ﬂ uctuations 
in its heat exchanges with Earth. Their timescale may be long, perhaps 
longer than the effects we see in the atmosphere, but we simply do not 
know. 
 For the atmosphere ’ s upper boundary, the Sun also changes its long - term 
output (years to decades) in ways that we do not understand. Indeed, it is 
possible that these solar ﬂ uctuations (Friis - Christensen and Lassen  1991 ) 
can account for the observed changes in Earth ’ s temperature over the past 
100 years. Furthermore, our planet is bathed with solar and galactic cosmic 
rays that vary in intensity unpredictably, and to compound these problems, 
the strength of its protective magnetic ﬁ eld is falling. Cosmic rays can affect 
the structure of the upper atmosphere, and lead to changes (cloud forma-
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
13
tion rates, etc.) that in turn can affect climate. No doubt there are other 
problems of which we are as yet unaware. 
 The processes that determine the Earth atmosphere ’ s behavior are non-
linear; see Chapter  1 . Feedback mechanisms are therefore essential to sta-
bility. As Earth warms, for example, evaporation of water vapor — another 
greenhouse gas — should increase thereby increasing global warming, but 
which also should increase the rate of cloud formation. Clouds increase 
Earth ’ s reﬂ ectivity, and hence reduce the Sun ’ s heat arriving at the surface. 
But the delicate balances involved in these processes are unknown, as are 
their relative importance compared with ice - cap melting, say, that should 
decrease reﬂ ectivity. There are in fact a multitude of such feedback mecha-
nisms, and most, if not all, of them are poorly understood. 
 However, climate modelers are making heroic attempts to tame these 
complexities and make predictions, but computer models can only be as 
good as the data they use. In addition, long - term predictions of nonlinear 
systems can be fraught with danger. Although there are many models of 
world economic performance, for example, and human interactions are 
reasonably well understood, how many modelers would dare to try to 
predict inﬂ ation levels, say, in 2050? 
 There is an urgent need, therefore, for  coherent  data rather than, as one 
hears so much today, calls for more powerful computers. The ozone hole, 
for example, was discovered by the British Antarctic Survey in 1985 when 
Joe Farman and his colleagues suspected that computers were automati-
cally rejecting vital data that on current understanding were deemed impos-
sible but that nevertheless were evidence for the hole (Farman et al.  1985 ). 
In these circumstances, the only viable approach is to encourage unfettered 
scientiﬁ c exploration. What we have, unfortunately, are armies of explorers 
obliged to treat components of this hypercomplex system as though they 
can be studied in isolation — as if each component were independent of all 
the others. Coherent approaches are unlikely to be funded because they 
would cross too many conventional disciplinary boundaries. 
 This does not mean that I advocate inaction. For example, in the absence 
of understanding, it would be irresponsible to continue injecting large and 
rising amounts of greenhouse gases such as CO 2  into the atmosphere.  *   They 
should be reduced, of course, or at least not increased until we are reason-
ably sure that we know what we are doing. What we should not do, however, 
is to claim that if humanity takes such actions, the global warming problem 
will be solved. It might not. The main causes might lie elsewhere, or there 
might not even be a problem.   
 * An excellent summary of the problems associated with controlling or trading carbon emissions 
is given in an editorial written by Schlesinger ( 2006 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14 
INTRODUCTION
 Chapter  2 describes transformative research, the term now used in the 
United States to describe the research that has a reasonable chance of radi-
cally changing our understanding of important concepts or creating new ﬁ elds 
of science. I avoid a more precise deﬁ nition, however, because the main objec-
tive of any transformative research initiative should be to rectify the serious 
ﬂ aws in current funding arrangements and thereby stimulate the creation of 
a twenty - ﬁ rst century Planck Club. The major snag is that every discovery 
made by their twentieth - century predecessors was unexpected. That not only 
creates difﬁ cult acts to follow, but sponsors of these initiatives must recognize 
that major breakthroughs in scientiﬁ c understanding are impossible to com-
mission. The most we can do is to restore the freedom that leads to them. 
 Chapter  3 discusses why we should be concerned about our current predica-
ment. Global per capita economic growth rates are falling, a fact that seems 
related to the policy changes made since about 1970. So - called breakthrough 
discoveries made in recent times are contrasted with some of the pre - 1970 
vintage that so transformed our lives. Before that fateful date, scientiﬁ c dis-
covery was intensely personal. Nowadays, however, research tends to follow 
the fashions of consensus. Large numbers of developments are attributed 
impersonally to anonymous  “ researchers ” rather than to highly individualistic 
Olympians such as Planck, and most of these are likely to be superseded by 
the next development before too long. I attribute the apparent fall in scientiﬁ c 
productivity to the loss of freedom in research, but the loss is not irrevocable. 
Scientists willingly gave up their freedom during World War II to serve their 
countries, and their contributions in such areas as radar, communications, code 
breaking, and the atomic bomb were crucial. That directed management - by -
 objectives mode could easily have become the norm as it was so obviously 
successful, but thanks to the actions of a few determined people, the peace 
brought a range of brilliantly effective measures to restore academic freedom. 
However, their very success led to an unprecedented expansion of scientiﬁ c 
enterprise, and consequently to demands for funds outstripping supply. We are 
therefore in dire need of a few determined individuals who can mount effec-
tive challenges to the new policies. It is never easy to accomplish change, but 
maybe they can take their inspiration from kindred spirits of the late 1940s. 
 Chapter  4 discusses how we might go about ﬁ nding Planck ’ s successors. The 
essential point is that such initiatives must pass the  “ Planck test ”  if they are 
to stand a chance of succeeding. Thus, search parties must genuinely believe 
that their procedures would probably have led to the support of Planck et al. 
 when they were starting out . Unfortunately, the funding agencies seem pre-
occupied with so - called high - risk research. They do not seem to have realized 
that they have hijacked the management of risk — that should normally be the 
researcher ’ s responsibility, at least for academics. For our part, we modeled 
our 1980s Venture Research initiative on the work of Planck Club members, 
and we could not believe that they thought their work was high - risk. Judging 
by the high rate of Venture Research successes, it seems we got it about 
right. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INTRODUCTION 
15
 Chapter  5 describes how a transformative research initiative might work in 
practice. Unfortunately, one ’ s procedures must also be transformative if the 
effects of the post - 1970 changes are to be mitigated. The ultimate objective is 
to create a twenty - ﬁ rst century Planck Club, of course, but likely members of 
such an august Club will probably be very careful when sharing their ideas. 
There must be mutual trust, and that must be won. Indeed, the staff of a trans-
formative research initiative has a very special role to play. Every member of 
the twentieth - century Planck Club enjoyed freedom as a right, but in its 
absence, staff must try to be  Nature ’ s ambassadors and act as Nature herself 
might if she had to make the selections. 
 Chapter  6 discusses the university as an institution, the very home of the 
intellectual dimension. This most successful of our institutions has served 
society well over the centuries. In the twentieth century, it provided an encour-
aging environment for most members of the Planck Club (but not all; some 
were from industry) and many others who made vital contributions during 
World War II. This extraordinary reservoir of talent is now under serious 
threat. The objective of offering higher education to 40 – 50% of the student 
cohort may be desirable, but unless we take steps to preserve, for example, the 
freedom of research, the university as we have known it will disappear, having 
drowned in a sea of mundanity. Possible solutions are discussed, but they 
would seem to require a revolution — a proposed Fifth Revolution — the natural 
successor to the generally accepted four that have dominated our lives for the 
past 300 years or so. Transformative research initiatives are unlikely to succeed 
unless we make some progress toward bringing that revolution about. 
 Chapter  7 gives the ﬁ rst full account of the 26 programs being funded by 
the Venture Research initiative at its close in 1990, and of their eventual prog-
ress. No programs are excluded. As will be seen, Venture Researchers were 
phenomenally successful. At least 14 groups or individuals made transforma-
tive discoveries, but their proposals had all been rejected by the usual funding 
agencies. These high success levels would seem to indicate that Venture 
Research (transformative research, by another name) is not high - risk, and 
could be a viable alternative, at least for radical researchers, to the environ-
ment prior to the 1970s or so that generally allowed freedom for all. It is also 
remarkably cheap. 
 Humanity ’ s future seems precariously balanced. We are facing a daunting 
catalog of problems of which perhaps the most intractable is that the majority 
of the world ’ s population are now demanding the higher standards of living 
long enjoyed by the industrial nations. There is no reason in principle why that 
cannot happen. However, if we are all to have decent shares of cake, there 
must be a lot more cake; that is, global per capita economic growth must con-
tinue to increase, year after year. Unfortunately, the underlying trend in recent 
years seems to indicate a decrease. Growth depends on technical change, but 
management by objectives and other instruments of bureaucracy are stran-
gling scientiﬁ c research, and our universities are struggling to cope with their 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16 
INTRODUCTION
rising demands. Thus, the global warning seems clear — falling growth and 
rising expectations could drive some regions into a chronically unstable state 
leading to the Damocles Zone and collapse. We do not know when that might 
happen, but it makes no sense to assume that it will not. On the other hand, 
if we strive to ensure that the most original of our elite scientists and universi-
ties are completely free to tackle these and  any other problems, experience 
tell us that we could synthesize the elixir that perpetuates civilization 
indeﬁ nitely. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 The Damocles Zone  
 “ My other piece of advice, Copperﬁ eld, ” said Mr. Micawber,  “ You know. Annual 
income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen (pounds), nineteen and six, 
result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty 
pounds ought and six, result misery ” . 
 — Charles Dickens,  David Copperﬁ eld , 1850 
 Charles Dickens had no training in the sciences, but that is hardly a prerequi-
site for an understanding of what seems to be a fact of life — that a  sustained 
shortfall in one ’ s circumstances — and not only the ﬁ nancial, of course — can 
eventually lead to catastrophic consequences. It would seem that after lengthy 
immersion in such dire straits, those affected enter a state of existence in which 
even trivial setbacks such as an unexpected bill, a minor fall, a modest bout 
of food poisoning, a common cold, or freezing weather that in normal circum-
stances would be taken in their stride, can lead to serious difﬁ culties or even 
disaster simply because they have reached the end of their tether and can no 
longer cope. During that precarious phase it might seem to the disinterested 
observer that tiny causes can become ampliﬁ ed to produce disproportionately 
huge effects on its victims. Moreover, they seem to be powerless to do anything 
about it — that is, they will have entered the Damocles Zone (see Poster  5 ).
1
17
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 However, it is not only the poor unfortunates who might ﬁ nd themselves 
in such a predicament. It potentially awaits us all, not only as individuals, but 
as societies, nations, and civilizations, and perhaps extending to humanity itself. 
Passage into the Damocles Zone is not necessarily the result of transient 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

18 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
 Poster 5: The Sword of Damocles and the Damocles Zone  
 The Roman politician and philosopher Marcus Tullius Cicero, writing in his 
 Tusculan Disputations , Book 5, tells a story about King Dionysius II of 
Syracuse and the sword of Damocles. He says (translated by C. D. Yonge 
(1812 – 1891)):
 XXI. This tyrant, however, showed himself how happy he really was; for once, 
when Damocles, one of his ﬂ atterers, was dilating in conversation on his 
forces, his wealth, the greatness of his power, the plenty he enjoyed, the gran-
deur of his royal palaces, and maintaining that no one was ever happier, 
 “ Have you an inclination, ” said he,  “ Damocles, as this kind of life pleases you, 
to have a taste of it yourself, and to make a trial of the good fortune that 
attends me? ” And when he said that he should like it extremely, Dionysius 
ordered him to be laid on a bed of gold with the most beautiful covering, 
embroidered and wrought with the most exquisite work, and he dressed out 
a great many sideboards with silver and embossed gold. He then ordered 
some youths, distinguished for their handsome persons, to wait at his table, 
and to observe his nod, in order to serve him with what he wanted. There 
were ointments and garlands; perfumes were burned; tables provided with 
the most exquisite meats. Damocles thought himself very happy. In the midst 
of this apparatus, Dionysius ordered a bright sword to be let down from the 
ceiling, suspended by a single horse - hair, so as to hang over the head of that 
happy man. After which he neither cast his eye on those handsome waiters, 
nor on the well - wrought plate; nor touched any of the provisions: presently 
the garlands fell to pieces. At last he entreated the tyrant to give him leave 
to go, for that now he had no desire to be happy. Does not Dionysius, then, 
seem to have declared there can be no happiness for one who is under con-
stant apprehensions? 
 Following Cicero ’ s thought - provoking story, I will use the term  Damocles 
Zone to describe that state within which its occupants are suddenly exposed 
to grave and imminent danger. That might be the case even though the 
obvious signs have been benign until that moment. On moving into the 
Damocles Zone, not only does one ’ s fate become precariously balanced but 
also survival is probably impossible without external intervention. Although 
a disastrous outcome is virtually certain, no estimate can be made as to 
when it might actually happen. 
 The existence of Damocles Zones of one kind or another is an intrinsic 
property of the universe we live in.  
mishaps such as storms, tsunamis, earthquakes, or even being caught in someone 
else ’ s war. A healthy society should indeed be able to take these things in its 
stride. Their impact on individual victims can be disastrous, of course, but 
experience shows that societies generally recover remarkably quickly. Such 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
19
disasters can arise out of the blue and may come about as accidentally as a 
car crash with few implications for humanity as a whole. The Damocles Zone 
has wider and deeper origins, however, and its effects would only rarely be 
reversible. 
 If the universe were dominated and controlled by linear processes we would 
always be safe from risk, accidental or otherwise. By  linear processes I mean 
any process in which the consequences of an action are predictable and directly 
proportional to its causes. I might push you in a friendly way, say, with a force 
that might normally move you a few inches, and in a linear world you would 
indeed move only a few inches. On the other hand, if you were standing at the 
edge of a cliff, you might go over the edge and suffer consequences that would 
probably be nonlinear and unpleasant. But if linear processes ruled the world, 
there would be no cliffs. Cliffs are always the result of some discontinuous and 
perhaps tumultuous event. In a linear world, all surfaces would either be ﬂ at 
or very gently undulating. Skiing would be out because without tumultuous 
events there could be no mountains. But that would be the least of our worries 
for another important reason — in a linear world not only would we be safe 
from all risks but there would also be no people and probably no world, 
either. 
 Our understanding of the universe is rather limited, of course. However, 
one feature that seems well established is that the universe is shaped and 
determined entirely by  nonlinearities ; that is, the nonlinear relationships 
between every entity — space, time, energy, matter, and so on — of which the 
universe is composed. This prosaic and tongue - twisting word is therefore the 
source of everything that is interesting and exciting, that makes life worth 
living, and indeed that makes it possible to live. Eventually, nonlinearities 
always lead to instability. There seems little doubt that the universe ’ s very 
creation, regardless of whether one accepts the Big Bang theory, comes from 
spontaneous instabilities from which matter emerges, and by which, on the 
scale of the universe, energy is conserved. Other types of instability seed the 
creation of individual stars, planets, and galaxies. The very chemical elements 
on which life on Earth is based (carbon, oxygen, nitrogen etc.) come from yet 
another — the spontaneous explosion of stars (supernovas) that ﬂ ood the uni-
verse with them. We have yet to discover precisely how life on Earth emerged, 
but we do know that proteins play an essential role in the later stages of that 
process, and that proteins are essentially unstable.  * If they were not, we could 
not exist as there could be no living cells, no renewal through birth and death, 
not only of cells but of whole organisms, and no mutations and no evolution. 
Even when life on Earth became established, its later extensive development 
into higher forms became possible and sustainable only because of physical 
 * Proteins are essential components of all living cells of all organisms. They may differ in sequence, 
shape, and function, but they must all be able to fold into speciﬁ c three - dimensional structures. 
These structures are not rigid. They each have a restless and dynamic existence, which involves 
unfolding and refolding, complex association and dissociation. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

20 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
instabilities in the core of the planet. They led to the steadily expanding crys-
tallization of the solid - iron core at the heart of Earth ’ s hot interior, and in turn 
to the subsequent turbulent ﬂ ows in the conducting outer core of molten iron 
that generate the magnetic ﬁ eld needed to protect higher life - forms such as 
ourselves from much of the harsh and damaging radiation from the Sun and 
beyond. Thus, without nonlinearities we would not only all be dead — we would 
never have lived. 
 That brief tribute to instability, however, omits a very important caveat. 
Although nonlinear processes would seem eventually to dominate every 
system ever observed, the universe at any one time is nevertheless a curious 
mixture of the linear and the nonlinear. Instability must be followed by a 
period of stability otherwise nothing new would survive. Unfortunately, these 
considerations take us into one of the most profound of all the sciences that 
at least on the astronomical scale is poorly understood — thermodynamics. 
Thus, the universe also seems to be characterized by the property that an 
ordered system evolves in such ways that it always becomes less ordered — that 
is, entropy must always increase as the arrow of time goes only one way. (As 
far as we know, the direction of that arrow never reverses.) Eventually, there-
fore, the universe will become an amorphous soup in which no structures can 
exist * and nothing can ever happen — a bleak prospect, indeed. But returning 
to present reality, it goes without saying that we do exist. Our immediate 
astronomical neighborhood also seems generally stable, and most of us can 
enjoy mostly quiet lives. Entropy ’ s eventual absolute hegemony, therefore, can 
be understood only if it applies to the universe as a whole. 
 On this viewpoint, therefore, some systems might behave linearly for long 
periods provided that a sufﬁ cient number of other systems behave nonlinearly 
(thereby becoming less ordered) over the same time so that the entropy of 
the universe indeed always increases. That anthropic thinking would seem to 
rationalize our existence nicely,  †   but while all this may be true, the mysterious 
forces harmonizing entropy ’ s inexorable rise over astronomical timescales 
need not concern us here. On the everyday timescale, Nature  depends on 
instability. Paradoxically, nothing could exist without it. In nucleic acids, the 
need for instability is well established — evolution depend s on mutation and 
rearrangement of DNA. Without the ability to break down or to promote 
 * The universe is expected to become more and more disordered until it ﬁ nally ends up as a fea-
tureless goo, but according to present understanding, that depressing fate is scheduled after the 
passage of such a ridiculously long time — perhaps 10 100 years — that it would seem only to indicate 
the extent of our ignorance. 
 †     As Richard Feynman and colleagues   put it:  “ For some reason, the universe at one time had very 
low entropy for its energy content, and since then the entropy has increased. So that is the way 
to the future. That is the origin of all irreversibility, that is what makes the processes of growth 
and decay, that makes us remember the past and not the future, remember the things which are 
closer to that moment in the history of the universe when the order was higher than now, and 
why we are not able to remember things where the disorder is higher than now, which we call the 
future ” (Feynman et al.  1963 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
21
changes in the constituent elements of living systems, there would be no devel-
opment. However, the complex processes that make up living systems such as 
humans, say, are all subject to rigorous control, for which, of course, there must 
be appropriate feedback mechanisms. A human, for example, is made of some 
10 14 cells in some 200 different types of tissue, and their behavior is linear —
 that is, predictable — for most, if not all, of our lives. 
 The quest to understand the requisite control mechanisms in biology is now 
a major scientiﬁ c discipline. As Mathew Freeman explains in a recent review 
(Freeman  2000 ):
 The intercellular communication that regulates cell fate during animal develop-
ment must be precisely controlled to avoid dangerous errors. How is this 
achieved? Recent work has highlighted the importance of positive and negative 
feedback loops in the dynamic regulation of developmental signalling. These 
feedback interactions can impart precision, robustness and versatility to intercel-
lular signals. Feedback failure can cause disease.  .  .  . Negative feedback occurs 
when, for example, a signal induces the expression of its own inhibitor; it serves 
to dampen and/or limit signalling. Positive feedback occurs when a signal induces 
more of itself, or of another molecule that ampliﬁ es the initial signal, and this 
serves to stabilize, amplify or prolong signalling.  
 Researchers generally seem to regard instability as a nuisance that they must 
deal with. However, instability is essential to Nature ’ s purposes, and so 
researchers should also be able to use it to their advantage. Indeed, Colin Self ’ s 
Venture Research work  (see Chapter  7 , VR 23) was dedicated to understand-
ing its role in biology and particularly in the immune system. Nonlinearity is 
at the heart of all biochemical processes, which Nature ensures are regulated 
by the appropriate feedback controls. The degree of instability can therefore 
be understood as being related to the need for feedback. If a process were to 
persist for too long (i.e., if its instability were too low), the process would go 
out of control unless the requisite negative feedback were applied at the right 
time. Alternatively, a weak and transient response to a stimulus (i.e. if its 
instability were too high) would need to be ampliﬁ ed by positive feedback if 
the response were to be effective. When we accidentally cut ourselves, for 
example, we need not normally fear for our lives. This is because antigens 
invading from the outside world almost instantaneously trigger the activation 
of a blood - clotting agent that seals the wound so that eventually it can heal. 
The next step is equally crucial. The agent must then be switched off! If the 
agent had too little instability (i.e., if it were too stable) it would exert its effect 
for too long, resulting in our entire blood supply rapidly coagulating into a 
solid mass following even a minor accident. Conversely, if the agent were too 
unstable, its effect would be transient and ineffective, and blood loss would 
continue unabated. Nature gets the balance just right, of course, or we would 
not be here. 
 Indeed, life would appear possible only because of a truly vast number of 
exquisitely balanced controls, not only at the molecular and cellular levels but 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

22 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
also at the macroscopic levels in all living organisms. Thus, for example, these 
controls maintain human body temperature at approximately 37   ° C indepen-
dently of whether we are resting, sitting in a steaming sauna, or engaged in 
vigorous exercise. At the cellular level, cells are constantly dividing and repro-
ducing, of course, processes that even in healthy people may frequently and 
hopefully transiently go out of control. If uncontrolled growth persists, it would 
lead to tumors and cancers, but a fully functioning immune systems will quickly 
restore growth to its normal levels. At the molecular level, regulation is simi-
larly complex. As John Maddox puts it:  “ A cell is a self - regulating biochemical 
democracy in which the several parts are continually casting votes in the form 
of the chemical signals they transmit. The genome is to the cell as the Supreme 
Court is to the national judiciary ” (Maddox  1998 ). 
 Other types of feedback would seem to operate at much higher levels of 
organization such as communities, nations, or perhaps even civilization itself —
 their study generally going under the name of  cybernetics . * Even though 
individual human behavior would seem almost inﬁ nitely variable, such skilled 
operators as advertisers and politicians seem able to identify traits to which a 
surprising number of us conform and on which they can focus their manipula-
tive powers. Depressingly, therefore, many of us can be persuaded to eat when 
we are not hungry, and to believe half - truths as gospels. However, the control 
that most interests me in this context is not necessarily the result of any pur-
poseful action, and was ﬁ rst described by the Scottish philosopher and political 
economist Adam Smith. In 1776, he published his  Inquiry into the Nature and 
Causes of the Wealth of Nations , in which he argued passionately for free trade. 
This was a very heretical view at the time as the conventional wisdom strongly 
held that the total volume of trade was ﬁ xed by the supply of gold and silver. 
In what became one of the most quoted passages in economics, he wrote (in 
Book 4, Chapter  2 ) (the italics are mine)
 .  .  . every individual  .  .  . neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows 
how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of 
foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry 
in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his 
own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by  an invisible hand to 
promote an end which was no part of his intention.  
 Diversity of opinion is endemic in economics, but Smith ’ s opus has been cele-
brated at every major anniversary since its publication. In 1976, for example, 
hundreds of assessments   †  were published, leaving no doubt that even after 200 
 * Founded by the American mathematician Norbert Weiner in the 1940s to examine the role of 
various feedback mechanisms in such diverse areas as systems control, computer science, philoso-
phy, the organization of society, and in biology itself. 
  †  See, for example, Terence Hutchison ’ s article on Adam Smith ’ s  The Wealth of Nations , published 
on the book ’ s bicentennial, which gives references to many other reviews published at earlier 
anniversaries (Hutchison  1976 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
23
years his work is still inﬂ uential. There has also been a considerable debate on 
precisely what Smith meant by his invisible - hand (Grampp  2000 ) reference, 
his supposed reasoning including the forces arising from altruism, a joke, or 
merely luck. However, I would like to adapt Smith ’ s term to give it a slightly 
different meaning. It may or may not be what he had in mind, but it seems 
consistent with his writings. 
 As I see it, Smith identiﬁ ed a powerful social feedback mechanism 
that promotes growth and prosperity. The operational details of Smith ’ s 
invisible hand may not be understood, but by his reference to invisibility 
Smith implies that understanding is unnecessary; we should merely sit back 
and allow it to work. That begs the question, of course, but my interpretation 
of Smith ’ s meaning is that individuals should be free to form their own 
judgments on what is important, and to do whatever they believe is 
necessary to bring their ideas to fruition. In another of his books,  The Theory 
of Model Sentiments , he writes about altruism and a person ’ s derivation 
of pleasure from another ’ s happiness although, as he puts it,  “ he himself 
derives nothing from it ” — which is perhaps an inverted schadenfreude. But 
that person may derive something from it. If one can see that happiness stems 
from one ’ s actions, regardless of any personal beneﬁ t, that person would have 
had the pleasure of achievement. That in itself may be sufﬁ cient reward, espe-
cially if one could take personal pride in the social beneﬁ ts ﬂ owing from what 
one had done.  
 Following Robert Solow ’ s transformative discovery in economics (see 
Chapter 2), we now know that technical change is by far the dominant source 
of long - term economic growth, but such change can come in many forms. Its 
technological component is well understood, and global expenditure on the 
search for new and improved technologies is enormous. However, although 
the pursuit of efﬁ ciency has always been an institutional priority, it is only in 
the past few decades, following the revolutionary developments in computing 
and communications, that it has been possible rigorously to implement that 
pursuit. Consequently, institutions now revel in the powers of their new toys. 
We now live in an age in which efﬁ ciency — that is,  perceptions of efﬁ ciency — is 
paramount, particularly in resource allocation and use. But the relationship 
between efﬁ ciency and creativity is not understood. 
 This serious situation should be of concern to everyone because as members 
of civilized society we are all stewards of creativity. Before the approximate 
watershed date of 1970 — the  “ dawn of the age of efﬁ ciency ” — we could safely 
assume that creativity, like the blooming of wildﬂ owers, would take care of 
itself. Provided they were sufﬁ ciently determined, pioneers were generally free 
to tackle any problem that interested them. That assumption is now invalid. 
For technology, pioneers can usually get backing because they can point to 
tangible objectives whose potential beneﬁ ts can be assessed. Unfortunately, 
science is dominated by philosophy. Peer endorsement for radical (but abstract) 
challenges is therefore seriously problematic simply because an advance state-
ment of a justifying case cannot always be made. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

24 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
 It is likely, therefore, that a latter - day Adam Smith might have to deal with 
such criticism as:  “ Mr. Smith, you  claim that although every individual intends 
only his own gain, he is led by an invisible hand to promote ends that were 
no part of his intention.  But where is the proof for your assertion? ” As the 
eighteenth - century Adam Smith had offered none, his radical views could have 
been safely dismissed as merely an expression of opinion. However, a sufﬁ cient 
number of inﬂ uential people appreciated the value of his thinking, and so 
Smith ’ s ideas took root. Rigorous proof might have been unnecessary because 
his assertion struck a chord with their experience and understanding of human 
behavior. That is, they were free to take it on faith without having to subject 
it to the interminable rounds of bureaucratic assessment our new Age rou-
tinely demands. Today ’ s world is truly bizarre. The emperor ’ s new clothes are 
constantly admired although many can see that he is stark naked. But Smith ’ s 
invisible hand and other philosophies advocating freedom seem to be denied 
 because it is impossible to see them. They cannot be rigorously assessed, 
therefore. 
 My assertion is that the guiding force behind Smith ’ s invisible hand is  cre-
ativity. When most, if not all, researchers were free to explore, Smith ’ s invisible 
hand could work its magic. Growth was fostered, therefore, even though it was 
not part of scientists ’ original intentions. Indeed, as my philosophical wizard 
pointed out in Poster  3 , that is precisely what happened up to the so - called 
Golden Age  of economic growth that began to end around 1970. As civiliza-
tions develop, populations expand. Thanks to Mr. Solow, we know that eco-
nomic growth is led by technology but diminishing returns will soon follow 
unless we ﬁ nd new technological veins, and nowadays their most reliable 
source is new science. As things stand today, however, the funding agencies 
will allocate freedom only when they agree that researchers ’ objectives are 
appropriate to today ’ s circumstances. As a result, putative members of a 
twenty - ﬁ rst century Planck Club are highly likely to be frustrated. Thus, our 
proxies (politicians and other leaders, public and private research funding 
organizations, etc.) are seriously undermining a vital part of the feedback that 
prevents civilizations from becoming unstable and that keeps us away from 
the Damocles Zone. 
 Instabilities of one kind or another ﬁ nally get us all eventually, of course, 
but experience shows that we do have some control over when it might 
happen. Life expectancy at birth in 2000, for example, was some 77 years in 
the United Kingdom and the United States, while it was some 37 years in 
Zambia. * In contrast, in 1842 in Manchester (UK), for example, a professional 
male had a life expectancy at birth of 38 years (Wood  1991 ), whereas that of 
a manual worker was only 17 years. These improvements might cavalierly be 
attributed to the fruits of a developing civilization, but they stem entirely from 
ingenuity, especially in science and technology. There seems to be no reason 
in principle why these favorable trends should not continue, albeit perhaps at 
 * US Census Bureau ’ s International Database. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
25
reduced rates, but institutions must understand that we can reap rich harvests 
only if scientists are free to cultivate their creativity. 
 The ﬁ gures on life expectancy alone indicate that although there is no 
escape from the fact that complex systems on average always evolve toward 
instability, evolution rates of speciﬁ c systems should be controllable if we apply 
the appropriate feedback. But ﬁ rst we must ﬁ nd them, of course. Initially they 
may be invisible, and so our proxies must maintain the environments in which 
creativity can ﬂ ourish as they did until relatively recently. For any given system, 
therefore, progression toward the Damocles Zone is not necessarily inevitable. 
Indeed, it would seem that we might defer entry indeﬁ nitely on any human 
timescale provided that the warning signs are recognized and appropriate 
actions taken. 
 What might those signs be? Jared Diamond has described the events that 
supposedly led to the Easter Island collapse, but as I mentioned, those who 
criticized the crazy policy of building escalating numbers of stone statues 
would probably have had no forum. If they had, collapse might have been 
avoidable. The appropriate actions in that case would have been for the island-
ers, when they took up residence on the island, to invite a few of their number 
to advise on the implications of policy decisions — in today ’ s language, they 
might represent, say, an Ecology Research Unit. Had they done so, it seems 
likely that this unit would have noticed the signs of deterioration as the island 
moved inexorably towards the Damocles Zone. 
 It might have worked something like this. As the island is normally swept 
by very strong winds, one might reasonably expect the Unit ’ s scientists to 
monitor tree movement as a function of wind speed at treetop level, and to 
measure the corresponding wind speeds at ground level. As the islanders 
continued to cut down trees more rapidly than new ones could grow, the sci-
entists would probably have noticed that as tree cover was reduced some tree 
movements sometimes approached their elastic limits even when winds were 
unexceptional, and that wind speeds at ground level were also increasing. Thus, 
it should have been obvious that the island ’ s ecology was beginning to lose 
the ﬂ exibility to withstand elements it had successfully resisted for millennia. 
A reasonable reaction in those circumstances would have been for the Unit 
to seek, say, a moratorium on statue building for a few years. They could have 
told the authorities that if they continued to cut down trees, then one day, 
probably without warning, they would not only have to manage with fewer 
trees but with none at all, with all the grave consequences that would entail. 
Had the authorities heeded my imaginary Ecology Research Unit ’ s warnings, 
they might then have agreed on a reasonable rate of stone - statue building, 
entry into the Damocles Zone might have been avoided, and Jared Diamond 
might have written about a sustainable success rather than a catastrophic 
collapse. 
 The world is vastly more complicated than tiny Easter Island, of course, but 
many great and extended civilizations have either collapsed or dwindled in 
the past. We may not fully understand the precise reasons for their passing, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

26 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
but a few causes arising from various forms of mismanagement seem domi-
nant. Thus, Mesopotamia ’ s poor irrigation policies led to increasing soil con-
tamination and starvation — ancient Rome ’ s corrupt bureaucracy had ambitions 
outstripping the capacity of its stagnating economy. Today, it is not difﬁ cult to 
see increasing causes for concern. As a would - be member of a putative Global 
Prosperity Research Unit, a group that would assess and advise on  all factors 
that might inﬂ uence global prosperity — intellectual as well as material — it 
seems that per capita economic growth is an important indicator. Material 
prosperity is not everything, of course, but it does seem to be a necessary if 
not sufﬁ cient condition for global prosperity. The rates of growth in world 
gross domestic product (GDP) seem to be hovering around 1.5% per person 
per annum. If that ﬁ gure is correct, would it be adequate? Would the scientists 
at my imagined Global Unit be happy that a 1.5% margin above stagnation 
will keep us clear of the Damocles Zone? 
 Another cause for concern is that the world ’ s economic systems are becom-
ing increasingly monolithic. This tendency might be stimulated by the emerg-
ing economies ’ wish to increase their share of global prosperity.  The Economist, 
in a  “ Survey of the world economy ” published on September 16, 2006, said:
 Last year the combined output of emerging economies reached an important 
milestone: it accounted for more than half of total world GDP (measured at 
purchasing - power parity). This means that the rich countries no longer dominate 
the global economy. The developing countries also have a far greater inﬂ uence 
on the performance of the rich economies than is generally realized. Emerging 
economies are driving global growth and having a big impact on developed 
countries ’ inﬂ ation, interest rates, wages and proﬁ ts. 
 Thus, for example, in 2006, China became the largest holder of foreign exchange 
reserves, * and the British steel industry was transferred to the ownership of 
Indian capitalists. The energy and vigor of the emerging economies should 
indeed increase global prosperity, but surely their effects will have a sustained 
impact on growth only if their contributions are new, and not merely based on 
producing existing ranges of goods and services more efﬁ ciently and cheaper 
than the advanced world can. 
 However, it should go without saying that monolithic systems lack diversity, 
that traditional font of ingenuity. By their very nature, such systems seek to 
impose uniform structures of customs and practices, and by promoting harmo-
nization they discourage individuality. Thus, individuals or nations must either 
conform or be prepared to face the pressures arising from nonconformity. This 
trend does not seem consistent with the enhancement of global stability. 
 Economic growth may not be everything, but buoyant growth creates opti-
mistic environments and the resources to deal with the trials and tribulations 
 * Holding  $ 941 billion, China narrowly overtook Japan in 2006. Taiwan was the third largest holder, 
with Russia fourth. See  The Economist p. 98 (Sept. 2, 2006). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
27
that our proxies should expect to beset us from time to time. Today, it seems 
generally agreed that the most important problems facing humanity include 
terrorism, the rise in religious fundamentalism, pollution and global warming, 
poverty and disease, the security and availability of energy supplies, and the 
huge potential increase in the resource needs of the emerging economies. 
China and India together, for example, represent approximately 40% of the 
world population. It is an awesome list, especially as various pundits at various 
times have described  each one of these problems as representing the gravest 
threat to global stability. Thus, humanity seems to be faced with a diversity of 
slippery slopes leading to Damocles Zones regardless of whether my own 
concerns are included. 
 The list of problems may be daunting, but they may not be the most impor-
tant. In 1957, a group of senior California Institute of Technology (Caltech) 
scientists ambitiously published their forecasts for the next hundred years in 
a book (Brown et al.  1957 ) * based on deliberations at some 30 conferences 
involving senior industrialists and other leaders. Their estimate of the most 
important problems for the next hundred years might bring included the threat 
of nuclear war, population growth and food production, resource allocation, 
and the problems arising from the spread and intensiﬁ cation of the advanced 
world ’ s (particularly the US) industrial culture. 
 The book contains fascinating discussions on humanity ’ s prospects and 
problems from the perspectives of 1957. It was, of course, a nightmare time 
when miscalculation could with very little warning have plunged the world 
into a devastating nuclear war. That threat may now have subsided, but the 
authors very appropriately drew attention to the perils of forecasting, as they 
should. Even though the book was written by eminent scientists, it contains 
no inkling of the dramatic revolutions in electronics and communications that 
began to pervade the world only some 20 years later. On their fears for world 
food production, the authors would also no doubt have been astonished to 
learn about the Green Revolution that began to transform agriculture in the 
1960s. Within a few decades of their forecasts, some parts of the world were 
plagued by so - called food mountains, and their governments paid farmers  not 
to produce food. However, it would be most unwise to assume that such prof-
ligate policies will endure. In the light of the increasing demands from the 
developing countries, it would not be surprising to see food production once 
more on the growing agenda of critical problems facing humanity. 
 Although none of the problems that Brown et al. identiﬁ ed have entirely 
gone away, one can see the marked change in emphasis. Their book concludes: 
 “ The problems which we face in the years ahead are indeed both numerous 
 * This august publication includes a foreword and a postscript written by Sir Solly Zuckerman, 
who was later to be the UK ’ s ﬁ rst Chief Scientiﬁ c Adviser, and a preface from Lee A DuBridge, 
President of Caltech and a senior colleague of Vannevar Bush (see Chapter  3 ) during World War 
II with overall responsibility for the development of radar. I am grateful to Terry Clark for drawing 
this book to my attention. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

28 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
and grave, but, theoretically at least, it seems likely that they can be solved by 
the proper application of our intelligence ” (Brown et al.  1957 , p. 152). 
 For the few decades following the book ’ s publication, authorities did indeed 
ensure that intelligence was properly applied. Notwithstanding, therefore, that 
the authors assessed the problems as  “ numerous and grave, ” they did not, in 
sharp contrast with today ’ s world, recommend that humanity ’ s intellectual 
resources should be marshaled into deriving speciﬁ c solutions to each problem. 
The academic authorities continued to allow intellectual endeavor full and 
free rein because that ’ s what they had always done. Signiﬁ cant proportions of 
industry did much the same. It does not follow, of course, that we can automati-
cally attribute the high and unprecedented rates of economic growth of the 
Golden Age to those simple policies. There may be other reasons. But, as a 
follower of Solow, my working hypothesis throughout this book has been that 
unconstrained creativity eventually leads to new opportunities and new growth. 
Conversely, although directed creativity may sometimes be advantageous in 
the short term, it eventually leads to diminishing returns and falling growth. 
As the authorities ’ actions over the last 25 years or so seem to have had 
precisely that effect, while it is not rigorous proof — always problematic in 
economics — the hypothesis would seem to merit serious attention. 
 Today ’ s problems might not prove as transient as some of those foreseen 
in 1957. To make matters worse, the fact that the world is intrinsically nonlinear 
means that the spontaneous creation of new nonlinearities cannot be ruled 
out. Furthermore, each one will need to be controlled by its own feedback 
mechanism if stability is to be maintained. Thus do the events of history prog-
ress. Even the most carefully prepared predictions will probably be wrong, 
therefore, and our supposed list of current problems may still be far from 
complete. However, this is not a prescription for despair. Our best strategy in 
these circumstances should be the old one of striving to understand as much 
as possible about the present in the reasonable hope that it will be sufﬁ cient 
preparation for the future. We are not straws in the wind. Our very progression 
from the ranks of the primitive primates 5 million years ago seems entirely 
due to the random ﬂ owering of our innate intelligence. It has seen us through 
ice ages, plagues, wars, ﬂ oods, droughts, and other environmental mayhem. 
There is every reason to expect that its  “ proper application ” will continue to 
see us through indeﬁ nitely. 
 As things stand at present, that optimism hinges crucially on that simple 
word  “ proper. ” There is no doubt that the potential power of intellect is widely 
appreciated — the pen is mightier than the sword and so on — but the nature 
of its chief characteristics seem not be understood at all. History shows that 
the more powerless creative individuals become, the more they are immersed 
in environments that institutionalize dogmatism. Very few new ideas emerged 
from the suffocating environment imposed by religious dogma during the 
Dark Ages, for example. Creativity is a delicate plant. Everyone who has had 
an idea is usually plagued by doubt and uncertainty. Is it really original? Is 
it correct or valid? Does it matter? For creativity to ﬂ ourish, it does not 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
29
necessarily need encouragement. Indeed, since its origins are not understood 
it may be impossible to encourage. But intellectual pioneers need environ-
ments that  accommodate dissent, as I tried to explain in my  Pioneering Research . 
Should it be surprising, therefore, that many seem to have lost their inspiration 
when they must struggle every day with the all - pervasive dogma on efﬁ ciency 
and accountability, however well intentioned its originators might be? 
 Pundits may presume the current threats the greatest ever, but the ill - 
considered actions of our proxies are making them much worse because they 
are undermining the creation of the very feedback mechanisms that have 
always kept us from the brink. Our universities have been reservoirs of creativ-
ity for the past 900 years. They have served us superbly well, as long as they 
have been free. 
 Industry, too, has a crucial role. Unfortunately, the great companies seem 
to have virtually ended their support for exploratory research. Today, it has 
been deemed that technology rules. Research is now the servant of technology, 
and apparently, each project must prove in advance that it can pay its way. In 
May 2004, the British Petrdeum (BP) Group ’ s Vice - President of Technology 
said in a speech entitled  “ Technology: Demonstrating value to the corporation ” : 
 “ Nevertheless technology, like every aspect of what goes on in any well - run 
business, constantly has to justify itself — to demonstrate value to the corpora-
tion. It ’ s not, and never can be, an end in itself. ” 
 How times change! In the 1960s, IBM ’ s Chairman, Thomas Watson Sr., 
began the Fellows Program in which he appointed Fellows (he called them his 
 “ wild ducks ” ) for 5 years to be  “ dreamers, heretics, mavericks, gadﬂ ies, and 
geniuses. ” Their remit was simply to  “ shake up the system. ” The Fellows 
Program has been supremely successful. Only some 165 scientists were 
appointed, but ﬁ ve of these won Nobel Prizes. General Electric and Bell 
Laboratories ran similarly distinguished programs. In 1980, as I have men-
tioned, BP launched Venture Research, arguably one of the most ambitious 
and imaginative exploratory research initiatives in industrial history, and sup-
ported it for 10 years. But then came a recession. In 1992, IBM suffered the 
biggest loss in US corporate history, and the company was  “ reborn ” shortly 
afterward. But common sense prevailed, and the company still runs the Fellows 
Program, although its Fellows now seem to have somewhat less freedom than 
wild ducks typically enjoy — among other things, they are now  expected to 
advance IBM ’ s technological leadership. 
 Nevertheless, IBM today seems to be one of a very few major companies 
that appreciate the full value of unconstrained intellectual endeavor. Nicholas 
Donofrio, IBM ’ s Senior Vice President, Technology and Manufacturing, said 
in his 2004 Hinton Lecture (Donofrio  2005 ):
 .  .  . about 25% of what we spend in research we spend on what we would call 
pure research. It may be maths — I am sure you remember Benoit Mandelbrot 
fractals. I am not sure that they sell computers, by the way.  .  .  . We did all this 
work with the scanning tunneling microscope, not knowing what would come of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

30 
THE DAMOCLES ZONE
it. We did the basic work on high - temperature superconducting materials that 
has at least prodded some other people to do even more seminal work in that 
area. We will never capitalize on that work to be candid with you, but that does 
not bother us because smart people like to be near smart people. We have a 
simple philosophy. If you have one or two Nobel Laureates, I do not care whether 
they are working in that area or not. If they go to the cafeteria and people say, 
 “ I saw her, ” or  “ I saw him. ” It is great.  .  .  . 
 These prescient remarks are extraordinarily courageous for an industrial 
leader in today ’ s climate, and reminiscent of past industrial visionaries. Even 
senior academics might think twice about advocating expenditure that might 
be perceived as leading to less - than - optimal returns on investments of  “ tax 
dollars ” or other currencies for fear of being trumped in their bids for funds. 
 The pharmaceutical companies — known colloquially as  pharmas — have tra-
ditionally made considerable investments in research. Their research budgets 
have increased some 50 - fold since 1970, and nowadays big companies might 
devote more than  $ 5 billion a year to R & D. Yet there is widespread concern 
about the decreasing output of new drugs. As ever, the discovery of new prod-
ucts depends on having research environments that encourage ﬂ air and cre-
ativity. Instead, as Pedro Cuatrecasas points out:  “ Scientists must contend 
with  ‘ management by objectives, ’ hierarchical and autocratic organisations, 
mandates from strategic planning groups, detailed and rigid scheduling, 
constant reporting, and achievements driven by milestones and ﬂ owcharts ” 
(Cuatrecasas  2006 ). * 
 The role of product champions, so essential in industry, has virtually disap-
peared as the consequences of being  “ wrong ” in today ’ s climate can be severe. 
In the sciences generally, as I have explained, twentieth - century Planck Club 
members would be unlikely to get funded today. Similarly, virtually every 
 “ blockbuster ” drug ever marketed (AZT, acyclovir, cimetidine, ﬂ uoxetine, etc.) 
would be unlikely to survive what Cuatrecasas describes as the current well -
 managed and efﬁ cient go/no - go systems. Moreover, companies are increas-
ingly reviewing their activities against what others are doing (benchmarking), 
rather than exploiting their own skills and experience. 
 Never before, therefore, have we been in greater need of people in any walk 
of life who will  “ shake up the system ” and liberate it from second - guessing 
bureaucracy. With the possible exception of global warming (see Poster  4 ), 
most of our current problems stem from human actions or neglect, and in 
principle, therefore, there is no reason why we should not solve them. On the 
basis of past experience, directed solutions — for example, the development of 
radar during World War II — are possible only if the intellectual environment 
is sufﬁ ciently fertile to give the authorities these options. Otherwise, they will 
be little more than a waste of money. Finance is crucial, of course, but that 
should not be a problem if economies are buoyant, as they are likely to be if 
 * I am grateful to Desmond Fitzgerald for drawing Cuatrecasas ’ paper to my attention. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE DAMOCLES ZONE 
31
their scientists are free. Thus, creativity is at the heart of a powerful positive -
 feedback loop. The authorities seem unaware of that simple fact; indeed, they 
are acting to inhibit it. 
 In summary, therefore, essential steps for avoiding collapse would seem to 
include the following: 
  •    The establishment of research initiatives aimed at creating a twenty - ﬁ rst 
century Planck Club. In time, we could have a global network of such 
initiatives that should eventually lead to increased economic growth and 
buoyant economies.  
  •    The emergence of altruistic sponsors to help fund these initiatives.  
  •    The creation (or perhaps the re - creation) of an extensive network of 
universities that will encourage and foster scientiﬁ c freedom. 
  •    The emergence of industrialists who will convince shareholders that a 
small proportion of industrial activities should be free of short - term 
assessment. 
 I will suggest how they might be taken in the following chapters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Scientiﬁ c Freedom and 
Transformative Research  
 The National Science Foundation mission must be to support the most innova-
tive and potentially transformative research — research that has the capacity to 
revolutionize existing ﬁ elds, create new subﬁ elds, or cause paradigm shifts in 
thought. Ongoing review and evaluation make clear to the Board that the Foun-
dation ’ s current solicitation, review and selection processes must evolve, in some 
respects substantially, in order to achieve the transformative potential the Board 
envisions. NSF must create an environment that welcomes and encourages such 
proposals from the research community. 
 — US National Science Board:  2020 Vision for the National Science 
Foundation , 2005 
 There is hardly a researcher who does not hope, perhaps secretly, to make 
the observation that might lead to substantial progress or a major new discov-
ery. No one can say in advance what form it might take, of course. The departure 
may be minor, but the expectant researcher may hope that it is the tip of an 
iceberg and an indication of a new facet of Nature ’ s behavior. Whatever it is, 
that Eureka! moment so beloved of the media would be a most unlikely occur-
rence. In some respects, major discoveries can be like winning the lottery, but 
there is a very important difference. Lotteries usually notify the biggest winners. 
In research, however, it might not immediately be obvious that you are onto 
something new. Experiments are, in effect, dialogs with Nature, but what lan-
guage is she using? Are you listening properly? Dudley Herschbach from 
Harvard University told me a nice story about this. When he won the Nobel 
2
32
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH 
33
Prize for Chemistry, he had many letters of congratulation from friends around 
the world. Although not a linguist, he could more or less decipher all except 
one.  “ What language do you think it was written in? ” he asked. The anticipated 
responses of Chinese, Russian, Arabic, or the Morse code were ﬂ icked away 
with a smile.  “ Braille, ” he said.  “ How do we know that Nature might not speak 
to us in the equivalent of Braille or something more esoteric? ”  
 The great microbiologist Louis Pasteur (1822 – 1895) once said:  “ In the ﬁ eld 
of observation, fortune favors the prepared mind. ” Dedicated researchers 
should therefore be alert to the possibility that unusual results might mean 
that Nature is trying to tell them something. There will be no fanfare of trum-
pets, and unless they take positive action, the moment may soon pass. If you 
are lucky, you might then experience a sense of anticipation or elation, a sense 
that here is an opportunity that should be grasped if only you can work out 
exactly what it is. You will have to be careful, however, because it may not be 
good news. You may have misread the signs, or the unexpected result may 
indicate a failure in your equipment. You won ’ t know in those ﬁ rst anxious 
moments, of course, and may be faced with days or months of troubleshooting 
until you can be sure that everything is working as it should. If you can elimi-
nate the hardware, your problems could then become more serious. The design 
of the experiment may be at fault, and the surprising result may indicate that 
you are not actually measuring precisely what you set out to measure. Even 
so, you could still be on to a winner. 
 In 1963 Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson began their independent profes-
sional careers at the Bell Laboratories in New Jersey. They had both taken 
their PhDs in the previous year; Penzias from Columbia University, and Wilson 
from the California Institute of Technology. Hired to work on radio astronomy 
and satellite communications, the two young physicists seized the opportunity 
to use a huge microwave receiver — a 20 - ft horn reﬂ ector antenna — recently 
made redundant from Bell ’ s satellite telecommunications program. They 
planned to use it to study radio emissions from the Milky Way, but quickly ran 
into problems because all they could see was noise — an apparently uniform 
random radio hiss from every direction they looked. Nowadays, such an obser-
vation could be terminal. Commercial pressures do not allow open - ended 
commitments to solve what business might see as peripheral problems, espe-
cially if young recruits are involved. However, their employers did not insist 
that they give up, nor did Penzias and Wilson want to, and they began a sys-
tematic search for possible sources. 
 The story is well known (Wilson  1992 ), particularly their struggles with a 
family of pigeons nesting in the horn whose droppings seemed to be fouling 
their results. The point I want to make here is that after searching for possible 
faults in their system for about a year, a tour de force in commitment in itself, 
they concluded that the noise did contain a real signal but unfortunately it just 
happened to look like noise. They knew their system intimately, of course. They 
could therefore calculate precisely how noisy it should be. As their signal was 
bigger, some of it could be coming from a real source. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

34 
SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH
 In research, the old adage that if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, and 
quacks like a duck, it  is a duck can be very seductive. Unfortunately, the 
obvious conclusion can sometimes lead you up the garden path. You may be 
seeing the shadow of something else. To make Penzias and Wilson ’ s problems 
even more bafﬂ ing, the signal was not only constant in every direction where 
they looked but also had no seasonal variation, and so perhaps it was coming 
from outside the solar system. If it were real, however, what could the amor-
phous hiss mean? After discussions with many colleagues, and particularly 
with Robert Dicke at Princeton University, they concluded that it was from 
the afterglow of the Hot Big Bang, the name given to the theory that the uni-
verse was created in a single cataclysmic event some 13.6 billion years ago. 
Their amazing discovery, often described as perhaps the greatest of the century, 
won Penzias and Wilson a share in the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1978. 
 It also led the scientiﬁ c community, informed by the mysterious processes 
that constitute consensus, to interpret the discovery as  conﬁ rmation of the Big 
Bang model. Indeed, the seeds of consensus germinated almost immediately 
following publication of their paper in the  Astrophysical Journal. This was 
probably because the adjacent paper was from Dicke ’ s group  “ explaining ” 
their result (Dicke et al.  1965 ; Penzias and Wilson  1965 ). Unfortunately, these 
papers effectively blocked the search for alternative theories despite the fact 
that many researchers had published temperature estimates of interstellar 
space made independently of the Big Bang model that were also in broad 
agreement with Penzias and Wilson ’ s measurement. There were alternatives, 
therefore. Nevertheless, the Big Bang model went from strength to strength. 
References in the literature today imply  that it is established fact , a tablet of 
stone. One often sees such statements as: 
  •    “ The universe was created 13.6 billion years ago.  .  .  . ” 
  •    “ The galaxy was formed 1 billion years after the Big Bang.  .  .  . ” 
  •      “  .  .  .  processes similar to those observed in the early universe,  .  .  .  . ”     
 but the model ’ s status as  hypothesis is rarely mentioned. This is a great pity, 
and the episode nicely illustrates the social pressures that can dominate 
science. 
 Leaving aside the history of its interpretation, would it be correct to describe 
the Penzias – Wilson  research as transformative? I do not think it would. One 
might as well ask whether Planck ’ s or Einstein ’ s original work were  relevant 
in today ’ s language, a question that would hardly have occurred to them. They 
simply did what they thought was important. There were no other consider-
ations. In the Penzias – Wilson case, they set out to explore radio emissions from 
the Milky Way. The ﬁ eld of radio astronomy was growing rapidly in 1963 
although it was still in its infancy. Bell Labs had played a pioneering role 30 
years earlier when they asked Karl Jansky to explore sources of static that 
might affect their transatlantic radio – telephone service. He concluded that 
static would not be a serious problem, but he went on to become the ﬁ rst to 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH 
35
observe radio signals from the Milky Way. The ﬁ nding attracted a lot of inter-
est, and was published by the  New York Times on May 5, 1933.  * Unfortunately, 
it was not an interest that Bell Labs could sustain in a severe depression, and 
Jansky was obliged to move on to other things. 
 But Jansky ’ s discovery was not forgotten. The Jodrell Bank radiotelescope 
in Cheshire, England was built in 1957. In 1963 the British Government 
appointed a Radio Astronomy Planning Committee under the chairmanship 
of Lord Fleck (Saward  1984 ). In another indication of how much customs and 
practices have changed in only half a century, Alec Fleck was not an astrono-
mer but a distinguished industrial chemist (he was then chairman of ICI), 
although his committee included many astronomers. The Fleck committee 
made recommendations for work in ﬁ ve ﬁ elds: 
  •    The solar system 
  •    The galaxy and individual nonthermal sources associated with supernovas 
and radio studies of certain types of stars  
  •     Nearby normal galaxies  
  •    The radio galaxies that exist with considerably greater intensity than our 
own galaxy  
  •    Cosmology 
 Thus, Penzias and Wilson ’ s work could have ﬁ tted into the Fleck plan had it 
been operational in the United States. In today ’ s jargon, radio astronomy was 
therefore widely recognized as a priority area when they began their work. It 
would have been relevant, therefore, and there would have been no need to 
set up a special initiative to foster it. There is no question that their  discovery 
was transformative. However, one of the characteristics of research is that it 
should always offer the prospect of a surprising outcome.  Any research has 
the  capacity to be transformative, therefore, particularly for researchers armed 
with Pasteur ’ s insight as Penzias and Wilson clearly were. But they must be 
allowed to keep at it for as long as it takes. 
 How should transformative research be deﬁ ned, therefore? I have been 
preoccupied with this question since 1980 when BP invited me to set up an 
innovative research initiative under the name  venture research , and effectively 
gave me and my colleagues  † complete freedom in what we could do. My 
 * The  New York Times headlines that day were:  “ New radio waves traced to center of the Milky 
Way; Mysterious static reported by K. G. Jansky held to differ from cosmic ray. Direction is 
unchanging. Recorded and tested for more than year to identify it as from Earth ’ s Galaxy. 
Its intensity is low. Only delicate receiver is able to register.   .  .  .   No evidence of interstellar 
signaling. ” 
 † The Venture Research Unit drew its staff from mainstream BP. I was its head throughout the 10 
years of its existence. The other scientists, who were members for 2 – 5 years, were Derek Barker, 
Peter Beadle, Keith Cowie, David Ferguson, David Ray, Tony Regnier, Tim Sanderson, and Jean 
Shennan. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

36 
SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH
preferred deﬁ nition of  transformative research   *  (TR) would be the same as 
that for venture research. Indeed, the terms are synonyms. My deﬁ nition is:
 Research that sets out radically to change the way we think about an important 
subject. 
 That may be a necessary deﬁ nition but it is not sufﬁ cient, and for the rest of 
this chapter I will try to put more ﬂ esh on these bones. 
 Why should a particular deﬁ nition have special value? In principle, research-
ers should be free to do what they wish as indeed was often the case before 
the 1970s or so. Scientists have not changed, but the environment in which 
they operate has. As I shall discuss in the next chapter, researchers today are 
rarely free to be full - ﬂ edged  scientists — that is, to survey Nature ’ s vast unex-
plored domains and to plan their forays according to their personal inclina-
tions. Instead, they are subject to ﬁ nancial and intellectual pressures to deliver 
the results that consensus deems would be the best value for money. Thus, a 
generation of researchers has been encouraged to think parochially rather 
than globally, and not surprisingly, this has led to a dearth of major new dis-
coveries. We hoped that our short deﬁ nition, which was as succinct as we could 
make it, would also allow would - be pioneers all the freedom they needed. 
 When working on our strategy, we came to the conclusion that current 
procedures for selecting and funding research would have to be abandoned 
because they did not pass the Planck test. Our job, therefore, would be to 
identify the procedures Nature herself might use if she were obliged to operate 
 in today ’ s circumstances . It is perhaps the ultimate arrogance to claim such an 
afﬁ nity with Nature, but we did not present it as a take - it - or - leave - it position 
and speciﬁ cally asked applicants for help; that is, we explained what we were 
trying to do, and invited applicants to set out their proposals in ways that 
Nature might respect. If they (or indeed anyone) could argue that our proce-
dures imposed artiﬁ cial or contrived constraints, then we would immediately 
do our best to remove them.  † Our selection strategy steadily evolved, there-
fore, always converging, we hoped, toward being as objective as possible. 
Indeed, our aim was to make the problem of research selection a rigorous 
discipline in its own right. 
 My experience spans 10 years operating the new procedures and a further 
17 in which they have been further reﬁ ned. As far as I know, no other scientist 
has more experience of TR. That does not give it special value, of course. I 
  *  The term  transformative research perhaps speaks for itself, but  venture research seems more 
exciting. Unfortunately, the term  venture has been hijacked by the venture capitalists, and is 
usually taken to indicate a risky but hopefully proﬁ table initiative within a speciﬁ c ﬁ eld and 
timeframe. As I shall explain, the Venture Research Unit was not at all risky. 
 † Unfortunately, some remained, but at least we were aware of them; we were able to offer support 
for only 3 years, for example, but support could be renewed for additional 3 - year periods. Indeed, 
it usually was as can be seen in Chapter  7 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH 
37
present it here for assessment in the hope that it may help prospective trans-
formational researchers. Unfortunately, there is no forum for evaluating the 
discipline of research selection. Indeed, few funding organizations would 
accept the need for one. Instead, they expect reviewers and selectors to pick 
up the necessary expertise even though there is no agreed - to store of knowl-
edge from which they can draw. Imagine the chaos that would ensue in physics, 
say, if funding organizations required reviewers to assess proposals on the 
assumption that there was no established learning! The work I describe in 
Chapter  7 has never been independently evaluated, therefore. I hope it speaks 
for itself. 
 So, how might it work for TR? Perhaps the most important decision facing 
prospective transformative researchers concerns their degree of commitment. 
If they are not intending to devote themselves totally to their new research, 
then it is unlikely to be transformative. As I see it, a wish to take part in a TR 
initiative implies a researcher ’ s intent, subconscious or otherwise, to radically 
change how the world is perceived. It might involve challenges to axioms 
hitherto accepted as statements of fact, or the exploration of one of Nature ’ s 
unfashionable domains, or a possible major departure from her expected 
behavior. Whatever the intent, however, it will most deﬁ nitely need a deter-
mination to stick to one ’ s guns. 
 Planck Club members might not necessarily have exhibited these charac-
teristics when they were ﬁ rst setting out. In principle, they had probably been 
free to tackle anything, so it is possible that decisions to embark on ambitious 
crusades might not initially have been deliberate. They might even have drifted 
into them before their insight crystallized and their commitment became total. 
Their modern successors must be similarly committed, of course. Researchers 
with a part - time interest in a problem who say (or imply) that they want to 
change the world cannot expect to be taken seriously. However, researchers 
today do not have the luxury of allowing their ideas to germinate at their 
natural rate, and are expected to deliver fully hatched proposals at the outset. 
As I shall discuss in Chapter  4 , operators of a TR initiative must take these 
factors into account, and do what they can to encourage and stimulate prospec-
tive transformative researchers while their ideas are still at the embryonic 
stage. 
 We might do worse, therefore, than to deﬁ ne TR as the type of research 
done by the founder members of the Planck Club. The environment in which 
their prospective successors would operate is also important. It must foster 
scientiﬁ c freedom, of course, and the ﬁ rst step in that direction concerns the 
funding agency ’ s commitment. Pioneers setting out on their daunting journeys 
will want to be reasonably sure that funding would continue if they met the 
sort of difﬁ culties that Penzias and Wilson had to deal with. In essence, that 
means that the agency should normally back the researchers ’ judgment. That 
does not mean that funds should be extended indeﬁ nitely, but it does imply 
unusual levels of partnership and trust between sponsors and researchers so 
that decisions on termination are not taken precipitously. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

38 
SCIENTIFIC FREEDOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESEARCH
 However, the TR speciﬁ cation should be restricted to the general and the 
abstract. Indeed, for Venture Research, which I hope might be seen as a pre-
cursor, the realization that we should not be precise in deﬁ ning what we were 
looking for was one of the most surprising.  Precision means that we would fall 
into the traps created when agendas  are set externally. Such agendas abound, 
and their very existence has led to the need for research initiatives free from 
them. Unfortunately, our very open - mindedness also created a catch - 22 for 
ourselves when we searched for alternative funds after BP pulled out. Had we 
told prospective patrons that we would concentrate on speciﬁ c areas, we would 
have been inundated with proposals in those areas as the conventional agen-
cies often are, and there would be nothing to differentiate us from them. On 
the other hand, possible patrons seem to lose interest when we do not tell 
them the speciﬁ c objectives that their money would go toward achieving. It 
seems that helping to create a twenty - ﬁ rst century Planck Club, whatever its 
members might do, is not sufﬁ ciently tempting. In my long - running quest to 
ﬁ nd replacement funds this would seem to have been  the major reason why 
we have not yet succeeded. 
 If one should not be speciﬁ c, perhaps a TR prospectus should give examples 
of possible areas of concern. There might be substantial beneﬁ ts if researchers 
were encouraged to derive new approaches to old problems. I do not agree. I 
wrote the wizard ’ s warning essay (Poster  3 ) with tongue in cheek and humor 
on my mind, but the message was a serious one. Creativity works best when 
it is free from constraints. If someone had said to Max Planck  “ .  .  . we don ’ t 
understand thermodynamics. You ’ re a clever chap, why don ’ t you look at it? ” 
I doubt if he would have spent 20 weeks on it rather than the 20 years that 
proved necessary,  because he would not have been working on his problem . 
 One cannot be sure, of course. However, I doubt that anyone would have 
spoken to Planck in that way when he was starting out. Thermodynamics ’ 
shortcomings were not generally recognized — it took Planck ’ s genius to do 
that. It will take similar genius to identify the serious weaknesses in current 
foundations and to discover how to ﬁ x them, but we have no idea what they 
might be. 
 Our experience indicates that researchers who wanted to substantially 
increase understanding in important areas where it is weak or nonexistent; 
had developed carefully crafted, radical, open - ended, general questions that 
could come only from prolonged and perceptive consideration; and/or had 
developed unique, convincingly argued and ﬂ exible lines of attack, would, in 
effect, deﬁ ne what is meant by transformative research.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Mismanagement by Objectives: The Need 
for Fresh Approaches  
 The state of mind which furnishes the driving power here resembles that of the 
devotee or the lover. The long sustained effort is not inspired by any set plan or 
purpose. Its inspiration arises from a hunger of the soul. 
 — Albert Einstein, in his Preface to Max Planck ’ s book, 
 Where Is Science Going? Ox Bow Press, 1933  
 For the ﬁ rst time in history, there is growing dissatisfaction that the research 
enterprise is not as productive as it used to be. It seems to be becoming staid 
and might be in need of a boost. In the United States, the Report to Congress 
by the House Committee on Science September 24, 1998,  Unlocking Our 
Future, Toward a New National Science Policy , said:
 However, if limited funding and intense competition for grants causes res earchers 
to seek funding only for  “ safe ” research, the R & D enterprise as a whole will 
suffer. Because innovation and creativity are essential to basic research, the 
federal government should consider allocating a certain fraction of these grant 
monies speciﬁ cally for creative, groundbreaking research.  
 In the European Union, the European Commission ’ s New and Emerging 
Science and Technology ’ s Adventure initiative provided funding for  “ .  .  . vision-
ary research across a very wide spectrum of science and technology and with 
an orientation toward the long - term. ” 
3
39
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

40 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 However, they must satisfy two conditions: (1), that the research supported 
lies clearly outside the domains covered by the  “ thematic priorities ” and (2) 
that the research supported is  “ high novelty, is highly ambitious, and has a 
high - risk/high - impact character. ” The expected impact of Adventure projects 
was judged in the ﬁ rst instance on scientiﬁ c and technical capability, but this 
must be in areas where societal or economic beneﬁ ts may be expected in the 
long term. The Commission ’ s documentation (December 2004) on Adventure 
went on to discuss the type of projects  that would not be funded . The list 
included:
 Research which is  open - ended , without clearly - articulated tangible objectives in 
the form of a highly challenging scientiﬁ c objective, or the creation of a basic 
technology. As an example, the objective of  “ increased understanding ” alone 
would not be considered sufﬁ ciently tangible.  
 Max Planck must have turned in his grave. 
 One can hardly imagine such pronouncements appearing in the 1950s and 
1960s, say, when the gloriously freewheeling research enterprise could still 
safely be relied on to produce a steady stream of radically new discoveries, 
much to the beneﬁ t of industrial activity and economic growth. In the 1950s, 
Robert M. Solow from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology began the 
work that established  technical change as the most important source of eco-
nomic growth (see Poster  6 ). He won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1987 
for this seminal work. As virtually every industrialised nation has introduced 
substantial changes to its arrangements for commissioning research and devel-
opment (R & D) since 1970 or so, we should be able to see signs of those 
changes in global economic growth. Expenditure on R & D has never been 
higher — Poster  7 gives some statistics. (See Figure  1 for trends in US expen-
ditures). Growth data for the last half century are given in Figure  2 . Each point 
on the curve is the average annual real - terms growth per capita for the preced-
ing 10 years. Growth has steadily declined. As I explained in my  Pioneering 
Research , the decline seems to have been caused by the very policies that were 
supposed to create a more efﬁ cient and productive research enterprise! I went 
on to suggest that this issue should be examined by professional economists, 
but apparently it continues to be ignored.  
 Growth seems to have accelerated over the past few years. However, 
another force that might stimulate growth has received an enormous and 
artiﬁ cial boost recently, and may be causing the apparent upsurge. According 
to estimates published by  The Economist on June 18, 2005:
 .  .  . the total value of residential property in developed economies rose by more 
than  $ 30 trillion over the past ﬁ ve years, to over  $ 70 trillion, an increase equiva-
lent to 100% of those countries ’ combined GDPs. Not only does this dwarf any 
previous house - price boom, it is larger than the global stockmarket bubble in 
the late 1990s (an increase over ﬁ ve years of 80% of GDP) or America ’ s stock-
market bubble in the late 1920s (55% of GDP). In other words, it looks like the 
biggest bubble in history.  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
41
 Poster 6: Economic Growth 
 Before the 1950s, the main sources of economic growth were thought 
to be 
  •    Capital 
  •    Labor 
  •    Resources 
 However, Robert Solow, in a 1957 study of the US economy between 1909 
and 1949, could not account for observed levels of growth using these 
sources alone, and found that some seven - eighths of it (in output per hour 
of work) was due to technical change (Solow  1992 ). His study has been 
subsequently reﬁ ned by many workers and most notably by Edward 
Denison. His study of American growth between 1929 and 1982 concluded 
that education per worker accounts for 30% of the increase in output per 
worker and the advance of knowledge accounts for 64% (Denison  1985 ). 
Thus, as Solow pointed out in his Nobel Lecture (he won the Nobel Prize 
for Economics in 1987), technology remains the dominant engine of growth, 
with human capital investment in second place. 
 Solow ’ s work would therefore seem to have proved beyond reasonable 
doubt that the twin pillars of (1) scientiﬁ c freedom, as the major source of new 
technology, and (2) university autonomy, as an important guardian of educa-
tional standards, do indeed play vital roles in maintaining global prosperity.  
 Figure 1  
US real R & D expenditures (2000 dollars). (  Source : US National Science Foundation, 
 Science and Engineering Indicators , 2006 .) 
 
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Year
Expenditure, $ millions
 Will we be well placed when this megabubble bursts? It seems unlikely, a view 
shared by many politicians, industrialists, and senior academics. It seems 
agreed, therefore, that the status quo cannot continue. Global markets rally 
from time to time, but each rally invariably turns out to be a  “ dead cat bounce ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

42 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
  Poster 7: R & D Investments    
 The total R & D expenditure * of all Organization for Economic Coopera-
tion and Development (OECD) nations in 2005 was  $ 687 billion in current 
money, or 2.3% of gross domestic product (GDP). This total includes the 
contributions from private industry. 
 In the United States the proportional expenditure on R & D was even 
higher at 2.7% of GDP (see Figure  1 ) and has risen roughly linearly in real 
terms since 1953. 
 The average OECD gross domestic expenditure on R & D as a percentage 
of GDP was 
  •     1.95% in 1981  
  •     2.3% in 2005    
 The average annual global per capita real - terms economic growth was 
  •     2.5% for 1951 – 1976  
  •     1.5% for 1977 – 2004 (see Figure  2 )       
 Figure 2  
World real GDP per capita; rolling 10 - year average percent changes. Each data point 
is the average for the preceding 10 years. (  Source : Data for 1951 – 1992 have been 
taken from Angus Maddison,  Monitoring the World Economy 1820 – 1992 , OECD, 
Paris, 1995. These data have been extended by those from the International 
Monetary Fund for 1993 – 2004, the latest available. World population growth has 
been taken from the US Bureau of the Census, International Database .) 
 
0.00%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Year
Percentage change
 * OECD MSTI database, November 2005. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
43
in the modern jargon. The underlying trend in real per capita growth would 
seem to be spiraling downward, with dips in each successive cycle becoming 
dangerously deeper. The urgent need, therefore, is for those who inﬂ uence the 
markets to rediscover Solow ’ s seminal work and to press for initiatives that 
can break the downward trend. 
 Initiatives are not always seen as good news. Researchers must be weary of 
the task of scanning the literature for details of the latest launchings that might 
possibly help in their never - ending quests for funds. All too often, they end in 
having to write yet more proposals that have only a  ∼ 20% chance of being 
funded. These colossal wastes of time and energy generally go unmentioned 
in the media. Why, therefore, should a transformative research (TR) initiative 
be of special interest? My answer is that the initiative should aim to bring 
about at least a partial restoration of academic freedom  * to its pre - 1970 levels, 
and therefore to correct perhaps the biggest imposition of the new policies. 
 All twentieth - century Planck Club members are now famous, of course, and 
many have acquired Olympian status. Researchers may conclude therefore that 
TR initiatives would be superelitist and therefore of no interest to them. 
However, it should be remembered that every one of this auspicious Club ’ s 
members started out as we all do as humble searchers after truth. They did not 
follow some magically preordained path. They, too, experienced doubt and 
uncertainty. What problem should I choose? Do I have sufﬁ cient ability to make 
progress? In another ﬁ eld of endeavor, Napoleon Bonaparte once said to his 
troops:  “ Every one of you carries a marshal ’ s baton in his knapsack; it is up to 
you to bring it out. ” Napoleon could say that because the environment he had 
helped create encouraged such advancements. Scientists have always needed 
patronage, of course, but in principle, their progression thereafter depends only 
on their dedication and commitment. I have quoted Albert Einstein ’ s wonder-
ful remarks on Planck ’ s motivation at the beginning of the chapter. Today, it is 
also most likely that researchers thinking deeply and driven by  “ a hunger of 
the soul ” will at some time in their careers have a great idea. If it could be 
brought to fruition, it might turn out to be transformative and qualify the 
researcher for membership of a future Planck Club. One never knows, of course, 
when that might happen, but a TR initiative standing by to make their  “ laby-
rinthine paths ” possible could transform their lives, and should be of interest, 
therefore, to  every practicing scientist. A TR initiative would not of itself bring 
a return to the pre - 1970s environment, but for would - be revolutionaries it could 
be the next best thing. In these circumstances, one might imagine my mythical 
Nature in extravagant mood saying to her troops:  “ Every one of you carries a 
ticket to Stockholm in your lab coat. It ’ s up to you to ﬁ nd it. ”  
 * In 1940, the American Association of University Professors agreed on a Statement of Principles 
on Academic Freedom and Tenure, which was subsequently endorsed by over 100 professional 
organizations. It was reafﬁ rmed in 1970 and in 1990. Regarding research, it says:  “ Teachers are 
entitled to full freedom in research and in the publication of the results, subject to the adequate 
performance of their other academic duties; but research for pecuniary return should be based 
upon an understanding with the authorities of the institution. ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

44 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 Poster 8: An Even - Handed Universe? A Tale of 
Two Experiments 
 Throughout the history of science, it has been tacitly assumed that the uni-
verse is even - handed; that is, if Nature allows a process she also allows its 
mirror image. The entity that seems to be conserved here is called  “ parity, ” 
and put more scientiﬁ cally, its conservation law says that all physical results 
should be independent of whether the observer uses a left - or a right -
 handed coordinate system. Conﬁ dence in this law was virtually absolute, 
and it therefore went unquestioned (apparently). However, in 1956, two 
theoretical physicists, Tsung Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang, published a 
paper pointing out that for the weak interactions, that is, the forces mediat-
ing radioactive decay, there was no evidence either for or against the law, 
and suggested methods for testing it (Lee and Yang  1956 ). Within weeks, 
Chieng Shiung Wu and her collaborators carried out a very simple experi-
ment that observed a violation (Wu et al.  1957 ). Lee and Yang were awarded 
the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957 for their astounding discovery. 
 However, the law had been tested long before by Cox and his collabora-
tors (Cox et al.  1928 ). They had also found evidence for a violation, but 
such was the weight of theoretical argument to the contrary that it was 
totally ignored even though the results of their experiments were published 
in a prestigious journal. As P. M. S. Blackett, a 1948 Nobel Laureate, said 
in his Rutherford Memorial lecture (Blackett  1959 ) of 1958:
 If these experiments had been followed up by any of us younger colleagues 
of Rutherford, many of whom were at the time looking for new and simple 
experiments to do — for this period at the Cavendish was less than usually 
active — then  .  .  . the essential asymmetry of nature between left and right -
 handed systems would have been established nearly thirty years earlier than 
in fact it was.  
 There would seem to be nothing that Cox and colleagues could have done 
about this situation. They courageously set out to observe an effect that 
was most deﬁ nitely not supposed to happen. But they did observe it, and 
their publication survived peer - review scrutiny (the old sort), which was a 
tribute to the reviewers. However, the work has rarely been cited presum-
ably because their observation lacked a critical mass of scientists to endorse 
it. They had dramatically challenged established wisdom, but there was not 
yet a framework within which their contribution could be fully assessed. 
The ﬂ ame of their truth was therefore quietly snuffed out, quenched not 
by conspiracy but by the indifference of the scientiﬁ c community. Its time 
had yet to come, but Cox and colleagues would not get the credit they richly 
deserved. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
45
 Setting up a genuine TR initiative will not be easy, and the status accorded 
to peer review or more accurately,  peer preview , will be crucial. There is, 
however, another serious problem: a researcher ’ s transformative discovery 
may actually be ignored. Poster  8 gives one relatively unknown example, but 
there are many others. Linus Pauling had unconventional views on vitamin C; 
Albert von Szent - Gy ö rgyi had unconventional views on almost everything; 
Barbara McClintock ’ s transformative ideas on jumping genes were ignored 
for years, as was Peter Mitchell ’ s chemiosmotic theory. All of these latter sci-
entists eventually won Nobel Prizes, but the essential point is that the indi-
vidual scientist has no control over the scientiﬁ c community ’ s opinion. Indeed, 
it is probably uncontrollable. As I mentioned earlier, the routes to consensus 
are mysterious. A TR initiative can avoid it as far as research selection is con-
cerned, but according to science ’ s unwritten law, a discovery does not count 
until it has been repeated by third parties and accepted by the community in 
general. Consensus rules in that domain.
 As I mentioned in the last chapter, we concluded that we could succeed as 
Nature ’ s proxy only if we could ﬁ nd selection procedures that she might 
approve of, and peer review  * would not be one of them because it did not pass 
the Planck test. This rigorous criterion should, of course, be the  acid test for 
all new initiatives. However, even Venture Research was not entirely free of 
peer review ’ s clutches. Such is its all - pervasive power that our BP board could 
not bring itself to forgo it, and we were obliged to ﬁ nd a form that would 
satisfy us all. The solution was to split the problem into two; we would ﬁ rst 
make up our own minds, but before we took our recommendation to the board 
we would approach a single peer selected by the researcher as being the most 
important person likely to be supportive. We then fully briefed that person, 
both verbally and in writing, and did what we could to persuade him or her to 
endorse our decision. However, even this farcical, vestigial form of peer review 
often failed to produce the support we requested. In every case, we were able 
to persuade the board to go ahead anyway. This is a luxury few researchers 
usually have. Their proposals must speak for themselves. On the other hand, 
Venture Researchers had an active friend at court, and their subsequent 
successes proved that we were right. 
 To some extent, the authorities ’ reverence for peer review is understandable 
because it works reasonably well in the mainstreams. Since these make up the 
overwhelming majority of all research, this would seem to be an excellent record. 
Critics have a serious problem, therefore:  Peer review is so infernally convenient . 
 But the general reader might appreciate a few clarifying remarks here. Peer 
review works best when its ministrations are conﬁ ned to well - established dis-
ciplines. Each discipline can be regarded as a separate country with its own 
language, and peer review in that metaphor is language - speciﬁ c. Funding 
 * Lest the reader should think that my views on peer review are extreme, Louis Alvarez, winner 
of the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1968, said in his autobiography (Alvarez  1987 ):  “ In my considered 
opinion the peer review system, in which the proposals rather than the proposers are reviewed, 
is the greatest disaster to be visited upon the scientiﬁ c community in this century. ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

46 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
agencies make special arrangements for the relatively few multidisciplinary 
programs they launch by recruiting linguists from each specialty. However, the 
agencies do not provide for  polyglot peer review, or ways in which one ’ s ideas 
can be assessed in a universal language like Esperanto, say. Put less fancifully, 
there is no peer review for science as a whole, which is, of course, the only 
language that Nature speaks. I do not know of a funding agency that has yet 
faced up to this inconvenient truth, or that even acknowledges its existence. 
Peer review, therefore, like the admission arrangements for an exclusive club, 
creates powerful barriers * for new entrants to a ﬁ eld. But genuine explorers 
may not speak the local language. They may even want to change it! 
 As every researcher knows, Nature does not respect consensus. We cannot 
expect to actually make progress simply because we have agreed among our-
selves that progress lies in a particular direction. Unless, of course, that direc-
tion is a simple extrapolation from what has gone before, but such objectives 
usually serve only to consolidate — unless researchers are free to follow inter-
esting observations wherever they may lead, as Penzias and Wilson were. 
However, as Planck pointed out, we should not expect our colleagues to accept 
signiﬁ cant criticism of their favorite dogma until we have demonstrated either 
its ﬂ aws or the viability of the alternatives. (Acceptance may still be deferred, 
of course.) If there is little or no slack in the system, that may not be possible. 
Thus, it is irrelevant that selection by peer review works reasonably well most 
of the time. So might selection by lottery or by tossing a coin. The fact remains 
that if it cannot pass the Planck test,  peer review is fundamentally ﬂ awed . 
 Thomas Kuhn, writing about  “ normal ” research, his special word for research 
in the mainstreams, gave the following words of warning (Kuhn  1970 ):
 Normal research, which  is cumulative, owes its success to the ability of scientists 
regularly to select problems that can be solved with conceptual and instrumental 
techniques close to those already in existence. (That is why an excessive concern 
with useful problems, regardless of their relation to existing knowledge and 
technique, can so easily inhibit scientiﬁ c development.) 
 He wrote that in 1970, that is, just as the governance of science was about to 
be drastically changed. What a pity that the authorities ignored him. 
 We have now had some 30 years of the new arrangements, and so it should 
be possible to make at least a preliminary assessment of their effects on scientiﬁ c 
discovery. But ﬁ rst, I should choose a benchmark. In Table  1 , I give a very brief 
description of some of the advances made by 20 Planck Club scientists. They 
either completed their work before  ∼ 1970, or generally enjoyed pre - 1970s 
freedom. It is merely a sample. The twentieth - century harvest was so rich that 
other lists could be produced according to preference. However, the work of these 
 * These barriers apply to the most senior scientists. Dudley Herschbach (Harvard University) won 
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1986. He contacted Venture Research a few days after the 
announcement with a proposal that would in effect require him to work as a theoretical physicist. 
He had tried the usual agencies, but they had repeatedly declined to fund him at the required 
level. Their response seemed to be:  “ Stick to your knitting. ” We whole - heartedly supported him. 
See Chapter  7 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
47
scientists alone transformed our lives. Indeed, I ﬁ nd it impossible to conceive of 
modern life without their contributions. Table  1  associates a single set of names 
with each discovery. Many others subsequently made substantial contributions in 
each ﬁ eld, of course, but I guess that few would dispute my speciﬁ c attributions. 
Each name resonates in my imagination, and no doubt in many others, too.  
 Science , one of the world ’ s most authoritative journals, has in recent years 
been publishing their year - end nomination for  “ Breakthrough of the Year ” —
 described as the most signiﬁ cant development in scientiﬁ c research in terms 
of its consequences for the advancement of science and for society.  Science ’ s 
editors produce the nominations, and also list nine runners - up. Complete list-
ings for the last 6 years are given in Tables  2 – 7 , with the Breakthrough of the 
Year listed as item 1 in each table. As 6 years is a rather short period over 
which to assess performance, I have extended these data over the previous 12 
years with details of the winning Breakthrough of the Year only in Table    8 . 
Before 1996,  Science called these awards  “ Molecule of the Year, ” and these 
are given from 1989 when the award was devised, until 1995. The short descrip-
tions are mine, as they were for Table  1 .               
 Comparisons between these two sets of tables, that is, Table  1 with Tables 
 2 – 8 , are complicated by the fact that they cannot yet be viewed with equal 
 TABLE 1.  Some Twentieth - Century Discoveries 
 Max Planck 
 Discovered that energy is quantized  
 Ernest Rutherford  
 Founded nuclear physics  
 Albert Einstein  
 Photoelectric effect; special and general 
relativity 
 Paul A. M. Dirac  
 Predicted existence of positrons  
 Wolfgang Pauli  
 Exclusion principle; predicted existence of 
neutrinos 
 Erwin Schr ö dinger 
 Founded wave mechanics  
 Werner K. Heisenberg  
 Founded quantum mechanics; uncertainty 
principle 
 Alexander Fleming  
 Discovered penicillin  
 Enrico Fermi  
 Built ﬁ rst nuclear reactor  
 Oswald T. Avery  
 Discovered that DNA is the genetic molecule  
 Linus Pauling 
 Seminal work on the nature of the chemical 
bond 
 Dorothy C. Hodgkin  
 Pioneered X - ray diffraction techniques  
 Max Perutz  
 Discovered structure of hemoglobin  
 Francis Crick and James D. Watson  
 Discovered double - helix structure of DNA  
 John Bardeen, Walter H. Brattain, 
and William B. Shockley  
 Invented the transistor  
 Dennis Gabor 
 Invented holography 
 Charles H. Townes  
 Invented the maser  
 Barbara McClintock  
 Discovered transposons  
 James Black  
 Discovered how to design targeted 
pharmaceutical drugs  
 Sydney Brenner  
 Pioneered molecular biology  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

48 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 TABLE 2.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2006 
  1.  Proof of Poincar é ’ s conjecture 
  2.  The sequencing of more than 1 million bases of Neanderthal DNA  
  3.  Observation of increasing ice - sheet loss in Greenland and Antarctica  
  4.  Discovery of a new tetrapod - like ﬁ sh species 
  5.  Construction of a microwave cloak of invisibility  
  6.  Discovery of a new drug for the treatment of age - related macular degeneration  
  7.  Several discoveries of new pathways to speciation  
  8.  Discovery of techniques that allow proteins and cells to be studied beyond the 
diffraction limit  
  9.  Several discoveries indicating that long - term potentiation strengthens 
connections between neurons  
 10.  Discovery of a new small RNA molecule that shuts down gene expression  
 Source :  Science  314 , 1848 – 1855 (2006). 
 TABLE 3.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2005 
  1.  Evolution in action: understanding evolutionary mechanisms  
  2.  Planetary exploration by robots  
  3.  Molecular clues to the coloring exhibited by plants  
  4.  Neutron stars: new observations  
  5.  Mechanisms of brain disorders  
  6.  Isotopic differences between earth and extraterrestrial rocks  
  7.  Molecular structure of a voltage - gated potassium channel  
  8.  Human sources of global warming  
  9.  Systems biology: cell signaling networks  
 10.  Fusion: Approval for International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
 Source :  Science  310 , 1878 – 1885 (2005). 
 TABLE 4.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2004 
  1.  Exploration of Mars: data from rovers  
  2.  Discovery of a new species of small hominid  
  3.  Evidence conﬁ rming possibility that primates can be cloned  
  4.  Condensate family tree extended  
  5.  Exploration of  “ junk ” DNA 
  6.  Discovery of a pulsar pair  
  7.  Evidence for declining biodiversity  
  8.  Water: possible evidence of new structures  
  9.  Public health: new public private partnerships announced.  
 10.  Seawater: molecular techniques to study organisms at great depth  
 Source :  Science  306 , 2010 – 2017 (2004). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
49
 TABLE 5.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2003 
  1.  Dark energy dominates universe  
  2.  Identiﬁ cation of genes contributing to mental illness  
  3.  Global warming: planetary responses  
  4.  How small RNAs orchestrate a cell ’ s behavior 
  5.  Nanotechnology: physicists and biologists identify new techniques  
  6.  Gamma - ray bursts: new observations  
  7.  Mouse embryonic stem cells  
  8.  Left - handed materials and anomalous refractive index  
  9.  Genetic sequencing of Y chromosome  
 10.  New anticancer drugs  
 Source :  Science  302 , 2038 – 2045 (2003). 
 TABLE 6.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2002 
  1.  Small RNAs operate many cellular controls  
  2.  Neutrino mass differences observed  
  3.  DNA sequencing: solving developing world ’ s problems 
  4.  Detection of polarization effects in cosmic microwave background radiation  
  5.  Movies on attosecond scale (10  – 18  s) 
  6.  Ion channels that respond to taste sensations  
  7.  Cryoelectron tomography: viewing structures of intact cells  
  8.  Adaptive optics 
  9.  How light resets the circadian clock  
 10.  Extending the hominid fossil record  
 Source :  Science  298 , 2296 – 2303 (2002). 
 TABLE 7.  Breakthrough of the Year, and Nine Runners - Up: 2001 
  1.  Nanotechnology: the ﬁ rst molecule - scale circuits 
  2.  RNA interference: quelling cell activity  
  3.  Solar neutrino oscillations observed  
  4.  First publication of human and other genomes  
  5.  High - temperature superconductivity: new record  
  6.  How axons ﬁ nd their way to correct destinations  
  7.  IPCC  a  : most of global warming is due to increases in greenhouse gases  
  8.  FDA  b  approves new cancer drug 
  9.  Bose – Einstein condensates 
 10.  Carbon budget: resolution of recent differences  
  a  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  
  b  US Food and Drug Administration.  
 Source :  Science  294 , 2442 – 2447 (2001). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

50 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 TABLE 8.  Science ’ s Breakthrough of the Year, 1996 – 2000, and Molecule of the 
Year, 1989 – 1995 
 2000 
 An explosion of gene sequencing data in bacteria and humans   a  
 1999 
 Ability to isolate and maintain human pluripotent stem cells in culture 
 1998 
 Evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating 
 1997 
 Lamb cloned from a single cell of an adult sheep  
 1996 
 Protease inhibitors and chemokines can block HIV   b  replication 
 1995 
 Conﬁ rmation of a new state of matter: Bose – Einstein condensates 
 1994 
 DNA repair enzyme system  
 1993 
 Tumor suppressor protein, p53  
 1992 
 Nitric oxide 
 1991 
 Buckyballs (buckminsterfullerenes) C 60  
 1990 
 Manufacture of synthetic diamonds  
 1989 
 Polymerase chain reaction  
  a  According to  Science , this was possibly the breakthrough of the decade, perhaps even of the 
century. 
  b  Human immunodeﬁ ciency virus.  
degrees of hindsight. The recent discoveries may look quite different in, 
say, 30 years ’ time, when some of them might turn out to have been momen-
tous. However, one factor seems to stand out from the awards of the last 18 
years: they are mainly for the achievement of speciﬁ c objectives, and many of 
them have a strong technological ﬂ avor. Judging by these awards, pure, 
disinterested research seems to have taken a back seat in recent years. In addi-
tion, although  Science does occasionally mention names in their breakthrough 
commentaries, phrases such as  “ .  .  . researchers have discovered  .  .  . , ”  “ .  .  . 
several groups have observed  .  .  . , ” and  “ .  .  . several reports this year  .  .  . ” fre-
quently recur. Discovery has become impersonal. There are few deﬁ ning 
names or living legends that might resonate in the imaginations of future 
commentators or inspire the young. We seem to have turned research into a 
faceless industry. Is it any wonder that young people are turning away from 
science? 
 Although Tables  2 – 8 describe some exciting new developments, one might 
question their durability. Many seem ephemeral and much like progress 
reports. They give the impression that, exciting though they may be, they will 
be superseded by the next round of developments before long. It is also impor-
tant to note that the research community that yielded the harvests outlined in 
Tables  2 – 8 was very much larger than that of the ﬁ rst 70 years or so of the 
twentieth century. As a rough guide to the global situation, the number of 
postdoctoral researchers at US universities has increased steadily since 1977, 
and now stands at some  4 times the 1973 number (see Figure  3 ). (This may be 
a major part of the problem — there are too many researchers. It is possible, 
therefore, that governments and funding agencies believe that such a huge 
army can be kept gainfully employed only if they are managed by objectives.) 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
51
The discoveries listed in Table  1 eventually opened up vast terrains of exploit-
able opportunities and transformed economic growth. In many respects, they 
deﬁ ned the twentieth century. One can imagine that scientists will still be 
talking about them 50 or 100 years from now, and some could well be  perma-
nent monuments to humanity ’ s progression. Indeed, they would seem to deﬁ ne 
the type of research that a TR initiative should foster.  
 The claim that individuality in scientiﬁ c enterprise is losing ground to team-
work and consensus is as impossible to prove conclusively as are Adam Smith ’ s 
attributions to his invisible hand. Proof of such claims is logically impossible, 
of course, and one must hope that the authorities are wise enough to see the 
point. Rather than parade endless anecdotes, I will therefore give only one 
more example as it also illustrates another aspect of the recent changes. 
 Table   9 gives the number of scientists sharing the Nobel Prize since 1997 
together with the winners ’ average ages at the time of the award. Table    10 
gives the equivalent data for the decade immediately preceding the 1970s. Up 
to  ∼ 1970, the Nobel Prize was commonly awarded outright to a single winner, 
indicating a general acknowledgement of that person ’ s overwhelmingly 
 Figure 3  
Science and engineering doctorate holders employed in US universites and other 
academic institutions by main activity. (  Source : US National Science Foundation, 
 Science and Engineering Indicators , 2006 .) 
 
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
120.0
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
Year
Numbers, 1000s
Teaching
Research
 TABLE 9.  Nobel Prizes, 1997 – 2006 
 Field 
 Number of Winners  
 Average Age at Award  
 Physics 
 28 
 69 
 Chemistry 
 24 
 65 
 Physiology and medicine  
 22 
 63 
 All 
 74 (average: 2.5 per Prize)  
 66 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

52 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
important contribution. Disagreements with the Nobel committees ’ selections 
were rare. Nowadays, however, the prizes almost invariably go to the maximum 
number of scientists permitted by the Nobel rules, namely, 3, and the fairness 
of a Nobel committee ’ s selections are often debated, particularly if an impor-
tant contributor has been overlooked. This should not be surprising. When 
large numbers of scientists pursue similar objectives, it is inevitable that 
opinions will vary on whom did most to get there ﬁ rst. 
 However, increasing competition often means that younger scientists lose 
out. Youth has much to commend, but  potential is perhaps its most important 
attribute. As with other abstract qualities, we should expect that consensus 
measurements will be poor indicators. Not surprisingly, therefore, the age 
at which young researchers can acquire independent support has increased 
considerably. Furthermore, as Tables  9 and  10 show, the ages of Nobel 
Prize winners has also increased. Elias A. Zerhouni, Director of the US 
National Institutes of Health, spoke in 2006 to express his concern on these 
matters: * 
 When I met Marshall Nirenberg, who won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine in 1968 for discovering the key to deciphering the genetic code and is 
a researcher at NIH, I went over his history. He started his independent research 
when he was 27 or 28 years old. At the time, he was unknown. Nobody thought 
that he had a prayer to crack the code, but he did it four or ﬁ ve years later. He 
got the Nobel when he was in his mid - to - late 30s. 
 This is not an isolated example. Figure  4 gives the ages at which the National 
Institutes of Health select new investigators for independent support. Figure 
 5 gives National Science Foundation data on the proportion of young (less 
than 35 years of age) doctorate holders among faculty at US universities. The 
ﬁ gures, widely duplicated in other countries, indicate the truly disgraceful 
treatment of a sector of the community that traditionally has been the source 
of many scientiﬁ c points of departure, often in the face of ﬁ erce opposition 
from their seniors. Furthermore, young people today are virtually powerless 
to do anything about it. The ﬁ gures indicate that the funding agencies are 
 TABLE 10.  Nobel Prizes, 1961 – 1970 
 Field 
 Number of Winners  
 Average Age at Award  
 Physics 
 18 
 53 
 Chemistry 
 15 
 57 
 Physiology and medicine  
 26 
 57 
 All 
 59 (average: 2.0 per prize)  
 56 
 * Quoted in  Chemical and Engineering News  (July 3, 2006, pp 12 – 17). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
53
increasingly overlooking the scientists who are in the most creative periods of 
their lives. Their creativity may not be lost if their leadership is deferred, but 
their time spent leading is being severely curtailed.  
 My choice of the Nobel Prize as a benchmark is appropriate for another 
reason. For the last 5 years or so of Venture Research we introduced the 
informal selection criterion that if we could not imagine an applicant ’ s 
 Figure 4  
Age at which young investigators win their ﬁ rst independent awards. (  Source : US 
National Institutes of Health, 2007 .) 
 
25
30
35
40
45
50
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Year
Average age at first award, years
 Figure 5  
Data showing the decreasing proportion of young ( < 35 - year - old) science and 
engineering doctorate holders in full - time faculty positions at US universities. 
( Source : US National Science Foundation,  Science and Engineering Indicator , 2006 .) 
 
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
1973
1975
1977
1979
19 81
1983
19 85
1987
1989
19 91
1993
19 95
1997
1999
2001
2003
Year
Percentage
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

54 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
proposed research  * eventually winning a Nobel Prize (or one of equivalent 
rank in the ﬁ elds that Nobel did not cover), then we should probably not 
support it. We hoped that this would give further conﬁ rmation of the excep-
tional standards we were looking for and encourage applicants to be adventur-
ous. I would strongly recommend it to operators of TR initiatives as hopefully 
it might lead to them being seen as  “ schools for Nobelists. ” Indeed, such 
schools might appeal to private sponsors as they could have their name associ-
ated with them, and could be developed as a possible alternative to TR (see 
Poster  9 ).
 * Some endorsement of Venture Research ’ s spiritual association with the Nobel Prize ethos is 
given by John Hurley in his  Organisation and Scientiﬁ c Discovery (Hurley  1997 ). Hurley reports 
on a survey of 16 Nobelists ’ assessments of the most important factors in research. The four 
regarded as  “ extremely important ”  were (1) freedom of thought, (2) choice of work, (3) inde-
pendence of thought, and (4) freedom to select problems. Two statements on which they  “ strongly 
disagreed ” were that the frameworks of existing science are incontrovertible and they work best 
under the pressure of evaluation. A full acceptance of all these sentiments was at the heart of 
Venture Research. 
 The United States is the largest supporter of research in the world.  † Figure 
 3 shows the dramatic increases that have taken place in the numbers of US 
doctoral scientists and engineers engaged in research. In contrast, the numbers 
engaged in teaching have hardly changed having risen at an average rate of 
only about 1% per year. The US total expenditure on basic research in all 
sectors has risen substantially (see Figure  6 ). One might argue that these huge 
increases have come from the US public and private sectors ’ supreme conﬁ -
dence in the potential of scientiﬁ c enterprise, and I applaud their optimism. 
But similar increases have taken place elsewhere (see Poster  7 ), and in view 
of the apparently escalating costs of discovery one might wonder, however, 
whether the authorities believe they are really getting value for money. 
Researchers are, of course, merely doing what society ’ s proxies are asking 
them to do — to provide a virtually endless supply of short - term miracles that 
might justify their support. The inevitable consequence is the rising costs and 
short life of discoveries in each ﬁ eld as its knowledge base becomes ever more 
reﬁ ned. Furthermore, the longer the authorities continue with these policies, 
the more budgetary demands will increase, and the greater will become the 
need to ﬁ ne - tune selection procedures to ﬁ nd the  “ best ” of them. Thus, we are 
becoming trapped in an ever - tightening vicious spiral.  
 Some commentators claim that all the easy discoveries have already been 
made, so we should expect, therefore, that new discoveries will become increas-
ingly harder and more expensive. However, it is astonishing that they use such 
a word as  “ easy ” in this context. Hindsight indeed can often devalue. The 
conception of most, if not all, of the major discoveries listed in Table  1 , for 
example, seems to have been agonized and protracted.  There probably never 
 † The United States has 17 of the world ’ s top 20 universities, and employs 70% of the world ’ s Nobel 
Prize winners [Leader (Editorial),  The Economist (March 11, 2006)]. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
55
 Poster 9: The A. Patron Prize for Science  
 The Nobel Prize is awarded  “ to those who, during the preceding year, shall 
have conferred the greatest beneﬁ t on mankind. ” However, the Nobel 
Prizes are awarded for achievement in only a small number of speciﬁ ed 
ﬁ elds, arcane and secret selection procedures are used, the number of 
recipients is arbitrarily controlled, and the prizes tend to be very 
conservative. 
 The A. Patron Prize would be unique in that suitably qualiﬁ ed scientists 
would, by their very application for research funding, be declaring their 
intention of working toward it. No ﬁ elds would be excluded, and achieve-
ments eventually recognized would be of standards similar to those of the 
Nobel Prizes. Researchers would be selected using the procedures used for 
Venture Research. Thus, the research would be of the highest international 
standard, would probably be outside current mainstreams, and would there-
fore be complementary to any conventional research programs with which 
A. Patron might be associated. The scientists involved would, in effect, be 
scholars of an invisible college of potential Nobelists, or whatever name we 
might give to this new nobelocracy. 
 The prize itself would be awarded to successful graduates, so to speak, 
from this college on the advice of a panel of distinguished and interna-
tionally respected scientists appointed by A. Patron. The panel would be 
responsible for determining whether the scientists concerned had indeed 
transformed  scientiﬁ c understanding. These scholars would be a powerful 
and inspirational force for change. The monetary value of the prize should 
be exceptionally high — say,  $ 1 – 2 million for each recipient. The A Patron 
Prize would therefore be at the pinnacle of a new and coherent approach 
to scientiﬁ c exploration. 
 The A. Patron Prize would be in a class of its own. It would enhance A. 
Patron ’ s reputation for farsightedness; would emphasize the value of trans-
parency, fairness, and mutual trust in research; and would help mitigate 
the intensely bureaucratic procedures that are now threatening to strangle 
creative talent worldwide. Major advances in unexplored ﬁ elds can provide 
unpredicted solutions to current problems and to those of which we are 
unaware. The prize would thereby add to A. Patron ’ s reputation as a person 
(or a company) that fully understands the subtleties of human progress.  
has been an easy discovery . Nevertheless, the dramatic rise of the US expen-
diture on R & D (see Figures  6 and  7 ) and similar increases elsewhere would 
seem to indicate that the commentators might have a point.  
 I do not agree. As I see it, the increases are evidence of diminishing returns. 
I am reminded of the joke about the schoolboy who claimed that spiders ’ ears 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

56 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
were in their legs. To prove it, he produced a spider, yelled at it, and watched 
it run away. He then caught the spider and cruelly pulled off its legs. He yelled 
at it again, but this time it stayed put.  “ You see, it can ’ t hear me now, ” he said. 
I do not mean any disrespect to commentators or schoolboys, but their logic 
seems rather similar. Recall the remarks made to the young Max Planck by 
 Figure 6  
 Total US real - terms expenditure on basic research in all sectors and from all sources, 
including federal, industry, and universities, in constant 2000 dollars. For comparison, 
the total U.S. expenditure on all types of R & D in 2004 was  $ 288,419 million (2000 
dollars). (  Source : US National Science Foundation,  Science and Engineering 
Indicators , 2006 .) 
 
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Year
Expenditure, $ millions
 Figure 7  
 US real - terms expenditure on academic research by sector(s) (2000 dollars): all 
sources (curve a); federal government (curve b); state/local government (curve c); 
industry (curve d); academic institutions (curve e); other sources (curve f). ( Source : 
US National Science Foundation,  Science and Engineering Indicators , 2006 .) 
 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
Year
$ millions
a
b
c
d
e
f
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
57
his supervisor around 1880 that physics was essentially a completed science so 
he should ﬁ nd some other ﬁ eld to work in. Such remarks are understandable, 
of course. Coming so soon after the major advances made by such great physi-
cists as Boltzmann, Faraday, and Maxwell, Planck ’ s adviser might have thought 
there was nothing much left to do. 
 However, then, as now, major problems abound for those who will look for 
them. On the atomic scale, we do not understand gravity and its relationship 
with Nature ’ s other forces. At the other end of the scale, current dogma main-
tains that the universe was created at some speciﬁ c moment some 13.6 billion 
years ago. It then requires an almost immediate but transient expansion at 
speeds vastly  * exceeding the velocity of light in order that predictions from 
current theories can be made compatible with what we actually observe. Fur-
thermore, cosmological thinking implies that we are able to  “ see ” only some 
4% of the matter in the universe. The other 96% is hidden from our direct 
view, which means, of course, that we know precisely nothing about it. One 
might conclude, therefore, that either we do indeed know very little about the 
universe we inhabit, or that current thinking is wrong or seriously ﬂ awed and 
we simply do not understand what we observe. In these hugely uncertain 
circumstances, one might expect that every conceivable avenue was being 
explored. However, the pressures of consensus are placing severe constraints 
on the approaches that will be funded. They not only come from bureaucracy: 
scientists themselves can also contribute. This is inevitable, of course, when the 
funding agencies encourage them to identify what seem to be the most promis-
ing approaches in their ﬁ elds. I have already mentioned that the Big Bang is 
virtually the only cosmological show in town. As a further illustration, Lee 
Smolin, in his  The Trouble with Physics (2007), points out that string theory —
 which is concerned with understanding the very fabric of space and the struc-
ture of all matter — now has such a dominant position that,  “ it is practically 
career suicide for young theoretical physicists not to join the ﬁ eld, ” despite the 
fact that, as Smolin carefully explains, it has many serious defects. Mavericks 
without independent funding, however, must conform or select another topic 
from a funding agency ’ s  à la carte menu, and not only in physics. 
 Current cosmological theories might ﬁ nally be conﬁ rmed, of course, in 
which case any intellectual discomfort would be irrelevant. Nature is the ulti-
mate arbiter. Meanwhile, they lack elegance in my view and have a somewhat 
Heath – Robinson  “ what do we have to do to make the theory ﬁ t the data ” 
appearance. Sadly, however, many people regard such esoteric subjects with 
indifference perhaps because they think they have little relevance to everyday 
life. But each one of us is embedded in the universe that cosmology, for 
example, seeks to describe. The fabric of the universe is the fabric of every one 
of our cells and neurons, and our very consciousness. We are not disinterested 
observers. 
 * Apparently, the expansion of the universe during the brief inﬂ ationary period is required to 
proceed at a speed exceeding 10 20 times the velocity of light. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

58 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 Turning to more obviously relevant issues, our understanding of many 
microorganisms is poor. Thousands of bacterial species in the soils and the 
oceans have never been studied. Indeed, it is slightly worse than the situation 
in cosmology — some 99% of these organisms are unknown. Thus, we know 
virtually nothing about the overwhelming majority of species we intimately 
share our environment with. Despite enormous and rising expenditures on 
research, viral and bacterial infections are still major killers. Some important 
bacterial infections can be controlled, but we do not understand the processes 
that drive mutation and thereby severely undermine that control. For viruses, 
we do not understand the phenomenon of latency by which, say, an otherwise 
lethal virus can live peaceably for long periods within a living host before 
ﬁ nally wreaking its havoc. Mental health is another major cause of concern. 
To give only one example: Anders Wimo estimated  * in 2006 that worldwide 
costs for dementia care were  $ 248 billion a year. 
 Medicine is understandably concerned with pathological states, but I doubt 
that we will see substantial progress toward controlling them, whatever their 
source, until we understand much more about what constitutes good health.  † 
Nature ’ s approach to health care is to tackle any problems at the earliest pos-
sible moment. Thus, instabilities that can affect human metabolism at every 
level from the molecular to the whole body, or attacks from bacteria, toxins, 
and other agents, are usually nipped in the bud by feedback mechanisms or 
immune systems before they can exert control. Few of these responses are 
understood. When they fail or have difﬁ culty coping, we become ill, of course. 
However, medicine ’ s traditional approach has been to treat symptoms, some-
times using aggressive and indiscriminating techniques that can have unpleas-
ant side effects. Symptoms take time to develop, of course, and might be a sign 
that Nature ’ s procedures need help. Happily, most of us are healthy most of 
the time, but how can we expect to treat disease and other anomalies if we do 
not really understand what being healthy means? 
 Commentators rarely seem to associate today ’ s dearth of major discoveries 
with the loss of freedom, but freedom is as essential to scientists as legs are to 
a spider. We seem to live in a universe of inﬁ nite complexity. When giving talks, 
I often like to ask the rhetorical question:  “ What proportion of what there is 
to be understood — say, in a thousand years from now — do we understand 
today? ” My answer is:  “ Very little. ” There does not seem to be  any ﬁ eld we 
can justiﬁ ably claim to fully understand, and in these circumstances, there 
are likely to be many that we do not even know that we do not understand. 
 * Presented to the 10th International Conference on Alzheimer ’ s Disease and Related Disorders, 
Madrid, July 2006. 
 † Chinese medicine, which is far older than the Western medicine, maintains that the processes of 
a healthy human body are interrelated and constantly interact with the environment. Its practi-
tioners strive to understand these interactions so that they can also treat and prevent illness and 
disease. Western medicine clearly has much to learn from these coherent approaches. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
59
Nevertheless, by its virtually exclusive use of peer review in the selection of 
new grants, a notoriously conservative process that few, if any, members of the 
Planck Club would have survived, the funding agencies imply that all the 
major discoveries have been made. 
 If, indeed, many still await us, should we be conﬁ dent that current 
policies will ﬁ nd them? As things stand, that seems unlikely as the odds are 
stacked against individual genius and ﬂ air. As Table  1 shows, my short list could 
have omitted the scientists ’ names as their great discoveries are inextricably 
linked with them, thereby conﬁ rming, if conﬁ rmation were needed, the essen-
tial role of individuality in research. With the exception of buckyballs  * it is 
hard to see the evidence for individuality in Tables  2 – 8 . The achievements of 
the past 16 years certainly represent signiﬁ cant progress, but those responsible 
are usually nameless and unsung, as if only the progress itself needs to be 
celebrated. 
 I have long been amused by statements as such  “ Hampton Court Palace 
was built (or rebuilt) by Henry VIII. ” He did no such thing, of course. Numer-
ous architects, engineers, and artisans toiled to bring into being what they 
thought he wanted despite the many difﬁ culties. We remember their sponsor 
but not their essential creativity. Today, the authorities who control the purse 
strings seem to have forgotten that great discoveries come from similar workers 
 who deﬁ ed the rules . They must defy them, of course;  “ the rules ”  merely being 
the fruits of past experience. In science, such workers are unique. They have 
no competitors. The word  “ best ” should not be applied to them. Unfortunately, 
current strategies lead to cautious, collectively endorsed, and carefully managed 
research objectives; nonconforming individuals get short shrift. We need a 
catalyst that will bring about a reversal of that trend. 
 A TR initiative can be that catalyst. As I shall discuss in the next 
chapter, the additional funding required would be tiny, but hearts and 
minds must also be changed, not to mention customs and practices. 
However, we can draw encouragement from the fact that the transition 
from a regulated and controlled environment to one of freedom has been 
made at least once before. As World War II approached its end, scientists 
everywhere began to think of the future and the restoration of freedom in 
research. Poster  10 contains the full text of a letter to  The Times written by 
Sir Henry Dale, President of the Royal Society and Nobel Prize winner in 
Physiology or Medicine, dated August 7, 1945, the day after the atomic bombing 
of Hiroshima.
 * In 1985, an experiment to unravel the carbon chemistry of red - giant stars led to the discovery 
of a new allotrope of carbon – C 60  or buckminsterfullerene, colloquially called  “ buckyballs ”  — 
by Robert F. Curl, Jr., Harry W. Kroto, and Richard E. Smalley. Their work was indeed highly 
individualistic. The problem they wanted to address was not seen as important, and they had to 
resort to funding some of it themselves. They were awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 
1996. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

60 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 Poster 10: Science in War and Peace; the Atomic Bomb; 
Secrecy or Freedom of Research 
 The following letter, addressed to the editor of  The Times (of London), was 
published in 1945:  
 Sir, It is a pity, in one way, that the ﬁ rst news of a great event in science had 
to come at the disclosure of a war secret and to deal chieﬂ y with the  “ atomic 
bomb. ” The world, however, has so arranged its affairs hitherto that we 
cannot, in fact, imagine that this tremendous realization of a scientiﬁ c predic-
tion would have been so soon achieved for any other purpose. 
 The connexion has also the advantage of making mankind face, promptly 
and squarely, the issues involved. The release of atomic energy, now an accom-
plished fact, can either destroy civilization or immensely enrich its possibili-
ties; the choice is clearly before mankind and those who guide its destinies. 
It is everybody ’ s concern and the statesman ’ s supreme responsibility, but I 
do not believe that the special right of scientists to be heard in its discussion 
will be challenged. There has been no opportunity for a national, still less an 
international, exchange of scientiﬁ c opinion. The world community of science, 
for the revival of which we now look eagerly, ought to have its say. Meanwhile, 
may I offer some observations on my individual responsibility, but with a 
conviction that some other scientists would agree? 
 This achievement, of all stages, has been the greatest of war secrets, kept 
with a magniﬁ cent loyalty. The scientists concerned will remain loyal to that 
duty; guarding closely what still has to be kept secret till the war with Japan 
is ﬁ nished. Then, I believe, they will all wish to be done with it for ever. We 
have tolerated much, and would tolerate anything, to ensure the victory for 
freedom; but when the victory has been won we shall want the freedom. I 
believe, further, that the abandonment of any national claim to secrecy about 
scientiﬁ c discoveries must be a prerequisite for any kind of international 
control, such as will obviously be indispensable if we are to use atomic energy 
to its full value and avoid the ﬁ nal disaster which its misuse might bring. If it 
be objected that this would be incompatible with military secrecy of any kind, 
I would be bold enough to ask whether that is not already useless. If arma-
ments are to be used only for the international policing of aggressors, what 
use have we for national secrecy? And have we not, on the other hand, had 
sufﬁ cient experience of the futility and the danger of pacts and agreements 
which impose quantitative limits on known and obsolescent types of arma-
ment, and leave the right to qualitative improvements and new developments 
in secret? 
 In any case, is it not obvious that, with the closing stages of this war, sci-
entiﬁ c discovery and invention are becoming the essential combatants? 
Science, an unwilling conscript, is becoming the direct agent of undiscriminat-
ing devastation at long range, needing only a minimum of military apparatus 
or personnel — witness the German V weapons and now the atomic bomb. If 
we retain military secrecy this will be concerned more and more then, with 
scientiﬁ c discovery and ever less with ﬁ ghting men and their equipment. It is 
bound, if we tolerate it, thus steadily to widen its encroachment and strengthen 
its hold on the freedom of science. Soon, under such conditions, many of the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
61
 During the war, the US President (F. D. Roosevelt) had set up the powerful 
Ofﬁ ce of Scientiﬁ c Research and Development (OSRD) to coordinate scien-
tiﬁ c research for military purposes and to bring the American scientiﬁ c com-
munity into the war effort. Run by Vannevar Bush, it oversaw projects covering 
the entire scientiﬁ c spectrum, including the development of radar and the 
Manhattan Project for the production of an atomic bomb. Thus, for the ﬁ rst 
time in US history, substantial federal funds  * were channeled into the universi-
ties. Toward the end of the war, President Roosevelt asked OSRD for advice 
on how peacetime research might be structured. Bush ’ s inﬂ uential report to 
the president (Bush  1990 ) was concerned mainly with government support of 
pure research. Bush said:
 Many of the lessons learned in the war - time application of science under Govern-
ment can be proﬁ tably applied in peace. The Government is peculiarly ﬁ tted to 
perform certain functions, such as the co - ordination and support of broad pro-
grams on problems of great national importance. But we must proceed with 
caution in carrying over the methods which work in wartime to the very different 
conditions of peace. We must remove the rigid controls which we have had to 
impose and recover freedom of inquiry and that healthy competitive scientiﬁ c 
spirit so necessary for expansion of the frontiers of scientiﬁ c knowledge  .  .  . 
Scientiﬁ c progress on a broad front results from the free play of free intellects, 
working on subjects of their own choice, in the manner dictated by their curiosity 
for exploration of the unknown. 
 — Vannevar Bush,  Science — the Endless Frontier , National Science 
Foundation 40th Anniversary 1950 – 1990, 1990, p. 12.  
 The most important of Bush ’ s postwar recommendations was a proposal for 
a new independent agency, originally to be called the National Research Foun-
dation. However, the new president (H. S. Truman) insisted that it should be 
subject to direct presidential control, and vetoed the bill in 1947 after Bush 
had helped successfully to negotiate its passage through Congress. But Bush 
scientists of some country at peace would ﬁ nd themselves in secret competi-
tion with those of another, as ours were ready to be with those of Germany 
in war, as to which could earlier elaborate the means of annihilating the 
others, and their countrymen and their country with them. 
 There, I suggest, lies the threat of ﬁ nal disaster to civilization in place of 
the measureless enrichment of life which a free science could offer the world. 
Nor is the moral factor to be ignored. The true spirit of science working in 
freedom, seeking the truth only and fearing only falsehood and concealment, 
offers its lofty and austere contribution to man ’ s moral equipment, which the 
world cannot afford to lose or diminish. 
 — H. H. Dale, The Royal Society, August 7, 1945  
 * Before 1940, the US federal government had generally limited its support for research and 
training in academic institutions to agriculture. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

62 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
did not give up, and over the subsequent 3 years lobbied hard to unblock the 
opposition, no doubt drawing hard on his huge reputation and prestige won 
during his Herculean efforts at OSRD. The National Science Foundation was 
ﬁ nally created in 1950, but as responsibility for medical and long - range defense 
research was excluded, it was but a shadow of what Bush had originally 
intended. After the war, the National Institutes of Health * became the focus 
of federally supported medical research; other agencies, notably the Ofﬁ ce of 
Naval Research (ONR), took responsibility for defense. The ONR also sup-
ported freely chosen and usually undirected basic research in the universities, 
and many thought it became a model for the newly created NSF. 
 In contrast, Britain set up the Advisory Council for Scientiﬁ c Policy chaired 
by Sir Henry Tizard. Not surprisingly, research in the nuclear, electronics, and 
aviation ﬁ elds was especially favored in the postwar expansion, but otherwise 
the prewar institutional arrangements were fully restored. Thankfully, they 
included the so - called dual - support system for academic research, the long -
 established arrangements by which speciﬁ c research support was separated 
from the funds needed to provide for  “ well - found ” university laboratories. This 
latter support, supplied by the prosaically named but highly inﬂ uential Uni-
versity Grants Committee (see Chapter 5), meant that academic staff knew 
that they could usually count on a modest but unquestioned supply of funds 
to test their embryonic ideas. 
 The pathways by which the United States and Britain reached postwar sci-
entiﬁ c normality were different, therefore. But the common factor was that 
freedom was generally restored, thanks to the tireless efforts of people like 
Bush, Dale, and many others who passionately argued that although govern-
ments should continue their support of academic research, they should not 
attempt to direct or control it. Luckily for everyone, their advice did not fall 
on deaf ears. Policies based on noninterference with academic freedom ﬂ our-
ished everywhere, but I have concentrated on the United States and the 
United Kingdom because in the immediate postwar period these governments 
led the Western world in their support for research enterprise and increased 
their budgets at close to exponential rates until the 1960s. In part, the expan-
sion was fueled by another unforeseen development, the cold war, as was 
pointed out in a report  † to the US Congress:
 .  .  . the Cold War had an indelible effect on the scientiﬁ c enterprise, as it provided 
a compelling rationale for research funding. Indeed, federal research dollars 
poured into science and technology during this period. The entire enterprise 
grew; greater numbers of research universities sprung up, more graduate students 
were trained to become scientists, and entire industries based on new technolo-
gies were founded.  
 * In 1948 Congress authorized the National Heart Institute to join the decade - old National Cancer 
Institute, and the former NIH became the National Institutes of Health. 
 † Report by the House Committee on Science, September 24, 1998,  Unlocking Our Future, Toward 
a New National Science Policy . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
63
 Indeed, academic research took off everywhere on a wave of postwar eupho-
ria, perhaps also inspired by the can - do attitude war stimulated and encour-
aged. However, the richness of its success also brought the expansion that led 
to the funding crisis around 1970. Freedom ’ s erosion followed, not this time 
from any military imperatives, hot or cold, but from the imposition of such 
well - intentioned considerations as fairness, priority, and relevance, together 
with the second - guessing censorship imposed by peer review. The harvest from 
these top – down interventions has been conformity, cascades of technology - led 
developments, and extensive duplication of objectives on a global scale. Today, 
Dale ’ s  “ true spirit of science ” is not only being diminished; it is under serious 
threat. * 
 Ideally, I would like to see a huge controversy on how the wondrous pro-
cesses of discovery might be freed from bureaucracy ’ s grip. It would mean that 
the problems had ﬁ nally been widely acknowledged, and in any case, diversity 
is usually a good thing. Luckily for fundraisers, TR ’ s costs should be low 
because its importance is in a similar category to that of vitamin C in a healthy 
diet. Only trace quantities of that vitamin are required for survival, but on the 
other hand, taking none at all would soon terminate a person ’ s existence. We 
must have the catalytic stimuli that TR provides, therefore, and our institutions 
should make the necessary minor ﬁ nancial adjustments to make it happen. 
Despite the urgency, it will not be easy. The authorities delayed their accep-
tance of vitamin C ’ s essential role for several decades after its effectiveness 
had been scientiﬁ cally proved. We may not have that time for TR. 
 As Bush ’ s and Dale ’ s and many other senior scientists ’ contributions were 
essential in restoring freedom ’ s role in the postwar years, their successors will 
probably also need the assistance and support of the nobelocracy, academi-
cians, politicians, industrialists, and other prestigious leaders before our institu-
tions ﬁ nally become convinced that radical action must be taken. Industry in 
particular could renew the strong leadership in basic research it had only 
ten or twenty years ago. As Figure  8 shows, US industry has provided a large 
fraction of the nation ’ s research funding for over 50 years, and it would 
require only a minuscule shift in present policies to allow the sponsorship of 
TR either by individual companies as BP did in the 1980s or in consort with 
others. 
 Such companies as Bell Labs, IBM, and GE once made legendary  † scientiﬁ c 
contributions. However, US industry support for academic research has 
declined in the past few years.  ‡     The universities ’  recently acquired penchant 
 * J. M. Ziman, in his 1983 Bernal Lecture, said:  “ Personal discretion in the choice of research 
problems is now severely limited, even in the university sector, because most projects are now 
funded by outside agencies. Tension between the individualistic norms of the academic tradition 
and managerial traditions derived from the industrial tradition has made research an ambivalent 
profession. ” 
 † Listing only the ultimate accolade — the Nobel Prize — Bell Labs have won six Nobel Prizes shared 
by 11 of its scientists; IBM, three shared by 5 scientists; and GE, two, each won unshared. 
 ‡ National Science Foundation Report NSF 06 - 315, April 2006. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

64 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
for aggressive protection of intellectual property, even when it arises from 
industry - funded research, may be one cause. Another may be that academic 
research today is not always distinguishable from industrial research. The 
urgent need for publishable and citable results, yet another byproduct of the 
 “ law of unintended consequences, ” produces much the same pressures on 
academic researchers as the search for saleable products does on their indus-
trial cousins. In these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that industry is 
losing interest. A TR initiative and the unique perspectives it stimulates might 
therefore catalyze a revival of industrial interest in academic research to the 
beneﬁ t of both institutions. 
 Paradoxically, however, their modest costs might mean that the authorities 
relegate decision making on TR initiatives to the echelons normally responsi-
ble for low - level investments.  That would be disastrous . Such relegation would 
bring them into direct competition with investments offering more immediate 
and certain rewards. It would also mean that those to whom the responsibility 
was transferred would probably lack the authority to enforce a relaxation of 
peer review ’ s relentless grip, with the danger that the looming specter of the 
Planck test would be either fudged or ignored. Despite its low initial costs, 
decisions on TR must therefore be taken at the highest possible levels — those 
once occupied by Bush and Dale, for example. The national implications would 
certainly justify it. 
 Technology has driven the world since civilized life began. Hunter - gatherers 
needed guile and courage, but without technology they could not have made 
the transition to farming, and we would not be civilized. Over the ensuing ages, 
new technologies ebbed and ﬂ owed with societies ’ toleration of dissent until, 
as is well known, the Industrial Revolution opened the ﬂ oodgates. Thanks to 
Solow, we now understand why living standards in the industrialized nations 
increased substantially even though populations have been exploding for the 
 Figure 8  
 The proportion of US R & D supported by industry. (  Source : US National Science 
Foundation,  Science and Engineering Indicators , 2006 .) 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Year
Proportion from industry
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES 
65
past couple of centuries. Not surprisingly, therefore, technology has a special 
place in the hearts of the authorities. It can enable them to rule or to conquer 
as they choose. 
 Technology ’ s primary, if not exclusive, source throughout most of history 
has been trial and error driven by pioneers dissatisﬁ ed with the status quo. 
Until the nineteenth century, science ’ s role was minuscule  , but technology 
without an understanding of the underlying science is like exploring with one ’ s 
eyes shut. In these circumstances a technology may or may not work, but one 
might have no idea why. But science works best when scientists seek to banish 
ignorance, particularly if they have identiﬁ ed it. Their motivation is then at its 
highest, whereas struggling to understand how someone else ’ s technology 
might be improved or extended — “ services science ” in the 2007 jargon — would 
rarely be as satisfying. 
 Support for disinterested science will always be difﬁ cult to sell because the 
full signiﬁ cance of what we do not know is often not easy to recognize. It can 
take great scientists to do that, as Planck and colleagues have proved. Having 
done so, however, and derived an apparently viable way forward, one would 
be faced today with the inevitable question — “ Yes, but what good will it 
do? ” — and convincing answers might only rarely be available. Fortunately for 
everyone, the need for such support could be taken as read until fairly recently. 
Science ’ s intellectual contributions were fostered in their own right because, 
to say the least, they enriched our culture. Thus, science ’ s soils were tilled 
independently of the technological crops that might be grown on them. When 
the new technologies the Planck Club inspired came along they could ﬂ ourish, 
as could economic growth. 
 The post - 1970 academic changes have already been described but post -
 1990, similarly constrained thinking began to affect industry. On March 3, 2007 
 The Economist published a well - documented brieﬁ ng on the shift from research 
to development, particularly in the big companies. Mammon will have it no 
other way, it seems. That covetous god has always stalked the marketplace, of 
course, but would now seem a frequent visitor to the academic sector. Indus-
trialists presiding over R & D ’ s loss of the ampersand, as  The Economist suc-
cinctly puts it, might therefore have a rude awakening when, as they have long 
been accustomed to doing, they turn to academia for new scientiﬁ c insights. It 
may simply not be available in the quality or breadth they look for. 
 Fresh approaches are now essential. The urgent need is for a few inﬂ uential 
leaders to recognize that policies aiming to maximize efﬁ ciency will work only 
when efﬁ ciencies can be measured reliably. At the margins of intellectual 
endeavor where scientists are grappling with difﬁ cult or intractable problems 
the authorities should expect such policies to fail. They might even be the worst 
possible policies in such circumstances. Until recently, we had visionary leaders, 
and academic research was wisely left to look after itself. In meritocratic 
societies vision was once an essential qualiﬁ cation for leadership. But the envi-
ronment has changed. An industrial leader ’ s prospects are now strongly inﬂ u-
enced by the quality of his or her company ’ s quarterly reports. Myopia rules. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

66 
THE NEED FOR FRESH APPROACHES
 Philanthropists also tend to focus on high - performing charities over similar 
timescales. There are, of course, many who generously donate their resources 
to alleviating problems in such areas as AIDS, TB, poverty, and education, or 
to fund deserving institutions. However, we now need a new type of philan-
thropist — one who fully appreciates the potential value of the intellectual 
dimension and is prepared to give carte blanche to Nature ’ s ambassadors (see 
next chapter) who would operate TR initiatives. Indeed, this is in effect the 
relationship I enjoyed with BP during the 1980s. However, it is a very tall order 
even though only relatively modest funds are required. Mutual trust is essen-
tial, and it is possible that philanthropists might feel more comfortable about 
taking this radical step if third parties such as, say, national funding agencies 
were also involved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Searching for Planck ’ s Successors 
 It is necessary from the outset to deal with the misconception that the advance 
of scientiﬁ c knowledge itself can be directed from the centre. This would be to 
misunderstand the original and spontaneous nature of science. The advance of 
scientiﬁ c knowledge cannot solely be achieved by the arbitrary selection of 
national goals and by committing resources   .  .  .   to them. Because science is origi-
nal it is also unpredictable: neither the provenance of a new idea nor its ultimate 
applications can reliably be foreseen by scientiﬁ c policy - makers.  .  .  .   The tasks of 
science policy are of another kind:  to maintain the environment necessary for 
scientiﬁ c discovery. (My italics) 
 — Council for Scientiﬁ c Policy ’ s  Report on Science Policy presented to 
the UK Secretary of State for Education and Science, May 1966  
 This quotation is taken from the ﬁ rst report by the UK ’ s then newly estab-
lished Council for Scientiﬁ c Policy. Its illustrious membership comprised senior 
scientists, vice chancellors, research council chairmen, and managing directors 
(from Mullards and Shell), and was topped off by two Nobelists and 17 Fellows 
of the Royal Society, no less, including its president. Astonishingly, however, 
the Council ’ s lucid thinking was demoted to the dust bin within only a few 
years of its appearance. The top – down pseudoregimentation of academic 
research ensued, and not only in the UK. The strong inﬂ uence of the  “ center ” 
can now be seen everywhere. Funding decisions  are usually made on the 
grounds of presumed national interests and efﬁ ciency. 
 In addition, some inﬂ uential politicians seem determined to ensure that 
government - funded scientists prove they are always earning their keep. Years 
4
67
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

68 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
spent without making a publishable discovery would seem to be years wasted, 
according to them. Thus, the unpredictable nature of exploratory science is 
being disregarded. Planck himself  “ wasted ” some 20 years in fruitless inactiv-
ity, and many others were similarly  “ unproductive ” for extended periods — see 
Poster  1 , for example. 
 One of the characteristics of our civilization is that its institutions occasion-
ally descend into collective madness giving rise to such lunacies as ﬁ nancial 
crashes and recessions. Collective perceptions of value can also occasionally 
lose their usual constraints. The resultant imbalances can be maintained for a 
time — civilization ’ s uncertainty principle — but wishful thinking is no match for 
nitty - gritty reality in the long term. Valuations are usually forced down to 
Earth eventually, the only question being whether the landing will be hard or 
soft. Soaring crude - oil prices and property values are among current (2007) 
areas of madness, but perhaps the most important of them all is the madness 
of managing academic research as if its main purpose were to supply com-
modities. Had the authorities been so afﬂ icted before 1970 or so, the towering 
contributions stemming from the Planck Club ’ s explorations would have been 
excluded as they drew their inspiration from such abstract sources as a hunger 
of the soul. Initially, neither commodities nor practicable applications were 
usually in sight. In view of the Planck Club ’ s vital importance, therefore, that 
madness would seem to be the single biggest threat to the stability of the global 
economy. 
 Unfortunately, doomsayers are commonplace nowadays. Global warming, 
epidemics, famine, pollution, and terrorism are serious threats demanding 
measured responses, but the media (and others) so often overplay them that 
we have the new threat of threat fatigue. Real signals could be lost in the noise. 
However, if despite the signs to the contrary you are still conﬁ dent, as many 
funding agencies apparently are, that such independently minded scientists as 
Planck et al. would in today ’ s world be given sufﬁ cient leeway to produce the 
rich harvest summarized in Table  1 (and that is only a sample), you would have 
only the doomsayers ’ threats to worry about.  But you had better be right. If 
not, you would, in effect, be forcing the authorities to cope without the wild 
cards that can unexpectedly change the rules, without that extra shake of the 
kaleidoscope that can radically change perspectives, without the economic 
ﬂ exibility major discoveries create: these and many other advantages — real 
and intangible — are precisely what members of the Planck Club among others 
provide. And given the right environment, they will do all this without being 
asked! 
 Fortunately, some institutions are beginning to see the danger signs. Over 
the last decade or so, some funding agencies have begun to recognize that the 
current dearth of major discoveries might be due to their overly cautious poli-
cies. They have therefore announced schemes to encourage  “ inherently high -
 risk research initiatives. ” In 2002, the Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Research Council (EPSRC), the largest of the UK research councils, announced 
its Adventure Fund. It deﬁ ned adventurous research as  “ Highly speculative 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
69
research that challenges current conventions, explores new boundaries or 
adapts novel techniques to an entirely different ﬁ eld with a resultant step 
change. ” Although the EPSRC has ended this initiative, it says that it still 
encourages adventurous research, but it now deals with such proposals through 
their usual mechanisms. 
 However, the funding agencies ’ caution does not stem from a positive deci-
sion to be risk - averse. Rather, it is an inevitable consequence of using consen-
sus (peer review) to select the research they will fund. In 2007, the newly 
established European Research Council (ERC) made the imaginative public 
announcement that it would give 5 - year grants totaling 289.5 million euros 
( ∼ $ 300 million) to the support of most promising young researchers — whom 
they deﬁ ne as people who have held a PhD,  “ not longer than nine and not less 
than 2 years. ” Any subject might qualify subject to the simple  *   guiding princi-
ple that it must be at the  “ frontiers ” of knowledge. The ERC says it is looking 
for  “ excellence. ” However, the announcement continues,  “ proposals will be 
evaluated by high level peer review evaluation panels, ” which will probably 
ensure that the research chosen will not be radical. In any event, the young 
people targeted will almost certainly not have tenure. It should be natural to 
expect, therefore, that they would use any ERC support to enhance their 
chances of getting a secure job in the future, which is hardly compatible with 
being adventurous. 
 The US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director ’ s Pioneer Award 
Program, is described as being a  “ high - risk research initiative of research 
teams of the future. ” The US National Science Foundation (NSF) has a Small 
Grants for Exploratory Research program, inviting proposals for  “ .  .  .   small -
 scale, exploratory, high - risk research in the ﬁ elds of science, engineering and 
education normally supported by NSF   .  .  .   (proposals) may be submitted to 
individual programs. ” 
 I applaud all new initiatives as they increase diversity. However, I would 
suggest that agencies are ill - advised when they encourage researchers to 
develop  “ high - risk ”  or  “ speculative ”  research programs. A scientist ’ s reputa-
tion is slowly earned and quickly damaged, and the length of a productive 
career can be all too short. A simple question arises, therefore: Why should 
academic researchers embark on major quests  if their funding agency expects 
most of them to fail ? That is what sponsoring high - risk research implies. 
 Perceptions of risk are relative, of course. One person ’ s risk might be 
another ’ s challenge. Some people might see skydiving as a dangerous pastime 
because they believe that the probability of a nasty outcome is high. Skydivers 
themselves, however, while acknowledging and even enjoying the risks, do not 
expect that their next jump will be other than successful. They would not jump 
 * The ERC has published the inevitable  Guide to Applicants, which runs to 53 pages. Speciﬁ c page 
and font size, line spacing, and margin widths  are mandatory. More importantly, the maximum 
overheads that the ERC will support must not exceed 20% of direct costs. However, many uni-
versities are making strenuous efforts to set their overhead fees at much higher levels. Is it reason-
able to expect that inexperienced researchers will be able to negotiate that colossal obstacle ? 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

70 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
otherwise.  Instead, they very carefully manage the risks. As their necks are on 
the line, they take every reasonable step to reduce, eliminate, or control every 
identiﬁ able source of risk. As a result, they are conﬁ dent that their jump will 
be exhilarating and enjoyable, and that they will land in one piece more or 
less where they thought they would. On the other hand, if it were decreed that 
the risks of skydiving had to be managed by those paying to enjoy the specta-
cle — that is, the spectators had to take full responsibility for anything that 
might happen — it is most unlikely that any jumps would take place.  Respon-
sibility shared is responsibility declined . In these circumstances, consensus 
opinion would opt for safety ﬁ rst as it usually does, and yet another expression 
of joie de vivre would vanish. 
 Attitudes to risk can also vary between institutions. I was told a lovely story 
by a senior executive from Scicon Ltd., then (1984) a subsidiary of BP. His 
company produced battle simulations for the UK Ministry of Defence, and 
once tried the experiment of interchanging ﬁ ghter pilots and ships ’ captains —
 the pilots would command the ships and the captains would ﬂ y the planes. The 
pilots discovered that frigates have a huge advantage over ﬁ ghters in that they 
do not crash when they run out of fuel. So, when the pilots operated the frig-
ates, they pursued their quarry, submarines in this case, much more aggres-
sively than naval captains would. Unlike naval captains, the pilots were not 
too concerned about calling up a refueling tanker. The result was that the pilots 
covered twice the area normally covered by sea captains, and  “ killed ” twice as 
many submarines. 
 In research, the adoption of  “ best value for money ” policies means, effec-
tively, that funding agencies give the highest priorities to the projects deemed 
to have the lowest risk of failure. Researchers must manage the residual risks, 
but so long as they do not stray too far from the beaten tracks, they can take 
comfort from the fact that consensus deems these risks to be acceptable and 
small. Should it be surprising, therefore, that research has become mainly 
predictable and sometimes even dull ? However, before 1970 or so researchers 
were responsible for every aspect of their work, including the risks. We cannot 
set the clock back, of course, but one of the most important tasks of a TR ini-
tiative will be to encourage intrepid researchers to be as adventurous as pos-
sible while retaining full responsibility for everything they do. 
 Imagine that we could plot all this on a few graphs. We cannot precisely 
quantify levels of success, of course, but we can illustrate the situation symboli-
cally. In Figure  9 , I plot the probability that a research project will be successful 
against the potential impact that that project might have.  “ Success ” here means 
that the research meets its objectives. Figure  9 would seem to accord well with 
experience. Most projects are expected to succeed but to have a potentially 
low impact. However, that does not mean that the research was not worth 
doing. Indeed, mainstream research plays a vital role in consolidating existing 
knowledge. The long tail indicates that a small proportion of researchers might 
achieve interesting and exciting results, even though they started out conven-
tionally, as Penzias and Wilson, or Fleming once did.  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
71
 In Figure  10 , I plot the funding agencies ’ recent excursions into high - risk, 
high - reward research in a similar way.  
 These two schematics should cover every type of research the funding 
agencies currently support. It seems reasonable to ask, therefore, where the 
work of the Planck Club scientists might have ﬁ tted. Their work undoubtedly 
had high impact, but was it high - risk when they began; that is, was it likely to 
fail ? When Planck et al. were performing their great works, all decisions on 
risk were the researchers ’ prerogative. So the question becomes the rhetorical 
one of how successful they thought they might be, and in particular, whether 
 Figure 9  
 An idealized plot of the possible relationships between a project ’ s chances of success 
and its potential impact. This plot is for  mainstream research funded by the 
conventional agencies. 
 
Low
Probability of success  
~100% 
0
Mainstream
research
Potential impact
High
 Figure 10  
 A plot similar to Figure  9 , but for  high - risk research projects as deﬁ ned by the 
conventional agencies. 
 
Low
Probability of success 
~100% 
0
High-risk,
high-reward 
research
Potential impact
High
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

72 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
they thought their work was risky. I cannot conceive that they did. My con-
ceptual abilities are irrelevant, of course. However, my analysis is based on 
what they  did and, as far as we know, how they went about it. My thesis is that 
although they could not know precisely where their  “ long and labyrinthine 
paths ” would take them,  they were conﬁ dent that they would prove signiﬁ -
cant — hence their enormous dedication. They had no timetables, except their 
own, and no one was specifying their goals or urging them on. They would 
only fail if they gave up. That would be most unlikely, as they clearly believed 
that if anyone could succeed, they would. As long as they were determined, it 
would be only a matter of time. I doubt if the idea of risk would have much 
occupied their minds. 
 In any event, when funding agencies foster high - risk research, they promote 
the idea that science is intrinsically risky. It is not.  It is difﬁ cult, but scientists 
are fully aware of that fact when they begin careers in research. Code breaking, 
too, can be difﬁ cult, but it is not risky;  it is what code breakers do. They might 
fail or succeed on a given timescale, but if the code is important, they will 
continue until they crack it. Scientists are no different. In addition,  “ risk ” is a 
word usually closely associated with danger. Why on Earth should the funding 
agencies want to associate danger with difﬁ cult problems ? If the funding agen-
cies would allow researchers fully to express their individuality some would 
 choose to tackle the difﬁ cult problems because they would see them as per-
sonal challenges. 
 While no one knows the minds of Planck et al., we modeled Venture 
Research on what we imagined their inspirations might be. As most of the 26 
Venture Research groups went on to make potentially  “ high - impact ” dis-
coveries (see Chapter  7 ), it would seem that our model is viable, and the high 
proportion of successes indicates that their research was not high - risk. I illus-
trate our experience schematically in Figure  11 . 
 Figure 11  
 An idealized plot similarly to Figures  9 and  10 , but based on Venture Research 
experience. 
Low
Probability of success 
~100% 
0
Venture
Research
Potential impact
High 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
73
 Venture Research would seem, therefore, to be  “ low - risk, high - reward, ”  
although we did not use such fashionable clich é s * at the time. We set out from 
the beginning to re - create the environment of total freedom that members of 
the Planck Club virtually took for granted. Thus, we  expected all scientists 
whom we supported to succeed in their ambitious goals eventually, but we set 
neither timetables nor goals. If a TR initiative were similarly successful, it 
would indeed be genuinely transformative. 
 The way ahead seems clear, therefore. The Venture Research initiative set 
out to be transformative. As it was very successful the prognoses for TR initia-
tives would seem excellent  if they are given freedom. For a national funding 
agency, the scaling problems mentioned in Chapter  1 would not seem insur-
mountable because a properly constituted TR initiative should appeal to only 
a small number of scientists with radical thoughts on their minds. The chal-
lenge is to recognize them as there are millions of scientists, and one does not 
even know which haystack hides the needle. While the major points of depar-
ture illustrated in Table  1 were transformative, few, if any, were extrapolations 
of what had gone before, nor were they speculative leaps into the dark. Rather, 
they were the culmination of long periods of reﬂ ective contemplation, or 
careful experimentation, or both, and a Pasteur - like awareness to be on the 
lookout for the unexpected. 
 The achievements listed in Table  1 may be obvious with hindsight, but a TR 
initiative must be able to respond adequately to the Planck Club ’ s possible 
successors  before they start their campaigns. How can they be reliably identi-
ﬁ ed ? Planck was one of the most inﬂ uential scientists of all time, and few sci-
entists would dream of comparing themselves to him, even though they might 
go on to make radically new discoveries. However, Einstein in his preface to 
Planck ’ s book quoted earlier has perceptively and sensitively described a 
philosophy that in my experience is common to many scientists who have 
become seriously dissatisﬁ ed with the status quo and believe they may have a 
viable alternative. They, too, might not be overly interested in the power, glory, 
or other transient rewards major discoveries might bring. Rather, they would 
seem to yearn for the inner satisfaction that comes from understanding. A TR 
initiative must therefore be able to respond to these visionary scientists and 
indeed to encourage them while their great excursions are still at the planning 
stage. 
 * The general reader may not be aware of the funding agencies ’ routine use of vacuous clich é s 
nowadays. Other widely used examples include  “ actors, ”  “ at the interfaces between disciplines, ” 
 “ benchmarks, ”   “ crosscutting, ”     “ deliverables, ”   “ generic richness, ”   “ horizon scanning, ”   “ ideas facto-
ries, ”   “ milestones, ”   “ out of the box, ”   “ risk appetite, ”   “ roadmaps, ”   “ sandpits, ”   “ stakeholders, ”  and 
 “ thematic priorities. ” None of these vague terms, or the concepts that might be behind them, 
were generally in use before the  ∼ 1970 watershed. The agencies who use them without 
apology or deprecation usually indicate a preoccupation with short - term performance and a 
lack of understanding of what scientiﬁ c inquiry is about. However, many researchers cannot afford 
to ignore them as they may contain news of opportunities that may ease their funding 
difﬁ culties. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

74 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
 I do not know of an agency anywhere in the world that as currently consti-
tuted could respond to these challenges. Devotion, hunger, and other abstrac-
tions are not noticeably high on funding agencies ’ agenda, but they must be if 
they are to engage effectively in TR. Some agencies have come to recognize 
the need for urgent remedial action in attracting adventurous proposals, but 
they still seem reluctant to provide the freedom to enable that need to be 
satisﬁ ed. Instead, they consult committees of the supposed best scientists and 
ask for recommendations. But committees can rarely, if ever, be creative. The 
fact that the best scientists might be involved is irrelevant. It can, of course, 
provide a defense against criticism as a committee ’ s membership can cloak its 
conclusions with respectability, but the collective responses of any group, 
however distinguished they may be as individuals, are usually uninspiring and 
based on compromise. Scientiﬁ c advances are none of those things. 
 So, the tasks of science policy as outlined by the British scientiﬁ c and 
technological heavyweights  quoted at the beginning of this chapter seem to 
have moved on. Post 1970s, policy - makers have deﬁ ned  “ the environment 
necessary for scientiﬁ c discovery ” in terms of what the supposed best research-
ers want to achieve. Funding agencies have then invited researchers to compete 
for the available funds in each discipline (or combinations of disciplines) 
according to complex rules usually punctuated with the sort of vague clich é s 
mentioned earlier. Some have recently tried to spice this bland mix with a 
sprinkling of so - called high - risk initiatives, but the rules have stayed much 
the same. 
 It would seem only a matter of time, therefore, before the need for TR 
initiatives is widely recognized, but how exactly should they be set up ? 
Venture Research experience indicates that in the absence of freedom for 
everyone — Nature ’ s preferred solution — the funding agency ’ s ﬁ rst step would 
be to accept that they must restore  “ the environment necessary for scientiﬁ c 
discovery ” to something approaching what it was, even if it is only for a small 
fraction of the community. Thus, the frameworks within which TR initiatives 
are set up must themselves be transformative. That would be a very big step 
for many agencies as they seem reluctant to acknowledge that any damage 
has been done by their present policies, however inadvertent. If they would 
bite the bureaucratic bullet, however, their reforms must not be formulaic, as 
any self - respecting prospective Planck Club member would almost certainly 
disdain them. 
 Subject to the general acceptance of the deﬁ nition of TR outlined in Chapter 
 1 , once an agency has appointed the key staff, they should invite them to get 
on with it. As I have implied, these people would in effect be  Nature ’ s ambas-
sadors. They would be responsible for deriving the strategies that Nature 
herself might imaginably be happy with in today ’ s world, that is, for freeing 
would - be transformative researchers from the ubiquitous rules and regula-
tions, and for encouraging ﬂ air. They will succeed only if they can present 
themselves acceptably to potential Planck Club members. Above all, they must 
win their trust and respect if these scientists are to share their real intentions 
with them. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
75
 However, and this is a big  “ however, ” the diplomatic analogy has weak-
nesses. In diplomacy, ambassadors may not always be trying to project the 
same image of their homeland everywhere they serve. Policies in the various 
ministries (political, commercial, defense, etc.) may have regional variations. 
There may be hidden agendas. Diplomats should never lie, but they may 
sometimes be economical with the truth. For these and other complex matters, 
ambassadors will usually receive their instructions from their governments 
according to current foreign policies. Diplomats understand these complexi-
ties, and this sophisticated service usually works well. 
 Nature ’ s ambassadors must strive to serve on a much higher plane and 
should have a positively Planckian dedication to the cause of science per se. 
Their dedication should also be their source of inspiration as obviously they 
are no more privy to Nature ’ s secrets than is anyone else. If they are to win 
researchers ’ conﬁ dence, however, their behavior should reﬂ ect what can be 
imagined we understand about Nature, and one of its most important ele-
ments, as Pasteur once famously observed, is that she recognizes only one 
science. * My affectionate creation of the entity I call  “ Nature ” is entirely ﬁ cti-
tious, of course, but in reality so are the disciplines, boundaries, or interfaces 
created by the establishment. Such venerable entities as physics, chemistry, and 
biology, are still nevertheless merely convenient ways of partitioning scientiﬁ c 
enquiry. Multidisciplinary research is a vague concept that has meaning only 
for bureaucrats and apparatchiks — it may not necessarily be a good idea for 
astronomers to collaborate with zoologists. On the other hand, coherence and 
ﬂ exibility in research are essential; researchers must either have anticipated 
every contributing factor in their prospective campaigns or be ready to respond 
to the unexpected as it may arise. Otherwise they will fail. 
 Nature ’ s ambassadors can be faithful to all this only if the environment 
within which they operate so empowers them. Thus, the major issues should 
be whether applicants have coherently and credibly covered all the bases and 
taken all reasonable steps to ensure that their research would be free from 
artiﬁ cial constraints. In a nonlinear world, events have a nasty habit of turning 
the tables. Indeed, the famous military aphorism  “ No battle plan survives ﬁ rst 
contact with the enemy ” seems applicable to any sphere, and stresses the 
importance of considering a range of options. The extent to which these con-
siderations are satisﬁ ed will be vital in determining the success of any TR ini-
tiative. Indeed, initiatives whose staff is not so empowered would probably be 
indistinguishable from those we have already. 
 Funding agencies aiming to create TR initiatives could well have serious 
difﬁ culties, therefore, as few, if any, fully recognize the unity  † of science. Frag-
mentation is the norm. 
 * The differing ways in which exploratory research in either the natural sciences  or in engineering 
can lead to surprising and unexpected outcomes were discussed in my  To Be a Scientist ( 1994 ). 
 † At a recent meeting, a member of the audience questioned my references to Pasteur ’ s one science 
with the observation that Pasteur made that remark more than 100 years ago.  “ We have moved 
on since then, ” he said. Perhaps he also regards gravity as a seventeenth - century notion that can 
now be safely ignored. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

76 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
 It is indeed unfortunate that the most signiﬁ cant developments of the 
newest major discipline — the biological sciences — have taken place during the 
policy upheavals of the last few decades. Consequently, the agencies have 
usually emphasized narrowly targeted objectives such as applications and 
techniques — genome sequencing, for example — because they are easier to 
assess and prioritize. This is one of the reasons why many breakthroughs 
announced nowadays look rather like  “ progress reports, ” as I mentioned in 
Chapter  2 . The quest for comprehension  * has suffered as a result. Further-
more, for historical reasons, medical research has retained its own hallowed 
preserve as if our cells and tissues were more important than those found 
in other forms of life. Such biological sciences as plant, developmental, micro-
bial, and molecular biology are dealt with on an ad hoc basis but separately 
from the physical sciences. While the current somewhat arbitrary divisions 
generally work for mainstream research, they would be particularly inappro-
priate for TR because its main purpose is  to make important and unexpected 
discoveries. Unless researchers ’ minds are fully pasteurized, so to speak, that 
is, unless they are prepared for every possible eventuality, fortune might not 
favor them. 
 In the United States, despite the efforts of Vannevar Bush, the NSF has no 
responsibility for medical sciences. The NIH has recognized that many impor-
tant medical advances stemmed from the physical sciences and has conse-
quently opened some of their initiatives to researchers whom they would not 
normally consider for funding,  provided their objectives are biomedical. Thus 
does the specter of Nature ’ s deadly enemy, compromise, raise its ugly head! 
Many physical scientists who realize that their work could have implications 
for biology or medicine might make useful contributions under this and similar 
schemes, but that is not how major discoveries come about. Lasers, nuclear 
magnetic resonance imaging, and electron microscopy, among many other 
technologies, have transformed medical practice. They all came from physical 
scientists, but none had biomedical applications or indeed any other in mind, 
and so it would be most unlikely therefore that they would have qualiﬁ ed for 
the NIH schemes had they been in existence at the time. Furthermore, it is not 
at all clear that their work would have survived scrutiny by the usual NSF  † 
mechanisms. NSF would probably have rejected Townes ’  proposal for work 
that led to the laser — had he been required to make one. Even his head of 
department and fellow specialist did not think Townes ’ proposal would work 
(see Poster  1 ). 
 In the United Kingdom, it is a sad fact that the arrangements for funding 
academic research are generally more fragmented than in the United States 
(see Poster  11 ).
 * Sydney Brenner, one of molecular biology ’ s pioneering practitioners, said in an essay published 
approximately a decade ago:  “ For many years it was widely held that molecular biology was a 
completely useless subject, a  “ fundamental ” science of no interest to those working on practical 
matters ” ( 1998 ). 
 †     Or by an equivalent organization — electron microscopy was ﬁ rst developed in Germany. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
77
 In contrast, British Petroleum allowed Venture Research to wander freely, 
but it is a private company that in principle can do almost anything without 
having to worry too much about treading on academic toes. I have long 
thought that any new sponsor of Venture Research would have to be private 
for this reason. Unfortunately, corporate and other private sources of research 
funds have also increasingly focused their attention on tangible or speciﬁ c 
outcomes in recent years. Although several organisations have expressed 
interest in Venture Research, none have ultimately taken the plunge (see 
Chapter  5 ). If the national agencies are not able to allow their TR initiatives 
 Poster 11: The UK ’ s Byzantine Research Councils  
 The United Kingdom was once the proud possessor of a Science Research 
Council, the principal organization for supporting academic scientiﬁ c 
research. Its virtually exclusive selection criteria were  “ timeliness and 
promise. ” Unfortunately, the move toward greater complexity began in 
1981, when it was renamed the Science and Engineering Research Council 
(SERC), implying thereby that engineering was not deemed a science. In 
April 1994, the SERC was split into the Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Research Council (EPSRC) and the Particle Physics and Astronomy 
Research Council (PPARC). SERC ’ s remote - sensing efforts were trans-
ferred to the Natural Environment Research Council, and its biotechnology 
efforts merged with the former Agriculture and Food Research Council to 
make the new Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. In 
2007 PPARC was merged with the former Council for the Central Labora-
tory of the Research Councils, and extracted responsibility for nuclear 
physics from EPSRC to form the Science and Technology Facilities Council 
(STFC) based in Swindon. Some scientists have mischievously dubbed the 
STFC the  “ Swindon Town Football Club, ”  which would seem nicely to 
reﬂ ect the levels of intellectual input the architects of these confusing 
changes have hitherto applied. 
 Medical research is supported from the government purse by the Medical 
Research Council, and privately at about the same level by the Wellcome 
Trust. The MRC is the oldest of the research councils — it was created in 
1913. In 2007, however, active consideration was being given to a,  “ Single 
Fund for Health Research, ” which would seem to involve the MRC being 
subsumed within the Department of Health. The MRC has been a proliﬁ c 
source of transformative discoveries over the years because, I would suggest, 
it took determined steps to protect scientiﬁ c freedom. Subsumed within the 
Department of Health, it could suffer the same fate as befell the University 
Grants Committee (see Chapter  6 ), another one - time staunch advocate of 
academic freedom. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

78 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
to survey the entire scientiﬁ c spectrum as Nature would surely intend, we 
could have an impasse. 
 Optimistically, we can hope that fully free and ﬂ exible TR initiatives will 
emerge soon. In principle, a proliferation of them even in one country should 
not cause too many problems, although it may lead to confusion among 
researchers, with such questions as which one they should apply to. 
 However, although many TR initiatives may be set up, those who create 
them must not lose sight of the reasons why they are needed. In particular, 
their staff would still be required to be Nature ’ s ambassadors. If they are to 
be credible, therefore, it is essential that they be authorized to operate  as if 
each initiative were unique; as if it were the only one. TR initiatives conﬁ ned to 
speciﬁ c ﬁ elds or restricted in any way would be a contradiction and probably 
a waste of money. They would imply that their sponsors knew the areas 
where major developments will pop up. But no one can know, not even the 
researchers. 
 In large countries like the United States,  it may be preferable to have several 
TR initiatives. In my rough estimation (see Chapter 6), such an initiative could 
eventually be supporting some 108 programs. This number may not seem large 
by continental standards, but our experience indicates that close relationships 
between staff and researchers are essential to the building and maintenance 
of mutual trust and respect. Staff members can play their part only if they are 
broadly familiar with every project, and among other things, prepared to help 
with the problems that radical researchers inevitably create. As they are highly 
individualistic people, one should  expect that they often will be awkward. 
However, it is astonishing how intolerant some university administrations can 
be with researchers whose work does not conform to the norm. In the absence 
of one ’ s radical view of the world being conﬁ rmed, researchers might be out 
on a limb as far as the rest of a department is concerned, and may not always 
receive the necessary protection against the routine slings and arrows that 
bureaucrats love to throw. In Venture Research, scientists regularly asked for 
our help with such mundane problems as disputes over lab space, appoint-
ments, visas, and funding, as well as advice on such strategic issues as research 
direction and patents. They also seemed to welcome encouragement when 
things were not going too well. 
 Sensitive management is people - intensive, and a nationwide US TR initia-
tive would in our experience imply a staff of about 10 scientists with a similar 
number in administrative support. Although this may not be very different 
from, say, the staff of an NSF Division, a TR initiative would not be adminis-
tering a program. There should be no speciﬁ c objectives, priorities (regional 
or subject), or special initiatives, and little or no peer review (merit review). 
Indeed, committees or panels should have as little direct involvement as pos-
sible. The TR staff will almost certainly wish to seek external advice, but ﬁ nal 
decisions should be theirs alone. For TR, the intellectual dimension should be 
paramount. Bureaucracy is, of course, the archenemy of all research, but it can 
hardly be avoided in the mainstreams if the agencies are to be fair to everyone. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS 
79
For TR initiatives, however, the concept of fairness should take on new 
meaning. Nature ’ s ambassadors should not strive to be fair to people per se, 
 but to the very concept of the creative spirit. 
 This new approach to fairness also means that every proposal meeting these 
exceptional standards should be approved. There should be no priorities. This 
is precisely how we ran Venture Research, but would - be sponsors now seem 
to view such an apparently open - ended commitment with horror. But it is 
exceptionally difﬁ cult to come up with a proposal that can credibly be argued 
might qualify the scientist for membership of a future Planck Club or win a 
Nobel Prize. Commitments restricted by such severe intellectual constraints 
would, in effect, limit themselves, as they are so difﬁ cult to satisfy, whereas 
those required merely to support  “ the best ” are effectively unlimited. Even 
rubbish can be graded. Indeed, it might be difﬁ cult to spend even 1% of a 
large funding agency ’ s budget on TR if Planckian standards are maintained. 
If expenditure substantially exceeds that level, its strategy would almost cer-
tainly be wrong. 
 It will also be essential that staff members, ambassadors for Nature as they 
would be, each speak with the same voice, and the smaller their number, the 
more likely that would be. One would be ideal but hopelessly impracticable. 
In Venture Research, we opted for the minimum whose integrated experience 
would roughly span the major disciplines — that is, three or four scientists with 
a similar number of administrators in support. Proposals in, say, physics, chem-
istry, or biology should not necessarily come ﬁ rst to their respective specialists, 
but as intellectual approaches vary among the disciplines we thought we could 
get closer to Nature, so to speak, by including representatives from each of 
the major scientiﬁ c blocs. We could then learn from each other about how 
Nature might think. That number was adequate to deal with about 1000 pro-
posals a year, and a steady - state international community of 25 – 30 groups of 
Venture Researchers comprising about 100 scientists. More importantly, it also 
allowed new staff readily to assimilate the current program, to adjust to the 
new ways of working, and to learn to think coherently. That might not be pos-
sible with either a large team or a large program. 
 The ambassadors ’ primary roles would therefore be to encourage and stim-
ulate, and to protect researchers as far as possible from all externally imposed 
constraints. This means that they should all be generally conversant with the 
scientiﬁ c concepts that each applicant brings forward, and clearly the numbers 
of applications they can manage in these circumstances is strictly limited. They 
could easily be swamped. To prevent that happening, while keeping the staff 
of each initiative to a minimum, large funding agencies such as the NSF might 
eventually choose to have say, four or ﬁ ve regional TR initiatives with a 
national director to ensure that each initiative was operating along similar 
lines. As face - to - face contact is important for TR, such arrangements would 
also considerably reduce the need for travel. 
 I acknowledge that these arrangements would be highly unusual for most 
funding agencies. However, TR initiatives should be exceptional because of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

80 
SEARCHING FOR PLANCK’S SUCCESSORS
the very nature of the problems they seek to alleviate and the potentially 
revolutionary contributions they could make. Their purpose should not be to 
serve the profession of science or indeed any social entity. 
 Our experience implies that the typical cost of a TR initiative (or set of 
initiatives) would probably be less than 1% of the national spend on research. 
It may also take some years to reach this level of expenditure because, after 
decades of mission - oriented research, even potential members of the Planck 
Club will need time to adjust their thinking to the new opportunities that the 
initiatives present. Cost alone is therefore unlikely to be an impediment, but 
national funding agencies may need some remission from the statutory obliga-
tions laid on them if TR initiatives are to have the necessary freedom. TR 
selection criteria should be exclusively scientiﬁ c — one would expect that 
Nature might yield her secrets to suitably sensitive, open - minded, and obser-
vant members of the human race, but that she would be indifferent to their 
ﬁ elds of expertise or such other irrelevant qualiﬁ cations as age, gender, minor-
ity status, or location. 
 Funding agencies may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to defend the use of public money on 
the basis of the abstract criteria outlined here. Thus, we may have a serious 
problem. Once upon a time, funding agencies conﬁ ned themselves to the most 
general issues, but now micromanagement is common. 
 Nowadays, the realpolitiks imposed by vested interests, pressure groups, 
costs, and the like severely restrict their room for maneuver. This has led to 
the emergence of substantial differences between what agencies can do and 
what ideally they ought to be doing. In addition, the 20 – 30 years spent in 
overseeing largely mission - oriented programs may simply have generated 
more bureaucratic inertia than can quickly be dissipated. These difﬁ culties 
mean that we may have to look elsewhere than government for TR initiatives, 
but industrial companies are also having their problems, and philanthropists 
seem reluctant to provide the unconditional support Planckian researchers 
need. 
 It may be attractive, therefore, to explore the possibility of combining the 
vision and courage often found in the private sector with the commitment to 
duty found in the public. Public – private TR initiatives funded in partnership 
could combine the best of both worlds. Flexibility in ﬁ nance, and efﬁ cient 
access to extensive academic networks and infrastructure could be a powerful 
combination. One might reasonably believe that Vannevar Bush and Henry 
Dale would be proud of them!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Universities for the Twenty - First Century: 
The Case for a Fifth Revolution  
 “ If a blunt axe will not sharpen a pencil, ten blunt axes will also fail. ” 
 — Edsger W. Dijkstra, remark to the author, 1983 
 The university  * is the oldest of our institutions. Incomparable in terms of the 
breadth and scope of its intellectual horizons, it is the ideal home for original 
thinkers on science or life in general. Founded in the eleventh century, it has 
always been subject to pressures from church or state, but this unique institu-
tion has survived because, apart from its functional roles in bringing the next 
generation abreast of current knowledge and preparing it for the future, it has 
developed and reﬁ ned other roles that could hardly be more important or 
initially less functional. For centuries, society has endowed the university with 
remarkable degrees of freedom, and this has paid off. Long ago, it was the 
institution that eventually broke the Church ’ s and feudalism ’ s paralyzing inﬂ u-
ence in Europe. It pioneered the idea that men (and at that time, sadly, only 
men) were to be distinguished only by the quality of their thinking, their social 
status being largely irrelevant. In his superb  History of the English People 
(Green  1909 ), John Richard Green wrote:
 The smallest school (university) was European and not local  .  .  . A common lan-
guage, the Latin tongue, superseded the warring tongues of Europe. A common 
5
81
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 * I include within this catch - all term colleges, institutes, and all other centers of higher 
education. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

82 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
intellectual kinship and rivalry took the place of the petty strifes which parted 
province from province or realm from realm. What the Church and Empire had 
both aimed at and both failed in, the knitting of Christian nations together into 
a vast commonwealth, the Universities for a time actually did.  .  .  . Among Oxford 
scholars, the son of the noble stood on precisely the same footing with the 
poorest mendicant. Knowledge made the  “ master ” .  .  .  . If the democratic spirit 
of the Universities threatened feudalism, their spirit of enquiry threatened the 
Church. 
 Unfortunately, like children given something whose value they do not appreci-
ate, the leadership in many countries today seems to believe that there is 
nothing special about the university. Its performance should therefore be 
subject to the same indiscriminate processes of optimization and performance 
assessment other institutions must endure. This chapter discusses the inherent 
dangers of that misguided and short - sighted policy, and why we must strive 
to protect this last bastion of intellectual freedom from the tides of 
homogenization. 
 In the sciences, Green ’ s  “ spirit of scepticism, of doubt, of denial ” (Green 
 1909 , p. 137), culminated in the seventeenth century with what has been called 
the ﬁ rst or often  the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. The name does not refer to any 
particular discovery, but rather to the societal, political, and institutional condi-
tions that combine to create environments conducive to major change. The 
story of this ﬁ rst Revolution (and of the subsequent three) has been told 
elsewhere.  *  Brieﬂ y, such scientists as Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, Newton, and 
Bacon shaped its development and argued that scientiﬁ c inquiry should be 
conducted in  dialog with Nature. This is in sharp contrast with the received 
wisdom of the time that scholars should merely contemplate the universe as 
Aristotle ’ s followers had advocated successfully for many centuries. That does 
not necessarily mean that these views went unchallenged but rather that any 
challenges would fall largely on deaf ears. 
 The Revolution also produced new types of institutions for the advance-
ment, recording, and dissemination of the new knowledge. The  Accademia dei 
Lincei (named for the fabled sharpness of the lynx ’ s eyesight) set up in 
Florence in 1603 was the ﬁ rst. By the 1660s, permanent national academies 
had been set up in England and in France, and in other countries shortly after. 
As academies usually founded journals for propagating their members ’ works 
and for establishing the priority of their discoveries, these remarkable develop-
ments also left a permanent legacy. As they expanded, they institutionalized 
the continuing progress of intellectual development, thereby laying the expo-
nentially increasing foundations of modern society. Unfortunately, based nec-
essarily on consensus as they are, they have also made it increasingly difﬁ cult 
for heretical views to be heard. As I shall explain, this is now creating serious 
problems. 
  *  For a review, see Cohen ’ s  Revolution in Science  (Cohen  1985 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
83
 Roger Hahn also described a second Scientiﬁ c Revolution beginning in the 
early nineteenth century (Hahn  1971 ). The increase in the number of scientists 
and people interested in science led to the establishment of the Royal Institu-
tion in London, and a wide range of professional societies, the ﬁ rst of which 
was set up by the geologists. It also led to the creation of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science and similar organizations in Germany, 
France, the United States, and elsewhere that catered for the public ’ s appar-
ently insatiable demand for the latest scientiﬁ c knowledge. Scientists such as 
Davy and Faraday were superstars in today ’ s language, and their work had a 
huge popular following. It is a sad fact that although the scope and importance 
of science in everyday life has increased immeasurably since their time, public 
interest has nowhere near kept pace. Except for the occasional bursts of curi-
osity that follow calamities such as earthquakes or epidemics, indifference to 
Nature ’ s often mysterious ways tends to be the general rule. This is a problem 
primarily for scientists, of course. Their experiments put them in direct com-
munication with Nature, so to speak, and it could be invaluable if they could 
galvanize the public with their insights as Davy, Faraday, and many others once 
did. But it is not easy. Scientists then could afford the investments of time and 
energy to make their work more accessible because they had much more 
security in those days. Those taking on these duties today would be penalized 
as they would have less time to spend on their endless searches for new 
funding. * 
 The Third Revolution began as the nineteenth century closed and twentieth 
opened. The number of universities increased substantially. In addition to their 
traditional roles in learning and scholarship, they also became centers for 
scientiﬁ c research and postgraduate training. Thus, science became established 
as  a profession in which a budding scientist could serve a form of apprentice-
ship and qualify for the right to carry out independent research. Institutes were 
created with no direct relationships with universities but operating on similar 
lines. These included the Carnegie Institute in Washington, DC and the 
Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft in Germany — later to become the Max Planck 
Institutes. 
 Above all, the Third Revolution marked the establishment of the industrial 
research laboratory and one of the deﬁ ning revolutions of the twentieth 
century. Thomas Edison set the scene. While many nineteenth - century scien-
tists such as Faraday with electromagnetism, Pasteur in microbiology and 
immunology, and Perkin with dyestuffs searched for and achieved industrial 
applications for their research, Thomas Edison was the master in this respect. 
He showed that the systematic and rigorous search for and evaluation of 
practical and proﬁ table uses for science was a profession in its own right. Thus, 
he made the remarkable discovery that one could do original and highly 
 * For many academic researchers, their continuing employment is also at stake. Up to about a half 
are employed on short - term contracts based on so - called  “ soft money, ” and concern about unem-
ployment is never far from their minds. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

84 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
creative work developing new products without necessarily uncovering any 
new science. That discovery turned out to be as important as any discovery in 
the natural sciences, and led eventually to the phenomenal levels of economic 
growth that characterized most of the twentieth century. 
 The potential of the Third Revolution reached its climax during World War 
II. In the United States and the United Kingdom in particular, academics made 
vital contributions in virtually every sector of warfare. Discoveries made in 
such ﬁ elds as radar, sonar, explosives, detonators, gunnery, weapons design, 
navigation, logistics, communications, cryptography, medicine, pharmaceuti-
cals, and nutrition, were mainly science - based. Engineers were mobilized, too, 
and helped to achieve and maintain the huge increases in manufacturing pro-
duction needed to service the voracious demands of total war. The construc-
tion in wartime of the Pluto  * pipeline across the English Channel to supply 
fuel to the Allies after the Normandy landings illustrates what can be done by 
inspired engineering and construction genius. Other supreme achievements 
included the Manhattan Project to design and build an atomic bomb, a project 
dominated by academics from both sides of the Atlantic and ﬁ nanced almost 
entirely by the United States; and the predominantly British Ultra program, 
by which huge numbers of mathematicians, musicians, chess players, electronic 
and other mainly academic experts combined their skills systematically to 
break and read the Axis codes (Enigma, etc.) on an almost routine basis. This 
latter program was so secret that its very existence could not be revealed until 
the 1970s. I should also include operational research introduced by Robert 
Watson - Watt (the radar pioneer) in 1939. It was, in his words (Zuckerman 
 1966 ):
 The application of the basic scientiﬁ c methods of measurement, classiﬁ cation, 
comparison and correlation, to the selection of means for attaining, with the least 
expenditure in effort and time, the maximum operational effect which could be 
extracted from the available or potentially available resources in personnel and 
material. 
 Thomas Edison would have approved! It was operational research that led, 
for example, to the highly effective switch, early in 1944, from the carpet 
bombing of centers of population to the destruction of the railway network in 
northwestern Europe. 
 No wonder, therefore, that Winston Churchill could say  †   in 1943:  “ When the 
fetters of wartime are struck off and we turn free hands to the industrial tasks 
of peace, we may be astonished at the progress and efﬁ ciency we shall suddenly 
see displayed. ” 
 * Pluto — pipeline under the ocean — consisted of a 3 - inch - internal - diameter armored pipe laid 
initially between the Isle of Wight and the Bordeaux peninsular. It was later extended over 
western Europe. Ultimately 500 miles of pipe were laid, and delivered a million gallons of fuel a 
day during the ﬁ nal months of the war. 
 † BBC broadcast, March 21, 1943. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
85
 These glittering successes set the scene for what Cohen has described as 
the Fourth Revolution beginning in 1945. Such leaders as Vannevar Bush in 
the United States and Henry Dale in the United Kingdom (see Chapter  3 ) 
catalyzed an unprecedented expansion of government support for academic 
research. The expansion brought the universities to perhaps their highest 
levels of performance, popularity, and prestige in the 1950s and 1960s, but the 
good times did not last. It was not that the universities had failed in any 
way — quite the contrary — but that their continued expansion at postwar rates 
had inevitably become impossible to sustain. The post - 1970 reforms followed, 
with their emphasis on narrow measures of perceived efﬁ ciency and account-
ability. In addition, the universities also had a wide range of social obligations 
heaped on them, probably the most important of which was the requirement 
that they open their doors to a larger proportion of the population. 
 Indeed, US and UK universities have come up with the goods in this latter 
respect, as can be seen in Tables  11 and 12 . Figures for many other countries 
are very similar. * As Eric Ashby (Lord Ashby) once famously remarked when 
these increasing enrolments were being proposed in Britain:  “ More does not 
mean worse; but it certainly means different. ” 
 Now that the slated increases, and perhaps more, have actually taken place, 
universities everywhere are indeed not the places they once were. Academics 
have always been proud of their self - appointed roles as commentators on 
contemporary society ’ s material and intellectual well - being, and of course, 
 TABLE 11.  Enrollment in Degree - Granting Postsecondary US Education 
Institutions 
 Year 
 Public Institutions, millions  
 Private Institutions, millions  
 1970  a  
 6.371 
 2.127 
 2002  b  
 12.750 
 3.860 
  a  Source :  Statistical Abstracts of the United States , 1972. 
  b  Source :  U.S. National Center for Education Statistics, September 2005.  
 TABLE 12.   Higher - Education Students in UK 
Universities and Colleges 
 Year 
 Number, millions  
 1969/70  a  
 0.264 
 2003/04  b  
 2.247 
  a  Source :  Department of Education and Science, 1975.  
  b  Source :  Higher Education Statistics Agency, 2005.  
 * D. W. Strangway has recently published details of current and projected student demand on the 
global scale, in millions, as follows: 6.5, for 1950; 97, for 2000; 119, for 2005; 151, for 2010; 183, for 
2015; 222, for 2020; and 263, for 2025 (Strangway  2005 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

86 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
they have occasionally made substantial contributions themselves. No one 
asked them to derive such roles, and in any case, no one could have speciﬁ ed 
them or even indicated what they might be. Luckily, no one tried. Over the 
centuries, societies everywhere seemed to have taken the unspoken decision 
that these reservoirs of extraordinary talent were worth their keep for that 
very reason alone. One never knew when they might be needed. 
 One of the Fourth Revolution ’ s most notable events was Robert Solow ’ s 
Nobel Prize – winning discovery that technical change was the major agent of 
economic growth. For the ﬁ rst time, therefore, the signiﬁ cance of the Planck 
Club ’ s discoveries made under the laissez - faire regime of the pre - 1970s could 
be quantiﬁ ed. It was no longer a matter of opinion. 
 Nevertheless, this superb record has apparently been set aside. Academics 
are now made constantly aware of their accountability to their various task -
 masters and of the need to justify their existence with respect to a host of 
extraneous responsibilities  * placed on them. Such shackles are, of course, all 
too familiar to people in other walks of life, but until recently the universities 
had generally been exempt. Sadly, however, the bureaucrats, backed up by the 
politically correct, have now decided that the universities should no longer be 
excluded from their tender mercies, justifying their decision on the grounds 
that the academic sector would thereby be more efﬁ cient. At ﬁ rst glance, this 
might seem sensible. ( “ First - glance ” is, of course, the bureaucrat ’ s weapon of 
choice. Closer inspection is rarely encouraged, acknowledged, or allowed.) 
Unfortunately, the major snags are that efﬁ ciency measurements  require goals 
to be speciﬁ ed, and their speciﬁ cation is usually based on external consider-
ations. The vast majority of academics rarely have a say. 
 It might be surprising that academics have generally acquiesced to all this. 
Ideally, of course, they should have marshaled their vast intellectual reserves 
to ﬁ ght for their independence. However, that would not be consistent with 
the best academic traditions. Academics hitherto were noted for their indi-
viduality. Collective action has never been their forte, and in any case, it could 
easily be represented as special pleading. Thus, the universities, once largely 
autonomous institutions for the promotion of scholarship and education, are 
now progressively being brought into line. In effect,  the universities are being 
made ﬁ t for purpose , but sadly, that purpose is no longer a matter for academics 
alone to work out. The university must now satisfy society ’ s perceived require-
 * A list of external issues currently being imposed on UK universities was published by F. H. 
Berkshire of Imperial College, London (Berkshire 2005  ) and includes  “ efﬁ ciency ” gains: time -
 and - motion study, corporate management structures, directed research, European conformity 
and centralization, examination structures in schools, funding of teaching in higher education, 
globalization — education as an international commodity, grade inﬂ ation at all levels, quality assur-
ance regulation, requirements of employers, research assessment exercises, research/scholarship/
teaching balance, school curricula, social engineering and access, and students as  “ customers ” in 
an international market. As Berkshire puts it:  “ A common feature of these issues is a fetish for 
the demonstration of accountability through the creation of performance metrics. ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
87
ments, which can be as changeable as governments, or as a company ’ s value 
on the stock exchange. As a result, the universities today are engaged in an 
apparently never - ending war of attrition as they struggle to cope with the new 
objectives and the stiﬂ ing pressures of homogenization. 
 Impartiality can be a priceless asset, and the university has always stood 
ready to offer well - informed, well - considered advice and comment on current 
affairs. Long ago, as Green and others have pointed out, its high - quality think-
ing helped break the Church ’ s stiﬂ ing grip. Nowadays, we have urgent need 
for penetrating insight on terrorism, on global warming and other real or 
imagined threats to our existence, and on an increasing torrent of so - called 
health - and - safety - inspired obligations that also combine to curtail freedom. 
As ever, such insightful contributions are unlikely to be welcomed initially by 
the  “ powers that be, ” but they would seem to be essential precursors and cata-
lysts for action. However, the university ’ s role is much wider than that; it can 
also emphasize the positive, which is where scientiﬁ c freedom comes in. There 
is absolutely no downside to an expanded understanding. 
 In principle, the university still has much to offer in these respects. But this 
option may not long be available if its institutions are obliged to recruit only 
those staff deemed best to meet functional speciﬁ cations in fashionable ﬁ elds. 
In the consultancy ﬁ eld, the old adage was that successful consultants merely 
delivered the advice their customers wanted to hear. Do we really want that 
of our universities? If we oblige them to provide precisely what our various 
proxies think that we need, according to timetable and balance sheet and at 
least as economically as the competition, there may have little energy left to 
do the other things, and the university as we have known it will have ceased 
to exist. 
 All revolutions come to an end, of course, and the signs are that the Fourth 
Revolution, too, is petering out; its energy sapped by the bureaucratic para-
phernalia of foresight,  * horizon scanning, relevance, roadmaps, and the like, 
none of which were even conceived of when the revolution began. It used to 
be said that researchers strived to learn more and more about less and less, 
but that will always be the case without the occasional explosive intervention 
 * Governments that place high value on foresight initiatives, of which the UK government is pos-
sibly the leader, usually base their forecasts on those embryo technologies that seem to offer the 
best prospects. It is in fact a form of projected hindsight as the discoveries on which these tech-
nologies are based have already been made. Advocates of these initiatives should study the 
amusing exercise carried out by  The Economist (p. 111, Feb. 12, 2000) that featured the story of 
two imaginary investors. In 1900, Felicity Foresight invested  $ 1 in the stocks that  would perform 
best in the coming year. In 1901, the compounded sum was invested in the best stocks for the next 
year, and so on until 2000. She was in many respects a Venture Researcher as she based her 
investments on potential that she was convinced  would  be realized. By 2000, her investments had 
yielded the staggering sum of ~ $ 10 19 . The other investor, Harry Hindsight, also started in 1900, 
but invested similarly in the best performing stocks of  the previous year , which, of course, were 
clear for all to see. In 2000, the cumulative value of his stock was  $ 783! 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

88 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
of scientists who stand existing thinking on its head or enable industry to 
engage in entirely new types of activity. To make matters worse, many research-
ers now spend more time struggling to cope with bureaucracy than they do on 
research. The infrastructure ’ s role dominates. 
 The Fourth Revolution started out with a blaze of hope, its policies designed 
to free scientists from the necessary clamps imposed by the exigencies of war. 
Its success has probably exceeded its architects ’ wildest dreams, but a fog of 
unintended consequences now clouds its once panoramic vision. 
 What should we do? Rising populations and increasing personal expecta-
tions mean that society as we know it today could breakdown if we cannot 
ensure that global economic growth continues to be positive and sustainable. 
However, thanks to Robert Solow, we now  know that growth is strongly 
dependent on having a vibrant and creative research enterprise.  That vital link 
seems to have been forgotten or disregarded.  If its signiﬁ cance were more 
widely appreciated, a stagnating research enterprise could not then be dis-
missed as an esoteric problem effecting only pampered academics. It would 
be everyone ’ s concern. 
 I suggest, therefore, that the time has come to launch a Fifth Revolution. 
However, revolutions scientiﬁ c or otherwise are usually only recognized with 
hindsight. Indeed, as with major discoveries, they are probably not speciﬁ able. 
They should arise spontaneously whenever the social or intellectual milieu 
becomes receptive. That condition does not yet seem fully satisﬁ ed. In the past 
few decades, there have been increasing restrictions on personal freedom, 
and institutions have become increasingly cautious and risk - averse, but these 
changes seem to be regarded as inevitable consequences of modern life to 
which we must adjust and do the best we can. But such fatalism could easily 
lead to disaster. In 2007, the fashionable belief was that the greatest threat to 
humanity came from global warming. In the 1990s, HIV/AIDS was among the 
major problems cited. The odds are that by 2017 (or maybe before that), we 
will also be at the mercy of other terrible prospects. 
 In a healthy society, such threats ebb and ﬂ ow as we either deal with them, 
or hopefully they fade in relative importance. But as many would agree, we 
should not allow them to become so dominant that actions taken to avert or 
reduce them seriously affect the quality of life. Indeed, in this respect, human-
ity ’ s prosperity will always depend on  the creation of new opportunities rather 
than the identiﬁ cation of threats. We should not ignore the obvious dangers, 
of course, and we must be able to respond effectively. However, the twentieth 
century was characterized by humanity ’ s vitality; its ability to create large 
numbers of major opportunities, material and intellectual, unexpectedly out 
of nothing. No committees, targets, or deadlines were involved. That vitality 
ensured that society had the ﬂ exibility needed to prosper despite the terrible 
hazards, including the unforeseen. 
 What might a Fifth Revolution comprise? If we could project ourselves 
forward a few decades, I would hope that people then might be saying its seeds 
were sown around 2007 when it ﬁ nally became obvious that: 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
89
  •    Real per capita global economic growth is declining  
  •    Technology is derived from major scientiﬁ c discoveries made decades 
ago 
  •    Managed creativity can at best produce only what its managers 
specify 
  •    Efﬁ ciency and accountability can sometimes be the worst possible 
policies 
  •    We must begin to create a twenty - ﬁ rst - century Planck Club    
 Managed creativity (by which I mean creativity directed toward a speciﬁ c 
objective or conﬁ ned in any way) may sound like a good idea, but as my wizard 
tried to warn us (see Poster  3 ), we do not understand creativity. In these cir-
cumstances, the best we can do is to give those rare individuals who seem 
capable of transformative thinking the freedom to bring their ideas to fruition. 
Efﬁ ciency and accountability have their places; there is little harm in insisting 
that researchers who know where they are going and when they expect to get 
there should justify details of their trips. But putative members of the Planck 
Club should hold themselves accountable only to Nature herself. It took 20 
years for Planck to reach his goal, but he had no idea how long it would actu-
ally take nor could he have precisely speciﬁ ed it when he set out. What was 
his efﬁ ciency? The question is irrelevant, of course. 
 The ﬁ rst stirrings of a Fifth Revolution might be heralded by a serious 
attempt to set up a transformative research initiative.  * However, it may not 
be possible to bring about such a momentous event in one throw. It may need 
several iterations before a full - ﬂ edged TR initiative appears in all its glory 
because some of the bad habits developed since ~1970 have become deeply 
engrained. That most pernicious instrument of consensus, peer review of pro-
posals, will probably be the most obdurate because it has acquired the status 
of  the gold standard of research quality even though it fails the Planck test. 
Unfortunately, the gold is the fool ’ s variety, and a TR initiative based on this 
ﬂ awed standard will also fail. We may need patience, therefore. Although the 
mandatory use of peer preview has been in force for only a few decades, it 
seems to have infected the very soul of research enterprise. It may need a few 
rounds of pseudo - TR initiatives before the funding agencies ﬁ nally bite this 
bullet. Let us hope that meanwhile some of us have not slid into the Damocles 
Zone and possible collapse. 
 Another clear sign would be a proliferation of attempts to protect the 
university and its most valuable traditions. Before ~1970, its elite status 
was universally acknowledged. However, more recent policies adopted by 
many advanced nations, such as the OECD member states, would extend the 
 * As this book was being ﬁ nalized, the US National Science Board published a memorandum, 
 Enhancing Support of Transformative Research at the National Science Foundation , which invited 
the NSF to report on its preliminary plans for TR by August 2007. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

90 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
privileges of a university education  * to some 40% or 50% of the student 
cohort. Figure  12  gives the total student enrolment in the United States since 
1967. 
 British polytechnic colleges once offered a wide range of excellent voca-
tional training. In 1992, however, the UK government abolished the so - called 
binary system, and reclassiﬁ ed all the former polytechnics as universities, thus 
blurring the distinction between training and teaching. There should be no 
question, of course, that anyone who can beneﬁ t from a university education 
should be entitled to one. But our leaders do not seem to have taken into 
account the effects that massive rises in student numbers will have on the 
concept of the university as an institution. How do they expect that the uni-
versity ’ s once automatic association with excellence can continue unques-
tioned when 50% is the proportion usually associated with average? 
 It is not at all clear, however, that the new policies offer students a university 
education per se; that is the disinterested pursuit of knowledge and under-
standing. Samuel Eliot Morison, writing in  Three Centuries of Harvard, 1636 –
 1936 (Morison  1969 ), said:
 As long as our teachers regard their work as simply giving courses for under-
graduates, we shall never have ﬁ rst class teaching here. If they have to teach 
graduate students as well as undergraduates, they will regard their subjects as 
inﬁ nite, and keep up that constant investigation (or research) which is necessary 
for ﬁ rst class teaching.  
 Figure 12  
 Total enrollment in all US institutions of higher education. The enrollment includes 
undergraduate and postgraduate students, but does not give their age distributions. 
In 2001, some 11.4 million were undergraduates while some 4.3 million were 
involved in postgraduate research. For comparison, the US population of 20 – 24 - year -
 olds in 2001 was 19.8 million. ( Source : US National Science Foundation,  Science and 
Engineering Indicators , 2006.) 
0
2,000,000
4,000,000
6,000,000
8,000,000
10,000,000
12,000,000
14,000,000
16,000,000
18,000,000
1967
1970
1973
1976
1979
1982
1985
1988
1991
1994
1997
2001
Year
Enrollment
 * On average across OECD countries, half of today ’ s young adults now enter universities or other 
institutions offering similar qualiﬁ cations at some stage during their life. ( Source : OECD, 2004). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
91
 Under the new regimes, it would seem that Morison ’ s  “ courses for under-
graduates ” are precisely what will increasingly be on offer, and such ephemeral 
subjects as  “ media studies ” will proliferate. 
 In 1988 the heads of over 500 universities worldwide signed the European 
Magna Charta  , marking the 900th anniversary of the founding of the Univer-
sity of Bologna, the oldest in the world. That document included a section on 
 “ fundamental principles ” (see Poster  12 ). For many of its international signa-
tories, these uncompromising statements on the essence of university auton-
omy so recently asserted must now seem like wishful thinking — indeed, each 
one is now threatened. Enabling access to higher education on a mass - 
produced industrial scale  * may be socially desirable, but many more teachers 
will be required to teach (or train) an expanding number of students and 
they cannot all be involved in research worthy of the name. The inseparability 
of teaching and research — a necessary condition if university teaching is to 
be  “ ﬁ rst class ” according to Morison — would therefore seem to have been 
abandoned. Academic teaching loads have already increased substantially 
over the past decade or so. In addition to these, the other social burdens 
(as opposed to intellectual) being heaped on the universities means that aca-
demics must spend so much time meeting deadlines and generally ﬁ ghting the 
ﬁ res that bureaucrats love to start that they have little time for calm contem-
plation. We should not be surprised, therefore, if the number left with sufﬁ cient 
energy and inspiration to raise their game to excellent and beyond, as required 
for Planck Club membership, seems to have fallen close to zero in recent 
times.
 * For an excellent survey of the universities and  “ the knowledge factory, ” see the October 2, 1997 
issue of  The Economist . 
 In my fairly extensive experience, most academics have regarded their 
teaching as an adjunct to their research, an important and stimulating involve-
ment with the next generation that should be taken very seriously but that 
nonetheless is subordinate to their main mission. That balance is changing to 
the detriment of research. All except three of the Planck Club short list in 
Table  1 did their original work at a university or an academic institution as 
would the great majority of an extended list. Until circa 1970, they seldom 
would have been required to justify what they did. That unspoken contract 
has proved supremely valuable. Academics have been able to make these 
contributions because the university, having invested considerably in their 
selection, generally backed their judgments without interference, direction, or 
comment, with only one minor caveat — that they should discharge their usually 
modest teaching duties. Unfortunately, the recent changes seriously under-
mine that contract and the university ’ s potential as an agency for change. As 
things stand, therefore, we face a future at least as uncertain as it has ever been 
but without the indispensable and unexpected boosts a full - ﬂ edged twenty -
 ﬁ rst - century Planck Club would provide. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

92 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
 Another noticeable effect of a Fifth Revolution might be the instigation of 
measures to prevent the university from being subsumed into the homoge-
nized mass of institutions subject to routine governmental control. Almost all 
universities in the European Union, for example, are government - funded, but 
even in the United States, which has a large number of private universities, 
they are not entirely free. Government ’ s indirect subsidies for student support 
and research are substantial, and private universities are not immune from 
legislation, of course. It is not clear, therefore, who would instigate such mea-
sures. The minimum objective should be to ensure that for at least a subset of 
universities, academic freedom was no less protected than it was before 1970 
or so, an objective that is nicely codiﬁ ed in the Bologna Magna Charta. The 
university has not yet been terminally  or irreversibly damaged, but if we do 
nothing to alleviate the effects of society ’ s new requirements, it might not be 
long before its store of exceptional talent becomes worn down by the tedious 
demands of excessive duty. 
 In today ’ s materialistic world, the ﬁ rst major question to be settled would 
be how these Bologna Magna Charta universities should be funded. One 
would hope that if a Fifth Revolution were actually in progress, materialism 
might be tempered somewhat, and funds for these relatively few universities 
would be provided on the basis of excellence  as each university would deﬁ ne. 
The major questions would then become: How might we realize this new 
regime; and just as importantly, how might it be sustained? 
 The problems would seem more complicated than the provision of personal 
freedom in research as many universities are state - funded bodies, and so gov-
 Poster 12: European Magna Charta,  Bologna, 1988 —
 Fundamental Principles    
 The following statements are excerpts from the European Magna Charta: 
 “ The university is an autonomous institution at the heart of societies 
differently organised because of geography and historical heritage; it 
produces, examines appraises and hands down culture by research 
and teaching. ”   
 “ To meet the needs of the world around it, its research and teaching 
must be morally and intellectually independent of all political author-
ity and economic power. ” 
 “ Teaching and research in universities must be inseparable if their tuition 
is not to lag behind changing needs, the demands of society, and 
advances in scientiﬁ c knowledge. ” 
 “ Freedom in research and teaching is the fundamental principle of uni-
versity life, and governments and universities, each as far as in them 
lies, must ensure respect for this fundamental requirement. ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
93
ernments must necessarily be involved. Nevertheless, it might also be more 
tractable because not so long ago it was widely  assumed  that universities  *   
should be autonomous, and some states took deliberate steps to ensure that 
their autonomy was protected. Unfortunately, these steps have now become 
deeply eroded. One can take comfort, however, from the fact that not so long 
ago they were in ﬁ ne shape, and if the lessons of history could be learned, they 
could provide the basis for a viable solution. 
 I have strived throughout this book to aim for a global perspective on the 
issues. After all, science itself is a global discipline. Nationalism has no role 
whatsoever — it would make no sense claiming to be the ﬁ rst Briton to discover 
the quantization of energy, for example. Academic freedom has a similar 
quality. However, perhaps through an accident of history, it would seem that 
the story of the rise and fall of university autonomy in the UK could provide 
excellent lessons on what should and should not be done in these respects, and 
might therefore be worth considering in some detail. 
 As Daalder and Shils ( 1982 , p. 439) point out, early in the twentieth century 
the UK government:  “ .  .  . acknowledged and assured the existence of a large 
area of free action in which the universities did as they thought right, according 
to the lights that were interior to them. ” 
 In 1919, it created the University Grants Committee,  † a body that at 
least until 1963 rigorously and jealously protected that autonomy. Its member-
ship included the most senior academics and government ofﬁ cials, a formida-
ble gathering in its own right. But perhaps most importantly of all, it was 
an instrument of the Treasury, that most powerful of government departments. 
The relationship was indeed special because, not being itself a spending 
department, the Treasury would probably be content if the UGC kept to its 
spending limits and generally did not rock the boat. Thus, the UGC could 
resist all attempts by most politicians and run - of - the - mill ofﬁ cialdom to inter-
fere, or to closely examine academic expenditures or impose such strictures 
as  “ earmarked grants. ” Thus, universities were free to deal with such labeled 
offerings as they thought ﬁ t. Furthermore, in those heady days funds came 
to them through rolling 5 - year grants — the quinquennium — and each univer-
sity was more or less free to spend their allocation  “ according to their 
lights. ” 
 In 1963, however, the tanks of a harsher regime began to roll when respon-
sibility for the UGC was transferred to the Department of Education and 
Science, the same body that had responsibility for the research councils. This 
apparently innocuous change — another powerful bureaucratic weapon — was 
imposed not because the UGC was failing — quite the contrary; it was generally 
held in high regard — but out of an ill - considered urge to rationalize and 
 * For a review of the universities in Europe and the United States, see the text edited by Daalder 
and Shils ( 1982 ). 
 † For a review of the UGC and its nineteenth - century antecedents, see Tom Owen ’ s article on The 
University Grants Committee (Owen 1980  ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

94 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
perhaps to impose more control on this imperious body. The number of UK 
universities was also about to be considerably expanded following Lord 
Robbins ’ inﬂ uential report, * and change was in the air. Progress — that is, the 
inexorable tide of events — cannot be halted, of course, but the consequences 
of these and subsequent administrative changes either seem to have been 
ignored, or, as some might say, needed hindsight to be fully revealed. However, 
some provisions — personal freedom in research, for example — are not optional 
if one wishes to secure a stable and prosperous society, and should have been 
safeguarded from the outset. Thus, autonomy, at least for a subset of univer-
sities, should have been protected so that they could nurture and maintain 
intellectually challenging environments. These points should not have been 
difﬁ cult to argue. The UGC had demonstrated beyond doubt over many 
decades that the edict is not the only way of bringing about change. Moreover, 
their more sensitive and mutually accepted techniques had the enormous 
advantages of protecting  both academic freedom and university autonomy. See 
Poster  13 .
 Poster 13: University Governance: An Intelligent Approach 
to Dirigisme 
 The following statement is taken from the UK government white paper 
 University Development 1957 to 1962 , Cmnd 2267, para. 627:
 The major question must be whether the measure of control which the State 
has entrusted to the Committee (the UGC) is exercised too heavily or too 
lightly. Some people — not all in the universities — feel that the Committee ’ s 
inﬂ uence is becoming too great; others — not all outside the universities — feel 
it is too light. This balance of opinion is perhaps a measure of their success. 
But at the same time the Committee do not, and would not, hesitate to exert 
further inﬂ uence if it seemed necessary. Only on three occasions in the last 
ten years have we felt it necessary to take a university directly to task on what 
we considered to be an inadequate regard to academic standards or national 
interests. On each occasion, our views have been well received and the 
response has been immediate. In the main, however, we consider that the 
universities if given a clear statement of any general or particular situation 
and a clear indication of what is wanted will of their own volition come to 
the right decision in the light of their particular circumstances. We, like the 
universities, recognize that external demands will grow, but we are conﬁ dent 
that our main task is to interpret such demands as we feel it legitimate to the 
universities and to leave the universities to adjust themselves to the changing 
environment. The delegation of responsibility, we believe, is essential if the 
health of higher education is to be maintained.  
 * As reported in  Higher Education , report of the Committee appointed by the Prime Minister 
under the Chairmanship of Lord Robbins, 1961 – 1963, Cmnd 2154. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
95
 In fact, the change in UGC ’ s governance meant that the dual - support 
system came under threat immediately — “ dual support ” is hardly worthy of 
the name if the same software controls both systems. It also meant that zealous 
civil servants long denied access to university affairs now became increasingly 
free. The quinquennium was one of the ﬁ rst casualties, and in the early 1970s 
the universities had to limit their planning horizons to a single year. In 1989, 
the government replaced the Olympian UGC by the University Funding 
Council, and in 1993 by the regional Funding Councils, one each for England, 
Scotland, and Wales, and a similar body for Northern Ireland. Furthermore, 
each of these parochial bodies was now an explicit instrument of government. 
The bombardment continued with Research Assessment Exercises, Foresight, 
Quality * Assessment, and other bureaucratic impositions that thankfully for 
scientiﬁ c enterprise have largely been conﬁ ned to the UK. Thus, university 
autonomy became severely compromised, and the climate of fear these bom-
bardments induced was such that the universities offered barely a whimper of 
protest. 
 Between 1945 and 1979, UK academic researchers won approximately 41 
Nobel Prizes in the sciences — perhaps the ultimate in international quality 
assessments. That is an average of more than one a year, an extraordinarily 
high rate for such a relatively small country. For most of this period the dual -
 support system was still largely intact and among other things provided for 
 “ well - found ” laboratories that created environments in which researchers 
could respond quickly to new ideas without the need to involve external asses-
sors. Between 1980 and 2006, the equivalent number was 10 or one every 2.6 
years. That fall is not so enormous, of course, and apologists have argued that 
the reduced ﬁ gure is still reasonable considering Britain ’ s size. However, six 
of those prizes were awarded to scientists working at such institutes as the 
Medical Research Council Laboratory for Molecular Biology, which strived 
to ensure that personal freedom was protected, and one worked in industry. 
Thus, the changes have resulted in almost a 10 - fold decrease in the rate at 
which Nobel Prizes are won by researchers at UK universities, and for these 
universities, at least, loss of autonomy would seem to be related to the appar-
ent loss in creativity. 
 Thus, the United Kingdom has moved from a regime were autonomy was 
rigorously protected to one were lip service only is paid to this ideal, as is now 
also the case generally elsewhere. The primary agent of that autonomy — the 
 * To give an indication of how unadventurous these changes have obliged universities to become, 
in 2005 the Higher Education Funding Council of England allocated  “ quality - related ” (QR) 
research funding of  £ 1.2 billion (~ $ 2.2 billion) as a block grant to English universities; funding 
the universities could use as they pleased according to their own priorities. However, a report 
published in 2007 (Impact of quality - related funding for research in English higher education 
institutions, Report to Higher Education Funding Council of England by SQW Ltd; Jan. 2007) 
could not identify a single example of radical departures from mainstream research arising from 
this funding. That conclusion is all the more remarkable as one of the fund ’ s primary purposes 
was to foster originality. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

96 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
UGC — was eliminated solely on misplaced ideological grounds. Its efﬁ ciency 
was above reasoned reproach. 
 Therefore, returning to my global perspective, a general solution to the 
problem of providing for and maintaining a network of autonomous Bologna 
Magna Charta universities might be for governments to create buffer agencies 
such as the UGC that would stand between them and these universities. These 
agencies would operate to set spending limits, would generally be responsible 
for university governance, and should be funded by a powerful nonspending 
department such as the Treasury so as to ensure, as far as possible, that uni-
versities were immune from petty or indeed any kind of external interference. 
Their membership should include senior academics and others sympathetic to 
the concept of autonomy, and be renowned for their academic experience and 
independence of mind. Such agencies might themselves be judged by the 
extent to which the universities in their care were internationally regarded as 
excellent. 
 However, there would still be a major snag. Restoring some of the old uni-
versities to Magna Charta status or creating new ones to the same standard 
would probably be strongly opposed because it would inevitably mean that 
only a small proportion of universities could claim to be ﬁ rst class. That could 
be a serious problem, but there might be another way of satisfying society ’ s 
understandable wish to provide higher education for a substantial proportion 
of the population. The limits of secondary education have systematically been 
extended everywhere over the past century or so. We could take this process 
to its next logical step by regarding  secondary education as being complete 
only after, say, 3 - or 4 - years study at a normal university. In that regime, there-
fore, a newly deﬁ ned higher or tertiary education would begin at a full - ﬂ edged 
Bologna Magna Charta university after this extended secondary phase had 
been completed, a proposal that would not be substantially different from the 
measures the UK government is now proposing for England, for example. See 
Poster  14 .
 Thus, the question of which universities were ﬁ rst - class in this context 
should not arise. They would  all be in that category according to some deﬁ ni-
tion otherwise the buffer agency would take the appropriate action. The 
Bologna Magna Charta universities would then in effect be equivalent to the 
research universities that we had before about 1970 and would be open only 
to those who could show that they were qualiﬁ ed. These new universities could 
be attached to existing universities or be established separately. Student admis-
sion should be on merit only as it still is generally for postgraduate study today, 
but researchers at the Bologna Magna Charta universities should be as free 
as they once universally were. That is they would all have access to modest 
levels of funding to use as they pleased. Hopefully therefore, this provision 
should restock the reservoir from which new Planck Club members might 
eventually emerge. 
 In the absence of such UGC - like agencies, academic leaders and others 
would at the threshold of a Fifth Revolution ﬁ nd ways of strongly resisting the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
97
trend of turning the universities into service - providing businesses. This threat 
is becoming real, as William Waugh has written (Waugh  2003 ):
 Colleges and universities tended to choose their leaders from the ranks of the 
faculty, often with academic qualiﬁ cations outweighing administrative skills. To 
some extent, many academic institutions still follow that model.  .  .  . Now, however, 
there is increasing pressure to recruit executives from the private sector armed 
with skills in business management but without work experience in academic 
administration. As a result, academic planning, budgeting, and day - to - day admin-
istration is becoming like the management processes developed for the private 
sector and increasingly reﬂ ects values that conﬂ ict with the traditional values of 
university governance.  
 As the trend continues, students will increasingly be regarded as customers 
and academic research, as a supplier of commodities. The commercial pres-
sures on academic research are all too familiar, especially as companies are 
cutting back on their in - house exploratory research. The pressures from 
customer – students to provide such user - friendly courses as cosmetics, costume 
design, and the culinary arts  * are already increasing. In the circumstances 
where governments are tending to focus on short - term pragmatism, who, in 
the absence of an organization like the UGC, would argue that a university 
 Poster 14: Elementary and Secondary Education in England  
 The timeline is as follows: 
  1880 — elementary education between the ages of 5 and 10 years became 
compulsory and free. 
 1918 — age range for compulsory and free education extended to 14 years.  
 1947 — age range for compulsory and free education extended to 15 years.  
 1972 — age range for compulsory and free education extended to 16 years.  
 2005 — the government published plans for a new national entitlement. The 
government ’ s Department for Education and Skills announced that it 
wants all 14 – 19 - year - olds in the country  “ to have the opportunity to 
pursue a course of study where they will learn in a style that suits them 
and in subject areas which motivate them. Whether in school or college 
or on an Apprenticeship, we want young people to be working towards 
qualiﬁ cations which have real standing with employers and the general 
public, which prepare them to progress into further and higher educa-
tion, and which place a premium on mastering the basics. ” The aim is 
that the new national entitlement will be in place by 2013.  
 * These snippets are taken from a depressingly longer list given in Sir John Meurig Thomas ’ excel-
lent paper on the impact of these pressures on university curricula  (Thomas 2001). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

98 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
education should be as demanding as possible? Customers often go for the 
easiest or cheapest options. 
 Alternative models of tertiary education should also be tried. The tacit 
assumption seems to be that present structures and responsibilities are the 
only viable options. This is hardly surprising, and is an extraordinary tribute 
to the longevity of the concepts developed at the beginning of the last millen-
nium. Thus, one usually ﬁ nds autonomous and relatively independent faculties 
in say the arts, the sciences, engineering, economics, and other disciplines, 
although some institutions may specialize in one or more of these broad 
groupings. Traditionally, most students are young and inexperienced, and the 
expectation has been that their training should be adequate preparation for a 
career spanning several decades. That is no longer the case. The demand for 
continuing education is increasing, but the traditional formula by which stu-
dents seek to acquire new skills from expert teachers remains much the same. 
It might be time, therefore, for a reexamination. 
 Our Venture Research experience indicates that there might be another 
approach. Our search was for scientists with ﬂ air and panache, but as we found 
in our workshops such people can also be inspirational, which is or should be 
a vital component of the educational processes. Thus, we found that their novel 
and defendable perspectives stimulated the attendants — industrial scientists 
and other experts — to see their own problems in a new light, which in turn 
promoted interactions from which everyone beneﬁ ted. Indeed, the workshops 
were so successful that we thought their format could form the basis of a new 
type of university (see Poster  15 ). It departs from tradition by focusing on 
education as an  enlightening experience and deliberately blurs the usual dis-
tinctions on status by aiming to foster intellectual interactions between people 
of comparable standing.
 The rising tide of events that later became known as the Industrial Revolu-
tion began about 250 years ago, and were arguably the most momentous in 
human history. Although its success has been prodigious, the global have - nots 
today still outnumber the haves, and there are many problems. We now have 
a new one — this ultimate of revolutions seems to be running out of steam. For 
over 200 years, we could enjoy its wild and proliﬁ c harvest, which like the 
seasons, could virtually be taken for granted. Major scientiﬁ c discoveries 
erupted spontaneously but at an acceptable average rate. Economic growth 
seemed to follow faithfully and somewhat mysteriously, but no sooner had 
Solow identiﬁ ed its source than we began to lose our unquestioning conﬁ dence 
in that magical relationship. As soon as they thought they understood all this, 
our proxies decided that progress would proceed more efﬁ ciently if research 
were focused on bringing about the technical changes we wanted when we 
wanted them. To make matters much worse, presumed industrial shareholder 
expectations are increasingly used to determine corporate research policies, 
thereby further inhibiting ﬂ air and audacity, and virtually eliminating the 
chance arrival of spontaneous discoveries. 
 The cancerous growth of consensus and other bureaucratic scourges could 
prove disastrous. In the academic sector, freedom is being curtailed because 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION 
99
 Poster 15: Outline Proposal for a New Type of University  
 Venture Researchers were scientists, of course, but our selection methodol-
ogy should be generally applicable. In literature, music, the arts, and other 
ﬁ elds, intellectual divisions are as similarly arbitrary as those found in the 
sciences, and they also change with time. The ideas of a latter - day Picasso 
or Stravinsky would probably struggle as much for acceptance as did those 
of many members of the Planck Club. Since Venture Research was com-
mitted to the idea that intellect is indivisible, its modus operandi could be 
used to identify those who have a unique, credible, but radical view of the 
human condition in general. 
 The proposal stems from these observations. The new type of university 
would be based  on people , and would not have departments in the tradi-
tional sense. Members of  “ staff ” would be selected for their radical and 
stimulating viewpoints. They would attend for short periods, say, a week 
initially, and be selected from a specially appointed panel of such people. 
 “ Students ” would attend because they felt a need for intellectual refresh-
ment. They would be mature and expert in some ﬁ eld. The relationships 
between staff and students would be based on mutual trust and respect 
between accomplished equals. 
 Students would attend for short periods for which they would pay or be 
sponsored. They would be from industry, commerce, the civil service, or 
indeed any walk of life. There would be no examinations and no degrees. 
The new university ’ s main objective would be to help students develop 
their own critical and creative capabilities, and to show them that life in 
general can be much richer than present orthodoxies recognize. In effect, 
participation would help students prepare themselves for the next phases 
of their careers rather than train them in a particular skill. Eventually, the 
aim would be that periodic attendance at universities of this type would 
become as important as graduation from a conventional university at the 
start of one ’ s career. 
 In keeping with its open intellectual approach, the new university should 
eventually be fully international. There would be a minimum of bureau-
cracy. It would probably be privately sponsored at ﬁ rst, but should soon be 
self - supporting. Initially, it could be attached to an existing university or 
group of universities, and operate for only a few weeks a year. Each course 
might last, say, one week, with the range of lectures/tutorials covering as 
much intellectual ground as possible. Student numbers for each course 
should be small, say, 30 or so, with, say, 5 – 10 staff. Courses should be resi-
dential if possible. Each course would have a director for coordination, and 
so on. 
 The new university would catalyze a considerable increase in the range 
of relationships between the academic and other professional worlds —
 industry, for example — for which there could be many unpredictable 
beneﬁ ts. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

100 
THE CASE FOR A FIFTH REVOLUTION
some inﬂ uential people fear that otherwise freeloaders will exploit it. In indus-
try, too few of its leaders are prepared to lead and to persuade shareholders, 
for example, that short - term competitiveness can sometimes compromise 
proﬁ ts and the prospects for long - term survival. All too often today, however, 
understanding is sacriﬁ ced in favor of tangible objectives. Understanding is, of 
course, a wholly abstract concept. I do not know of any civilization that col-
lapsed because it had too much, whereas all too many failed because they 
clamped down on its supply. Our future is precariously balanced. Our burgeon-
ing problems mean that we have a tiger by the tail, and survival may depend 
on having all the understanding, ﬂ exibility, and audacity we can get. We may 
learn new tricks thereby, and might even learn to tame the tiger. Many civiliza-
tions have eventually ended in collapse, but it is not inevitable. Thanks to the 
elixir that comes from scientiﬁ c freedom, we can postpone it indeﬁ nitely if we 
appreciate the value of our most precious asset. 
 New knowledge usually comes from maverick loners. Society ’ s full recogni-
tion of that fact, and all its consequences, could be the most permanent legacy 
of a Fifth Revolution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Venture (or Transformative) Research: 
How It Works in Practice  
 This gift of seeing things where others see nothing is indeed the mark of scientiﬁ c 
genius, a faculty guided by vague criteria, just as are the feats of keen eyesight. 
That is what the members of the world ’ s ﬁ rst scientiﬁ c society boasted of by 
calling themselves the  Accademia dei Lincei . 
 — Michael Polanyi,  Knowing and Being , University of Chicago 
Press, 1969, p. 107  
 In 1980, Dr. Jack Birks, a BP managing director, invited me to come to BP and 
set up what they hoped would be a radically new research initiative — the 
Venture Research Unit — charged with creating completely new types of indus-
trial opportunity. He offered complete freedom, which was rather worrying as 
I would have no one to blame if I failed! In those days, managing directors of 
large companies were expected to back their judgment. They were responsible 
to their boards, of course, but they were usually free to take any action they 
considered to be in the company ’ s best interests, a justiﬁ cation they could 
postpone until after the event. They had to be mostly right, of course, at least 
on the important issues, or they would not survive. The delegation of such 
powers is now rare in big companies. Committees and focus groups have now 
replaced individuality, and ﬂ air seems to have ﬂ own out of the window. That 
is a pity. The interests of industrial giants once extended far beyond what 
shareholders might initially expect. Until the late 1970s, BP ’ s research plan-
ning * was based on a 10 - year  “ look ahead, ” and BP ’ s researchers were allowed 
6
101
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 * As stated on p. 421 of BP ’ s  Our Industry Petroleum , The British Petroleum Company, 1977. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

102 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
the freedom to generate  “ new basic knowledge which may have some rele-
vance to the group ’ s future business ” that may lead to  “ completely new busi-
ness outlets and to unsuspected solutions to existing problems. ” The creation 
of the Venture Research initiative in 1980 was the culmination of that policy. 
Sadly, BP was to terminate the initiative 10 years later even though BP 
acknowledged its considerable successes. BP ’ s reasoning was that it did not 
want to give shareholders a signal that the company might be considering even 
the minutest departures from an exclusive concentration on core businesses. 
 There are some signs today of a reversion to older more conﬁ dent ways 
among big industrial companies. GE, for example, is reported to be moving 
away from its famous  “ six sigma ” policy that obliged GE managers to concen-
trate on being consummately good at delivering incremental improvements 
precisely on time. In a recent interview with  The Economist (Dec. 8, 2005), the 
GE corporate leadership is quoted as saying:  “ In future (managers) will be 
judged not only by all the usual measures such as return on capital that inves-
tors typically care about: they will also be held accountable for helping to save 
the planet. ” My hope is that TR initiatives, particularly if they can be set up 
cooperatively with visionary industrialists, will help to encourage this welcome 
trend. 
 In 1980, Birks was responsible for almost all the technological aspects of 
BP ’ s businesses — exploration, production, engineering, research, and develop-
ment — a huge portfolio. Not surprisingly, he was somewhat autocratic, a trait 
he skillfully cloaked with a relaxed and good - humored appearance. However, 
I have never met anyone who could cut through woolly thinking more quickly 
or mercilessly. He was also rather devious. To keep me in check, he had 
arranged that I would be responsible to a specially constituted board of some 
of the most prestigious scientists in Britain and the most senior executives in 
BP — a formidable phalanx of establishment leaders. Sir James Menter, Prin-
cipal of Queen Mary College London, a nonexecutive BP Director, and a dis-
tinguished physicist and industrial scientist, chaired  * it. Menter was a man of 
very few words; none at all was his usual preference, his silence usually meaning 
to trained interpreters that he was content. That meant that he and I had 
interesting meetings, as they say, but I knew that if I could persuade Jim to do 
something, his authority was such that it would probably happen. Birks thought 
that Jim and I would make an excellent team because he knew I would never 
give up. Menter could be obdurate, but if I could convince him, which was 
often as difﬁ cult as what I imagined scaling the north face of the Eiger would 
be, he could be a powerful and generally unstoppable ally. 
 British Petroleum offered total freedom, so we could aim therefore to 
create a unique initiative. As major new industry — that based on the laser for 
 * The other external members were Sir Hans Kornberg, Professor of Biochemistry at Cambridge 
(later to become Master of Christ ’ s College Cambridge), and Sir Rex Richards, Warden of Merton 
College and Professor of Physical Chemistry at Oxford. Ex ofﬁ cio members from BP were Profes-
sor John Cadogan, Director of Research; the Head of Corporate Planning; and BP ’ s Chief 
Engineer. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
103
example — is unpredictable, I decided that we would concentrate exclusively 
on the type of research that might lead to its creation. But global research 
expenditure on research and development is gigantic (see Poster  7 ), while 
Venture Research ’ s would not even register on the global scale. Indeed, at its 
peak it turned out to be less that 0.5% of BP ’ s research budget. How on Earth, 
therefore, could we hope to come up with something that was not already 
being done? We decided that we should differentiate ourselves by striving to 
support research as in an ideal world it should be supported. We did not 
presume that our model would necessarily be applicable to mainstream 
research. That was not our brief. What we needed was a disciplined route to 
the unexpected, and we decided that it might come from striving to create a 
Planckian perspective on the sciences; that is, we would submit our procedures 
to the Planck test from the outset. In these circumstances, it would not matter 
if subsequently we found that other companies were doing much the same. 
The Planckian approach fosters individuality, and just as no two ﬁ ngerprints 
are the same, it would be most unlikely that even if others had adopted the 
same strategy, we would be in direct competition with them. 
 The Planckian approach might lead to uniqueness, but the adoption of such 
a high - minded course of action is easier said than done. We might have been 
expected to slide into expedient ways, especially as that is what some of our 
critics expected us to do. Thus, we might have chosen a few terribly important 
high - priority areas * and teams of the most prestigious scientists to add luster 
to our program. We could then have proudly joined the crowded high - tech 
circuit of conferences and meetings in exotic places safe in the knowledge that 
we would probably not be criticized because that is what everyone was 
doing. 
 Ernest Rutherford once said:  “ When money is short there is no alternative 
but to think. ”  It seems a sad fact that if one is awarded a large grant, as might 
be the case in such ﬁ elds as nanotechnology or the hydrogen economy, so 
much money is sloshing around that thinking is not necessarily essential. One 
can be kept respectably busy managing the funds. So, inspired by Rutherford, 
we took the line that although BP had not yet revealed the limits to its altru-
ism, they would probably not be very high. We would look, therefore, for 
researchers who needed freedom above all because the costs of providing that 
rare commodity are almost exclusively intellectual. They would need funding, 
of course, but we soon found that the requirements of freedom - starved 
researchers are usually modest. That should not be too surprising, as the total 
initial support for the 20 members of the Planck Club listed in Table  1 , who 
of course did precisely as they pleased, could have been provided at a one - off 
cost of about  $ 20 – $ 30 million in today ’ s money, which of course would have 
been one of the best investments in history! One merely has to derive an efﬁ -
cient means of ﬁ nding them. 
 * In 1980, the four areas that many expected us to support were biotechnology; electronics, infor-
mation processing, and robotics; new materials; lasers and optoelectronics. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

104 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
 Putting ourselves in what we imagined Planck ’ s shoes might be, and spurred 
on by Rutherford ’ s dictum, we set out to create an initiative of which both 
might be proud. We started by trying to eliminate every selection rule imposed 
since about 1970 that appeared to stand in the way of freedom. This was a long 
and painful process. After a few agonizing years, our main conclusion was that 
we should concentrate exclusively on trying to identify people who had rec-
ognized substantial ﬂ aws or gaps in existing knowledge, and who might know 
what to do about them. Bearing in mind that the researchers we were looking 
for are rare — membership of the Planck Club should be rather exclusive — we 
would make it as easy as possible to apply. Written applications could be made 
on one page or preferably less, and if researchers needed a quicker reply, they 
could apply by telephone. With such a low application threshold initially, we 
would not then feel too guilty when we had to tell almost everyone that their 
research did not seem to qualify, nor would we have wasted too much of their 
time. The important word here is  “ seem. ” We would add that any researcher 
who did not agree with our apparent rejection, could return at any time with 
a rebuttal. Thus, however long (or short) our dialog might be, we tried to 
arrange that we always returned the ball to the applicant ’ s court. The onus 
would always be on them to respond to the line we had taken. 
 In effect, therefore, we were creating an  environment in which researchers 
could select themselves (see Poster  16 ). We, as Nature ’ s ambassadors, would 
manage that environment and try to ensure that all who entered should have 
every opportunity to share their scientiﬁ c vision with us. Applicants mistakenly 
turned away could return if they wanted to. Our possible error would then 
have served to test their determination, an essential Planckian quality that was 
precisely what we were looking for. We did not set such tests mischievously, 
of course, but this element had the looked - for  “ fail - safe ” quality, and helped 
to reduce our worries that our lack of expertise might make us miss golden 
opportunities staring us in the face. Fail - safe selection procedures would mean 
that if applicants were determined, and there would be no point of supporting 
them otherwise, we might have at least one more stab at the gold.
 However, there are a few big snags. We were looking for scientists with a 
Planckian turn of mind, but they might currently be neither well connected 
nor well known. We decided, therefore, that all proposals should be unsolic-
ited. We were not an established funding agency, of course, so we had to spread 
the news of our interests  “ on the hoof ” as it were, speaking at as many uni-
versities that we could persuade to invite us, to the media, and publishing in 
those  very few journals * that would permit it. We thought about advertising, 
 * I do not understand the scientiﬁ c literature ’ s almost total indifference to what Venture Research 
is trying to do. It is as if we are being vetoed by their peer - review procedures. I gave a speciﬁ c 
example of this in  Pioneering Research : ﬁ rst  Nature and then  Science , two of the world ’ s most 
inﬂ uential journals, declined to publish in 2001 a short letter (238 words) from 19 senior British 
and American scientists (including two Nobel Laureates) marking the 100th anniversary of Max 
Planck ’ s seminal discoveries, and drawing attention to the problem of scientiﬁ c freedom in general 
terms. Neither gave a reason. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
105
 Poster 16: An Environment for Transformative Research  
 The prospect for success for a transformative research (TR) initiative will 
depend on the extent to which we can restore the conditions that prevailed 
until about the 1970s. That is impossible for every scientist, of course. TR 
is unpredictable, so we need an environment in which there is a good 
chance that the tiny few capable of transforming scientiﬁ c enterprise can 
select themselves. Unfortunately, that environment must be managed, but 
its promoters must strive to make it appear as if it were unmanaged, as if 
nothing had changed. 
 Some properties of that environment would be: 
  •    “ Free ” funds (i.e., Funds available for use as required)  
  •    No boundaries 
  •    No deadlines 
  •    No exclusions 
  •    No milestones 
  •     No peer review  
  •    No priorities 
  •    No speciﬁ c objectives other than to understand or explore  
  •    Researchers free to go in any direction at any time  
  •    Risks to be selected and managed by the researchers  
 Above all, the TR environment must foster mutual trust and respect. 
 The academic research environment had all or most of these properties 
before the 1970s, although they may not have been explicitly stated. 
However, the promoters of TR should not be unduly prescriptive about 
what is and what is not TR. They will need to be alert to unusual proposals 
and to pursue them rigorously, as if they were bench scientists struggling 
to understand an unusual observation.  
but always decided against it. Our reasoning was that the Olympians we were 
looking for might see it as beneath their dignity to respond to an ad. 
 Our message was intended to convey respect — respect for every aspect of 
the sciences, respect for those who seek to deepen and extend understanding 
independently of tangible beneﬁ t, and respect for the courage needed to tackle 
challenging and perhaps intractable problems. Our immediate objective was 
to remove the selection process as far as possible from the routine,  * at least 
 * We got about 1000 applications a year, but about 90% of those seemed to be from researchers 
seeking additional funds to extend the work they were already doing rather than freedom to 
embark on new departures. However, we encouraged them to reply if they disagreed. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

106 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
as far as the serious contenders were concerned. In our case, this latter number 
turned out to be about 100 or so a year, all of whom we arranged to meet. We 
then sat down near a white board and talked about whatever science inter-
ested them. Almost invariably, the ﬁ rst thing we had to do was to discourage 
them from describing the possible beneﬁ ts that might ﬂ ow from their proposed 
work (applications, technology, etc.). In this, they merely seemed to be follow-
ing normal practice by telling us what they thought we as a funding agency 
wanted to hear. The level of possible funding was another of their priorities. 
Our response was to ask them to assume that we had an inﬁ nite amount of 
money and could offer freedom to match! With these and other extraneous 
issues so beloved of conventional funding agencies out of the way, we could 
ﬁ nally ask them to tell us what they would like to do that they were not doing 
now. 
 As our scientiﬁ c team was never more than three or four (and often less), 
our coverage of the huge range of current scientiﬁ c disciplines was, to say the 
least, severely limited. However, we soon saw that we could turn this apparent 
drawback into a strong advantage. Normally, the funding agencies aim to 
assess whether a team ’ s speciﬁ c skills would be adequate to meet its declared 
goals, and whether those goals would be worthwhile. The agency then invites 
a small number of the team ’ s peers, who are also their closest competitors, to 
subject the proposal to a microscopic examination against these criteria, which 
verdicts they can deliver anonymously. By focusing our discussions exclusively 
on scientiﬁ c concepts, we would avoid getting bogged down in distracting 
details. Our perspective could only come from a highly elevated vantage point, 
of course, but then we were looking for researchers who also had panoramic 
vision. We knew, of course, that real progress requires ﬁ rm contact with 
Nature ’ s undergrowth, so to speak, but we could defer any assessment of their 
abilities to penetrate that until later,  if necessary. Most funding agencies focus 
almost entirely on these mundane, if essential, abilities — which is one of the 
main tasks of peer preview — so here was yet another departure for our pro-
spective Planck Club members to get used to. But our concentration on con-
cepts created a sensitive test by separating those anxious to impress us with 
their tactical expertise from the strategists who knew that their tactics would 
have to vary as their research evolved. We were looking for coherence and 
ﬂ exibility. Uncertainty (as opposed to risk) is  an essential part of scientiﬁ c 
research worthy of the name. It therefore makes no sense to dwell on any one 
set of techniques or tactics at the outset. 
 The best of our applicants not only had no difﬁ culties with our novel 
approach but positively rose to the occasion. But they did not do so immedi-
ately. They seemed to want to gauge our seriousness, and more importantly, 
whether they could trust us before they would tell us what they really wanted 
to do. This latter point is vital. Why, indeed, should they tell us what they were 
thinking if our ﬁ rst reaction would be to share those thoughts with their closest 
competitors as conventional peer review requires. There is no magical formula 
for this any more than there is for cementing personal relationships in general. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
107
We merely talked to them as one scientist might talk to another — inviting 
them to tell us about their plans, how they had arisen, and to put it all into a 
global context. Our agenda was to understand what were likely to be difﬁ cult 
concepts, and so we leavened our discussions by talking about the weather, or 
music, or anything that might put them at their ease and increase the efﬁ ciency 
of communication. 
 We also needed to build our trust in them. If we were to fund their proposal, 
it would be with the lightest of touches. They would be free to do whatever 
they liked with the funds we provided, subject only to the usual accounting 
constraints. We expected them to address the problems we had agreed on, and 
there would be a contract between their home institute and BP describing 
their research in general terms and guaranteeing our support for, say, 3 years. 
But we designed the contract so that it would give researchers full freedom of 
action. We could offer nothing less if our arrangements were to pass the Planck 
test. We could be happy with these relaxed arrangements only if we trusted 
them. They would only tell us what they wanted to do if they trusted us not 
only to provide funds but also to back them when things might not be going 
well. Once we had made our minds to support them, we became their collabo-
rators. Henceforth, we became part of their team, writing and shepherding 
their proposal through Menter ’ s board, and being involved with every aspect 
of their progress thereafter. Their problems became our problems. We also 
took vicarious pleasure in their discoveries. In my case, that was certainly an 
important part of the trade off in giving up my own research career. 
 However, there was another important step before we could go forward. 
Once we were convinced about the research, we needed to satisfy ourselves 
that the researchers were capable of doing it. To start, we might consult a suit-
able expert. This is not the same as peer review. We had effectively made up 
our minds, but wanted to be reasonably sure that we had not missed anything. 
Thus, for example, we asked for  impressions  on whether applicants seemed to 
know what they were talking about, and whether the data they proposed to 
take would give them the information they were looking for. This consultation 
would often throw up useful suggestions, but in our experience never revealed 
real problems. One of us would then visit the researchers in their home envi-
ronment  “ to kick the tires. ” They would show us what they were doing and 
something of what was going on elsewhere in their department. Almost invari-
ably, the ﬁ elds would be new to us, but we found that it is remarkably easy to 
judge levels of competence from the ﬂ uency with which presentations are 
made, or questions answered (or avoided). As we would often tour their labs, 
it was interesting to note other scientists ’ responses to what had been pro-
posed, and the degrees of respect (or otherwise!) in which the applicants were 
held. These visits would be low - key, and take a few hours. In our experience, 
they never raised problems not already discussed and were usually a formality. 
Nevertheless, they formed an essential part of our  “ due diligence, ” and helped 
give us conﬁ dence that we were doing the right thing. The wool might be being 
pulled over our inexpert eyes, but every bench scientist might have similar 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

108 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
worries with unusual sets of data. There is no alternative to constant checking 
and rechecking, but eventually, one has to back one ’ s judgment. We now have 
the clarity of more than 10 years ’ hindsight from which we  know that our 
decisions, often taken in the teeth of peer - review assessment, were the right 
ones. It is indeed ironic that the procedures we regarded as a formality are 
usually the prime focus of the conventional funding agencies ’ attention, much 
to researchers ’ frustration, especially when success rates are low. 
 Chapter  7 describes  all our Venture Research projects running at the closure 
in 1990. It seems reasonable to conclude that if our researchers did succeed in 
radically changing the ways in which we think in important ﬁ elds, and our 
novel procedures did provide a reliable route to the unpredictable, we might 
justiﬁ ably claim to be acting as proxy for Nature. We could not know that at 
the time, of course. We thought that they could hardly fail because their lines 
of attack were unique and ﬂ exible, the areas were important but poorly under-
stood, and their dedication was total. They also knew we would back them 
through thick and thin. We could not predict what they would do, but once we 
had made up our minds we  expected important results. However, as all funding 
agencies should note, we made no attempt to specify what they might be or 
even the general areas in which they might come. Goals selected by consensus 
rarely surprise. 
 Of the 26 groups that were running at the initiative ’ s close in 1990, perhaps 
14 made transformative discoveries: that is, they did radically change the way 
we think, and several succeeded in achieving important scientiﬁ c objectives 
that their peers had thought were impossible or irrelevant. Ken Seddon ’ s and 
Martyn Poliakoff ’ s Venture Research contributions, for example, have trans-
formed the ﬁ eld of green chemistry, and might be one of the most important 
developments in industrial chemistry in the last 50 years. If other develop-
ments are included, they could lead to an industrial value of more than a 
billion pounds in the next decade — all for a total initial investment of some 
 £ 15 million. 
 However, all that lay in the future. Meanwhile, having established mutually 
trusting relationships, we worked hard to maintain them. We did this by gener-
ally keeping in touch with progress and by periodic visits to their labs. We also 
arranged annual 2 - day meetings at our headquarters in London to which all 
Venture Researchers were invited. It took a few years to work out a viable 
format for these meetings, covering the entire spectrum of research as we did. 
We knew that we had got it about right when the attendance, which was not 
compulsory, of the more than 100 participating scientists reached close to 
100%. Indeed, many researchers told us that despite the plethora of confer-
ences nowadays, ours was a  “ must go. ” One of their attractions was that they 
were a festival of  science — speciﬁ c disciplines were rarely mentioned, and we 
hope that Pasteur would have been at home. Our format was to allocate 
roughly equal time to presentations and discussions, to abolish the concept of 
the stupid question, and to have extended breaks between each day ’ s few 
presentations. As all our researchers were pioneers, they seemed to welcome 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
109
the opportunity to share their trials with fellow crusaders. Their discussions 
also led to several informal and fruitful collaborations that we usually funded 
separately. 
 We also held frequent workshops on general topics arising naturally from 
our program. They usually involved about ﬁ ve of our research teams and about 
a dozen or so BP scientists, and lasted 2 days. Technology transfer has long 
been fashionable, but it is too passive a term. Know - how cannot be transferred 
like a baton in a relay race. There must be a meeting of minds, and we found 
that the most effective transfers (a two - way process) occur when people are 
stimulated to see their own problems in a new light. There are no intellectual 
obstacles in these circumstances as one might reasonably claim that any new 
ideas were one ’ s own. Workshops with such titles as  “ coherent systems, ”  “ theo-
retical engineering, ” and  “ organization and behavior in biology ” arose ad hoc 
and were simply one - off meetings on a broad and topical subject. One of those 
workshops happened to coincide with the breaking news of Fleischmann and 
Pons ’ cold fusion  “ discovery, ” and we dedicated a couple of hours to debating 
the published claims (Fleischmann et al. 1989  ). We very quickly concluded that 
as far as nuclear fusion was concerned, they were nonsense. Deciding to stick 
my neck out, I reported our opinion the next day to a meeting of senior BP 
staff, some of whom were not very pleased as they were hoping to jump on 
the bandwagons that many shortly expected would roll. 
 The workshops on computing science were different from the others, 
and we had about 10 workshops on that subject. This was because we had 
the good fortune to have Edsger W. Dijkstra ’ s participation * in our program. 
Tony Hoare, Professor of Computation at Oxford University, said of him in 
1986:
 Dijkstra occupies in Computing Science the same position that Einstein did in 
Physics in the 1920s. Any physicist who did not know his name would hardly be 
accepted as a physicist. The work of Dijkstra in solving the problems of software 
engineering is as important as the work of Einstein in the generation of power 
or the manufacture of bombs. But in contrast to Einstein, Dijkstra is keen to 
pursue his research into the development phase and right through to 
application. 
 Dijkstra was indeed one of the most profound thinkers I have met, and a 
consummately skilled practitioner in the use of Occam ’ s razor. His Venture 
Research, which extended over 9 years in collaboration with either Netty van 
Gasteren or Lincoln Wallen, was entitled variously,  “ The taming of complex-
ity ” or  “ the streamlining of the mathematical argument. ” It might also have 
been informally called  “ to erect barriers to the introduction of complexity. ” 
One of his ﬁ rst remarks was that the usual name given to his ﬁ eld,  computer 
science (as opposed to  computing science), was a meaningless term because it 
was like referring to surgery as  “ knife science. ” 
 * At Eindhoven University of Technology, and later, at the University of Texas at Austin. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

110 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
 Unfortunately, his rigorous concentration on fundamental principles, and his 
sometimes tactless remarks * to those who might not be inclined to agree, 
annoyed some BP scientists and engineers. They did not appreciate Dijkstra 
telling them, as in this trivial example, that zero was a number; they knew that 
very well, they said. But when asked to name the lowest integer, how many 
would reply with  “ zero ” ? Education from primary level onward often treats 
zero as a special case rather than merely as an even number with certain 
properties. In computing science, failure to recognize zero ’ s status can lead to 
serious problems. BP was divided, therefore, into people who either hated or 
admired him. Consequently, technology transfer was difﬁ cult because some 
people did not agree that he had anything to transfer! However, our involve-
ment with Dijkstra persuaded several eminent scientists to participate in our 
Venture Research program, which in turn eventually led to BP creating an 
in - house Information Technology Research Unit. Not surprisingly, BP Explo-
ration was a major user of computers. At that time, the global demand for data 
processing in oil exploration was larger than in any other ﬁ eld, exceeding even 
military and defense requirements. Nevertheless, this was a major departure 
for BP, and the ITRU was subsequently very inﬂ uential. Its ﬁ rst director Tom 
Hill acknowledged that much of its success would not have been possible 
without access to Venture Research ’ s academic connections, which themselves 
were made possible only by virtue of our association with Dijkstra. 
 In 1990, our stock within BP generally could hardly have been higher, and 
we were also beginning to establish a wider - based reputation for excellence. 
Nevertheless, in March that year, a few gray men decided that our magniﬁ cent 
initiative should end.  † Fortunately, managing directors intervened to allow our 
10th - anniversary conference to go ahead in the summer to which we had 
invited about 250 people. The conference was our most successful, and many 
scientists (including many senior BP research staff) expressing bewilderment 
that such a huge and enlightened company as BP could not ﬁ nd a niche to 
accommodate such a tiny jewel in its enormous crown. 
 Those who set up TR initiatives should therefore ensure that the arrange-
ments are consistent with long - term stability. But they should not be immune 
from assessments even on relatively short timescales. One of the inherent 
 * Dijkstra loved to lampoon pompous managers, and sometimes delivered his scathing remarks in 
the guise of written pronouncements from the chairman of his ﬁ ctitious company, Mathematics 
Inc. For example, he once had that mischievous chairman make the following remark (Dijkstra 
 1982 , p. 204):  “ With Mathematics Inc., by the way, we are in trouble. No matter how corrupt our 
commercial practice, no matter how fraudulent our scientiﬁ c activities, the world around us seems 
to beat us up. In these competitive times, it is bloody hard even to catch up with reality! ” 
 † See my  Pioneering Research for a review of that story. Brieﬂ y, we became vulnerable following 
two retirements. Robert Malpas succeeded Jack Birks in 1982 as our contact managing director. 
He did so with great enthusiasm. When he retired in 1988, I was unable to prevent the transfer 
of the Venture Research Unit into the protective custody of the research director, John Cadogan. 
Sir Peter Walters, BP ’ s Chairman and Chief Executive, retired in 1990. He had been perhaps our 
staunchest ally for over 8 years. Within days of his going, the Unit was closed down. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
111
advantages of TR is that one can judge its quality long before projects come 
to fruition. Within a few years, it should be possible to differentiate TR from 
mainstream research by the exceptional ability of its scientists and their open -
 ended approaches. Indeed, one of the reasons we took the high - proﬁ le course 
of holding regular conferences in BP ’ s head ofﬁ ce in London was to allow staff 
to see for themselves the inspirational qualities of the scientists involved. It 
was a high - risk strategy, of course. Had they been run - of - the - mill, we would 
not have lasted long. But it was effective, and the conferences played an essen-
tial role in Venture Research ’ s survival for over 10 years. 
 However, TR initiatives must be protected from the inevitable attacks by 
vested interests. Such attacks are as old as the hills and have determined sci-
entiﬁ c progress since Aristotle ’ s time. Nevertheless, these initiatives will need 
sustained and committed high - level protection because some ofﬁ cials will 
believe that successful TR initiatives would be living proof of the serious ﬂ aws 
in their policies. In these circumstances, they might be tempted only to offer 
 “ every assistance short of actual help, ” as the saying goes. TR staff must do 
everything they can to soften any criticism implied by their very roles, but as 
my experience at BP suggests, the more successful they are, the bigger the 
threat to their existence would become. My recommendation is that the best 
protection would come from basing them on the broadest possible infrastruc-
ture. Before 1970 or so, that infrastructure would have been civilized society 
itself, when it was arranged, by accident or otherwise, that most researchers 
had access to modest funds more or less on demand. We have moved on, of 
course, but consideration might be given to setting up TR initiatives as public –
 private partnerships. In addition to the advantages mentioned in Chapter  3 , it 
could mean that these initiatives are not as susceptible to ex cathedra decisions 
on such issues as closure from one of the partners. The arrangement might 
also act to soften any implied criticism. Such collectively funded high - proﬁ le 
initiatives would be so obviously different from anything that had gone before 
that comparison could be avoided. 
 As ever, getting the right people will be vital to success. My suggestion 
would be that the TR director should be selected in consultation with senior 
scientists and then invited to take whatever action he or she deems appropri-
ate. The director would appoint others to work alongside as required, subject 
to the approval of an appropriate board. Staff should be prepared to serve for 
5 years or preferably longer. This would help build mutual trust — there would 
be no point in offering to back researchers through thick and thin if you will 
not be around to keep that promise. It also concentrates the mind if your term 
of ofﬁ ce is sufﬁ ciently long to allow you to reap the credits or whirlwinds as 
they materialize. Bureaucracy is, of course, the archenemy of research, and the 
director should be free to reduce it to the lowest level deemed compatible 
with efﬁ cient operations. Indeed, TR staff should ﬁ ercely resist trends that 
might lead to increased bureaucracy. As their program grows, the director may 
wish eventually to consider ways of maintaining personal and direct involve-
ments in the face of increasing demands. A large national program might be 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

112 
HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE
split into a number of regional programs, for example, with an overall director 
to ensure that regional entities operated along similar lines. 
 The likely costs can be estimated using back - of - the - envelope ﬁ gures. Let us 
assume that there were about 300 transformative researchers — the extended 
membership of the Planck Club — during the twentieth century. Let us adopt 
a rule of two by which we increase or decrease cost estimates by a factor of 
two whichever is the most pessimistic. Allowing for inefﬁ ciencies, therefore, 
let us increase the target number of transformative researchers we must ﬁ nd 
to 600 — that is, six a year on average over the century. This is a global estimate, 
but for a TR initiative in a large country such as the United States, then, 
according to our rule of two, we assume that  all the new members might have 
to be found in that country since it is home to about half of all R & D. If we 
also assume that the searches will be about 50% efﬁ cient, which Venture 
Research experience indicates would be about right, it would mean that a US 
TR initiative should ﬁ nd some 12 transformative researchers a year. (For 
comparison, a maximum of nine scientists can win the Nobel Prizes each year). 
TR is the cheapest research there is, as it is heavy on intellectual requirements 
but relatively light on resources. For Venture Research in the late 1980s – early 
1990s operating in Europe and the United States, the average cost per project 
was less than  £ 100,000 a year, including all academic and industrial overheads. 
Costs have gone up since then, so for our present purposes we might double 
them to, say,  £ 200,000 or  $ 400,000 a year per project on average. 
 Transformative researchers should be supported initially for 3 years. Our 
experience indicates that about half of them would require a second 3 - year 
term; and half of those, a third term of support. Very few projects should run 
for more than, say, 9 years. Those leaving the TR scheme either would have 
succeeded and been transferred to other programs created for them — that is, 
their research would actually have been transformative — or, the scientists 
agree that they had probably failed in their Herculean quests. However, these 
average ﬁ gures are quoted for guidance; there should in fact be no hard - and -
 fast rules on the length of support. Remember Planck! 
 So, the back of the envelope should now be ready. If  x is the number of new 
research projects selected each year, then according to these rough rules, the 
number of projects being supported after three complete 3 - year cycles, or 9 
years, would be
 
 
3
3
2
3
4
5 25
x
x
x
x
+
+
= .
 
 This sum should also be the steady total thereafter. As we have chosen  x to 
be 12, after 9 years, therefore, a TR research budget (i.e., excluding overheads 
such as the initiative ’ s administrative costs) would be some  $ 25 million a year. 
If it turns out to be signiﬁ cantly more than that, the initiative would be tackling 
a different problem than TR. After the ﬁ rst 9 years, the TR initiative would 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HOW IT WORKS IN PRACTICE 
113
have backed some 108 projects, of which according to our experience about 
54 should eventually turn out to be transformative in some way. 
 A TR budget for a smaller country — say, the United Kingdom — should be 
about half that of the United States, or  $ 12.5 million per annum. The Venture 
Research budget in our ﬁ nal year of operation (1990) was some  $ 5 million, 
two thirds of which we spent in Britain. As we had been operating for 10 years, 
it is possible that we had identiﬁ ed most of the researchers in Britain looking 
for potentially transformative research support at that time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 The Venture Research Harvest  
  “ Old Recipe ”  for Venture Research: 
  •    Take a senior scientist eager to take vicarious pleasure in other people ’ s 
research. 
  •    Give that scientist a modest bag of money.  
  •    Take hungry researchers plotting revolution.  
  •    Prepare mutual trust. 
  •    Cut out all bureaucracy.  
  •    Season generously with freedom and encouragement.  
  •     Stir, taste, and contemplate.    
 British Petroleum set up the Venture Research Unit in 1980 and closed it down 
in 1990. I was the head of the Unit throughout that time. Twenty - six projects 
were running at the time of closure, but as we awarded grants for 3 years, some 
coasted on after 1990. They all ﬁ nally expired in 1993. However, for the ﬁ nal 
phase after 1990, researchers were on their own; that is, they were not provided 
with the usual Venture Research services described in Chapter  6 and summa-
rized above in the  “ old recipe. ” Several teams could not get further funding 
as they were immediately and prematurely exposed to the full rigors of peer 
preview. These teams might have made substantial progress, but it was never-
theless insufﬁ cient either to create new mainstreams or to convince funding 
agencies that the new lines were worth pursuing. 
7
114
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
115
 When the Unit was ﬁ rst set up, we did not have a viable strategy. 
Hence, we were cautious, and much of our energies went into discussions 
about what we should do. Indeed, it took about 4 or 5 years before we 
were conﬁ dent that our strategy would be effective. As a result, the Unit ’ s 
expenditure during the ﬁ rst 5 years was much less than half the total for 
the decade. The research supported during that ﬁ rst period was certainly of 
high quality as otherwise our BP board would not have approved it. 
However, its coefﬁ cient of adventurousness, so to speak, was generally less 
than that of the latter 5 years because we then knew precisely what we were 
looking for. 
 The reasons for selecting each participating team and, where possible, 
some of their subsequent achievements, are summarized in the following 
pages. All except one had been unsuccessful with the conventional funding 
agencies. Indeed, we were usually the agency of last resort. The total cost of 
the program for the period 1980 – 1990 was approximately  £ 15 million, includ-
ing all BP and university overheads. BP honored its ﬁ nancial commitments 
during 1990 – 1993 at a further total cost of about  £ 5 million. The average 
cost of the nine projects approved in 1989, the last full year of normal opera-
tions, was  £ 287,671 ( $ 460,274) for a 3 - year program, including university 
overheads. 
 The review covers all the 26 projects running at our closure. My assessment 
is that almost all of them were scientiﬁ cally successful — that is, the Venture 
Researchers generally achieved objectives that their peers had thought either 
impossible or irrelevant, and went on to produce many signiﬁ cant publications. 
At least 14 proved transformative, and these are listed in Table    13 . (Poliakoff 
and Seddon were completely separate projects, but their contributions to 
Green Chemistry are now usually taken together.)  
 Our experience therefore conﬁ rms the huge harvest awaiting those 
who would ﬁ nd ways of giving individuality completely free rein. Venture 
Research was global in scope, but our budget — determined entirely by the rate 
at which potentially transformative ideas could be brought forward — never 
exceeded 0.2% of the UK expenditure on academic research, and, of course, 
was therefore only a miniscule fraction of the global total. Individuality did 
run more or less free before  ∼ 1970, but freedom for everyone is impossible 
now. 
 Table   13 would seem to prove conclusively that for radical researchers at 
least, a Venture Research – style initiative does indeed offer a viable alternative 
to the environment prior to  ∼ 1970. However, although the program ’ s results 
have been published in the literature, they are widely dispersed. There would 
be little or nothing to indicate a common source, for example. I have therefore 
gathered as much of the information as possible together for the ﬁ rst time — 
it is perhaps 90 – 95% complete – and presented it as a story. Although we 
have been unable to raise the funds to replicate the program (as of 2007), I 
hope that it will either help our quest, or inspire others to reproduce it 
themselves. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

116 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 The following is an index of my summaries. Groups are listed alphabetically 
in their present (2007) university locations: 
 VR 1. Mike Bennett, Kew Gardens; and Pat Heslop - Harrison, Leicester: 
 “ The Nature and Signiﬁ cance of Higher Order Genome Structure, ” 
1986 – 1992 
 VR 2. Paul Broda, University of Manchester Institute of Science and 
Technology:  “ Biodegradation of Lignin ” , 1981 – 1991  
 VR 3. Terry Clark, Sussex:  “ Macroscopic Quantum Objects, ” 1985 – 1991 
 VR 4. Stan Clough and Tony Horsewill, Nottingham:  “ Coherence in Con-
densed Matter Dynamics, ”  1989 – 1992  
 VR 5. David Cooper, Liverpool; and Joe Gerratt, Bristol:  “ Understanding 
the Electronic Structure of Solids, ” 1990 – 1993 
 TABLE 13.  Some Transformative Discoveries by Venture Researchers 
 VR 1 
 Mike Bennett and Pat 
Heslop - Harrison 
 Discovered a new pathway for evolution and 
genetic control 
 VR 3 
 Terry Clark 
 Pioneered the study of macroscopic quantum 
objects 
 VR 4 
 Stan Clough and Tony 
Horsewill 
 Solved the quantum – classical transition 
problem by developing new relativity and 
quantum theories 
 VR 7 
 Steve Davies 
 Developed small artiﬁ cial enzymes for efﬁ cient 
chiral selection 
 VR 10 
 Nigel Franks, Jean Louis 
Deneubourg, Simon 
Goss, and Chris Tofts  
 Quantiﬁ ed the rules describing distributed 
intelligence in animals  
 VR 12 
 Herbert Huppert and 
Steve Sparks  
 Pioneered the new ﬁ eld of geologic ﬂ uid 
mechanics 
 VR 14 
 Jeff Kimble 
 Pioneered squeezed states of light  
 VR 15 
 Graham Parkhouse 
 Derived a novel theory of engineering design 
relating performance to shapes and materials  
 VR 16 
 Alan Paton, Eunice Allen, 
and Anne Glover  
 Discovered a new symbiosis between plants 
and bacteria 
 VR 19 
 Martyn Poliakoff  
 Transformed green chemistry  
 VR 22 
 Ken Seddon 
 VR 23 
 Colin Self 
 Demonstrated that antibodies in vivo can be 
activated by light  
 VR 24 
 Gene Stanley and Jos é 
Teixeira 
 Discovered a new liquid – liquid phase 
transition in water that accounts for many of 
water ’ s anomalous properties  
 VR 25 
 Harry Swinney, Werner 
Horsthemke, Patrick 
DeKepper, Jean - Claude 
Roux, and Jacques 
Boissonade 
 Developed the ﬁ rst laboratory chemical 
reactors to yield  sustained spatial patterns —
 an essential precursor for the study of 
multidimensional chemistry  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
117
 VR 6. Adam Curtis and Chris Wilkinson, Glasgow:  “ Understanding Nerve 
Circuits, ” 1985 – 1991 
 VR 7.  Steve Davies, Oxford:  “ Understanding Molecular Architecture, ” 
1985 – 1991 
 VR 8. Edsger W. Dijkstra, Texas at Austin; Netty van Gasteren, Eindhoven; 
and Lincoln Wallen, Oxford:  “ The Taming of Complexity, ” 1981 – 1990 
 VR 9. Peter Edwards and David Logan, Oxford:  “ Metallic, Non - metallic, 
and Exotic States of Matter, ” 1987 – 1992 
 VR 10. Nigel Franks, Bristol; and Jean Louis Deneubourg and Simon Goss, 
Universite Libre de Bruxelles:  “ Collective Problem Solving, ” 1990 – 
1993 
 VR 11. Dudley Herschbach, Harvard:  “ Dimensional Scaling as a New Cal-
culus for Electronic Structure, ” 1988 – 1991 
 VR 12. Herbert Huppert, Cambridge; and Steve Sparks, Bristol:  “ Multi -
 Phase Flows in Dense Media, ” 1983 – 1992 
 VR 13. Andrew Keller, Ted Atkins, and Peter Barham, Bristol:  “ Polymer 
Transition Dynamics, ” 1984 – 1990 
 VR 14.  Jeff Kimble, California Institute of Technology:  “ Quantum Dynam-
ics of Optical Systems, ” 1983 – 1992 
 VR 15. Graham Parkhouse, Parkhouse Consultants:  “ An Integrated 
Approach to the Theory of Structures, ” 1986 – 1992 
 VR 16. Alan Paton, Eunice Allan, and Anne Glover, Aberdeen:  “ Induction 
of Novel Symbioses between Bacteria and Higher Organisms, ” 1982 – 
1992 
 VR 17. John Pendry, Imperial College of Science and Technology:  “ Trans-
port in Disordered Systems, ” 1982 – 1991 
 VR 18. John Polanyi, Toronto:  “ Surface Aligned Photochemistry, ” 
1984 – 1991 
 VR 19. Martyn Poliakoff, Nottingham:  “ Supercritical Fluids: An Environ-
ment for Reaction Chemistry, ” 1988 – 1991 
 VR 20. Alan Rayner and John Beeching, Bath:  “ Towards Understanding 
Multicellularity, ” 1987 – 1990 
 VR 21. Ian Ross, University of California at Santa Barbara:  “ Cytoplasmic 
Control of Nuclear Behavior, ” 1988 – 1991 
 VR 22. Ken Seddon, The Queen ’ s University of Belfast:  “ Chemistry and 
Physics in Ionic Liquids, ” 1988 – 1991 
 VR 23. Colin Self, Newcastle:  “ Biological Instability, ” 1990 – 1993 
 VR 24. Gene Stanley, Boston; and Jos é Teixeira, Laboratoire Leon 
Brillouin, CEA - CNRS, France:  “ Water in Conﬁ ned Geometries, ” 1990 – 
1993 
 VR 25. Harry Swinney, Texas at Austin; Werner Horsthemke, Southern 
Methodist University, Dallas; and Patrick DeKepper, Jean - Claude 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

118 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
Roux, and Jacques Boissonade, Center de Recherch é Paul Pascal, 
Bordeaux:  “ Self - Organisation in Non - linear Chemical Systems, ”  1985 – 
1991 
 VR 26. Robin Tucker, David Hartley, and Desmond Johnston, Lancaster: 
 “ Geometrodynamics, ” 1990 – 1993 
 VR 1.  Mike Bennett, Kew Gardens, and Pat Heslop - Harrison, Leicester: 
 “ The Nature and Signiﬁ cance of Higher Order Genome Structure, ” 
1986 – 1992 
 I ﬁ rst met Mike Bennett and Pat Heslop - Harrison at the Plant Breeding Insti-
tute in Cambridge following an invitation from the Director, Peter Day. After 
the introductions, Day explained how embarrassed he was that he could not 
support the group ’ s proposed research because it lay outside Institute ’ s remit. 
Indeed, as they wanted to carry out a coherent study of the hierarchical struc-
ture of genomes in general — that is, those of animals, humans, and plants — it 
would have required the concerted approval of three autonomous UK research 
councils, a feat that even for noncontroversial research would have bordered 
on the impossible. To make matters worse, it was generally thought in 1986 
that cell nuclei were amorphous; that is their constituents were immersed in 
what was often called a  “ nuclear soup ” , or alternatively,  “ nuclear spaghetti. ” 
Conventional wisdom therefore insisted that there was no structure to study, 
so their proposals were consistently turned down. As one of Nature ’ s 
ambassadors, its simplicity appealed to me immediately, and I could not see it 
supported quickly enough. 
 The group was the ﬁ rst to demonstrate that genes and the chromosomes 
on which the genes are carried are arranged nonrandomly within three - 
dimensional structures. They showed that a chromosome ’ s three - dimensional 
position is correlated with and regulates the development of cells, organisms, 
and species. They also discovered some of the rules governing the regulation 
and behavior of suites of genes as genomes evolve and hybridize with time. 
These changes can be substantial, and give heritable changes independently 
of mutations. Thus, the group would seem to have discovered a new pathway 
for evolution and for genetic or developmental control. 
 Bennett and Heslop - Harrison have therefore opened up a new dimension, 
quite literally, in our understanding of biology. However, despite this 
prodigious success, they were unable to obtain further support when their 
Venture Research funding came to an end in 1992. Their problem seems to 
be that their work is not regarded as relevant, in the current jargon. Addition-
ally, it is not based on such fashionable organisms as  Arabidopsis or rice, 
and would not necessarily lead to new genome products. Their proposals 
are met with nit - picking quibbles and are considered  “ too broad ” in scope. 
Thus their novel and proven approach is being ignored. If it could be contin-
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
119
ued, it would almost certainly lead to a new understanding of disease, of the 
dynamic structure of the genome, and of such essential topics as gene 
expression. 
 General References  
 1.   J. S. Heslop - Harrison and M. D. Bennett, Nuclear architecture in plants,  Trends 
Genet .  6 , 401 – 405 (1990). 
 2.  J. S. Heslop - Harrison, Comparative genome organisation in plants: From sequence 
and markers to chromatin and chromosomes,  Plant Cell  12 , 617 – 635 (2000). 
 VR 2.  Paul Broda, University of Manchester Institute of Science and 
Technology (UMIST):  “ Biodegradation of Lignin, ”  1981 – 1991 
 Lignin is the major structural component of all plant material. It is unique 
among the abundant natural polymers in being formed by chemical polymer-
ization rather than biosynthesis. It is also insoluble, three - dimensional, and 
nonchiral with a variety of bond types in random order. Moreover, it combines 
in Nature with cellulose and hemicellulose to form lignocellulose, the world ’ s 
principal renewable resource. In 1980, Paul Broda was about to move to 
UMIST to take up a new appointment, a time when researchers are often in 
an adventurous frame of mind. He therefore proposed to tackle the apparently 
intractable problem of lignin biodegradation, arguing that there could be 
substantial environmental beneﬁ ts in such ﬁ elds as animal nutrition or pulp -
 and - paper production if its biodegradation were better understood. The only 
organisms known to break down lignin completely in pure culture are the 
white rot fungi,  Phanerochaete chrysosporium , for example, so Broda ambi-
tiously proposed using the new techniques of molecular genetics to study both 
lignin degradation and white rot fungi. In parallel, his group also proposed 
studying actinomycete bacteria (which are also ﬁ lamentous) to establish 
whether they, too, can degrade lignin. 
 We were delighted to support such a broadly based study of an important 
topic, and in a ﬁ ne example of what can be done by public – private partnerships 
(see Chapter 4). Broda was also able to persuade the Agricultural and Food 
Research Council (which no longer exists) to support the work in parallel with 
Venture Research thereby doubling his money, so to speak. We were happy to 
have catalyzed the ampliﬁ cation. 
 Three principal themes emerged from Broda ’ s pioneering approach: 
 1.   His group developed methods for DNA and messenger RNA isolation 
from fungi that became widely adapted. Thus, they isolated clones car-
rying genes speciﬁ cally and strongly expressed during lignin degradation. 
Some of these were lignin – peroxidase - related sequences differentially 
expressed under different physiological conditions. They also applied the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

120 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
newly discovered technique of polymerase chain reaction to analyze the 
differential expression of closely related lignin peroxidase and cellulase 
genes. 
 2.   His group was the ﬁ rst to use fungi in restriction fragment length poly-
morphisms for genetic mapping, and for strain improvement.  
 3.   His group was the ﬁ rst to study hemicellulose degradation by  Phanero-
chaete chrysosporium . 
 His group also showed that the actinomycete bacteria can at least solubilise 
lignin if they cannot degrade it. They characterized enzymes that break down 
the hemicellulose component (xylanases), and developed substrates for more 
rigorous assays of lignin and hemicellulose degradation. 
 Broda ’ s pioneering work continued until 1995 and provided a rigorous basis 
for the future dissection of this complex, fundamental, and technologically 
important process. However, his Venture Research support ended in 1988 
when BP deemed that support for his work should be transferred to BP Nutri-
tion, then a member of the BP group. The rationale was that as livestock 
animals are unable to extract the nutrients that lignin encapsulates, Broda ’ s 
approach could considerably improve the nutritional value of traditional 
animal feeds, then one of BP Nutrition ’ s major business, by improving the 
accessibility of previously entrapped nutrients.  This thesis remains valid today; 
the nutritional value of such feedstuffs can indeed be improved by reduction 
of lignin content. Moreover, the bovine spongiform encephalopathy saga has 
highlighted the dangers of inappropriate and unnatural feedstuffs. Unfortu-
nately, the high initial costs of enzyme production mean that an enzyme - 
supplemented composting - type treatment has been deemed economically 
unviable. The alternative possibility of using genetically engineered organisms 
now seems unacceptable to the public, and has not been rigorously explored. 
 The pulp - and - paper industry is one of the most energy - intensive and his-
torically polluting, partly because of the need to remove and/or bleach the 
lignin component from wood pulp. Chlorine and its compounds are no longer 
used for bleaching, having been replaced by molecular oxygen. Although there 
has been some development of enzyme processes for pulp bleach enhance-
ment, deinking, pitch removal and ﬁ brillation, microbial technologies for 
decolorization of efﬂ uents, and biopulping to reduce the use of chemicals and 
energy, Broda ’ s elegant techniques have had little impact largely because of 
the initially high capital costs. However, in this and the animals feed case, it 
would seem that economies of scale have been largely ignored. 
 General References  
 1.  B. S. Hartley, P. M. A. Broda, and P. J. Senior (eds.),  Technology in the 1990s: Utilisa-
tion of Lignocellulose Wastes , The Royal Society, London, 1987.  
 2.  P. M. A. Broda, P. R. G. Birch, P. R. Brooks, and P. F. G. Sims, Lignocellulose degrada-
tion by  Phanerochaete chrysosporium : Gene families and gene expression for a 
complex process,  Molec Microbiol  19 , 923 – 932 (1996). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
121
 VR 3. Terry Clark, Sussex:  “ Macroscopic Quantum Objects, ” 1985 – 1991 
 The very title of his proposed Venture Research raised serious problems 
for him among the peer - review establishment simply because quantum -
 mechanical behavior had never been associated with  macroscopic objects. 
However, Clark ’ s reasoning opened our eyes to a wide range of new and 
unexplored science. As he explained, when quantum mechanics was ﬁ rst 
formulated by Schr ö dinger, Heisenberg, and others in the 1920s, it was 
speciﬁ cally designed to predict the properties and behavior of microscopic 
objects — electrons, atoms, molecules, and light particles (photons) — and there 
was an implicit belief that this behavior would be observed only in the micro-
scopic domain. Nevertheless, it was soon realized by Bose and Einstein that 
particles carrying zero or integer quantum spin followed a special statistics, 
subsequently known as  Bose – Einstein statistics . Furthermore, they demon-
strated that below a certain critical temperature a collection (a gas) of these 
particles — “ bosons ” — could undergo a transition to a single quantum state 
described by a simple, macroscopic parameter, and usually referred to as a 
 condensate . It was already known that superconducting behavior occurred in 
certain metallic materials at sufﬁ ciently low temperatures, and that it closely 
resembled the dissipationless behavior of electrons bound in atoms and 
molecules. In the 1930s superconductivity was joined by a new stable mate —
 superﬂ uidity — where the dissipationless ﬂ ow was that of chargeless helium - 
4 atoms. 
 It might have been realized then, therefore, that quantum mechanics 
was not restricted to the microscopic domain. However, it was argued that a 
macroscopic condensate is not a quantum object. It took many developments, 
in both theory and experimental technique, for the stage to be set for the 
construction and observation of macroscopic quantum objects. Of outstanding 
importance in this respect was the prediction by Brian Josephson in the 
early 1960s of  “ weak superconductivity ” in the coherent tunneling of electron 
pairs between two bulk pieces of superconductor — the famous Josephson 
effect. These devices are now called  weak links . This was followed in the 
late 1960s by the invention of the SQUID (superconducting quantum interfer-
ence device) ring, which eventually transformed the argument about the 
possibility, or otherwise, of macroscopic quantum objects. In its simplest form 
the SQUID comprises a thick superconducting ring enclosing a Josephson 
weak link. 
 Clark had realized that the SQUID ring  is a macroscopic quantum object, 
although for many years it was generally regarded as quasi - classical — a kind 
of halfway house between the classical (Newtonian) and quantum worlds. This 
typically one - centimeter - diameter object has the remarkable property that its 
energy levels can be changed by the application of extremely small amounts 
of magnetic ﬂ ux. Furthermore, shifts in energy levels were periodic in this ﬂ ux. 
The ﬂ ux dependence, and the periodicity, arises because of the remarkable 
potential (energy) dependence of the SQUID ring on external ﬂ ux (a parabola 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

122 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
with a cosine modulation). When an external ﬂ ux is applied, the potential rolls 
one way or the other, as he put it, depending on the direction (sign) of the 
ﬂ ux, shifting the ring energy levels as it goes. 
 Clark went on to tell us that this simple picture constituted no less than a 
paradigm shift and opened the way to studying macroscopic quantum objects 
for the ﬁ rst time. All that was required to probe the quantum evolution of a 
SQUID ring was to couple the ring to an external, classical inductive circuit. 
In practice this would take the form of a linear parallel inductive – capacitive 
resonant circuit, usually resonating at radio frequencies, and which, of course, 
is most deﬁ nitely macroscopic. The quantum evolution of the SQUID ring can 
then be followed through shifts in the resonant frequency of the classical part 
of the coupled inductive system. In order to excite its resonance, Clark ’ s team 
had created a technique whereby the excitation came from the intrinsic noise 
in the low - temperature (low - Kelvin - range) classical circuitry coupled to the 
SQUID ring. 
 Despite the exhilarating prospects Clark had outlined, his group was 
about to lose its SERC support (see Poster  11 ). As they were all on  “ soft ” 
money (Clark did not have tenure), the group not only was about to be dis-
banded but would also be unemployed. We were delighted to step into the 
breach. 
 As their work continued, it revealed a further twist to the interaction of the 
quantum and the classical. The dynamical inductance of the SQUID ring is a 
nonlinear (and periodic) function of the applied ﬂ ux. Thus, the observed induc-
tance of the coupled resonator is also nonlinear, and periodic, in this applied 
ﬂ ux. Thus, a macroscopic quantum object, a SQUID ring, can not only manifest 
its quantum evolution in a classical, macroscopic circuit structure but can also 
induce nonlinear, and often extreme, behavior in that structure. Quantum 
mechanics has, of course, been widely studied using optical systems, but it turns 
out that Clark ’ s SQUID - based system is much more efﬁ cient at creating non-
linear effects, and hence may be a more sensitive probe of quantum mechanics. 
All this, and much more, was revealed in the course of their Venture Research 
work, as the following short list indicates: 
 1.  M. J. Everitt, T. D. Clark, P. B. Stiffell, J. F. Ralph et al., Superconducting analogues 
of optical phenomena: macroscopic quantum superpositions and squeezing in a 
superconducting quantum interference device ring,  Phys. Rev. A  69 , 3804 (2004); 
idem, Quantum down - conversion and multipartite entanglement via a mesoscopic 
superconducting quantum interference device ring,  Phys. Rev. B  72 , 458 (2005).  
 2.   J. F. Ralph, T. D. Clark, M. J. Everitt et al., Nonlinear backreaction in a quantum 
mechanical SQUID ring,  Phys. Rev. B  64, 1805 (2001). 
 3.  T. D. Clark, J. F. Ralph, M. J. Everitt et al., Coherent evolution and quantum transi-
tions in a two level model of a SQUID ring,  Ann. Phys .  268 , 1 – 30 (1998). 
 4.  R. Whiteman, T. D. Clark, J. F. Ralph, M. J. Everitt et al., Microwave - induced transi-
tions in a superconducting quantum interference device,  J. Mod. Opt .  45 , 1175 – 1184 
(1998). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
123
 5.  T. P. Spiller, T. D. Clark et al., The adiabatic monitoring of quantum objects,  Phys. 
Lett. A  170 , 273 – 279 (1992). 
 6.  J. F. Ralph, T. D. Clark et al., Self - capacitance of the superconducting condensate, 
 Physica B  226 , 355 – 362 (1996) 
 Clark ’ s group also developed new electronic techniques for characterizing 
weak electronic signals with high spatial resolution. These techniques, devel-
oped initially for their SQUID studies, have proved to have a wide range of 
applications, particularly in biology. In effect, these techniques can noninva-
sively measure voltages to exceptionally high precision in time and space. Thus, 
their handheld heart monitor can immediately give high - resolution electrocar-
diograms of the heart ’ s performance throughout its cycle. A scan of the author ’ s 
heart using Clark ’ s equipment is shown in Figure  13 . 
 The group developed devices for scanning other organs, including the brain, 
and for scanning electronic signals from living cells. However, Clark is not a 
businessman, and he has always insisted that access to their group ’ s impressive 
technology would be conditional on support being provided for his basic 
research on quantum systems. Had Venture Research continued, this would 
not have been a problem,  * and his valuable technology could by now be well 
on the way to full commercial exploitation. Progress has been made, but is but 
a shadow of what it could have been. 
 That comment also applies to their science. The size of his quantum objects, 
for example, creates intriguing possibilities. By modulating the potential of 
 Figure 13  
 The author ’ s electrocardiogram taken in 2001 with handheld equipment from Terry 
Clark ’ s lab 
 
 * The funding problems at British universities are well known, but those at the University of Sussex 
have attracted wide publicity. The Physics Department has been virtually closed down (Clark ’ s 
group moved to Engineering, for example), and the Chemistry Department is on the verge of 
closure. Sir Harry Kroto, the University ’ s most recent Nobel Laureate (Chemistry), has moved to 
the University of Florida. Such an environment is not conducive to contemplative research. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

124 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
quantum - mechanical SQUID rings, it might be possible to generate energy 
bands extending over time rather than space — that is,  time bands rather than 
the more familiar spatially periodic energy bands in crystalline structures in 
condensed - matter systems. This could be a truly revolutionary discovery that 
would open up a vast new range of physics. Furthermore, bearing in mind that 
high - energy physicists probing the QED of nuclear systems are obliged to use 
high - energy and expensive  γ rays (i.e., photons with wavelengths comparable 
to those nuclear dimensions), similar experiments (Widom and Clark  1982 ) 
could be performed with the QED inherent in SQUID rings using low - energy 
and cheap microwaves.  
 VR 4.  Stan Clough and Tony Horsewill, Nottingham:  “ Coherence in 
Condensed Matter Dynamics, ” 1989 – 1992 
 Conceptual problems and controversy have dominated the history of quantum 
mechanics. In the case of systems transformed by rotation, for example, an 
isolated ammonium molecule cannot be distinguished from itself after being 
rotated through 360 ° ; that is we cannot count rotations in quantum mechanics. 
In classical mechanics, this is a trivial matter. The hands of a grandfather clock, 
say, look identical after 12 hours, but the weight will have fallen. The difference 
arises because quantum theory has to account for quantization but in so doing 
makes it impossible to describe classical phenomena. The team ’ s ambitious 
goal, therefore, was to reconcile these apparently essential incompatibilities. 
Conventional quantum mechanics describes microscopic systems, and as 
objects in the everyday world are composed of assemblies of such systems, one 
theory should describe both. However, quantum mechanics has had little 
success in describing classical behavior. Since theoretical understanding in any 
ﬁ eld strongly inﬂ uences what is done and the types of question asked, failure 
to reconcile the two views could inhibit the discovery of new phenomena, or 
restrict the ways we exploit current understanding. We had no hesitation, 
therefore, in supporting their proposal. 
 In the team ’ s view, conventional quantum theory contains features that are 
neither veriﬁ able nor unveriﬁ able, and which are in conﬂ ict, therefore, with 
the philosophy of scientiﬁ c method. One of these is the axiom that quantum 
particles are identical and indistinguishable. Classically they are distinguish-
able, of course, and initially, their project aimed to trace this apparent paradox 
through the quantum – classical transition exhibited by molecular rotors in 
solids and then make whatever theoretical changes should turn out to be 
necessary. There were three possibilities: 
 1.   Classical theory is wrong and protons should be indistinguishable.  
 2.   Quantum and classical theories are both slightly wrong and need modify-
ing to make indistinguishable protons become distinguishable as part of 
the quantum – classical transition. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
125
 3.   Quantum theory is completely wrong, and protons are not indistinguish-
able particles.    
 The generally accepted view was possibility 1, but suspiciously, no classical 
theory with indistinguishable particles has ever been developed. Their original 
expectation was that possibility 2 would be correct, but astonishingly, they 
have now reached the radical conclusion that the correct interpretation is 
possibility 3. 
 Since their Venture Research funding ended, the team have been consider-
ing and reﬂ ecting on what they did. It would now seem that the reason for 
their remarkable conclusion is that science has used the wrong concepts, and 
has done so since the time of Archimedes and Euclid. Stan Clough has gone 
on to show  * that none of the concepts of distance, time, velocity, and particles 
of ﬁ xed size and shape can actually be observed. Indeed, they are independent 
of the observer, have an unveriﬁ able existence, and are incompatible with the 
relativity principle. Instead, they are observer - dependent and deﬁ ned by mea-
surement, as are range, age, Doppler shift, and the observed variable size and 
shape of electrons, for example. 
 The switch to these concepts results in a new relativity, and quantum and 
classical theories that cover the same ground as the ones they replace while 
being mutually compatible. Their foundation is Einstein ’ s relativity principle, 
the most fundamental of all physical laws. This is crucially absent from con-
ventional quantum and classical theories and, although present in Einstein ’ s 
relativity, it is expressed in concepts with which it is incompatible, making the 
theory more complicated and mysterious than is necessary. 
 The broader objectives that they subsequently set themselves imposed 
completely new demands. It was no longer sufﬁ cient to concentrate on molecu-
lar rotation and the concept of indistinguishable particles. It became necessary 
to show that their new concepts deliver all the established results of relativity 
and quantum theory. These include the gravitational redshift, the curvature of 
light by the sun, the closed geometry of the ﬁ nite universe, the precession of 
the perihelion of the planet Mercury, the different ages of traveling twins, the 
existence of black holes, antimatter, and the equivalence equation:  E  =  m c 2 . In 
quantum theory it was necessary to show that the concepts are consistent with 
diffraction, atoms, molecules, spin, and indistinguishable particles. 
 Their Venture Research support ended in 1992, but after more work and a 
heroic amount of contemplation they ﬁ nally achieved their ambitious goal in 
2007. Their achievement could turn out to be a signiﬁ cant milestone if not a 
revolution in the development of physics. 
 During the last century relativity and quantum theory have developed 
something of the status of holy writ. To suggest that Einstein, Bohr, Schr ö dinger, 
Heisenberg, and many who followed them had been getting something wrong 
meant that the team had to go out on a very long limb. This required enormous 
 * S. Clough, private communication (to be published). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

126 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
courage. Indeed, their skepticism was generally seen as heresy rather than an 
essential tool of the scientiﬁ c method. In this hostile climate, the team has 
acknowledged that the support of the heretic - friendly and, indeed, heresy -
 encouraging Venture Research program played an important and much appre-
ciated role. 
 General References  
 1.  S. Clough, G. J. Barker, K. J. Abed, and A. J. Horsewill, Molecular friction and nuclear 
magnetism,  Phys. Rev. Lett .  60 , 136 – 139 (1988). 
 2.   S. Clough, The wrong side of the quantum tracks,  New Scientist , 22 March, 37 – 40 
(1988).  
 3.   S. Clough, Resonant broadening of NMR line shapes of tunnelling methyl groups 
at level crossings,  Molec Phys  78 , 781 (1993). 
 4.  S. Clough, A molecular rotor,  Europhysi. Lett.  29 , 169 (1995).  
 VR 5.  David Cooper, Liverpool; and Joe Gerratt, Bristol:  “ Understanding 
the Electronic Structure of Solids, ” 1990 – 1993 
 Fashion dominates science. When David Cooper, a young newly appointed 
lecturer, and Joe Gerratt, a senior theoretical chemist, ﬁ rst came to see us, we 
discussed some of the problems with understanding the electronic structure 
of molecules and solids. The essential difﬁ culty was that although these struc-
tures are dominated by electronic interactions, attempts to understand them 
have for over 50 years been based on models such as molecular orbital theory 
or band theory, in which it is assumed that the electrons move more or less 
independently of each other, experiencing only the time - averaged effects of 
the electronic repulsions. Although these  “ independent particle ” models have 
had many successes, they cannot describe some important phenomena, such 
as the formation of molecules from atoms or the decomposition of molecules 
into products, because the electron correlations play a crucial role in determin-
ing the strength of bonds, and the point at which they form, break, or rear-
range. These correlations are crucial to the understanding the electrical and 
magnetic properties of solids. 
 Traditional methods had relied heavily on computers that can execute vast 
numbers of routine calculations in the shortest possible time. However, these 
brute - force methods make it difﬁ cult or impossible to incorporate what is 
known about chemical behavior. To give a simple example, the then - current 
calculations on the hydrogen molecule evaluated all possible interactions 
between its four constituent particles — two protons and two electrons — but 
took little account of the obvious fact that a hydrogen molecule consists of 
two hydrogen atoms. Cooper and Gerratt proposed to correct this serious 
defect by deferring mathematical analysis on the system in question until they 
had injected as much knowledge on the chemistry as possible. For some time, 
they had been developing a spin - coupled theory that took into account the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
127
different ways that electron spins can pair together, without imposing precon-
ceptions. Their  “ spin - coupled valence bond theory ” aimed to be the ﬁ rst 
quantum - mechanical treatment of chemical bonding that combined useful 
accuracy with highly visual interpretations, and, hopefully, would yield new 
insight into how systems behave. They also wished to apply their ideas to solid 
materials for which current approaches were hopelessly inadequate. Other 
approaches such as band theory, while they could be adjusted to ﬁ t data, had 
little predictive power and had difﬁ culty describing electrical or magnetic 
properties. 
 We were delighted to give them the support they needed. Unfortunately, 
although their funds were guaranteed for 3 years, the Venture Research team 
was disbanded in 1990, a few months after the start of Cooper and Gerratt ’ s 
research. This decision took some of the wind from their sails as they knew 
that the promised personal interactions that we normally catalyzed would not 
take place, and perhaps more importantly, there would be no prospect of their 
support being renewed. They therefore modiﬁ ed their ambition somewhat to 
concentrate on reﬁ ning their methodology before tackling the more serious 
problems posed by solids. 
 Together with Thorstein Thorsteinsson and Mario Raimondi, they were 
indeed successful in developing a new approach to valence bond calculations. 
It took the tangible form of a calculative package, CASVB (Thorsteinsson 
et al.  1997 ), which was essentially a series of algorithms for performing valence 
bond calculations, but with the important advantage that they could be embed-
ded in the more traditional packages based on molecular orbital theory. The 
CASVB codes are now part of the widely used electronic structure packages 
such as MOLPRO and MOLCAS. 
 The increased interest in valence bond theory led to the publisher Elsevier 
inviting Cooper to edit a new volume in its Theoretical and Computational 
Chemistry series:  Valence Bond Theory , published in 2002. 
 Sadly, Joe is now deceased.  
 VR 6.  Adam Curtis and Chris Wilkinson, Glasgow:  “ Understanding Nerve 
Circuits, ” 1985 – 1991 
 We were impressed from the outset by their unusual range of expertise —
 Curtis is a cell biologist and Wilkinson an electrical engineer — and their 
determination to tackle a fashionable problem (neural networks) from a 
unique perspective. The electrical activity of single nerve cells was reasonably 
well understood, but the interactions between even small numbers of 
nerve cells were not. It should not be surprising, therefore, that the signal 
processing in the astronomically larger human nervous system and brain is 
one of the least understood of any complex system. However, not only 
are living central nervous system networks complex — they were not amenable 
to experimental manipulation. Their aim was to use substrates patterned 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

128 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
using microelectronic techniques to persuade nerve cells to arrange them-
selves into simple speciﬁ c networks of connectivity patterns, and to study these 
cells over long periods using noninvasive extracellular electrodes. Thus, they 
hoped that the proposed work would give new understanding of the grammar 
and syntax of nerve signal processing at the most basic level. We were delighted 
to be part of it. 
 As they were pioneers in this ﬁ eld, they had to work out every detail for 
themselves. Crucially, of course, once they removed the neural cells from their 
natural environment, they had to keep them alive and functioning. That meant, 
for example, that they had to be kept wet; they needed access to a medium 
containing a suitable mix of salts, food (usually glucose, but they found that 
hungry cells  “ talk ” more), and growth factors if necessary; and the  “ guiding ” 
surfaces for aligning the neurons had to be biocompatible. Furthermore, they 
had to design and construct the surface topography that might organize cells 
into observable connection patterns, develop methods of extracting electrical 
signals from the cells over long periods, and develop the techniques for growing 
nerve cells in culture — another largely unexplored area. Not surprisingly, 
therefore, they made only limited progress during their ﬁ rst 3 years of Venture 
Research support, but as their proposals continued to excite us, we enthusiasti-
cally renewed the funding  for another 3 years. Unfortunately, they had still 
nowhere near achieved their ambitious goals when Venture Research was 
closed down. 
 After our closure, they managed to ﬁ nd alternative funds from the Well-
come Trust subject to the condition that henceforth they would work on ver-
tebrate neurons. Not surprisingly, they agreed, a point that nicely illustrates 
how the major grant - giving bodies not only decide who should be funded but 
also place subtle controls on what they might do. In 2007, we can now see that 
although their work has taken far longer than they originally anticipated, they 
now seem to have achieved after some 20 years of heroic effort all they origi-
nally set out to do. Their speciﬁ c results are summarized in the following 
publications: 
 1.  P. Clark, P. Connolly, A. S. G. Curtis, J. A. T. Dow, and C. D. W. Wilkinson, Cell guid-
ance by ultraﬁ ne topography in vitro,  J. Cell Sci.  99 , 73 – 77 (1991). 
 2.  A. S. G. Curtis and C. D. W Wilkinson, Topographical control of cell migration, 
in  Motion Analysis of Living Cells , D. R. S. D. Wessels (ed.), Wiley, New York  , 
1998. 
 3.   C. Wilkinson and A. Curtis, Networks of living cells,  Physics World  12 , 45 – 48 
(1999). 
 4.  L. Breckenridge, P. Clark, P. Connolly, A. S. G. Curtis, J. A. T. Dow, R. Wilson, R. Lind, 
and C. D. W. Wilkinson, Artiﬁ cially induced nerve cell patterning or real neural 
networks, in  Synthetic Microstructures in Biological Research. J. M. Schnur and M. 
Peckerar (eds) Plenum Press, New York   (1992). 
 5.  R. J. A. Wilson, L. Breckenridge, S. E. Blackshaw, P. Connolly, J. A. T. Dow, A. S. G. 
Curtis, and C. D. W. Wilkinson, Simultaneous multisite recordings and stimulation 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
129
of single isolated leech neurons using planar extracellular electrode arrays,  J. Neu-
rosci. Meth.  53 , 101 – 110 (1994). 
 6.  C. D. W. Wilkinson, M. Riehle, M. Wood, J. Gallacher, and A. S. G. Curtis, The use of 
materials patterned on a nano - and micro - metric scale in cellular engineering,  Mater. 
Sci. Eng. C  19 , 263 (2001).  
 7.  A. Curtis, Breaking the neural code,  Nature  416 , 274 – 275 (2002). 
 VR 7. Steve Davies, Oxford:  “ Understanding Molecular Architecture, ” 
1985 – 1991 
 Davies in 1985 was a young chemist whose opening remarks to us were that 
much of the thinking in organic chemistry was wrong. Enzymes have taken 
millions of years to develop into efﬁ cient and highly speciﬁ c reagents for 
organic synthesis. Natural enzymes (average molecular weight  ∼ 50,000) are 
excellent at controlling the chirality (handedness) of the products that they 
make, excellent at discriminating between enantiomers (hands — left or right) 
of molecules, and very efﬁ cient catalysts. Synthesis of such complex molecules 
would clearly be impossible, but Davies had another approach. As I explained 
in my  To Be a Scientist (Braben  1994 ):
 He had asked himself the question of how Nature might accomplish chiral syn-
thesis if she had all the chemicals easily to hand that he had in his laboratory, 
rather than having to make do, as Nature must, with whatever materials can be 
found dispersed in the natural environment. He seemed to have discovered that 
a simple organic molecule with iron at its core behaved like a universal enzyme. 
It worked very efﬁ ciently, but he did not understand why it did so. We were 
astounded, not only by the audacity of his thinking, but also because the conven-
tional funding agencies had declined to back the substantial and exciting program 
on which he now wished to embark. Reasons for rejection are rarely given, but 
it is likely that his youth played a part; young people are rarely authorized to 
attack major problems nowadays. Also, he wished to concentrate on understand-
ing the processes of molecular architecture, rather than, as is the current fashion 
in organic chemistry, to promise to produce a new product virtually every 
week. 
 In the ﬁ rst few years of the project he developed small (molecular weight 
 ∼ 500) artiﬁ cial enzymes that in terms of asymmetric synthesis (i.e., of the left 
or right enantiomer) and molecular recognition  are better than natural enzymes . 
This transformative discovery was indeed a tour de force. 
 Together with Davies, BP set up a small company to begin to exploit his 
technology, but it was quickly overtaken by BP ’ s decision to terminate Venture 
Research. Davies and others set up a new company shortly afterward: Oxford 
Asymmetry. In 1998, it was ﬂ oated on the London Stock Exchange at a value 
of some  £ 200 million. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

130 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 VR 8.  Edsger W Dijkstra, Texas at Austin; Netty van Gasteren (1981 – 1987), 
Eindhoven; and Lincoln Wallen (1987 – 1990), Oxford:  “ The Taming of 
Complexity, ” 1981 – 1990 
 Dijkstra had an international reputation long before I ﬁ rst met him. However, 
two things about Venture Research appealed to him. British Petroleum is one 
of the world ’ s biggest companies, and Dijkstra was intrigued by the enormous 
challenge of trying to introduce new types of thinking into BP ’ s decision 
making. He also had a research student — Netty van Gasteren — for whom he 
was unable to ﬁ nd funds to allow her to work with him. As his research pro-
posals also appealed to us, we were delighted to have his participation. 
 One of the most important problems in computing today is that we do not 
know how to program computers to ensure that they always execute their 
tasks precisely as required. The concerns involved are wholly intellectual. As 
for the natural sciences, there are problems of assessment and scaling up if 
discoveries in computing science are to be successfully exploited in the mar-
ketplace. For the natural sciences, however, the processes of development have 
evolved over many decades, while the equivalent processes for computing are 
still in their infancy. At present, the precise behavior of a substantial computer 
program cannot be predicted before it is used in practice. The traditional 
approach is to take a statistical approach to the program ’ s completion. Thus, 
the program is tested until most of the errors or bugs have been identiﬁ ed and 
a point of diminishing returns is reached in the search for the rest. At that 
stage, the prospective failure of the system in normal operation is accepted as 
a reasonable risk, even though there can be no indication as to whether a pos-
sible failure will be of minor or major importance. This problem has not gone 
away, and may indeed have grown in importance as our everyday lives — health 
services, customs and immigration, trafﬁ c control, and so on — are increasingly 
subject to the whims of computers and the lack of precision in their 
programmers. 
 Dijkstra ’ s broad thesis was that if computer programs could be written in 
the form of mathematical proofs, debugging would be unnecessary because 
proofs must necessarily be correct. In 1980 the domain of such programs 
was limited to simple examples; the aim of his Venture Research was to 
expand that domain into areas that could be of practical importance — the 
design of safety - critical software, for example. In everything Dijkstra did, from 
his meticulous handwriting and command of the English language onward, he 
stressed the need for beauty and elegance. If a proof were ugly, it must be 
inefﬁ cient. He deplored mathematicians who punctuated their proofs with 
 “ rabbits out of a hat ” — that is, with such infuriating remarks as  “ it can be 
shown that, ” when in fact the steps were rarely obvious and also inhibited 
understanding. He advocated that proofs should contain the minimum number 
of lines, with each step following logically and inevitably from the previous 
one, as if one were walking down a staircase of even pitch — see Poster  17 , for 
example.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
131
 Formally, their objective was to improve, by an order of magnitude, on the 
state of the art of presentation and systematic design of algorithms and math-
ematical proofs. This terse description accurately describes what they set out 
to do, but it may not allow its signiﬁ cance to be readily appreciated. Even in 
the 1980s, there were millions of computers, and they almost all worked well 
for almost all of the time. However, few people trusted them, a situation that 
may not have changed much, but the problems stemmed mainly from the 
software rather than hardware. As for hardware, industrialists soon saw the 
need to reproduce on industrial scales laboratory conditions that do not allow 
one detectable spec of defect - causing dust, for example, so that hardware is 
virtually fault - free. Such equivalent processes for software did not (and still 
do not) exist, and intellectual dust abounds. There were (and still are) some 
large and widely used programs in which hundreds of new errors are discov-
ered each month, and even when they are corrected, it is sometimes the case 
that each correction introduces more than one new error.
 Poster 17: The Pythagorean Theorem: A Beautiful Proof  
 Edsger W. Dijkstra was inspired by the following rabbits - out - of - a - hat free 
proof of the Pythagorean theorem when he was 12 (Dijkstra 1975, p. 175  ). 
The two external squares diagrammed below have the same area; therefore, 
they are equal.
 
a 
 
       b
a
 
b 
a
b
ab/2
ab/2
ab/2
b2
ab
ab
c2
a2
ab/2
b
a
 
  Area of left square   =    a 2  +  b 2  +  2 ab 
  Area of right square   =   4 ab /2  +  c 2  =  2 ab  +  c 2 
 Therefore:  a 2  +  b 2  +  2 ab  =  2 ab  +  c 2 
 Hence, by subtracting, we ﬁ nd that:  a 2  +  b 2  =  c 2 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

132 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 Mathematics is the key to reliable programming — not so much on mathe-
matical results, but on the processes by which mathematics is done. The Stan-
ford mathematician John McCarthy, in a seminal paper presciently published 
as a young man (McCarthy  1963 ), concluded: 
 It is reasonable to hope that the relationship between computation and mathe-
matical logic will be as fruitful in the next century as that between analysis and 
physics in the last. The development of this relationship demands a concern for 
both applications and for mathematical elegance.  
 Dijkstra and his colleagues worked hard on that relationship, and made 
substantial progress. The objective is still as important as ever, and had BP ’ s 
sponsorship of Venture Research continued until the present day, it is most 
likely that we would still wish to be closely involved. 
 Unfortunately and most sadly, both Edsger and Netty are now deceased. 
My letter to Dijkstra, on the occasion of his one - thousandth EWD, is given in 
Poster  18 . One of Dijkstra ’ s famous characteristics was that he rarely pub-
lished papers in the scientiﬁ c literature. Instead, he produced immaculately 
handwritten and numbered reports — EWDs — which he photocopied and cir-
culated to friends and colleagues, who in turn, might circulate them further 
aﬁ eld.
 VR 9.  Peter Edwards and David Logan, Oxford:  “ Metallic, Non - metallic, 
and Exotic States of Matter, ” 1987 – 1992 
 When Humphrey Davy discovered lithium, sodium, and potassium early in the 
nineteenth century, he worried about whether these materials were actually 
metals because their densities were much lower than those of, say, mercury, 
silver, or gold. He called them  metalloids , a classiﬁ cation that the scientiﬁ c 
community was reluctant to change for 50 years. The question of whether 
materials are conductors or insulators persists today. If electrons are free to 
move within the crystal lattice, the material is a metal; whereas for insulators, 
the electrons are always bound. However, it is possible that all materials will 
be conductors (i.e., metals) if the external pressure is high enough. Liquid 
hydrogen, for example, is usually an insulator, but becomes metallic at pres-
sures above approximately 2 million atmospheres. The planet Jupiter, the 
largest of the solar system ’ s gas giants, is composed mainly of hydrogen and 
helium. These elements may become superconducting at the intense pressures 
of the planet ’ s interior, and may be the source of its high magnetic ﬁ eld. 
 In their initial proposal, the team planned to use the well - known technique 
of conﬁ ning metal atoms in rare - gas solids such as neon or argon. These host 
materials were previously chosen to study atomic states because they were 
thought to have little effect on them. However, the team suggested that the 
perturbations can be substantial for a wide range of conditions, and their ideas 
were supported by their ability to account for a number of previously unex-
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
133
 Poster 18: Letter from the Author to Edsger W. Dijkstra, 
March 19, 1987  
 The letter proceeded as follows:
 We received via Netty *   a few days ago, the latest batch of EWDs (991 – 1000). 
One of the great pleasures in my self - appointed task of trying to help those 
scientists whose work takes them far from the madding crowds of their less 
critical colleagues is the occasional sheer joy accompanying the dawn of new 
understanding, especially on those rare occasions when one has been able to 
make a modest contribution. They can come from say an elegant argument 
suddenly appreciated, or from the realisation that phenomena hitherto 
thought to be unrelated are part of a coherent picture, and in general cause 
the dropping of the proverbial penny. On balance, these pleasures can more 
than offset the attendant problems and frustrations of taking on the scientiﬁ c 
establishment, some of whom are not averse to saying or implying, in effect, 
that — I disagree with what you say and will ﬁ ght to the death to prevent you 
from saying it! 
 The pleasant duty of responding to your 1000th EWD also provides a nice 
opportunity for me to acknowledge our association and friendship, which are 
not only longer than any other I have been pleased to have with Venture 
Researchers and others during the last seven years, but also have been perhaps 
the most stimulating and exciting. It might of course be pointed out that my 
ignorance in the ﬁ elds you so beautifully illuminate was so profound that it 
could hardly have been otherwise. With some embarrassment, I might concede 
that there was some truth in that view, but at least I can now say with pride 
that thanks to your patience and skill I have seen some of the light, and that 
I understand what you and your close colleagues are trying to do better than 
many of your would - be professional peers, who not only refuse to be enlight-
ened, as you well know, but who also seem to believe that although there 
might be the odd dark corner, additional lighting is generally not required. 
 The EWDs have played an important part in our dialogue, and I hope that 
your post - bag will shortly be able to provide conﬁ rmation that they are now 
required reading in other parts of BP too. So, congratulations from us all in 
achieving a notable goal with panache and humor. Long may you continue 
to give confusion to your enemies and inspiration to your friends!  
 * His collaborator, Netty van Gasteren 
plained data from published work on these systems. Edwards, an experimen-
talist, and Logan, a theoretician, went on to make the audacious prediction 
that certain rare - gas hosts should generate strong permanent dipole moments 
in their guest atoms. Thus, they ignored the conventional wisdom that accord-
ing to quantum mechanics, atomic dipole moments are absolutely forbidden. 
Indeed, they thought that these forbidden states might be intermediaries in 
the generation of new materials with exotic properties. As they were free to 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

134 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
follow their science wherever it might lead them, their overall objective was 
to understand the ways metallic states may be created. 
 They found that the atomic dipolar state, far from being forbidden, is more 
widespread than had been thought previously, and they have therefore opened 
up a new window on science. Indeed, they thought that the new dipolar state 
may play a substantial role in understanding the behavior of high - temperature 
superconductors. 
 Peter Edwards was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1996.  
 VR 10.  Nigel Franks, Bristol; and Jean Louis Deneubourg and Simon Goss, 
Universite Libre de Bruxelles:  “ Collective Problem Solving, ” 1990 – 1993 
 When the team came to discuss their ideas with us in 1989, they explained 
current thinking on animal intelligence. Accordingly, humans occupy one end 
of a wide spectrum of abilities, exhibiting the highest levels of individual intel-
ligence, while ants are found at the other. Individually, however, ants seemed 
less intelligent than any other animal, but communities of ants could be very 
intelligent. This is not because they are directed and organized by an intelligent 
individual such as a queen; her role is solely reproductive. Their intelligence 
stems from the bottom up, and would seem to be drawn solely from the com-
munities in which they live. How does that come about? How is it organized? 
Their behavior seemed to be governed by a small number of simple rules. What 
are they? 
 The conventional view was that the behavior of ants and other social insects 
is preprogrammed and determined by an insect ’ s age. Franks did not agree. 
According to convention, if a colony were to suffer a catastrophe, for example, 
that killed a large number of workers — young or old — the resultant inefﬁ cien-
cies could persist for years. But that is not what is observed. He had been 
impressed with the work done by the Prigogine school in Brussels, who took 
the view that control in biological systems is based on self - organization. Franks 
had therefore begun to collaborate with members of that group to see if the 
principles of self - organization, previously limited to studies of pattern forma-
tion in inorganic chemistry and developmental biology, might also be applied 
to the elaborate patterns of behavior seen in animal communities. Their pre-
liminary data had led to their proposal. They were now proposing that ant 
colonies would provide a unique experimental model system because unlike 
interactions between molecules, interactions between workers can be observed 
directly, and unlike cellular systems or natural neural networks, insect societies 
can be easily and rapidly taken apart and reassembled. 
 Ant societies use self - organization to solve problems that are beyond the 
scope of their individual members. Such  distributed intelligence is used in 
ﬁ nding the shortest routes in a network, synchronizing activity and sorting 
items, and in task allocation. The collective problem solving of ants is often 
massively parallel and actively uses feedback, randomness, and redundancy 
(see Poster  19 ). Indeed, the algorithms used by ants are often robust, reliable, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
135
and fault - tolerant. As their goal was to discover the structure of these algo-
rithms, we suggested collaboration with a researcher (Chris Tofts) from 
the Calculus of Communicating Systems Laboratory at the University of 
Edinburgh, * and all parties were eager to accept. We were very happy, there-
fore, to fully support their heretical ideas.
 Poster 19: Collective Problem Solving According to Ants  
 The Franks, Deneubourg, and Goss algorithms allow for positive feedback, 
randomness, and redundancy in animal behaviour. The idea that ants 
seem to use such algorithms was heretical at the time of their original 
proposal. 
 Let us say that an ant colony is exploiting many scattered food sources 
of varying quality and quantity: 
  •    Positive feedback means that ants following and reinforcing the same 
chemical (pheromone) trail leading to a food source can produce rapid 
and efﬁ cient exploitation.  
  •    Randomness , that is, wandering off an existing trail, may enable ants 
to discover alternative food sources before the ﬁ rst one is exhausted. 
(Venture Research ants?) Randomness also allows individuals to break 
out of suboptimal conditions.  
  •    Redundancy : Having very large numbers of very similar units perform-
ing the same tasks means that individual failures, for example, individu-
als becoming lost, do not cause the system to break down.  
 Such collective problem solving can be reliable, ﬂ exible, fault - tolerant, and 
fundamentally simple.    
 * Earlier in the decade, we had supported a 3 - year Venture Research program at the precursor to 
that Lab by Rod Burstall, Gordon Plotkin, and Robin Milner. 
 The collaboration with Tofts turned out to be very successful (Tofts and 
Franks  1992 ), and led to the ﬁ rst application of that calculus to any ﬁ eld 
outside computation. In addition, despite the fact that the team soon realized 
that their Venture Research funding would not be renewed no matter how 
successful they would be, they responded magniﬁ cently to our encouragement 
to make full use of the freedom allowed. Thus, ﬂ ying in the face of conven-
tional wisdom, they decided from the outset to examine the hypothesis that 
ant behavior was organized from the bottom up; that is, ants are free to choose 
what to do on the basis of stimuli coming from changing task demands rather 
than being hardwired by age. 
 The astonishing result, however, was that the algorithms they derived 
revealed that ants have  both  individual and collective intelligence. Indeed, far 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

136 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
from what was thought in 1989, they found that individual ants can show high 
levels of intelligence and altruism. Only recently, Franks and Richardson 
(2006) have shown that individual ants can sometimes be extraordinarily intel-
ligent, and have published the ﬁ rst rigorous account of how an animal, in this 
case an individual ant, sets out to teach another about the location of a food 
source. The usual method in large ant societies is by broadcasting, through the 
laying of pheromone trails, for example, which is effective in large groups. But 
in small societies, where information is valuable and easily lost, teaching works 
better. Their identiﬁ cation of teaching behavior in an ant shows that a big brain 
is not necessarily a prerequisite. Thus, surprising as it may seem, Franks et al. 
were the ﬁ rst to demonstrate the phenomenon of teaching  * in nonhuman 
primates. 
 It is well known that ants lay pheromone trails to indicate the location of 
new food sources, but in a remarkable mathematical model they showed that 
ants might usefully lay  repulsive pheromones ; that is, if ants had thoroughly 
explored an area and found no food in it, they might deposit a small amount 
of chemical scent that would discourage their nestmates from wasting their 
time on a fruitless search. However, even though their surprising theoretical 
result was rigorously based, the team could not ﬁ nd a peer - reviewed journal 
that would publish it because this sort of behavior is not supposed to happen. 
They published in a book chapter instead (Stickland et al.  1999 ). They did not 
have to wait long before their prediction was experimentally veriﬁ ed. In 2005, 
negative pheromone marking in ants was demonstrated and published in 
 Nature (Robinson et al.  2005 ). 
 There are about 10,000 described species of ants. Following the work of 
Franks et al., however, it would now seem that individual ants are as sophisti-
cated as they need to be, and almost all have high information processing 
capabilities at the individual level. It is also possible that ants have collective 
intelligence too. Back in the early 1990s, the team emphasized collective intel-
ligence above all, and indeed, their very emphasis on determining the simple 
rules controlling individual behavior indicated that individual ants might be 
dumb and stupid. This is simply not true. The exciting prospect which Franks 
and his colleagues intend to pursue and understand, however, is that ants have 
sophisticated information - handling abilities at all levels from the individual to 
the collective.  
 VR 11.  Dudley Herschbach, Harvard:  “ Dimensional Scaling as a New 
Calculus for Electronic Structure, ” 1988 – 1991 
 I ﬁ rst met Dudley Herschbach at an American Physical Society meeting in 
New Jersey a few days after the announcement that he had won a share in the 
 * An individual is a teacher if it modiﬁ es its behaviour in the presence of a naive observer, at some 
initial cost to itself, in order to set an example so that the other individual can learn more quickly 
(Caro and Hauser  1992 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
137
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1986. I was impressed that he had taken time 
from his celebrations to come to my talk. I was also wary, because the few 
Nobelists to contact us seemed to take the view that we should gratefully 
welcome their participation because it would add luster to our program. But 
we did not play those fashionable games. We offered freedom, and Nobelists 
surely had that in abundance. Over the course of the next few months, however, 
Herschbach proved that he was truly exceptional even by Nobel standards. 
 Herschbach told me that a few years earlier he had been preparing an 
introductory course on electronic interactions with nuclei for Harvard chem-
istry students when he had come across in  Physics Today an interesting tech-
nique used in quantum chromodynamics. He thought it might form the basis 
of a nice exercise for them, based, as he put it, on making two wrong moves. 
The ﬁ rst was to calculate the interactions that electrons and nuclei would have 
if the space they occupied were one - dimensional instead of the usual three. 
He would then compare that with the interactions expected if the space had 
an inﬁ nite number of dimensions. His reasonable assumption was that the 
actual interactions in real three - dimensional space should lie between these 
two extremes, and as the technique seemed to work for the ferociously strong 
forces between quarks found  inside nuclei, they should work for the very much 
weaker ones involving electrons. His back - of - the - envelope calculations made 
before he asked his students to play his game not only revealed that he was 
right, but he was astonished to ﬁ nd that his bizarre model (which he called 
 “ D - scaling ” ) produced remarkably accurate results. Indeed, they were more 
accurate than very elaborate conventional calculations using powerful com-
puters! What was Nature trying to tell him? Perhaps she was using Braille? 
 Conventionally, calculations on the electronic structure of atoms and mole-
cules can be extremely arduous or sometimes even intractable. Accuracy 
comparable to experiment had been achieved only for the simplest systems 
despite enormous increases in computing power. The fundamental difﬁ culty 
was the extremely high accuracy required. For the nitrogen molecule, for 
example, the bond is relatively strong — it is a triple bond involving three pairs 
of electrons. However, the bond dissociation energy is only 0.04% of the total 
electronic energy of the molecule. It would therefore be a formidable task to 
calculate that bond energy to an accuracy of say, 1%. (He compared it to 
weighing a ship ’ s captain by taking the difference between the ship ’ s weight 
with him onboard and ashore.) As he had quickly found that in some cases he 
could get signiﬁ cant improvements over the traditional brute - force methods 
by using D - scaling, he now wished to fully explore what could be done if he 
took it seriously. Unfortunately, the usual funding agencies had told him, in 
effect, to stick to his knitting (reaction chemistry) and declined to give him 
the funding he needed. After an extended series of meetings, largely to test, I 
have to admit, whether he was really serious about all this, we were delighted 
to oblige. 
 As one must be prepared to accept, however, Herschbach ’ s approach might 
not have  “ caught on, ” as he puts it, with the large industry of electronic 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

138 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
structure calculators, who now use mostly density functional theory. However, 
there have been some valuable developments. His former postdoc, Sabre Kais 
(now at Purdue), has used D - scaling to demonstrate aspects of electronic 
structure of atoms and molecules akin to phase transitions in statistical mechan-
ics. Marlan Scully (Texas A & M and Princeton) has a sizable group extending 
D - scaling to treat excited electronic states of atoms and molecules. It would 
seem that results to a useful accuracy are substantially easier to obtain via D -
 scaling than by conventional methods. 
 This somewhat disappointing outcome might be attributable partly to our 
premature closure. In addition, the BP research director ’ s apparent indiffer-
ence to Venture Research also meant that even though BP had many chemists 
with whom Herschbach would have been eager to collaborate (and they with 
him) opportunities to do so always failed to materialize simply because they 
needed the research director ’ s approval. 
 VR 12.  Herbert Huppert, Cambridge; and Steve Sparks, Bristol:  “ Multi -
 Phase Flows in Dense Media, ” 1983 – 1992 
 Herbert Huppert, a mathematician, and Steve Sparks, a geologist, were both 
young researchers at Cambridge when they ﬁ rst spoke to us. (We always 
referred to them as H 2  +  S 2 .) Even at Cambridge, one of the most prestigious 
research universities in the world, the burden of teaching and administration 
can be heavy, especially for young people. Their youth and complementary 
blend of unusual skills had given them an abundance of ideas that they wanted 
to explore, all of which sounded intriguing and rich with potential. In particu-
lar, they had extensive and apparently inexhaustible plans for simple, low - cost 
experiments that might simulate real planetary processes. Nowadays, as men-
tioned earlier, one hears constant calls for increased funding because of the 
rising cost of equipment for world - class research. Freed from the need to 
compete, however, Huppert and Sparks could concentrate on simple experi-
ments that had never been done. Equipment is rarely on the critical path in 
such cases. Apart from a modest computer and a videocamera, their require-
ments were for not much more than might have been found in a well - equipped 
Victorian laboratory, complete with the traditional string and sealing wax. A 
glass cylinder, for example, containing a cold - water column poised above a 
hotter one with dissolved chemicals (to make it compositionally more dense) 
and suitably dyed could probe geologic mixing processes; air forced vertically 
through a tiny nozzle and containing varying concentrations and diameters of 
small particles could yield valuable information on erupting volcanoes; and 
cooling a crystallizing saturated ﬂ uid generates convection currents that can 
lead to complex chemical gradients, and can test how multicomponent systems 
can solidify and melt. Their enthusiasm was infectious, and radiated  “ can do ” 
and ﬂ air. 
 Their proposed experiments were designed with elegance, simplicity, and 
insight. They also created the impression that they could generate new and 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
139
simple approaches to old problems virtually at will. All they needed was 
the freedom to get on with it. That involved releasing them from their burden-
some university duties while maintaining them in Cambridge ’ s creative 
environment. The university was very cooperative. All they required was that 
we provide salaries for replacement lecturers. H 2  +  S 2 needed very modest 
funds for equipment and so on, and we were very happy to supply all these 
things. 
 Taking full advantage of the ﬂ exibility offered by Venture Research funding, 
and not least the possibility that it could be extended indeﬁ nitely, Huppert and 
Sparks developed some fundamentally new concepts in the earth sciences. 
Concentrating on dynamical ﬂ ows in geology, their work addressed such key 
issues as how rocks melt, how magma evolves chemically and physically in 
reservoirs under volcanoes, and how magma behaves during volcanic erup-
tions. The research involved the application of ﬂ uid mechanics to geology as 
well as developing new concepts in ﬂ uid mechanics. Thus they played a pio-
neering role in the creation of the emerging ﬁ eld of  geologic ﬂ uid mechanics 
(a term they coined). Their work has had major inﬂ uence * on fundamental 
earth science problems, such as how the crust melts, how magmas chemically 
differentiate, and how volcanic eruptions proceed. It also had signiﬁ cant eco-
nomic and commercial implications — for example, their ideas on how, early in 
Earth ’ s history, very hot lavas melted sediments has led to an understanding 
on how nickel - ore bodies are formed. 
 The team inﬂ uenced not only geology but also ﬂ uid dynamics. Starting with 
honey drooled over toast, for example, surely the most appetizing consumable 
ever used in an experiment, their work advanced basic understanding of 
melting and solidiﬁ cation in multicomponent ﬂ uid systems, the ﬂ ow of viscous 
ﬂ uids such as the ﬂ ow over molten glass during its manufacture, and the propa-
gation of hazardous lava ﬂ ows following eruption. Their studies of the natural 
convection caused by phase changes pioneered the idea that composition 
rather than temperature will dominate behavior in many natural and industrial 
systems. 
 Their work attracted widespread recognition in terms of prizes and awards, 
culminating in their elections to the Royal Society: Huppert became a Fellow 
in 1987 and Sparks, in 1988. 
 General References  
 1.  H. E. Huppert and R. S. J. Sparks, The generation of granitic magmas by intrusion 
of basalt into continental crust,  J. Petrol.  29 , 599 – 624 (1988). 
 2.  H. E. Huppert and R. S. J. Sparks, Cooling and contamination of maﬁ c and ultramaﬁ c 
magmas during ascent through continental crust,  Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.  74 , 371 – 386 
(1985). 
 * The inﬂ uence of their work has recently been discussed in detail in Davis A. Young ’ s book on 
the history of igneous geology (Young 2004  ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

140 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 VR 13.  Andrew Keller, Ted Atkins, and Peter Barham, Bristol:  “ Polymer 
Transition Dynamics, ” 1984 – 1990 
 Polymers are long - chain molecules, but chains are rarely fully extended. 
Indeed, polymers are normally entangled or closely coiled like a ball of string. 
When the group ﬁ rst spoke to us, there were no techniques for extending 
polymers without breaking them. Thus, polymers were difﬁ cult to characterize; 
that is, their strength, stiffness, molecular weight, charge properties, and 
strength could not easily be measured, which was perhaps  the major problem 
in polymer science. Consequently, light - or neutron - scattering techniques used 
to probe polymer structure ﬁ rst had to resolve the confused and tangled large -
 scale structure before the polymer ’ s molecular properties could be revealed. 
To say the least, this tended to be something of a nightmare. 
 Andrew Keller had been a polymer scientist for many years, and had had 
support from both industry and the research councils. He was also one of the 
most prolix people I have met, which no doubt created difﬁ culties when he 
was trying to persuade the various agencies to support his work. Indeed, one 
of our BP board members referred to Keller ’ s writings as  “ the Hungarian 
scrawl. ” However, I relate this anecdote affectionately, because we found that 
with patience and perseverance, powerful signals began to emerge from his 
somewhat circumlocutory ramblings that were worth waiting for. He clearly 
was very insightful, and was one of the leaders in the polymer ﬁ eld, but it also 
attracted intense industrial interest, which meant that research — even the 
basic research — tended to focus on perceived problems. Thus, he had rarely 
been allowed the freedom to pursue his ideas wherever they might take him 
without having to constantly justify them in terms of some exploitable outcome. 
That was precisely the freedom we gave him and his team. 
 The team proposed to use ﬂ uid ﬂ ows of such high rates that the effects of 
viscous drag could stretch the chains to their full extent, and thereby enable 
for the ﬁ rst time their molecular dynamics to be studied. 
 In 1994 Keller was the winner of Royal Society Rumford Medal. It was 
awarded  “ in recognition of his contributions to polymer science, in particular 
his elucidation of the basis of polymeric crystallization, a fundamental ingre-
dient in many materials, to methods of making strong ﬁ bers and to the under-
standing of polymer solutions which underlie this technology. ” It was a tribute 
to his work for Venture Research. 
 Sadly, Andrew is now deceased.  
 VR 14.  Jeff Kimble, California Institute of Technology:  “ Quantum 
Dynamics of Optical Systems, ” 1983 – 1992 
 I ﬁ rst met Jeff Kimble a few years after he had been appointed assistant pro-
fessor of physics at the University of Texas at Austin. His graduate work had 
been in Leonard Mandel ’ s laboratory at the University of Rochester, where 
he had made the ﬁ rst observation of  “ photon antibunching, ” a phenomenon 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
141
that in later years would be recognized as having ushered in a new area in 
quantum optics. However, the ﬁ eld of quantum optics was then (1977) far from 
the mainstreams. Kimble therefore had difﬁ culty in securing a postdoctoral 
appointment, opting instead for a position as a staff scientist at the General 
Motors Research Laboratories in Warren, Michigan. 
 Not surprisingly, a management - prescribed research environment was not 
to Kimble ’ s liking, so he sought employment in academia that offered the 
freedom to determine his own research directions. But quantum optics was 
still seen as a backwater, so his wide - ranging search over physics departments 
in the United States and Canada was fruitless. Fortunately, thanks to Leonard 
Mandel, he learned of a position at the University of Texas at Austin, and by 
another stroke of luck a faculty member there (Manfred Fink) remembered 
him from his undergraduate days at a small college in Texas, whence he 
became a junior faculty member in 1979. 
 By the standards of the day, Kimble ’ s basement laboratory, despite his 
energetic scrounging and lobbying, was not well equipped but was sufﬁ cient 
to launch a modest program. His interest lay in the recently observed phe-
nomenon of optical bistability in which the optical transmission, say, of an 
optical cavity exhibits well - developed hysteresis effects. The phenomenon was 
generally well understood from a  semiclassical perspective, but he wished to 
exploit it as a means to explore the  quantum physics of optical systems of  “ the 
greatest conceptual simplicity. ” In this respect his proposed work was against 
the current trend for device development such as high - speed switches and 
optical computing. Kimble thought that his difﬁ culties with the NSF stemmed 
from the fact that his interests fell in the crack between two divisions — the 
Quantum Electronics Division of the Engineering Directorate, and the Atomic 
and Molecular Physics Division of the Physics Directorate. The ﬁ rst was not 
interested in fundamental processes, and there was insufﬁ cient atomic physics 
in the proposal for the second. He had also spoken to the program ofﬁ cers of 
the Defense Agencies (Ofﬁ ce of Naval Research, Air Force Ofﬁ ce of Scientiﬁ c 
Research, and Army Research Ofﬁ ce), who had told him,  “ .  .  . if it is not an 
idea that will make a device work, do not submit a proposal. ” 
 The optical system that Kimble wanted to study involved two - level atoms 
located inside optical cavities. For example, he wanted to investigate the fun-
damental limits for approaching an instability — that is, the point at which it 
switches from one stable state to another. In this respect, therefore, he sought 
to explore the nature and impact of quantum tunneling for bistable systems. 
Ultimately, his goal was to move optical physics into a new regime where 
manifestly quantum processes become dominant. His strategy was to develop 
ways of exploring the wide gulf between the macroscopic world, for which our 
normal intuition sufﬁ ces, and the world of quantum mechanics, which seems 
to be governed by a bizarre set of nonintuitive rules. As we talked in his lab, 
he said that if the tabletop next to us represented the full domain of quantum 
mechanics, then in his view our current understanding was limited to only one 
tiny patch in one corner, with the rest unexplored and ripe for discovery. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

142 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 We talked about other problems in the ﬁ eld of quantum mechanics such as 
how to measure a system without disturbing it, and the generation of new types 
of quantum states that have less ﬂ uctuations (noise) than does the vacuum 
state. In other words, they are  “ darker than darkness, ” as he imaginatively 
described them; states that offered the prospect of making measurements 
more accurately than the Heisenberg uncertainty principle allowed in its usual 
(naive) application. Here was a researcher who seemed equally at home with 
either theory or experiment. He also convinced us that given freedom he 
intended to forage deep into what seemed to be an exciting and unexplored 
wilderness, which is precisely the sort of mission we love to support. We were 
happy to oblige, therefore, and give him his ﬁ rst major grant. 
 Kimble ’ s early experiments in optical bistability laid the principal founda-
tions for the modern ﬁ eld of cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED). His 
Venture Research support led to the ﬁ rst observations of the interactions 
between single atoms and photons. These included the demonstration of a 
quantum phase gate in cavity QED for quantum logic with single photons (in 
1995) and the realization of a laser that operates with one, solitary atom in a 
regime of strong coupling (in 2003). Here, Kimble has pushed laser operation 
to its conceptual limit. 
 In 1986 with his second Venture Research grant (and later continuing with 
his third), Kimble and his colleagues embarked on a new direction, namely, 
the creation of  “ squeezed light ” with quantum ﬂ uctuations below the standard 
quantum limit. Using the freedom we allowed and indeed encouraged, Kimble 
courageously spent his entire 3 - year budget in a few months to implement his 
idea for the creation of squeezed light via parametric down conversion. The 
result was a tour de force, and provided what is still the most successful route 
for the generation of squeezed light more than 20 years later. Moreover, 
Kimble discovered a direct demonstration of the Heisenberg uncertainty prin-
ciple for light, and made the ﬁ rst measurements with sensitivities beyond the 
standard quantum limits. His work with squeezed light led to the ﬁ rst realiza-
tion of the Einstein – Podolsky – Rosen paradox (dating to 1935), and to the ﬁ rst 
demonstration of bona ﬁ de quantum teleportation (in 1998). 
 Kimble was elected  * to membership of the US National Academy of 
Sciences in 2002. 
 Kimble ’ s experience provides further demonstration that the careers of 
putative members of a twenty - ﬁ rst - century Planck Club cannot be expected 
 * Ten years after his Venture Research support ended, Kimble sent me a personal note on the 
occasion of his election. He said:  “ I hope that you will remember many years ago when you came 
to UT to speak about the VRU, and following that, the receipt of a letter from a young assistant 
professor at UT. One thing led to another, and eventually to my VRU grant, which has made all 
the difference in my career. Back then the things that I proposed were well outside the mainstream 
of traditional AMO physics, but by now have become established (credible) programs within a 
broader scientiﬁ c community. Certainly, not everyone was supportive of me or my ideas. So, all 
these many years later, I do sincerely thank you for taking a chance on me, and for making what 
was then, a decision far outside the fashion of the day. It has made all the difference for me. ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
143
to run according to bureaucratic or indeed any externally set agenda. His cita-
tions rocketed (see Figure  14 ) following his Venture Research support even 
though his interests were in a backwater when he started out.  
 VR 15.  Graham Parkhouse, Parkhouse Consultants:  “ An Integrated 
Approach to the Theory of Structures, ” 1986 – 1992 
 Is it possible to do Venture Research work in engineering? Research in the 
natural sciences should always imply the possibility of a surprising outcome, 
however mundane it may be initially. The question therefore arises: Is it pos-
sible to conceive of open - ended research in engineering since highly speciﬁ c 
objectives seem essential? I thought it was, but our problem was that we got 
very few proposals from engineers. 
 In an attempt to encourage them, I published an essay in the  New Scientist 
on blue skies research in engineering and the role of the  theoretical engineer 
(Braben  1986 ). Imagine that you ask an engineer to design a bridge or a build-
ing. The engineer will consider the speciﬁ cation, visit the site, think about costs 
and timescales, and generally contemplate the problem. Then at some fateful 
moment, the engineer will pick up a pencil and tentatively sketch a design and 
will then probably have a clear mental picture of the methods of construction, 
location, materials to be used, and so on, and the simple act of sketching them 
might have closed the other options. Henceforth, the engineer draws either on 
well - established design processes, or others that may have to be derived if the 
 Figure 14  
 H. J. Kimble ’ s citations in the literature. (  Source: ISI Web of Science . Copyright 2007, 
The Thompson Corporation .) 
 
Citations in each year
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
850
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1975
1976
1977
1978
Years
2007
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

144 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
problems are substantial — the Sydney Opera House,  * for example — but the 
objectives will be clear. However, when we come to consider what might have 
happened during the interval between the initial invitation and the engineer 
starting to sketch, we can say very little. Do these  abstract processes (such as 
those that Parkhouse illustrated in Figure  15 ) have structure? How might they 
vary between recently qualiﬁ ed engineers and those with, say, 20 years ’ experi-
ence? My suggestion was that those who would address such questions should 
be called  “ theoretical engineers ” as their research might lead to new types of 
things being done, and perhaps to surprising outcomes.  
 Parkhouse was a consulting engineer in a large company when he ﬁ rst came 
to see us. Not surprisingly, he lacked the freedom to develop his theoretical 
ideas on the nature of engineering processes. He explained that he was inter-
ested in the concept of hierarchy in design and wanted to build experimental 
rigs that would test his ideas with real materials. However, although we were 
soon convinced that he was a Venture Researcher, it was not possible for him 
to participate in our scheme while remaining with his company. Showing 
 Figure 15  
 The role of a  theoretical engineer. While engineers use existing theory to produce 
real structures, the theoretical engineer is considering how to improve the conceptual 
structures that the theory implies. (  Source : The cartoon is by Graham Parkhouse and 
is reproduced by permission .) 
 
  HOW CAN I 
EXPRESS THESE 
IDEAS BETTER?
MATERIAL
SHAPE
MATERIAL
PERFORMANCE
THEORY
PRACTICE
SELECTION
DIMENSIONS
SPECIFICATIONS
THEORETICAL
ENGINEER
ENGINEER
 * Initially designed in 1956 by the 38 - year - old Danish architect J ø rn Utzon, the building of this 
iconic structure by the British company Ove Arup, which was completed only in 1973, required 
many technological innovations that have since passed into accepted engineering practice. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
145
remarkable courage and conviction, therefore, he decided to resign if we 
would support him, which we were delighted to do. Indeed, he turned out to 
be the only industrial scientist we could ﬁ nd. But ﬁ rst we had to ﬁ nd him a 
locus, and luckily, we were able to persuade the University of Surrey (the 
university nearest to his home) to offer him an academic post and a lab. He 
could now begin his life as a  “ theoretical engineer ” , and develop the integrated 
approach to the theory of structures that he had long contemplated 
(Parkhouse and Sepangi  1994 ). 
 Parkhouse ’ s thinking starts with Figure  16 . It shows unrecognized relation-
ships between shape and material, but he gives these concepts special meaning. 
First, they are both abstract concepts in his theory (Parkhouse  1987 ).  Shape is 
a purely geometric concept without substance, while  material is unbounded 
shapeless substance. The mathematics he associates with shape is simply 
geometry. The properties he associates with material include density, stiffness, 
strength, and cost. In everyday engineering they always coexist, as shown in 
Figure  16a . Every structure can be characterized by shape, material, and geom-
etry. Such properties as the strength and cost of a bridge, for example, describe 
a structure ’ s performance, and the designer ’ s task is to choose a structure 
whose properties meet the speciﬁ cation. Choosing a material — steel, alumi-
num, concrete, GRP, or timber, say — is relatively simple, but then one is faced 
with the difﬁ cult problem of choosing the shape as there are an inﬁ nite number 
of possible types: lattice, tubular sections, stiffened plates, and so on. Almost 
 Figure 16  
 Two important relationships between material and shape. (  Source : The cartoons are 
by Graham Parkhouse and are reproduced by permission .) 
 
Material 
+ 
a shape 
= 
a structure 
Material 
+ 
a repeating shape 
= 
a “macromaterial” 
(a)
(b)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

146 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
all the geometric complexity comes from the repeating shapes, but when ﬁ lled 
with a material, as in Figure  16b , they have material properties rather than 
structural ones. In effect, they become another material, which Parkhouse calls 
a  macromaterial , which is less dense than the original because of the space 
entrained within it. Thus, he shows the synthesized material in Figure  16 in a 
lighter shade of gray, and describes the structuring (the shaping of material 
into tubes, lattices, etc.) as a process of  material dilution  (Parkhouse  1984 ). 
Solid beams of macromaterials of the correct strength and density, for example, 
can represent rolled - steel joists — timber would be a good choice.  
 Macromaterials are hierarchical. The repeating shapes in Figure  16b , for 
example, can exist in more complex or lighter forms, each with a speciﬁ c 
density, stiffness, strength and cost. If designers had this kind of information 
(coming from, say, an international program of testing and analysis on a range 
of macromaterials), their tasks could be transformed into a rational process 
of macromaterial selection guided by performance and cost rather than by 
pragmatism. 
 His Venture Research work focused on the extraction of data on macroma-
terial strength and stiffness from load tests on structures. As it progressed, it 
became clear that some types of repeating shape are suitable for use in com-
pression, while others are suitable for tension. A ﬁ brous form, for example, is 
excellent in tension and poor in compression, while a block or granular form 
is excellent in compression and poor in tension. Materials likewise fall into 
two categories: those that are ductile and excellent in tension, and those that 
are brittle and excellent in compression. The performance of a prestressed 
composite member of ceramic blocks held in compression by taut GRP 
wrapping (Parkhouse  1989 ) was shown to exhibit ductile behavior in tension 
even though neither of the constituent materials was ductile. He discovered a 
remarkable lenticular shape (Parkhouse et al.  1992 ) that had the geometric 
attributes to qualify it as a model structural member. Under any end - loading 
this model member  has one identical stress pattern at every section along its 
length even when it is approaching failure and the material within it is yielding. 
Such a serendipitous shape would be a gift to theoretical engineers wanting 
to understand the structural implications of material nonlinearity. 
 Sadly, Parkhouse ’ s transformative research came to an end following our 
closure. Little support was available elsewhere as engineering is understand-
ably a conservative ﬁ eld and there had simply been insufﬁ cient time for his 
radical ideas to take root. That is a great pity. In the short term, they could be 
used as an aid for teaching as they enable a perspective on every type of 
structure that has ever been built. In the long term, his ideas would offer the 
prospect of applying the experience of building in steel and concrete, say, to 
all modern high - strength materials. Above all, however, he has made the 
remarkable discovery that the performance of a structure can be assessed by 
enveloping it with an imaginary shape, and treating its contents as a form of 
 “ material ” independently of all its countless components, a technique that 
could be applied to all engineering ﬁ elds and to technology in general.  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
147
 VR 16.  Alan Paton, Eunice Allan, and Anne Glover, Aberdeen:  “ Induction 
of Novel Symbioses between Bacteria and Higher Organisms, ” 1982 – 1992 
 When Alan Paton ﬁ rst came to us in 1982 he was already semiretired (he was 
born in 1922). About 10 years earlier, he had examined rotten potato cells 
under a microscope. He had found many dead cells, of course, but some were 
still living even though they were almost full - to - bursting with bacteria. He 
asked himself the simple question: How can these bacteria get into cells when 
they cannot get out? He then recalled a private communication he had received 
years before about L - form * bacteria — bacteria that have either temporarily 
or permanently lost the ability to synthesize their cell walls. The walls not only 
determine a cell ’ s shape but also protect the cell from attack. Deprived of it, 
they can take up virtually any shape, and Paton thought that the L - form ’ s 
plasticity may have enabled the bacteria to invade the potato cells. However, 
that only deepened the mystery. The bacteria in question were pathogens, but 
cells apparently full of them still seemed viable. What was happening? Had he 
discovered a new type of organism that was neither wholly plant nor wholly 
bacterium? Had he come across a new plant – bacterium symbiosis? 
 He had tried unsuccessfully to get funding, but the  “ theoretical dogma 
hitherto universally accepted as correct ” was that pathogens and plants do not 
enter into symbiotic associations. The dogma forbade it. The major problem 
was that plants are eukaryotes while bacteria are prokaryotes. They use dif-
ferent genetic languages, therefore, and so the dogma maintained that they 
cannot easily communicate. Paton was also a self - styled,  “ good old - fashioned 
microscopist, ” and microscopy was no longer fashionable. His peers ’ response 
implied that his eyes might be deceiving him so that what he thought he was 
seeing was really an artifact. That would normally have been the end of the 
matter, but he was undaunted and struggled on intermittently with whatever 
meager resources he could scrounge. These later studies reinforced his view 
that he was seeing an unusual symbiosis. Furthermore, they seemed to show 
that plants  “ inoculated ” with pathogenic L - forms were resistant to infection 
from fully active bacteria. 
 We liked their proposal, but the weight of opposition was such that we were 
initially only able to offer short - term support (i.e., one year). Part of the 
problem was that he could not always reproduce some of his results. He was 
as mystiﬁ ed by this as we were. However, his vast experience convinced him 
that something very unusual was going on, and he was determined to under-
stand it. We made several visits to Aberdeen, where, with Paton ’ s microscope, 
we could actually see pathogenic bacteria apparently thriving within cells that 
should be dead. There seemed little doubt, therefore, that something very 
interesting was going on. We knew that normal cells contain organelles such 
as mitochondria and chloroplasts that seem bacterial in origin. Despite current 
 * These bacterial forms were ﬁ rst described at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine (a school 
of the University of London) in 1935. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

148 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
dogma, it was possible that Paton might be about to rediscover a form of 
association that Nature had experimented with eons ago, but that she no 
longer needed. The lack of reproducibility might stem from his failure to 
identify every contributing factor, which is often a problem in the biological 
sciences. Thus, unknown processes were inﬂ uencing the phenomena he was 
observing, and as they would therefore be uncontrolled, they might be the 
cause of the troublesome lack of reproducibility. 
 All this was indeed intriguing, and we decided to go ahead with full - scale 
support subject to the proviso that the team should recruit a molecular biolo-
gist to help increase the breadth of their attack, and perhaps also silence some 
of the skeptics by putting his results on a more acceptably rigorous footing. 
Thus, Anne Glover subsequently joined the group with expertise that added 
a powerful new string to their bow. 
 The major problem was to demonstrate beyond   doubt that pathogenic 
bacteria were fully metabolizing within the plants, that is, that  both 
organisms were thriving. This was done by means of one of the most elegant 
experiments performed during the 10 years of Venture Research. The key part 
of the experiment was their use of the  lux genes — the name given to genes 
expressing the enzyme luciferase. The  lux genes can be isolated, and using 
genetic engineering techniques can be introduced into any bacterial cell. It emits 
tiny ﬂ ashes of light if the  lux genes are expressed within a normally functioning 
cell. Their experiments are illustrated by the cartoons in Figure  17 .  
 Thus, the L - form of the pathogenic bacterium seems to have lost its ability 
to infect (Amijee et al.  1992 ; Walker et al.  2002 ), and the inoculated plant can 
grow and develop normally. Unfortunately, these experiments were completed 
only in 1990, shortly before Venture Research ’ s demise. Other experiments 
undertaken by Eunice Allan et al. using a different reporter mechanism than 
 Figure 17  
 Cartoons illustrating the effect of inoculating a plant with either the  l - form or the 
normal form of a pathogenic bacterium: (a) French bean,  Phaseolus vulgaris , 2 days 
after being inoculated with the  l - form of the pathogen  Pseudomonas syringae ; 
(b) French bean 2 days after being inoculated with  l - form of the pathogen equipped 
with the  lux genes; (c) French bean 2 days after being inoculated with the normal 
pathogen equipped with the  lux genes 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
149
 lux (the  gus  β - glucuronidase reporter gene) revealed that plants inoculated 
with L - form bacteria derived from nonpathogens also conferred resistance to 
both bacterial and fungal plant pathogens. As the  gus gene is under the control 
of a bacterial promoter, its expression can take place only in a prokaryotic 
environment. But plants are eukaryotes, of course. Their discoveries would 
therefore seem to have established a previously unexpected form of symbiosis, 
and could open up a wide range of scientiﬁ c possibilities. However, although 
their discoveries are potentially transformative, they have yet to be widely 
recognized. As funding has been highly problematic, the team has split up. 
Eunice Allan continues with the quest on very limited resources, but little 
progress with the basic research has been made since the Venture Research 
funding ended. 
 Sadly, Alan is now deceased. 
 General References  
 1.  E. Tsomlexoglou, P. W. H. K. P. Daulagala, G. W. Gooday, L. A. Glover, B. Seddon, 
and E. J. Allan, Molecular detection and   b - glucuronidase  expression of  gus - marked 
 Bacillus subtilis L - form bacteria in developing Chinese cabbage seedlings,  J. Appl. 
Microbiol.  95 , 218 – 224 (2003). 
 2.  P. W. H. K. P. Daulagala and E. J. Allan, L - form bacteria of  pseudomonas syringae 
pv phaseolicola induce chitinases and enhance resistance to  Botrytis cinerea infec-
tion in Chinese cabbage,  Physiol. Molec. Plant Biol.  62 , 253 (2003). 
 VR 17.  John Pendry, Imperial College of Science and Technology: 
 “ Transport in Disordered Systems, ”  1982 – 1991 
 I ﬁ rst met Pendry shortly after his appointment as professor of theoretical 
solid - state physics at Imperial College at the age of 38. Pendry was very much 
a rising star, and as such well funded by the Science Research Council, as it 
then was. However, he quite naturally saw his appointment as presenting an 
opportunity to branch out into new and unexplored areas as so many scientists 
before him had done on these occasions. Change can be a powerful catalyst 
and source of inspiration. But since 1970 or so, funding in the United Kingdom 
has been managed nationally, with only modest funds available for individual 
universities to disburse as they see ﬁ t. Astonishingly, therefore, support that 
would allow Pendry to change tack and to vary it as his research developed 
was highly unlikely to be forthcoming. 
 The electronic properties of crystalline materials were well understood 
at that time. However, it was normally assumed that local - scale behavior —
 involving a few tens of molecules, say — would be invariable throughout the 
crystal. In other words, the crystalline materials must be virtually perfect. This 
meant that the theory had little practical value when applied to real materials 
as they are usually far from perfect. Electrical conductors have electrical resis-
tance. That resistance, however, is not an intrinsic property of the material, 
but is a function of the imperfections, thermal ﬂ uctuations, and disorders 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

150 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
unavoidably introduced during manufacture. Amorphous materials were also 
becoming increasingly important — for use in solar cells, for example — and the 
inﬂ uence of disorder on their conducting properties presented some of the 
deepest problems in theoretical physics. The understanding of liquids was also 
in its infancy. 
 Thus, theoretical understanding of electronic properties was almost entirely 
conﬁ ned to ideal materials — that is there was no general theory describing the 
interaction of waves (e.g., the ﬂ ow of electrons) with disorder. Pendry wanted 
to exploit the freedom that our support offered to embark on an ambitious 
study aimed at understanding the electronic properties of real materials, and 
to combine his theoretical studies with the large - scale use of computers to 
simulate their properties. Hopefully, it would lead to an understanding of the 
disordered state, and thereby help lay the foundations for the next generation 
of electronic devices. 
 Venture Research support indeed proved indispensable in enabling Pendry 
to found a leading new condensed - matter theory group. He applied group -
 theoretic methods to transport in disordered systems to give a complete solu-
tion of the general scattering problem in one dimension, and derived advanced 
techniques for treating higher dimensions (MacKinnon et al.  1992 ; Pendry 
 1994 ). A key result was the prediction that in all dimensions the channels for 
transport show a bimodal distribution — they are either open or closed in the 
limit of large systems. 
 John Pendry was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1984. His services 
to science were recognized with a knighthood in 2002.  
 VR 18.  John C Polanyi, Toronto:  “ Surface Aligned Photochemistry, ” 
1983 – 1991 
 When I ﬁ rst met John Polanyi in 1983, he was already one of Canada ’ s most 
distinguished scientists. His long - term but once - pioneering work on reaction 
dynamics was reasonably well funded, but Polanyi now wished to turn his 
attention to the exploration of a new area — the possibility of catalyzing pho-
tochemical processes by the use of carefully chosen surfaces. Sadly, the common 
approach to exploratory research in academia nowadays is for a senior scien-
tist to ask a postdoc to look at it for a few years to see what might be done 
with more signiﬁ cant resources. One can keep lots of irons in the ﬁ re in this 
way, which in the present funding regime is usually vital. The drawback is, of 
course, that the postdoc charged with the reconnaissance is not only inexperi-
enced but usually looking to his or her next job. Subtle signs may easily be 
missed. None of this applied to Polanyi. He was convinced that the new area 
was going to be important, and wanted to devote most, if not all, of his ener-
gies to it. However, this  “ embryo ﬁ eld, ” as he described it, stood little chance 
of being funded by the research councils because the consensus view was that 
photoprocesses at surfaces would be inefﬁ cient and complicated by energy 
transfers to the surface. Polanyi did not agree. His theoretical studies had 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
151
indicated that his approach — that is, surface - aligned photochemistry — could 
be viable. 
 Catalysis is one of the most important ﬁ elds in chemistry, but in the absence 
of complete understanding, it is dominated by empirical approaches. Polanyi 
was not so much interested in catalysis per se but in the fundamental process 
that go on at surfaces. In particular, he was interested in their molecular 
dynamics, and the patterns of molecular motions that convert reagents into 
products. This would involve studying reagents and products as a function of 
energy and direction (with respect to the surface) of the photorecoiling mol-
ecules adsorbed on the surface. As a one - time elementary - particle physicist, I 
knew that this was a powerful technique. It would not be easy to make it work 
in the more complex chemical domain, but if anyone could, it would be 
Polanyi. We were very happy, therefore, to fund his change of tack. 
 His initial idea was that he could both simplify and reveal the dynamics of 
having the reacting molecules  “ pinned ” by weak physisorption forces to a 
surface before shining light on them to initiate a reaction. Thus, the reacting 
molecules at the surface would be aligned and separated by known distances, 
and by varying these quantities they could  “ catalyze ” the reaction in (ulti-
mately) a predictable way (Bourdon et al.  1984 ). The results showed that an 
absorbed bromide molecule sent a shower of bromine atoms upward at a 
deﬁ ned angle to the surface, aligned along the axis of the molecule originally 
placed on the surface. In the course of the next 30 papers, they learned how 
to aim the molecular shower along the surface rather than away from it, and 
hence achieve their  “ surface - aligned ”  objective. 
 In 1981, G. Binnig and H. Rohrer invented the scanning tunneling micro-
scope (for which they won a share in the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1986). This 
led Polanyi ’ s group to realize that they could use this technique (which revealed 
individual surface atoms) to study the dynamics of photoinduced surface reac-
tions one molecule at a time. The new technique also provided a novel means 
of imprinting desired patterns of molecular dimensions at surfaces. 
 Today (2007) the group allow molecules to self - assemble into patterns on 
silicon surfaces, and then permanently imprint those patterns through the 
agency of light. It is as if they could photocopy molecular systems only a few 
molecules wide (Dobrin et al.  2007 ). The group ’ s new direction started with 
Venture Research, but now seems about to beneﬁ t the makers of nanostruc-
tures and, perhaps, nanocatalysts. 
 Polanyi won a share in the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1986 for his pio-
neering work on reaction dynamics.  
  VR 19.   Martyn Poliakoff, Nottingham:  “ Supercritical Fluids: 
An Environment for Reaction Chemistry, ” 1988 – 1991 
 As I have stressed, promoters of Venture Research need to be constantly on 
the alert for intrepid explorers yearning for opportunities that would allow 
them to penetrate deeply into the unknown, or to bring about the downfall of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

152 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
a cherished theory in an important area. But slavish adherence to any strategy 
is normally a bad thing in research, and indeed, one should always be on the 
lookout for  anything unusual, even if at ﬁ rst glance it may seem mundane. That 
includes, for example, ideas that might seem obvious, and on which one might 
comment: Surely that ’ s been done before? 
 Ordinary liquids are virtually incompressible, of course, while gases have 
low densities. Hitherto, despite these serious disadvantages, chemistry had 
usually been performed in gaseous or liquid environments. Poliakoff was plan-
ning a major departure from this historic practice by proposing a possibly 
revolutionary step of breathtaking simplicity: that of examining the potential 
of supercritical ﬂ uids (see Poster  20 ) as  an environment in which to do reaction 
chemistry  (see also Figure  18 and Table  14 ). Previously, users of supercritical 
ﬂ uids had conﬁ ned themselves to exploiting their speciﬁ c properties. Industry 
had used them for decades; the oldest example was the use of liquid CO 2 for 
extracting caffeine from coffee. However, there was a good reason why the 
potential of the supercritical regime had been largely unexplored — it was 
necessary to conﬁ ne the ﬂ uid in a high - pressure vessel, while at the same time 
retaining the ability to observe and study its behavior. While these obstacles 
are formidable, they are not insurmountable, but they do require considerable 
expertise. The general view had always been that there seemed to be no 
obvious prizes in terms of new products or processes that would justify the 
effort. Why bother, therefore?  
 Poster 20: Poliakoff and Supercritical Fluids  
 A generalized phase diagram for a pure material is shown in Figure  18 . 
The materials that Poliakoff proposed to use — ethane, carbon dioxide, or 
xenon — are usually known as  gases . If the temperature and pressure are 
high enough, however, the average distance between molecules is reduced 
to such an extent that the material — by now a supercritical ﬂ uid — acquires 
some of the properties associated with liquids. At the same time, molecular 
kinetic energy is still high enough for the material to retain some gaslike 
properties. 
 As Figure  18 shows, a material can become supercritical only if the 
temperatures and pressures to which they are subject are above certain 
minimum values,  T c and  P c , respectively. Supercritical ﬂ uids are signiﬁ cantly 
denser than gases (see Table  14 ) but usually less dense than liquids. Density 
is a key factor in the ability of a ﬂ uid to dissolve solid materials. In sharp 
contrast to liquids, supercritical ﬂ uids are highly compressible; a relatively 
small change in applied pressure can cause an appreciable change in the 
density of the ﬂ uid. Thus, the solubility of a given material in a supercritical 
ﬂ uid becomes a function of the applied pressure.  
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
153
 Poliakoff thought differently and had acquired the necessary expertise. He 
argued that the unprecedented degrees of control allowed in the supercritical 
regime could open up new types of chemistry, as well as leading to new insights 
on the old. For example, the physical properties of supercritical ﬂ uids are such 
that spectroscopic studies throughout the range from ultraviolet to infrared 
become possible, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra should become 
sharper and easier to interpret. Unfortunately, this was not enough for the 
research councils, but they had not rejected him completely. The Science 
Research Council had provided modest funds from an industrial - collaboration 
scheme (with ICI), but it offered neither the freedom nor the funds adequately 
to support his revolutionary steps. Supercritical ﬂ uids had fascinated scientists 
for more than a century, but Poliakoff ’ s vision, enthusiasm, and novel ideas on 
their use strongly appealed to us. 
 With funding no longer a limitation, Poliakoff ’ s ﬁ rst task was to develop 
equipment to handle high - pressure ﬂ uids safely in the lab. He and his team 
devised an ingenious modular system of magnetically activated taps, cells, and 
gauges that could be quickly built up into the apparatus needed for a particular 
experiment (Poliakoff et al.  1995 ). Chemically, he pioneered a completely new 
ﬁ eld — organometallic chemistry in supercritical ﬂ uids — that has now been 
taken up worldwide, particularly for homogeneous catalysis in supercritical 
CO 2 . 
 Figure 18  
 A generalized phase diagram for a pure material 
 
Pressure
Pc
Tc
Solid
Liquid
Vapor
Supercritical
region
Critical
point
Temperature
 TABLE 14.  Some Fluids Having Critical Points Near Room Temperature 
 Material 
 Temperature  T c ,  ° C 
 Pressure  P c , atm 
 Critical Density, g/mL  
 Ethylene 
 9 
 50 
 0.23 
 Xenon 
 17 
 59 
 1.1 
 Carbon dioxide  
 31 
 74 
 0.47 
 Ethane 
 32 
 49 
 0.20 
 Water 
 374 
 218 
 0.32 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

154 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 Much of Poliakoff ’ s work exploited the fact that supercritical ﬂ uids are 
gases, and so they are completely miscible with permanent gases such as 
hydrogen or nitrogen. This enabled him and his two Venture Research fellows, 
Steve Howdle and Mike George, to make a series of new metal dihydrogen 
and dinitrogen compounds (Howdle et al.  1990 ), the unexpected stability of 
which provided a challenge to theoreticians. Indeed, Poliakoff then demon-
strated that these compounds could be generated and isolated using a small -
 scale continuous reactor, rather like a tiny chemical plant (Banister et al.  1995 ; 
Darr and Poliakoff  1999 ). 
 The enforced end of Poliakoff ’ s Venture Research funding coincided with 
the birth of green chemistry in the United States  “ Green chemistry ” is a new 
ﬁ eld in which researchers aim to invent radically cleaner approaches to the 
design, manufacture, and use of chemicals (Poliakoff et al.  2002 ). Thus, Venture 
Research put Poliakoff in a position where he could exploit the growing inter-
est in this ﬁ eld and in  “ clean technology, ” as Ken Seddon (VR 22) was also 
doing. In 1994, Poliakoff was awarded the ﬁ rst Science and Engineering 
Research Council ’ s Clean Technology Fellowship, and Seddon won the same 
award a year later. In 1995, Poliakoff started a major industrial collaboration 
that culminated in the building of a full - scale, 1000 - ton/year chemical plant, the 
world ’ s ﬁ rst multipurpose supercritical chemical reactor (Licence et al.  2003 ), 
a direct spin - off of his work with Venture Research. A second collaboration 
involved selective partial oxidation in supercritical water, where they key factor 
is the miscibility of oxygen with the water and reactants. This work (Fraga -
 Dubreuil and Poliakoff  2006 ) is leading to a new approach to manufacturing 
terephthalic acid, one of the chemical precursors to the now - ubiquitous plastic 
water bottle, which might displace the current oxidation technology that has 
dominated for more than 50 years. These and other industrial collaborations 
have placed Poliakoff among the world leaders in green chemistry. 
 Poliakoff was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2004 with the citation 
speciﬁ cally mentioning his achievements in green chemistry. 
 Venture Research completely changed Poliakoff ’ s research direction, which 
is now devoted entirely to supercritical ﬂ uids. It launched his two young col-
leagues, Steve Howdle and Mike George, on their scientiﬁ c careers. Both are 
now full professors and still work with these ﬂ uids. It made the United Kingdom 
a major center for supercritical research, and many of Poliakoff ’ s students and 
postdocs work in academia and industry, both in the United Kingdom and 
internationally. More generally Poliakoff says that his Venture Research has 
been a big factor in creating the current level of interest worldwide in super-
critical ﬂ uids as reaction media.  
 VR 20.  Alan Rayner and John Beeching, Bath:  “ Towards Understanding 
Multicellularity, ” 1987 – 1990 
 At our ﬁ rst meeting, Alan Rayner described the vast unexplored terrain domi-
nated by the fungi. Much previous genetic and biochemical work had been on 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
155
the commercially valuable unicellular fungus,  Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
(brewer ’ s yeast), but such unicellular forms are greatly outnumbered in nature 
by ﬁ lamentous forms. These latter fungi produce  mycelia , labyrinths of 
protoplasm - ﬁ lled tubes, which, although perhaps resembling amorphous 
masses of cotton wool, are actually very complex. They occupy a wide range 
of habitats, are more species - diverse than plants are, and probably outweigh 
the animal kingdom. Forests, grasslands, and heath  could not exist without 
their symbiotic support, and some forest forms are among the largest living 
organisms found on Earth. To thrive, these fungi need to be able to forage to 
ﬁ nd new food sources, to move to them when the old resources are depleted, 
and to hold onto and expand their genetic territory in the presence of other 
organisms. * Correspondingly, they exhibit remarkable developmental versatil-
ity, display senescence, and are able to switch between vegetative and repro-
ductive growth.  †  
 While fungi are interesting in their own right, they are also among the sim-
plest forms of eukaryotes. Nature tends to be conservative, so tricks used in 
one domain tend to be repeated in similar domains. The team had recognized, 
therefore, that the fungi would be a highly versatile and convenient model 
eukaryotic system amenable to experimentation. Using a combination of 
whole organism and molecular biological approaches, the team wanted to 
study gene expression and regulation; how mycelia divide their labor, coordi-
nate their development, and interact with self and nonself; and a huge range 
of biochemical pathways that would be relevant to eukaryotic organisms in 
general — animals and plants. However, the study of mycelia from these generic 
perspectives had been almost totally neglected. 
 The emergence of multicellularity is one of the major landmarks in evolu-
tion. It introduced a virtually boundless scope for the development and diver-
siﬁ cation of life, a rigorous understanding of which would be one of the most 
important goals in biology. However, the general principles underlying the 
ways in which eukaryotic organisms coordinate the development and inter-
relationships of distinctive cell and tissue types, which are at the heart of 
multicellularity, were not understood. The scope of their proposed studies was 
perhaps greater than could easily be managed, even for a determined group. 
But ambition should not be penalized, and given freedom, they would soon 
home in on the topics that most interested them. I could hardly believe that 
the research councils would not fund such a fascinating study, and we were 
delighted to do so. 
 Using an elegant technique — the examination of interactions between 
mycelia of the same species but obtained from different parts of the world —
 the team quickly made a variety of discoveries with implications for under-
standing how cells and their organelles respond to one another and to their 
 * The familiar mushrooms are the reproductive structures of particular mycelial species. 
  †  Fungi produce chemicals that enable them to retain their own and enter others ’ territory, and 
can reject or accept potential mating partners. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

156 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
environments. Their molecular biology showed that these interactions could 
have highly unstable outcomes, resulting in genetic takeover, degeneration, 
and chaotic patterns of development. Especially spectacular was an interaction 
between an English strain and an Australian strain of the same fungus, which 
led to the cellular degeneration of the latter accompanied by the outgrowth 
of a mass of crystalline aggregates of a single,  optically pure, organic com-
pound: (+) - torreyol. These organic crystals had remarkable ﬂ uid - dynamic 
properties, growing up to 6   cm long and branching in a wide variety of patterns 
reminiscent of fungal mycelia themselves. 
 As I have mentioned, one of the advantages of Venture Research was the 
frequent conferences and workshops at which researchers could share their 
heretical ideas. Rayner and Beeching met Ian Ross (see VR 21) at one of these 
meetings, and quickly realized that many aspects of their ideas complemented 
each other, and indeed, although their routes were different, they had common 
objectives. They both used fungi as model systems, and had noticed that mating 
in some fungi resulted in the formation of two functional zygotic thalli, each 
with identical nuclei but with different mitochondria and phenotypes. Thus, 
they discovered the potential role of mitochondria in regulating cell behavior 
a decade before the current paradigm of mitochondrial control of programmed 
cell death * (apoptosis) and other senescence programs were accepted. They 
subsequently expanded their hypothesis to include a mitochondrial role in 
regulating speciﬁ c nuclear gene expression, which if perturbed could lead to 
cell and whole - organ senescence and possibly explain the apparent random 
nature of causes of death, even among close siblings and clones. 
 It was some years before Rayner and Beeching — still keeping in touch with 
Ross — were able to follow up these ideas following Venture Research ’ s closure. 
Eventually, together with Zac Watkins, they obtained modest funding that 
enabled them to gather data to support their hypothesis that fungal mycelia 
are complex nonlinear systems whose variable patterns of cellular develop-
ment and response arise from distinctive expressions of oxidative and anti-
oxidative metabolism. These distinctive expressions can both induce and 
suppress cellular degeneration, and lead to variations in the permeability, 
deformability, and continuity of cell boundaries. 
 Ultimately, Venture Research enabled Rayner and Beeching to develop 
a systemic model for understanding the development and ecology of fungi 
in terms of the generation of variable boundary chemistry in dynamic 
relation with the oxidative and reductive potential of their habitat. Unfortu-
nately, they have found it difﬁ cult  “ in a scientiﬁ c community obsessed 
with speciﬁ c mechanism and detail to the point of blindness to underlying 
systemic process, ” as they put it, to gain either recognition of or further support 
for their work. They were obliged to abandon their mycological research in 
1999, a year after Rayner had been President of the British Mycological 
Society. 
 * See, for example the  Nature article by Olson and Stenlid (2001). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
157
 Beeching subsequently pioneered an investigation into the molecular genet-
ics and developmental biology of the rapid postharvest deterioration of cassava 
roots, one of the most important tropical food crops. Hitherto, cassava had 
been regarded as too uneconomic in ﬁ rst - world terms, and the problem too 
complex to be worth bothering with. Now others have added their weight to 
Beeching ’ s initiative. The phenomenon of variable apoptotic responses to 
oxidative stress, which the group pioneered in their Venture Research days, is 
now at the heart of the current global strategy on cassava development.  
 VR 21.  Ian Ross, University of California at Santa Barbara:  “ Cytoplasmic 
Control of Nuclear Behaviour, ” 1988 – 1991 
 My ﬁ rst contact with Ian Ross stemmed from an act of desperation, as he put 
it, when, with only the cost of a postage stamp to lose, he sent a tentative letter 
of enquiry to our London ofﬁ ce. His interests were in developmental biology, 
but he saw enormous advantages in using fungi as a model system. As these 
two areas of science were generally thought to have little or no overlap, the 
funding agencies had always declined his proposals perhaps for the simple 
reason that there were few peers to review them. 
 Ross explained that the development of a fertilized egg (a single cell) 
into a multicellular adult is the result of a well - choreographed program of 
genetic, biochemical, and cytological events that when initiated causes them 
to operate in the correct temporal sequence. In eukaryotic cells, it is normally 
presumed that the cytoplasm is controlled by the nucleus. However, these 
roles are reversed in the ﬁ rst stages of embryo development. In the earliest 
stages, nuclei are totipotent and capable of expressing any part of their 
genome. (Today, this quality of totipotency is at the core of the highly fashion-
able ﬁ eld of stem cell research.) A short time later, these same nuclei in 
animals and plants become highly specialized and express only the particular 
genes appropriate for the next sequence of events in that part of the embryo —
 liver cells, for example, in humans. The trigger for the change in behavior 
comes from spatially localized molecules in the cytoplasm rather than the 
nuclei. However, the study of this essential nuclear programming is difﬁ cult in 
animals and plants because the changes take place rapidly and the cells are 
very small. On the other hand, cells at the tips of ﬁ lamentous fungi offer the 
enormous advantage that  the embryonic stage persists virtually indeﬁ nitely , and 
the cells can be large. He believed, therefore, that the ﬁ lamentous fungi offer 
a radically new way of studying these early stages of development, and would 
open up a new set of investigations into the cytoplasmic control of nuclear 
behavior. 
 Working on shoestring budgets, he had already shown that the totipotent 
nuclei of fungi (in fungi, individual cells may have many nuclei) enter speciﬁ c 
developmental pathways only if they are in areas of cytoplasm that contain 
the appropriate macromolecules; that is these nuclei are regulated in the same 
way as the nuclei of early embryos. Not only had he conﬁ rmed, therefore, that 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

158 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
fungi were a viable model system; it was also one that is readily amenable to 
experimentation. Regulation had to date only been studied in far less accessi-
ble systems. 
 He argued that his proposed study would permit a direct means of control-
ling the constituents of the cell membrane, and could thereby lead to new ways 
of regulating pre - and postembryonic differentiation of all higher plants and 
animals, and of controlling many plant diseases. The mechanisms he expected 
to discover might also be useful in regulating and reactivating cells of adult 
organisms normally unable to regenerate (e.g., nerve tissue). His substantial 
list of objectives may or may not have been achievable, of course, but the 
clinching argument for us in Venture Research was that Ross was not really 
interested in any particular problem but wanted to understand some of the 
complexities of developmental biology. He was merely trying to make his 
proposed research look as attractive as possible, as if he were applying to a 
conventional agency. From our point of view, however, he had a most imagina-
tive and new approach for tackling one of the major unsolved problems in 
biology, and we were therefore delighted to support it. 
 Ross ’ collaborative work with another Venture Research group is discussed 
at VR 20. 
 Ross continued his work with intermittent small - scale funding after 1991. 
In September 2003, he presented a paper to the 10th Congress of the Interna-
tional Association of Biomedical Gerontology on the evolutionary reasons for 
the fact that mitochondria are inherited only from one parent — the mother 
(Ross  2004 ). As he explains: 
 Because mating brings two sets of haploid nuclear genes into the zygote, two 
alleles of each of the proteins in question could theoretically be expressed. If 
maternal and paternal alleles differed in base sequence affecting amino acid 
sequence, the two allelic proteins in zygotes could have different abilities to 
interact with the mitochondrial - gene - coded proteins of the complexes. Competi-
tion, therefore, could lead to adverse interactions and less than optimal mito-
chondrial efﬁ ciency. 
 Mitochondria play dynamic roles, affecting programmed cell death, numerous 
diseases, and possibly cell aging and senescence leading to Alzheimer ’ s disease 
and cancer. Currently, the focus has been on the nuclear control of mitochon-
dria, but the reverse is also possible. His hypothesis was that the onset of cell 
aging may be a result of a failure of the mitochondrial inﬂ uence on nuclear 
genes. * Unfortunately, he has been unable to obtain further funding for this 
line of enquiry until its validity has been established, yet another example of 
the catch - 22 nature of modern funding.  
 * This idea was discussed by Nick Lane (2005), who added that this kind of gene regulation of 
selected alleles might be a kind of imprinting. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
159
 VR 22.  Ken Seddon, The Queen ’ s University of Belfast:  “ Chemistry and 
Physics in Ionic Liquids, ” 1988 – 1991 
 Our ﬁ rst meeting with Ken Seddon as a principal investigator  * was in our 
plush, City of London headquarters. He was young (about 35), somewhat 
overweight, had mutton - chop whiskers, and spoke very directly with a strong 
Liverpool accent. I mention these personal details only because it would seem 
that some people are adversely inﬂ uenced by them. Acting as we were as 
proxies for Nature herself, we took care, therefore, not to allow ourselves to 
be distracted by extraneous issues. Seddon ’ s appearance merely indicated to 
us that he could be an interesting person.   †  
 In his opening remarks, Seddon told us that solvents had dominated the 
history of chemistry. In the earliest periods, water was  the medium for the 
study of chemical reactions. More recently, a variety of new solvents have 
come into use — liquid ammonia, BrF 3 , liquid halogens, and organic solvents. 
However, the majority have one common factor — they are all essentially 
molecular solvents with a covalent structure. He went on to tell us about a 
new class of solvents — ionic liquids. ‡ They were transparent ﬂ uids at room 
temperature, stable over a wide range of temperatures (ranging from  − 90 ° C 
to +160 ° C), and had relatively low viscosity, large electrochemical and spec-
troscopic windows, and no measurable vapor pressure up to about 100 ° C. 
Hence, it was now possible, for the ﬁ rst time, to study inorganic, organometal-
lic, and organic chemistry in a totally ionic environment without the problems 
of thermal degradation. 
 * Seddon had been a junior member of one the ﬁ rst Venture Research teams. With P. D. Calvert 
and A. J. McCaffrey (University of Sussex), he had studied  “ composites as active materials. ” 
Polymer matrices are ubiquitous in Nature. Materials such as mother - of - pearl, bone, and chitin 
are highly structured and designed to achieve speciﬁ c purposes. The group wished to understand 
the ways that growth of such structures is controlled, and how they are designed. 
  †  One senior BP director was not impressed. When he saw us heading for the BP Visitors ’ Dining 
Room, which was indeed a very ﬁ ne restaurant, he took me to one side and whispered:  “ You can ’ t 
be taking him in there. He ’ s not even wearing a tie! ” 
  ‡ The liquid he started with was: [emim]X - AlX 3. (emim] +  =  1 - ethyl - 3 - methylimidazolium cation; 
X  =  Cl or Br.) He has subsequently used many others. 
 His proposed Venture Research contribution was therefore to study the 
chemistry of ions in an ionic environment. This contrasted with the study of 
molecules in a molecular environment that had dominated the history of 
chemistry to date. He also mentioned that he had previously sent the proposal 
to the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). Their 
hypercritical response had been to give it a  γ rating,  their lowest possible at the 
time. I have never understood the research councils ’ need so precisely to cat-
egorize the research that they reject. In Seddon ’ s case, a young scientist start-
ing to make his independent way, the only message it could convey was that 
his peers thought his ideas were utterly devoid of value. It was a contemptuous 
gesture, and put him in a position from which one would normally have found 
it very difﬁ cult to recover. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

160 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 We thought differently. At the tactical level, Seddon ’ s proposal seemed rich 
in possibilities. The ionic liquids he proposed to use were stable, pervaded by 
strong electric ﬁ elds, and seemed to be virtually universal solvents for both 
ionic and molecular species. The behavior of neutral species in such liquids 
had hardly been studied. In addition, charged species remain intact, and have 
exceptionally low mobilities. Surprisingly, therefore, ionic liquids would provide 
relatively passive environments for the study of many important processes, 
particularly those involving transient or unstable species, and yield informa-
tion not readily available using molecular solvents. In addition, they would 
avoid the solvation problem. Let us say that we wish to study the interaction 
between two charged molecular species A and B in a water solvent. As they 
move closer, the ﬁ rst interaction is not between A and B but between the water 
molecules that surround each of them. This extra complexity must be resolved 
before anything can be said about the primary interaction being studied. In 
an ionic solvent, however, there are no impediments; both A and B can  “ see ” 
each other directly, and the interaction is uncontaminated. 
 We were also impressed by Seddon ’ s strategy. He seemed to have discov-
ered a major and virtually unexplored branch of chemistry — an intellectually 
green ﬁ eld — and seemed to know precisely how to go about exploring it. 
In short, we found the proposal irresistible, and we eventually persuaded 
Menter ’ s board to fund it. However, we were soon reminded that the EPSRC ’ s 
devastating response to Seddon ’ s earlier submission could not be ignored, 
based as it was on the informed opinion of researchers deemed the best in the 
ﬁ eld. As is usual, they pass their judgments anonymously, of course, and so we 
could not know whether one of these experts might turn out to be the single 
peer whom we offered as our concession to peer - review or one who might 
know a board member. We feared, therefore, that we might not have an easy 
ride, and we were right. The  “ peer ” wrote a devastating assessment, and we 
could not get him to change his mind. But we went ahead anyway, and my 
submission to Menter ’ s board included the dreadful review together with my 
own very positive recommendation. To make matters worse, the peer was 
known to a board member as someone who took pains to encourage young 
people! However, I was also a member, and so this time Seddon had a well -
 briefed scientiﬁ c advocate who could argue his case. As might be expected, it 
was not straightforward, but to the board ’ s credit, Seddon won the day. 
 Venture Research funding gave Seddon just the impetus he needed to lay 
the foundations of what turned out to be a new green technology. With a small 
team of PhD students and postdoctoral assistants, and interest from main-
stream BP (Mike Green, Andy Fleet, and Martin Atkins), a new vista on 
chemistry opened up. Seddon did not rush into print, but with BP (and later 
Unilever and BNFL) ﬁ led a series of patents to protect the industrial sponsors 
of his work. These were over a broad range of applications, for polymerization 
of alkenes, alkylation of aromatics, synthesis of fragrances, preparation of fatty 
acids, and nuclear fuel reprocessing, illustrating something of the huge range 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
161
of industrial opportunities in this area. In 1993, he moved to the Chair of 
Inorganic Chemistry at the Queen ’ s University of Belfast. When he ﬁ nally 
published some of his work in a Russian journal in 1996 and in more accessible 
sources in 1997  * and 1998, it triggered an explosion of interest. In 1997, 19 
papers on ionic liquids were published; in 2006, over 2028 appeared on this 
subject, and up to the time of writing (2007) the total has risen to over 8000 
in the past 10 years. It has now been estimated that there are well over a 
million possible ionic liquids, and over 10 18 derived ternary systems. 
 Seddon is now the most widely cited author in the ﬁ eld, and his organization 
QUILL (The Queen ’ s University Ionic Liquid Laboratories, a university – 
academic consortium supported by 16 industries from four continents), is the 
most frequently cited research center. His work has been recognized by the 
president of the United States (awarded the 2005 Presidential Green Chem-
istry Challenge Award), and by the Queen (awarded the 2006 Queen ’ s Anni-
versary Prize for Higher and Further Education for  “ Ionic Liquids: A Green 
Solution for Pollution ” ). Their work has also been formally recognized by the 
G8 nations (QUILL is the UK focus for the International Green Network), 
and the European Union (QUILL is a Marie - Curie Centre). It has attracted 
over  £ 8 million ( ∼ $ 16 million) in support. Since BASF made the ﬁ rst public 
announcement of an industrial process based on ionic liquids (BASIL), another 
dozen have followed. In addition, there are now commercial suppliers of ionic 
liquids in most countries from the one gram to the 50 - ton scale. 
 General References  
 1.  M. J. Earle et al., The distillation and volatility of ionic liquids,  Nature  439 , 831 – 834 
(2006). 
 2.  M. Deetlefs, K. R. Seddon, and M. Shara, Predicting physical properties of ionic 
liquids,  Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  8 , 642 – 649 (2006). 
 3.  A. Arce, M. J. Earle, S. P. Katdare, H. Rodriguez, and K. R. Seddon, Mutually immis-
cible ionic liquids,  Chem. Commun. 2548 – 2550 (2006). 
 4.  M. Deetlefs, K. R. Seddon, and M. Shara, Neoteric optical media for refractive index 
determination of gems and minerals,  New J. Chem .  30 , 317 – 326 (2006). 
 5.  C. M. Gordon, J. D. Holbrey, A. R. Kennedy, and K. R. Seddon, Ionic liquid crystals: 
hexaﬂ uorophosphate salts,  J. Mater. Chem.  8 , 2627 – 2636 (1998). 
 * When he wrote:  “ The reactions we have observed represent the tip of an iceberg — all the indica-
tions are that room - temperature ionic liquids are the basis of a new industrial technology. They 
are truly designer solvents: either the cation or the anion can be changed, if not at will, then cer-
tainly with considerable ease, in order to optimize such phenomena as the relative solubility of 
the reactants and products, the reaction kinetics, the liquid range of the solvent, the cost of the 
solvent, the intrinsic catalytic behaviour of the media, and air - stability of the system. For the ﬁ rst 
time, it is possible to design a solvent to optimize a reaction (with control over both yield and 
selectivity), rather than to let the solvent dictate the course of the reaction.  .  .  . This, quite literally, 
revolutionizes the methodology of synthetic organic chemistry: it will never be the same again! ” 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

162 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 6.   C. J. Adams, M. J. Earle, G. Roberts, and K. R. Seddon, Friedel - Crafts reactions in 
room temperature ionic liquids,  Chem. Commun . 2097 – 2098 (1998). 
 7.  K. R. Seddon, Ionic liquids for clean technology,  J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol .  68 , 
351 – 356 (1997). 
 8.  K. R. Seddon, Room temperature ionic liquids — neoteric solvents for clean catalysis, 
 Kinet. Catal.   37 , 743 – 748 (1996). 
 VR 19 and VR 22.   Martyn Poliakoff (University of Nottingham) and 
Ken Seddon (Queen ’ s University Belfast) 
 The latter focus of their work has been the industrialization of green chemistry, 
and their research has been at what is conventionally regarded as the inter-
faces of chemistry, chemical engineering, biochemistry, and physics. But both 
passionately believe, with true Venture Research spirit, in the globalization of 
chemical advances. Their disparate solvents are now considered formally as 
neoteric solvents, and they have complementary rather than competitive 
applications. 
 No other Venture Researchers illustrate more clearly the beneﬁ ts of striving 
to develop absolute selection criteria (in the absence of complete freedom as 
a right) instead of those based on myopic, conservative, and consensual peer 
review. This is especially necessary where young people are concerned. We can 
now see that our criteria equipped us with what might be seen as amazing 
foresight in supporting both of them, but of course foresight was not involved. 
We merely recognized their huge potential  to do something important. Their 
impact on the science base and the chemical industry has indeed been sub-
stantial. There is no better way of mapping their recent careers than monitor-
ing the impact of their publications (see Figure  19 ). 
 VR 23.  Colin Self, Newcastle:  “ Biological Instability, ” 1990 – 1993 
 Nature depends on instability. In nucleic acids, the need for instability is well 
established — evolution depends on mutation and rearrangement of DNA. 
Without the ability to break down or to promote changes in the constituent 
elements of living systems, development and control would be so limited as to 
be useless. It was remarkable, therefore, that not only had instability and 
its consequences attracted little attention; experimentalists also tended to 
regard them as nuisances. They merely presented problems that had to be 
overcome. 
 To Colin Self, they represented substantial opportunity. Components of 
biological systems each have degrees of instability attached to their roles. As 
I explained in the chapter on the Damocles Zone, if a control element such 
as, say, the blood - clotting agent activated when we cut ourselves exhibits too 
little instability, it might exert its effect for too long, resulting, say, in our entire 
blood supply rapidly coagulating following even a minor accident. Conversely, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
163
if the element were too unstable, its effect could be transient and ineffective 
and blood loss could continue indeﬁ nitely. Thus, there is probably a spectrum 
of instabilities, some of which may currently be hidden from view because they 
are too transient. Plants, for example, do not appear to have active immune 
systems to protect them from infection, but they might be going undetected 
because they lie outside the spectrum of  “ visible ” instabilities. 
 He was proposing to use the immune system as a model for understanding 
biological control in general. The immune system is highly regulated, but we 
knew almost nothing about its stability requirements. Exposure to a  “ foreign ” 
antigenic substance must ﬁ rst lead to a recognition that it is indeed foreign, 
and that initial response might be followed by a commitment to produce anti-
bodies highly speciﬁ c to the antigen. Such distinct responses offer a rich spec-
trum of opportunities for study. To mention only a few: 
 Figure 19  
 The evolution of publications and citations on Martyn Poliakoff ’ s and Ken Seddon ’ s 
Venture Research. ( Source: ISI Web of Science , Copyright 2007, The Thompson 
Corporation .) 
 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Years
Years
Years
Years
Published Items in Each Year
Published Items in Each Year
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Citations in Each Year
Results found: 263
Sum of the Times Cited  i  : 8,545
Average Citations per Item  i  :  32.49
h-index  i  : 48
Citations in Each Year
TS = (supercrit*) AND AU = (poliakoff M)
DocType = All document types; Language = All languages; Databases = SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI;
Timespan = 1900–2007
AU = (SEDDON KR)
DocType = All document types; Language = All languages; Databases = SCI–EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI; Timespan = 1970-2007
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

164 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
  •    Do responses vary quantitatively or qualitatively with changes in antigen 
stability? 
  •    How does antigen instability affect its effectiveness in causing an immune 
system to produce a speciﬁ c antibody? 
  •    How long must an antigen remain associated with the system for recogni-
tion to take place and a commitment to be made?  
  •    To what extent is a potentially unstable antigen actually stabilized by 
association with receptors in the system?  
  •    Is it possible to stabilize an antigen or speed up the commitment phase 
so that a highly unstable antigen causes a response?  
 As the immune system depends on the same principles of recognition as found 
in the complementary lock – key relationships between ligands and receptors 
that occur generally throughout Nature, answers to such questions could have 
wide biological signiﬁ cance and be truly transformative. Once again, we mar-
veled at the funding agencies ’  myopia, and were delighted to give him our full 
and enthusiastic support. 
 A major problem in searching for speciﬁ c antibodies against highly unstable 
materials is that they may be present only in exceedingly low concentra-
tions — perhaps beyond the capability of the usual detection techniques. 
However, as serendipity would have it, we had supported Self a few years 
before in helping him develop, while still a medical student at Cambridge, a 
new form of immunoassay that went under the name  ampliﬁ ed enzyme - linked 
immunoassay (AELIA). This phenomenally sensitive technique actually 
makes use of the natural ampliﬁ cation found in many biological control 
systems, and its new use brought Self ’ s Venture Research contribution full 
circle. It had also led to a successful commercial development (by IQ Bio Ltd.) 
that made a great deal of money. If BP had had interest in that area, the proﬁ t 
from AELIA alone would have funded the entire cost of the Venture Research 
initiative up to 1985, the time of the initial development. 
 The most important outcome of his later work was the development of 
means of introducing  controlled instability into biological systems. Medical 
scientists have long dreamed of controlling disease by  “ magic bullets ” that will 
attack tumors, say, in a body, and do nothing else — that is, they would be free 
from all side effects. Self has made substantial progress toward achieving this 
end by developing his ideas on how instability works in general rather than 
by confronting speciﬁ c disease directly, which is the conventional approach 
today. His work culminated in an experiment in which he ﬁ rst deactivated an 
antibody by associating it with a chemical that is also light - sensitive. The anti-
body was then injected into a body, and activated in the desired area only by 
illuminating it with low - intensity light (soft ultraviolet). Thus, the group 
showed that tumors in mice could be killed merely by shining a handheld light 
onto a particular location, and thereby became the ﬁ rst to demonstrate that 
antibodies can indeed be activated by light (Self and Thompson  1996 ). As 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
165
antibodies can be raised against an enormous range of substances, this technol-
ogy has very broad application in the development of ways to target and 
control a wide range of biological systems. When, for example, antibodies are 
directed against elements of the immune system (such as T cells), this means 
that immunity can be directed around the body by light. When used in con-
junction with tumor - targeting antibodies, their inherent speciﬁ city can be dra-
matically increased. This enables a much greater differentiation between 
tumor cells and normal cells, reducing collateral damage and potentially 
serious side effects. 
 Self has shown that his unique approach to the control of biomedical 
systems is both viable and effective. One would have thought, therefore, that 
henceforth he would have little difﬁ culty raising new funds. However, in 
today ’ s risk - averse, bureaucratic environment, researchers starting outside the 
mainstream ﬁ nd that even when the efﬁ cacy of their new insight has been 
soundly demonstrated they must still spend some 90% of their time seeking 
new sponsorship. Transformative research initiatives must also address this 
important issue (which we also wanted to tackle, but BP forbade it) if their 
full value is to be realized.  
 VR 24.  Gene Stanley, Boston; and Jos é Teixeira, Laboratoire Leon 
Brillouin, CEA - CNRS, France:  “ Water in Conﬁ ned Geometries, ”  1990 – 1993 
 When I ﬁ rst met Gene Stanley, we began by discussing liquid water. Its anoma-
lous behavior is well known. Water expands, for example, at 4 ° C, when it is 
either heated or cooled, and its high dielectric constant means that it is a virtu-
ally universal solvent. These and its many other macroscopic properties are 
generally understood, but he went on to tell us that when water molecules are 
enclosed in spaces whose dimensions are comparable to the length of transient 
hydrogen - bonded networks, or when water is involved in reactions that take 
place over times comparable to the duration of a typical hydrogen bond, 
 ∼ 10  − 12  s, the behavior of water is hardly understood at all. Bearing in mind that 
water enclosed in living cells, or in complex organic molecules is constrained 
in either or both these ways, the team seemed, therefore, to have identiﬁ ed a 
substantial shortfall in understanding. But why had these important problems 
not been addressed before? The chief obstacle was that full range of systems 
in which water is tightly conﬁ ned are diverse — clouds, rocks, as well as biologi-
cal environments. Water had been well studied in each of the relevant disci-
plines — meteorology, geology, and biology — but researchers were interested in 
water only inasmuch as it impacted on the objectives of their discipline. Water 
per se was generally of little interest to them. Consequently,  coherent and 
impartial studies on water structure and dynamics in conﬁ ned geometries had 
been neglected simply because no one was interested in funding them. Despite 
its importance conﬁ ned water, therefore, was a virtually unknown substance. 
 The remarkable progress in understanding bulk water had come from 
focusing on the structure, dynamics, and statistics of the hydrogen - bonded 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

166 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
network. However, these successful studies have assumed that bulk water 
exhibits long - range symmetry, which of course it does. But when the conﬁ ning 
space is of the order of tens to hundreds of angstroms, this assumption is no 
longer valid, and the behavior of the hydrogen - bonded network is modiﬁ ed. 
The network will probably also hold the clue to understanding conﬁ ned water 
and indeed might be a key to understanding how living cells accomplish their 
function. However, instead of considering water as a continuous medium, as 
had almost always been done in the past, the team wanted to consider the 
dynamics of the microscopic hydrogen bonded network as an essential element 
of the cell. 
 Biological systems — cells, enzymes, and so on — are in constant vibrational 
or oscillatory motion at the molecular level, which the team thought would 
perturb the hydrogen - bonded network and could account for conﬁ ned water ’ s 
anomalous properties. They proposed to study the perturbations using two 
broad techniques — ultrasonic, and inelastic thermal – neutron scattering —
 chosen because they would probe different length scales of the network and 
so would yield complementary data. However, we were also impressed by the 
team ’ s vision, particularly by their determination to understand biological 
systems from unusual perspectives. They suspected, for example, that 
randomness may play a key role in natural phenomena, a view that for us 
resonated with that of another budding Venture Research team — Colin Self 
(see VR23)  — and we were eager, therefore, to support it. 
 Taking full advantage of the freedom inherent in Venture Research, Stanley, 
Teixeira, and other subsequent collaborators launched a wide range of studies. 
They have now discovered a new liquid – liquid phase transition that would 
seem to explain the fundamental mechanisms underlying the remarkable 
behavior of liquid water. When water is rapidly cooled (at rates  ∼ 10 6  K/s), 
freezing is avoided, and at temperatures below  ∼ 140  K becomes a noncrystal-
line solid; that is, a glass.  * Glassy water is probably the most common form of 
water in the universe. It is observed as a frost on interstellar dust and consti-
tutes the bulk of matter in comets. Furthermore, their discovery also applies 
to other liquids with a local tetrahedral structure, such as silicon and silica. 
 The observed transition (Mishima and Stanley  1998 ) takes place between 
a high - density liquid phase and a low - density liquid phase separated by a 30% 
jump - discontinuity in density. Stanley et al. have also developed a theoretical 
model for this transition. If the interaction energy between two molecules has 
a single well, the system will have a single critical point from which emanates 
a line of liquid – gas phase transitions. If, like water and tetrahedral liquids, the 
attractive well has two subwells, the outer of which is deeper and narrower, 
then for sufﬁ ciently low temperature, the one - phase liquid can condense into 
the narrower outer well, thereby giving rise to a new low - density liquid phase, 
and leaving behind the high - density liquid phase whose constituent molecules 
occupy predominantly the inner subwell. 
 * For a review, see the paper in  Physics Today by Debenedetti and Stanley ( 2003 ). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
167
 As I mentioned earlier, it was hitherto believed that water ’ s unusual behav-
ior arose from the extensive network of hydrogen bonds. While this network 
is sufﬁ cient to explain some water properties, such as the relatively high 
melting and boiling points, it is not sufﬁ cient to explain others such as the 
apparent divergence of thermodynamic properties as supercooled water 
approaches 228   K. Nor does it explain the properties of materials such as silica 
and silicon, which display anomalies similar to those of water but lack hydro-
gen bonds. The Stanley group ’ s new mechanism explains these and other 
properties such as diffusivity and viscosity, which are also anomalous at low 
temperature. If liquid water is sufﬁ ciently cold, its diffusivity increases and its 
viscosity decreases on compression. In water, pressure disrupts the tetrahedral 
network, causing molecular mobility to  increase . In contrast, for most other 
liquids compression leads to a progressive loss of ﬂ uidity as molecules are 
squeezed closer together. 
 The implications of the new liquid – liquid phase transition could be far -
 reaching. It not only explains many of water ’ s properties but has also opened 
up the new ﬁ eld of  liquid polyamorphism . Water ’ s unique importance means 
that their work has implications for biology, astrophysics, materials science, 
and the technology of low - temperature preservation of biological molecules. 
 Stanley is a proliﬁ c author, and has pursued many interdisciplinary studies 
at the interfaces between physics and chemistry, physics and medicine, and 
even physics and ﬁ nance. His papers have been cited 30,000 times, and his 
Hirsch index is 88. Only ﬁ ve other physicists have a higher index. However, 
Stanley wrote in 2007 to say that his Venture Research support played a vital 
role in his studies on water and other complex systems. Citing these studies, 
the Commission on Statistical Physics of the International Union of Pure and 
Applied Physics awarded him the  Boltzmann Medal in 2004. Awarded every 
three years, the Medal is the highest award in statistical physics. 
 Gene Stanley was elected to membership of the US National Academy of 
Sciences in 2004.  
 VR 25.  Harry Swinney, Texas at Austin; Werner Horsthemke, Southern 
Methodist University, Dallas; and Patrick DeKepper, Jean - Claude Roux, 
and Jacques Boissonade, Center de Recherch é Paul Pascal, Bordeaux: 
 “ Self - Organisation in Non - linear Chemical Systems, ” 1985 – 1991 
 My ﬁ rst meeting with Harry Swinney was entirely serendipitous. I had traveled 
to the University of Texas at Austin to meet my old friend Peter Riley at the 
Physics Department, and Peter had introduced us. Swinney then told me of an 
experiment he had been planning for some time with a group of French chem-
ists, but he had been unable to interest anyone in funding it. There are usually 
interesting possibilities in the ofﬁ ng when physicists and chemists want to work 
together, and this turned out to be no exception. Classically, when one wishes 
to study the interaction of two chemicals, say, one puts them in a test tube and 
stirs them thoroughly so that they are in intimate contact with each other. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

168 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
Indeed, virtually all chemistry, academic or industrial, is done in what is effec-
tively a zero - dimensional environment. That is what  “ well - stirred ” implies. 
Bearing in mind that a scientist ’ s main objective is to study the ways in which 
Nature does things and thereby to try to understand them, one should note 
that although natural phenomena are highly diverse, Nature would seem  never 
to engage in well - stirred chemistry. No living system is well stirred, nor are 
Earth ’ s rocks, oceans, or atmosphere or indeed the universe. There is structure 
everywhere we look. 
 Physicists and chemists had traditionally preferred to study systems in or 
near thermodynamic equilibrium where nonlinearities can be neglected or 
treated as small perturbations. In contrast, Nature (and industry) often pro-
ceeds by driving systems (by external gradients in temperature, concentration, 
velocity, etc.) far from equilibrium where nonlinearities play a crucial role. It 
is the nonlinear character of natural and technological systems that creates 
the remarkable similarities in the behavior of such diverse systems as ﬂ uid 
ﬂ ows, lasers, and slime molds, and which in turn has given rise to the ﬁ eld of 
nonlinear dynamics. Indeed, the team ﬁ rst came together at one of the many 
conferences in this new ﬁ eld. Hitherto, most research on nonlinear phenomena 
had concerned  temporal behavior, and the well - stirred reactor is sufﬁ cient for 
that. In biology and industry, however, diffusion processes and  spatial proper-
ties can be crucial, but they cannot be studied in well - stirred reactors. Diffusion 
is, of course, a multidimensional process, but no one to date had devised a 
simple realizable prototype for processes involving diffusion. 
 The proposed Texas – Bordeaux collaboration had stemmed from contacts 
Horsthemke had made when he was a member of Prigogine ’ s group in Brus-
sels before he moved to the United States. The team had devised a new use 
for a very old apparatus — the circular Couette reactor, ﬁ rst devised in the late 
nineteenth century. In the Couette, reactions take place in the narrow annulus 
between concentric rotating cylinders into which reagents can be injected. 
When the differential rotation rates of the concentric cylinders exceed a 
certain value, toroidal Taylor vortices form, encircling the inner cylinder like 
coils of rope. With the continuous slow addition of chemicals either at one end 
of the annulus or separately to each Taylor vortex, each vortex becomes a 
separate reactor, coupled to its neighbors by diffusion. In another version of 
their apparatus, the two cylinders making up the Couette reactor would be 
rotated in opposite directions. In this latter case, there would be no Taylor 
vortices, but the turbulent diffusion rate in the axial direction could be con-
trolled by varying the rotation rates of the two cylinders. The team proposed 
to study reactions of steadily increasing complexity as they developed this 
elegant technique. They would start with a few simple chemical reactions, 
then an autocatalytic reaction, and ﬁ nally, address oscillating and chaotic 
reactions. 
 It was clear that neither group would dare to attempt such an ambitious 
program without the complementary expertise of the other. Furthermore, 
the proposed collaboration would not be physics, nor chemistry, nor chemical 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
169
engineering, nor ﬂ uid mechanics but a combination of them all. 
As the team also straddled the Atlantic, funding from the usual sources 
became even less likely. Some preliminary work had been in progress for 
about a year, so they knew that the system worked. However, the full - scale 
collaboration could not take place without our support. We were delighted to 
oblige. 
 The group ’ s long - range collaboration worked superbly well. Modern com-
munications make it easier nowadays, but in addition, the collaboration was 
cemented by regular exchanges of postdocs between the two main centers. The 
Bordeaux team devised the idea of using the CIMA (chlorite – iodide – malonic 
acid) reaction as a model chemical system, and developed a one - dimensional 
chemical reactor that yielded the ﬁ rst Turing patterns. Shortly afterward, the 
Texas group observed two - dimensional Turing patterns in a study of the CIMA 
reaction in a higher - dimensional reactor, which BP patented. The group ’ s goal 
from the outset had been to develop reactors to study laboratory - controlled 
and  sustained chemical patterns, and indeed they went on to derive other 
geometries of reactors. Variants of their designs are now used in many labo-
ratories worldwide. The key word here is  “ sustained. ” Transient patterns had 
been observed since the 1960s. Such patterns can be produced when chemicals 
are poured into a Petri dish from which, say, a spiral might emerge and make 
a few rotations before the chemicals are consumed — that is, the system rapidly 
evolves toward equilibrium as the reaction runs down. However, virtually 
every interesting process used in industry or biology is systematically driven 
away from equilibrium by the continued arrival of new chemical feeds or 
food. 
 The group ’ s Venture Research established a new ﬁ eld. As a measure of the 
impact of their work, the  ISI Web of Science relates that up to 2006, the four 
top most frequently cited papers from the Texas Venture Research, all pub-
lished in  Nature or  Science , have been cited 831 times. These papers are listed 
below (under  “ General References ” ) . Their next 11 most widely cited papers 
garnered another 921 citations. These citation numbers are huge for basic 
research in physics and chemistry. Medical research, for example, often has 
more numerous citations, but the number of participating researchers is much 
larger. 
 Harry Swinney was elected to membership of the US National Academy 
of Sciences in 1992. 
 General References  
 1.  Z. Noszticzius, W. Horsthemke, W. D. McCormick, H. L. Swinney, and W. Y. Tam, 
Sustained chemical waves in an annular gel reactor: A chemical pinwheel,  Nature 
 329 , 619 (1987). 
 2.  Q. Ouyang and H. L. Swinney, Transition from a uniform state to hexagonal and 
striped Turing patterns,  Nature  352 , 610 (1991). 
 3.  K. J. Lee, W. D. McCormick, Q. Ouyang, and H. L. Swinney, Pattern formation by 
interacting chemical fronts,  Science  261 , 192 (1993). 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

170 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 4.  K. J. Lee, W. D. McCormick, H. L. Swinney, and J. E. Pearson, Experimental 
observation of self - replicating spots in a reaction - diffusion system,  Nature  369 , 215 
(1994). 
 5.  V. Petrov, Q. Ouyang, and H. L. Swinney, Resonant pattern formation in a chemical 
system,  Nature  388 , 655 (1997).  
 VR 26.  Robin Tucker, David Hartley, and Desmond Johnston, Lancaster: 
 “ Geometrodynamics, ” 1990 – 1993 
 It is rare today that one meets scientists yearning to tackle the truly great and 
profound problems. Such ambition is now generally discouraged by the need 
to show that progress to the order or timetable beloved by the funding agen-
cies might indeed be possible. As such ambitious scientists are often theoreti-
cians, claims that their work might lead to tangible outcomes are also difﬁ cult 
to sustain. Furthermore, one of the tragedies of modern science, as mentioned 
many times in this book, stems from the funding agencies ’ apparent belief that 
progress in science has now reached the stage where there are no longer any 
truly great unsolved problems. Thus, from this perspective, the grand plan has 
more or less been hammered out. Consequently, agencies do not need to 
provide the virtually unlimited freedom scientists once enjoyed, as the greater 
good would be better served by focusing research on perceived priorities 
among the myriad lesser problems that will always be with us. 
 As is well known, Einstein devoted many years attempting to produce 
a fully relativistic coherent theory of all the known forces of Nature — 
electromagnetic, nuclear, and gravitational. His dream was not to be realized. 
A few others have made similarly heroic attempts, but this supreme goal 
remains elusive. As a result, it is generally assumed that gravity, Nature ’ s most 
pervasive force, can be neglected for all interactions on the atomic scale. 
 In the 1960s, John Wheeler attempted to realize Einstein ’ s dream via a 
wholly geometric route. He was not successful, but Robin Tucker believed that 
the considerable progress made in mathematics since that time, to which he 
had contributed (on the theory of exterior differential systems and relativistic 
membranes), made him optimistic that a new attempt might be more success-
ful. Thus, in response to the freedom that we could provide, he had drawn up 
an ambitious program that set out to derive a fully relativistic geometric 
description of natural phenomena. The breadth of his intellectual grasp, his 
infectious enthusiasm, and his audacity were impressive. As ever, I was mysti-
ﬁ ed as to why the funding agencies would not be similarly impressed. The 
single peer we invited to provide the independent assessment of the proposed 
work (as required by our board) indeed conﬁ rmed that the very breadth of 
Tucker ’ s proposal, ranging over problems on the micro - and macroscopic 
scales, would indeed constitute too rich a disciplinary mixture for the agencies 
to accommodate. 
 Not only did we agree to support him, but as the scope of his studies was 
so extensive and important, my intention at the time was that subject to our 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST 
171
usual criteria on renewals, we would continue to support him for many years. 
We could not really expect him to succeed in a few years where Einstein had 
failed in almost as many decades. Sadly, however, the BP board meeting that 
approved their proposal turned out to be the last. From my perspective, there-
fore, our support soon came to an untimely end. However, the team ’ s mathe-
matical reformulation of inherently nonlinear phenomena made important 
contributions to such ﬁ elds as spinning strings, membrane theory, and the 
uniﬁ cation of the fundamental interactions as summarized in the following list 
of publications: 
 1.  D. H. Hartley and R. W. Tucker, A constructive implementation of the Cartan - Kahler 
theory of exterior differential systems,  J. Symbolic Logic  12 , 655 (1991). 
 2.  M. Onder, T. Dereli, and R. W. Tucker, Signature transitions in quantum cosmology, 
 Class. Quantum Gravity  10 , 1425 (1993).  
 Figure 20  
 A cartoon illustrating the Industrial Mathematics and Gravity Group ’ s work on 
marine riser dynamics. I hope that the reader may be both surprised and amused 
with this ﬁ gure as it has evolved quite naturally from the purest academic research 
on quantum gravity. Perhaps Einstein, too, would be pleased. (  Source : Reproduced 
by permission of Robin Tucker, David Hartley, and Desmond Johnston .) 
Marine Riser Dynamics
Spar
Surface
Vortex Shedding
Marine
Riser
Anchor
Chain
Seabed
Buoyancy
forces at the
spar induce
parametric
excitation on
the Riser.
The Riser may
be modelled by
a Cosserat rod
subject to fluid
and gravity 
forces.
Dynamical 
forces and 
torques are 
induced by 
contact with 
the seabed.
Shear Flow
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

172 
THE VENTURE RESEARCH HARVEST
 3.   D. H. Hartley, R. W. Tucker, and P. Tuckey, Equivalence of darboux and gardner 
methods for integrating hyberbolic equations,  Duke Math. J.  77 , 167 (1995).  
 4.   T. Derelli and R. W. Tucker, A broken gauge approach to gravitational mass and 
charge,  J. High Energy Phys.  42 (April 2002).  
 5.  J. Gratus and R. W. Tucker, A quantum geometric description of a q - brane with 
intrinsic spin,  Nucl. Phys. B  88 , 349 (2000). 
 6.  R. W. Tucker, Classical ﬁ eld - particle interactions in spacetime geometries,  Proc. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. A  460 , 2819 (2004).  
 Robin Tucker ’ s work might normally be regarded as of archetypal academic 
purity, and therefore of no practical relevance. However, Venture Research 
outcomes, in common with those from genuinely impartial pursuits of new 
knowledge in general, are unpredictable. We always invited Tucker to partici-
pate in our periodic workshops, therefore, set up to catalyze informal exchanges 
between Venture Researchers and the best of BP ’ s industrial scientists and 
engineers. We took this course even though quantum gravity is hardly a hot 
topic in industrial circles. Most satisfyingly, however, these exchanges led to 
several long - term industrial contracts from BP and other companies for work 
in such areas as the stability of bridges under wind and rain excitations, friction 
forces on rotating drill strings, and fatigue damage to undersea marine risers 
due to the periodic emission of vortices. Eventually, their extensive under-
standing of nonlinear problems led to the foundation of the Industrial Math-
ematics and Gravity Group to promote further work in these areas. The work 
on one of their commissions is illustrated in Figure  20 . 
 It is ironic, not to say astonishing, that even though the industrial value 
of this spin - off greatly exceeds what the team needs to continue on their 
Einsteinian quest, in today ’ s short - term optimizing culture it is nevertheless 
not forthcoming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 Bibliography 
 Alvarez ,  L. ,  Adventures of a Physicist ,  Basic Books ,  New York ,  1987 . 
 Amijee ,  F. ,  E. J.  Allan ,  R. N.  Waterhouse ,  L. A.  Glover , and  A. M.  Paton ,  Non - pathogenic 
association of L - form bacteria ( Pseudomonas syringae pv. phaseolicola ) with bean 
plants ( Phaseolus vulgaris L.) and its potential for biocontrol of halo blight ,  Bio-
control Sci. Technol.  2 ,  203 – 214 ( 1992 ). 
 Banister ,  J. A. ,  P. D.  Lee , and  M.  Poliakoff ,  Flow reactors for preparative chemistry in 
supercritical - ﬂ uid solution — solvent - free synthesis and isolation of Cr(CO)5(C 2 H 4 ) 
and ( η (5) - C 5 H 5 )MnCO 2 ( η (2) - H 2 ),  Organometallics  14 ,  3876 – 3885 ( 1995 ). 
 Barnet ,  C. ,  The Audit of War ,  Macmillan ,  1986 . 
 Berkshir ,  F. H. , in  Proc. Conf. Statistics, Science and Public Policy , A. M. Herzberg (ed.), 
April  2005 , p.  136 . 
 Blackett ,  P. M. S. ,  Proc. Roy. Soc.  251 ,  310 ( 1959 ). 
 Bourdon ,  E. B. D. ,  Surface aligned photochemistry ,  J. Chem. Phys.  88 ,  6100 ( 1984 ). 
 Braben ,  D. W. ,  New Scientist p.  76 (June 26,  1986 ). 
 Braben ,  D. W. ,  To Be a Scientist ,  Oxford University Press ,  1994 . 
 Braben ,  D. W. ,  Pioneering Research: A Risk Worth Taking ,  Wiley ,  2004 . 
 Brenner ,  S. ,  Science  282 ,  1411 – 1412 ( 1998 ). 
 Brown ,  H. ,  J.  Bonner , and  J.  Weir ,  The Next Hundred Years ,  The Scientiﬁ c Book Club , 
 1957 . 
 Buderi ,  R. ,  The Invention that Changed the World ,  Abacus ,  1996 . 
 Bush ,  V. ,  Science — the Endless Frontier , National Science Foundation 40th Anniversary 
1950 – 1990,  1990 . 
173
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

174 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Caro ,  T. M. , and  M. D.  Hauser ,  Quart. Rev. Biol.  67 ,  151 – 174 ( 1992 ). 
 Cohen ,  B. ,  Revolution in Science ,  Harvard University Press ,  1985 . 
 Cox ,  R. T. ,  C. G.  McIlwraith , and  B.  Kurrelmeyeer ,  Acad. Sci. USA  14 ,  544 ( 1928 ). 
 Cuatrecasas ,  P. ,  Drug discovery in jeopardy ,  J. Clin. Inverst.  116 ( 11 ),  2837 (Nov. 
2006 ). 
 Daalder ,  H. , and  E.  Shils ,  Universities, Politicians and Bureaucrats: Europe and the 
United States ,  Cambridge University Press ,  1982 . 
 Dainton ,  F. ,  Doubts and Certainties ,  Shefﬁ eld Academic Press ,  2001 . 
 Darr ,  J. A. , and   M.  Poliakoff ,  New directions in inorganic and metal - organic coordina-
tion chemistry in supercritical ﬂ uids ,  Chem. Rev.  99 ,  495 – 541 ( 1999 ). 
 Debenedette ,  P. G. , and  H. E.  Stanley ,  Supercooled and glassy water ,  Phys. Today pp. 
 40 – 46 (June  2003 ). 
 Denison ,  E. ,  Trends in American Economic Growth, 1929 – 1982 ,  Brookings Institution , 
 1985 . 
 Diamond ,  J. ,  Collapse ,  Penguin Books ,  2005 . 
 Dicke ,  R. H. ,  P. J. E.  Peebles ,  P. G.  Roll , and  D. T.  Wilkinson ,  Cosmic black - body radia-
tion ,  Astrophys. J.  142 ,  414 – 419 ( 1965 ). 
 Dijkstra ,  E. W. ,  Selected Writings on Computing: A Personal Perspective ,  Springer -
 Verlag ,  1975 . 
 Dobrin ,  S. et al.,  Maskless nanopatterning and formation of nanocrystals and switches , 
 Nanotechnology  18 ,  4012 ( 2007 ). 
 Donofrio ,  N. ,  The value of innovation ,  Ingenia (Feb. – March  2005 ). 
 Farman ,  J. C. ,  B. G.  Gardiner , and  J. D.  Shanklin ,  Nature  315 ,  207 – 210 ( 1985 ). 
 Feynman ,  R. ,  R.  Leighton , and   M.  Sands ,  Lecture Notes in Physics ,  Addison - Wesley , 
 1963 ,  46 – 5 . 
 Fleischmann ,  M. ,  S.  Pons , and  M.  Hawkins ,  Electrochemically induced nuclear ﬁ ssion 
of deuterium ,  J. Electroanal. Chem.  261 ,  301 ( 1989 ). 
 Fraga - Dubreuil ,  J. , and  M.  Poliakoff ,  Organic reactions in high - temperature and super-
critical water ,  Pure Appl. Chem.  78 ,  1971 – 1982 ( 2006 ). 
 Franks ,  N. R. , and   T.  Richardson ,  Teaching in tandem - running ants ,  Nature  439 ,  153 
( 2006 ). 
 Freeman ,  M. ,  Feedback control of intercellular signaling in development ,  Nature  408 , 
 313 – 319 ( 2000 ). 
 Friis - Christensen ,  E. , and  K.  Lassen ,  Science  254 ,  698 – 700 ( 1991 ). 
 Grampp ,  W. D. ,  What did Smith mean by the invisible hand ?  J. Polit. Econ.  108 ,  443 
( 2000 ). 
 Green ,  J. R. ,  History of the English People ,  Macmillan ,  1909 , pp.  136 – 137 . 
 Hahn ,  R. ,  The Anatomy of a Scientiﬁ c Institution: The Paris Academy of Sciences, 
1666 – 1803 ,  University of California Press ,  1971 . 
 Howdle ,  S. M. ,  M. A.  Healy , and  M.  Poliakoff ,  Organometallic chemistry in supercritical 
ﬂ uids — the generation and detection of dinitrogen and nonclassical dihydrogen 
complexes of group - 6, 7, and 8 transition - metals at room - temperature ,  J. Am. Chem. 
Soc.  112 ,  4804 – 4813 ( 1990 ). 
 Hurley ,  J. ,  Organisation and Scientiﬁ c Discovery ,  Wiley ,  1997 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
175
 Hutchison ,  T. ,  Adam Smith and  The Wealth of Nations ,  J. Law Econ.  19 ,  507 ( 1976 ). 
 Kuhn ,  T. S. ,  The Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions ,  2nd ed.,  University of Chicago Press , 
 1970 , p.  96 . 
 Kunze ,  E. ,  J. F.  Bower ,  I.  Beveridge ,  R.  Dewey , and  K. P.  Bartlett ,  Science  313 ,  1768 – 1770 
( 2006 ). 
 Lane ,  N. ,  Power, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life ,  Oxford University 
Press ,  2005 . 
 Lederman ,  L. E. ,  Science: The End of the Frontier , American Association for the 
Advancement of Science,  1991 . 
 Lee ,  T. D. , and  C. N.  Yang ,  Phys. Rev.  104 ,  254 ( 1956 ). 
 Licence ,  P. ,  J.  Ke ,  M.  Sokolova ,  S. K.  Ross , and  M.  Poliakoff ,  Chemical reactions in 
supercritical carbon dioxide: From laboratory to commercial plant ,  Green Chem.  5 , 
 99 – 104 ( 2003 ). 
 MacKinnon ,  A. ,  J. B.  Pendry , and  P. J.  Roberts ,  Universality classes and ﬂ uctuations in 
disordered systems ,  Proc. Roy. Soc. A  437 ,  67 ( 1992 ). 
 Maddox ,  J. ,  What Remains to Be Discovered ,  Macmillan ,  1998 , p.  164 . 
 McCarthy ,  J. ,  Towards a mathematical science of computation , in  Computer Program-
ming and Formal Systems ,  P.  Braffort and  D.  Hirschberg (eds.),  North - Holland , 
 1963 . 
 Mishima ,  O. , and  H. E.  Stanley ,  Nature  396 ,  329 – 335 ( 1998 ). 
 Morison ,  S. E. ,  Three Centuries of Harvard, 1636 – 1936 ,  Belknap Press ,  1969 , pp. 
 335 – 336 . 
 Mowery ,  D. C. , and   N.  Rosenberg ,  Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth , 
 Cambridge University Press ,  1989 . 
 Olson ,  A. , and  J.  Stenlid ,  Plant pathogens: Mitochondrial control of fungal hybrid viru-
lence ,  Nature  411 ,  438 ( 2001 ). 
 Owen ,  T. ,  The University Grants Committee ,  Oxford Rev. Educ.  6 ,  254 ( 1980 ). 
 Parkhouse ,  J. G. ,  Structuring: A process of material dilution , in  Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Space 
Structures ,  H.  Nooshin (ed.),  Elsevier Applied Science ,  1984 . 
 Parkhouse ,  J. G. ,  Damage accumulation in structures ,  Reliability Eng.  17 ,  97 – 109 
( 1987 ). 
 Parkhouse ,  J. G. ,  The inﬂ uence of prestress on composite performance , in  Applied 
Solid Mechanics , Vol. 3,   I. M.  Allison and  C.  Ruiz (eds.),  Elsevier Applied Science , 
 1989 . 
 Parkhouse ,  J. G. ,  H. R.  Sepangi , and  W. E.  Williams ,  Structural simplicity through a 
lenticular pattern ,  Int. J. Mech. Sci.  34 ,  957 – 970 ( 1992 ). 
 Parkhouse ,  J. G. , and   H. R.  Sepangi ,  Macromolecules , in  Proc. Seminar: Building the 
Future , Brighton, April 1993, E  & A Spon, London, 1994, Fig. 10.  
 Pendry ,  J. B. ,  Symmetry and transport of waves in 1D disordered systems ,  Adv. Phys. 
 43 ,  461 ( 1994 ). 
 Penzias ,  A. A. , and  R. W.  Wilson ,  A measurement of excess anenna temperature at 
4080  Mc/s ,  Astrophys. J.  142 ,  419 – 421 ( 1965 ). 
 Planck ,  M. ,  Where Is Science Going ?  Ox Box Press ,  1933 . 
 Polanyi ,  M. ,  Knowing and Being ,  Routledge  & Kegan Paul ,  1969 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

176 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Poliakoff ,  M. ,  S. M.  Howdle , and  S. G.  Kazarian ,  Vibrational spectroscopy in supercriti-
cal ﬂ uids — from analysis and hydrogen - bonding to polymers and synthesis ,  Angew. 
Chem. Int . (English edition)  34 ,  1275 – 1295 ( 1995 ). 
 Poliakoff ,  M. ,  J. M.  Fitzpatrick ,  T. R.  Farren , and   P. T.  Anastas ,  Green chemistry: Science 
and politics of change ,  Science  297 ,  807 – 810 ( 2002 ). 
 Robinson ,  E. J. H. ,  D. E.  Jackson ,  M.  Holcombe , and  F. L. W.  Ratnieks ,  Insect commu-
nication — “ No entry ” signal in ant foraging ,  Nature  438 , 442 ( 2005 ). 
 Ronayne ,  J. ,  Science in Government ,  Edward Arnold ,  London ,  1984 . 
 Ross ,  I. ,  Ann. NY Acad. Sci.  1019 ,  581 – 584 ( 2004 ). 
 Saward ,  D. ,  Bernard Lovell .  A Bibliography ,  Robert Hale ,  London ,  1984 , p.  268 . 
 Schlesinger ,  W. H. ,  Editorial ,  Science  314 ,  1217 ( 2006 ). 
 Self ,  C. H. , and  S.  Thompson ,  Nature Med.  2 ,  817 – 820 ( 1996 ). 
 Smolin ,  L. ,  The Trouble with Physics ,  Allen Lane ,  2007 . 
 Solow ,  R. , in  Nobel Lectures, Economics 1981 – 1990 ,  K. - G.  M ä ler (ed.),  World Scientiﬁ c 
Publishing ,  Singapore ,  1992 . 
 Stevens ,  M. D. , and  G. W.  Roderick (eds.),  Universities for a Changing World .  The Role 
of the University in the Late Twentieth Century ,  David  & Charles ,  1975 . 
 Stickland ,  T. ,  N. F.  Britton , and   N. R.  Franks ,  Models of information ﬂ ow in ant foraging: 
The beneﬁ ts of both attractive and repulsive signals , in  Information Processing in 
Social Insects ,  C.  Detrain ,  J. - L.  Deneubourg , and  J.  Pasteels (eds.),  Birkhauser -
 Verlag, Basel ,  1999 , pp.  83 – 100 . 
 Strangway ,  D. W. , in  Proc. Conf. Statistics, Science and Public Policy , A. M. Herzberg 
(ed.), April  2005 , p.  98 . 
 Thomas ,  J. M. ,  What is happening to our universities ? (lecture presented at the  Honour-
able Society of Cymmrodorion to mark its 250th anniversary, The Royal Society, 
London,  2001 ). 
 Thorsteinsson ,  T. ,  D. L.  Cooper ,  J.  Gerratt , and  M.  Raimondi ,  A new approach in 
valence bond calculations: CASVB , in  Quantum Systems in Chemistry and Physics: 
Trends in Methods and Applications ,  R.  McWeeny ,  J.  Marauni ,  Y. G.  Smeyers , and  S. 
 Wilson (eds.),  Kluwer Academic Publishers ,  1997 . 
 Tofts ,  C. , and  N. R.  Franks ,  Doing the right thing: Ants, honey bees, and naked mole 
rats ,  Trends Ecol.  7 ,  346 – 349 ( 1992 ). 
 Townes ,  C. H. ,  How the Laser Happened ,  Oxford University Press ,  1999 , p.  65 . 
 Walker ,  R. ,  C. M. J.  Ferguson ,  N. A.  Booth , and   E. J.  Allan ,  The symbioses of  Bacillus 
subtilis L - forms with Chinese cabbage seedlings inhibit conidial germination of 
 Botrytis cinerea ,  Lett. Appl. Microbiol.  34 ,  42 ( 2002 ). 
 Waugh ,  W. L. ,  Jr. ,  Issues in university governance: More  “ professional ” and less  “ aca-
demic, ” in  Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , Vol. 585, 
 2003 , p.  85 . 
 Widom ,  A. , and  T. D.  Clark ,  Quantum electrodynamic uncertainty relations for mag-
netic ﬂ ux measurements in circuits ,  J. Phys. Math. Gen.  15 ,  3617 – 3621 ( 1982 ). 
 Williams ,  G. P. ,  Chaos Theory Tamed ,  Taylor  & Francis ,  1997 . 
 Wilson ,  R. , in  Noble Lectures, Physics 1971 – 1980 ,  S.  Lundqvist (ed.),  World Scientiﬁ c 
Publishing ,  Singapore ,  1992 . 
 Wood ,  P. ,  Poverty and the Workhouse in Victorian Britain ,  Alan Sutton ,  1991 , p.  21 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
177
 Wu ,  C. S. ,  E.  Ambler ,  R. W.  Hayward ,  D. D.  Hoppes , and  R. P.  Hudson ,  Phys. Rev.  105 , 
 1413 ( 1957 ). 
 Young ,  D. A. ,  Mind over Magma: The Story of Igneous Petrology ,  Princetion University 
Press ,  2004 . 
 Zuckerman ,  S. ,  Scientists and War ,  The Scientiﬁ c Book Club ,  1996 , p.  17 . 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Index
Note: references to ﬁ gures and tables are indicated as 5f, 100f; to footnotes are 
indicated as 5n, 100n; to the Posters as 5P, 100P.
178
Scientiﬁ c Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization, by Donald W. Braben
Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Accademia dei Lincei, 82, 101
Adventure Fund (EPSRC), 68–69
Adventure initiative (E.C.), 39–40
Advisory Council for Scientiﬁ c Policy, 
62
AELIA, 164
age, 51, 52–53, 53f, 69
life expectancy, 24–25
Agriculture and Food Research 
Council, 119
Allen, Eunice, 116f, 117, 147–149
altruism, 23, 136
Alvarez, Louis, 45n
Alzheimer’s disease, 58f, 158
American Association of University 
Professors, 43n
animal feeds, 120
ant colonies, 134–136, 135P
apoptosis, 156
Ashby, Eric, 85
Astrophysical Journal, 34
Atkins, Martin, 160
Atkins, Ted, 117, 140
atmosphere, Earth’s, 12–13P
atomic bomb, 59, 60P, 84
Avery, Oswald T., 6P, 47f
Bacon, Francis, 8P
bacteriology, 58, 147–149, 148f
Bardeen, John, 6P, 47f
Barham, Peter, 117, 140
battle simulations, 70
Beeching, John, 117, 154–157
Bell Laboratories, 5P, 29, 33–35, 63
Bennett, Mike, 116f, 116, 118
Big Bang, 19, 34, 57
Binnig, G., 151
biological sciences, 76
Birks, Jack, 101, 102, 110n
Black, James, 6P, 47f
Blackett, P. M. S., 44P
Boissonade, Jacques, 116f, 118, 167–169
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INDEX 
179
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 57
Boltzmann Medal, 167
Bose, Sayendra Nath, 121
Brattain, Walter H., 6P, 47f
Brenner, Sydney, 6P, 47f, 76n
British Antarctic Survey, 13P
British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 83
British Petroleum (BP), 29, 35, 38, 45, 
66, 77, 101–102, 109, 110, 115, 
130, 138, 160, 171, 172
BP Nutrition, 120
Information Technology Research 
Unit, 110
 see also Venture Research
Broda, Paul, 116, 119–120
Brown, H, 27
buckminsterfullerene, 59
bureaucracy, 15, 30, 57, 63, 78, 80, 86, 
87–88, 98
Bush, Vannevar, 1, 5P, 61–62, 63, 76, 85
Cadogan, John, 102n, 110n
Caltech, 27–28
Calvert, P. D., 159n
Carnegie Institute, 83
cassava, 157
catalysis, 151
China, 26, 27
Chinese medicine, 58n
Churchill, Winston, 84
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 18P
Clark, Terry, 116f, 116, 121–124
Clough, Stan, 116f, 116, 124–126
code-breaking, 72, 84
cold fusion, 109
cold war, 62
complexity, 109, 130–132
computers, 13P
computing science, 109–110, 130–132
condensed matter dynamics, 124–126
Cooper, David, 116, 126–127
cosmology, 19–20, 34, 57
Couette reactor, 168
Council for Scientiﬁ c Policy, 67
Cox, R. T., 44P
creativity, 6, 8P, 23–24, 28–29, 31, 38
and age, 53
managed, 89
Crick, Francis, 6P, 47f
crystalline materials, 149
Cuatrecasas, Pedro, 30
Curtis, Adam, 117, 127–129
cybernetics, 22
Daalder, H., 93
Dale, Sir Henry, 59, 60–61P, 62, 63, 85
Damocles, 18P
Damocles Zone, 10, 11, 16, 17–19, 18P, 
24–27
Davies, Steve, 116f, 117, 129
Davy, Humphrey, 83, 132
deforestation, 9–11, 25
DeKepper, Patrick, 116f, 117, 167–169
Deneubourg, Jean Louis, 116f, 117, 
134–136
Denison, Edward, 41P
Department of Education and Science, 
93
Diamond, Jared, 9–10, 25
Dicke, Robert, 34
Dijkstra, Edsger W., 81, 109–110, 117, 
130–132
letter to, 135P
diplomacy, 75
Dirac, Paul A. M., 6P, 47f
disasters, 18–19
Donofrio, Nicholas, 29–30
DuBridge, Lee A., 27n
Earth, 19–20, 139, 168
Easter Island, 9–10, 25
ecology, 9–10, 25
economics, 22–24, 26, 28
see also growth, economic
Economist, The, 7, 26, 40, 54n, 65, 87n, 
91n, 102
Edison, Thomas, 83, 84
education
elementary, 97P
secondary, 96, 97P
tertiary, 98
see also teaching; universities
Edwards, Peter, 117, 132–134
efﬁ ciency, 23, 29, 65, 86, 88
Einstein, Albert, 3, 6P, 39, 43, 47f, 73, 
109, 121, 125, 170, 171
electrocardiogram, 123f
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

180 
INDEX
electronic structure
dimensional scaling, 136–138
of solids, 126–127
transport in disordered systems, 
149–150
engineering, theoretical, 143–146, 144P
Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Research Council (EPSRC), 
68–69, 159, 160
Adventure Fund, 68–69
entropy, 20
European Magna Charta, 91, 92, 92P, 
96
European Research Council (ERC), 69
Guide to Applicants, 69n
European Union, 39–40, 92, 161
evolution, 118
Faraday, Michael, 57, 83
Farman, Joe, 13P
Fedoroff, Nina, x
Fermi, Enrico, 6P, 47f
Feynman, Richard, 20n
Fleck, Alec, 35
Fleet, Andy, 160
Fleming, Alexander, 6P, 47f, 70
ﬂ uid dynamics, 139
ﬂ uid mechanics, 138–139
supercritical ﬂ uids, 149–154, 152P, 153f
Foresight, 95
foresight, 8P, 87
Franks, Nigel, 116f, 117, 134–136
freedom, intellectual, 2–4, 14, 29, 31, 
41P, 54n, 58, 59, 60–61P, 63, 73, 
74, 87, 98, 102
Freeman, Mathew, 21
funding, research, 4n, 9, 37, 38, 39–40, 
43, 62–63, 67, 106, 138, 149, 165
agencies, 2, 4, 6, 7, 14, 45–46, 52–53, 
57, 59, 68–77, 73n, 80, 106, 108, 
128, 137, 170
see also names
fungi, 154–158
Gabor, Dennis, 6P, 47f
Gasteren, Netty van, 130–132
GE (General Electric), 63, 102
gene sequencing data, 50f, 76
genes, nuclear, 157–158
mitochondria, 158
genome structure, 118–119
Human Genome Project, 6
geologic ﬂ uid mechanics, 138–139
geometrodynamics, 170–172
George, Mike, 154
Gerratt, Joe, 116, 126–127
global warming, 12–13P, 30
Glover, Anne, 116f, 117, 147–149
Goss, Simon, 116f, 117, 134–136
gravity, 57, 170–172, 171f
Green, John Richard, 81–82, 87
Green, Mike, 160
green chemistry, 154, 162
Green Revolution, 27
gross domestic product (GDP), 26, 40, 
42f
growth, economic, 7, 14, 15, 23, 24, 
26–27, 40–41, 41P, 43, 84, 86, 88
Hahn, Roger, 83
Hartley, David, 118, 170–172
health, 58
Heisenberg, Werner K., 6P, 47f
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 142
Herschsbach, Dudley, 32–33, 46n, 117, 
136–138
Heslop-Harrison, Pat, 116f, 116, 118
Higher Education Funding Council, 95n
Hill, Tom, 110
Hoare, Tony, 109
Hodgkin, Dorothy C., 47f
Horsewill, Tony, 116f, 116, 124–126
Horsthemke, Werner, 116f, 117, 167–169
House Committee on Science, US 
Congress, 39, 62n
Howdle, Steve, 154
Human Genome Project, 6
Huppert, Herbert, 116f, 117, 138–139
Hurley, John, 54
Hutchinson, Terence, 22n
IBM, 63
Fellows Program, 29
immune system, 21, 163–165
India, 27
individuality, 4, 51, 59, 86
Industrial Revolution, 1–2, 64, 98
industry, 31, 65, 100
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INDEX 
181
research, 7, 29, 63–64, 65, 83
US, 63–64, 64f
instability, 19–21, 25, 162
biological, 162–165
optical, 141
intelligence, 28, 134–136
ionic liquids, 159–161
Jansky, Karl, 34–35
Jodrell Bank, 35
Johnston, Desmond, 118, 170–172
Josephson, Brian, 121
Kais, Sabre, 138
Keller, Andrew, 117, 140
Kimble, Jeff, 116f, 117, 140–143
citations, 143f
Kuhn, Thomas, 46
laser, 5P, 76, 142
Lederman, Leon L., 4n
Lee, Tsung Dao, 44P
L-form bacteria, 147–149
life expectancy, 24–25
lignin, 119–120
linear processes, 19
Logan, David, 117, 132–134
macromaterial, 145f, 146
macroscopic quantum objects, 121–124
Maddox, John, 22
Malpas, Robert, 110n
Mandel, Leonard, 140, 141
Manhattan Project, 6, 84
marine riser dynamics, 171f
maser, 5P
material dilution, 145f, 146
Maxwell, James Clerk, 57
McCaffrey, A. J., 159n
McCarthy, John, 132
McClintock, Barbara, 6P, 45, 47f
Medical Research Council, 77P, 95
medicine, 58, 164
Menter, James, 102
Mesopotamia, 26
metallic states, 132–134
Mitchell, Peter, 45
mitochondria, 158
molecular architecture, 129
Morison, Samuel Eliot, 90–91
Morita, Akio, 9n
multicellularity, 154–157
multiphase ﬂ ows, 138–139
mycology, 154–156
Napoleon Bonaparte, 43
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
US, 52, 62, 76
Pioneer Award Program, 69
National Research Foundation, US 
(proposed), 61
National Science Board, US, x, 32, 89n
National Science Foundation (NSF), 
US, 32, 52, 62, 76, 141
Small Grants for Exploratory 
Research program, 69
nationalism, 93
Nature, 104n, 136, 169
Nature, 3n, 15, 21, 36, 44P, 45, 46, 58, 
74–76, 78, 79, 83, 168, 170
Nature’s ambassadors, 15, 74–76
neural networks, 127–128
New Scientist, 143
New York Times, 35
Nobel Prizes, 29, 45, 51–54, 55P, 63n, 95
1961–1970, 52f
1997–2006, 51, 51f
age of winners, 51, 51f, 52, 52f
Chemistry, 32–33, 46n, 51f, 59n, 
136–137, 151
Economics, 40, 41P
Physics, 5P, 34, 44P, 51f, 151
nonlinearities, 13, 19–21, 28, 168, 171–172
nuclear behavior, 157–158
Ofﬁ ce of Naval Research (ONR), US, 
62
Ofﬁ ce of Scientiﬁ c Research and 
Development (OSRD), US, 61, 
62
optical physics, 140–143
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), 42P, 89–90
Oxford Asymmetry, 129
parity, 44P
Parkhouse, Graham, 116f, 117, 143–146
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

182 
INDEX
Pasteur, Louis, 33, 35, 75, 83
Paton, Alan, 116f, 117, 147–149
Pauli, Wolfgang, 6P, 47f
Pauling, Linus, 45, 47f
peer preview, 45
peer review, 45–46, 59, 63, 69, 89, 106, 
114, 160
Pendry, John, 117, 149–150
Penzias, Arno, 33–34, 35, 70
Perutz, Max, 6P, 47f
pharmaceutical companies, 30
philanthropists, 66
photochemistry, 150–151
Planck, Max, 3–4, 6, 38, 46, 47f, 56–57, 
68, 73, 88, 103
Planck Club, 6P, 14, 15
Planck test, 14
plant pathogens, 147–149
Pluto pipeline, 84
Polanyi, John, 117, 150–151
Polanyi, Michael, 101
Poliakoff, Martyn, 108, 116f, 117, 
151–154, 162
publications and citations, 163f
polymer matrices, 159n
polymer transition dynamics, 140
polytechnic colleges, 90
precision, 38
prizes
A. Patron, 55P
see also Nobel Prizes
problem solving, 134–136, 135P
proof, 24, 28
mathematical, 130–132, 131P
proteins, 19
Quality Assessment, 95
quantum chromodynamics, 137
quantum electrodynamics (QED), 
142
quantum gravity, 170–172, 171f
quantum mechanics
coherence in condensed matter, 
124–126
dipolar state, 133–134
macroscopic, 121–124
optical physics, 141–142
quantum optics, 140–143
QUILL, 161
Rabi, Isadore, 5P
radar, 5P, 27n, 30
radio astronomy, 33–35
Raimondi, Mario, 127
Rayner, Alan, 117, 154–157
relativity, 3, 4, 125
Renaissance, 1–2, 7
research, 3, 9
costs, 2
expenditure, 40, 42P, 80, 103
US, 41f, 42P, 54, 55, 56f
funding see separate entry
industrial, 7, 29, 63–64, 65, 83
“normal”, 46
policies, 6, 7, 70
potential impact, 70–72, 71f, 72f
proposals, 6, 69
university, 7, 63–64, 65, 83, 84–85, 91, 
92, 95, 97, 138
see also transformative research; 
Venture Research
Research Assessment Exercises, 95
Research Councils, 159
UK, 77P
see also names
researchers
employment status, 83n
Riley, Peter, 167
risk, 14, 15, 69–73, 71f
Rohrer, H., 151
Rome, ancient, 26
Ross, Ian, 117, 156, 157–158
Roux, Jean-Claude, 116f, 118, 167–169
Royal Institution, 83
Royal Society, 139, 140, 150, 154
Rutherford, Ernest, 6P, 47f, 103
Schawlow, Arthur, 5P
Schlesinger, Arthur, 13n
Schrödinger, Erwin, 6P, 47f
Scicon Ltd., 70
Science, 104n, 169
“Breakthrough of the Year”, 47–51, 
48f, 49f, 50f
science
disciplines, 45, 75–76, 79
as a profession, 83–84
science and engineering doctorate 
holders, 51f, 53f, 54
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

INDEX 
183
Science and Engineering Research 
Council (SERC), 77P, 122, 154
Science Research Council, 77P, 149, 153
Scientiﬁ c Revolutions
ﬁ rst (17th c.), 82
second (19th c.), 83
third, 83–85
fourth, 85–88
ﬁ fth, supposed, 15, 88–90, 92, 96, 100
Scientist, The, 8P
Scully, Marlan, 138
Seddon, Ken, 108, 116f, 117, 154, 
159–161, 162
publications and citations, 163f
Self, Colin, 21, 116f, 117, 162–165, 166
self-organization, 134
in non-linear chemical systems, 167–169
Shockley, William B., 6P, 47f
Smith, Adam, 22–24
Smolin, Lee, 57
Solow, Robert, 23, 24, 28, 40, 41P, 43, 
64, 86, 88, 98
Sparks, Steve, 116f, 138–139
sponsorship, 7
“squeezed light”, 142
SQUID, 121–122
Stanley, Gene, 116f, 117, 165–167
string theory, 57
structures, theory of, 143–146, 145f
Sun, 12–13P
superconductivity, 121–124
supercritical ﬂ uids, 149–154, 152P, 153f
Swinney, Harry, 116f, 117, 167–169
Sydney Opera House, 144
symbiosis, 147–149
Szent-Györgyi, Albert von, 45
teaching
by non-humans, 136
university, 90–91, 138
technology, 29, 41P, 64–65
technology transfer, 109, 110
Teixeira, José, 116f, 117, 165–167
tenure, 4, 5
theoretical engineer, 144–145
thermodynamics, 20, 38
Thorsteinsson, Thorstein, 127
threats, 88
Times, The, 59, 60–61P
Tofts, Chris, 116f, 135
Townes, Charles H., 5P, 6P, 47f, 76
transformative research (TR), 14, 16, 
35–38
environment for, 105P
funding, 59, 73–74, 79
initiatives, 15, 43, 45, 51, 54, 59, 70, 
77–78, 79–80
cost, 63–64, 80
setting up, 89, 110–113
staff, 15, 78
transport in disordered systems, 149–150
Tucker, Robin, 118, 170–172
Ultra program, 84
uncertainty principle, 142
universe, 19–20
creation, 19, 34, 57
universities, 11, 15, 29, 31, 41P, 81–87, 
89–89
Aberdeen, 147–149
autonomy, 92–95, 96
Bath, 154
Boston, 165
Bristol, 126, 134, 138, 140
California at Santa Barbara, 157
California Institute of Technology, 27, 
140–141
Cambridge, 138–139, 164
Columbia, 5P
Edinburgh, 135
European Magna Charta, 91, 92P, 
96
funding, 123f, 149
Glasgow, 127
Harvard, 136
Imperial College of Science and 
Technology, 149
Lancaster, 170
Leicester, 118
Liverpool, 126
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
5P
Newcastle, 162
new type proposed, 99P
Nottingham, 124, 151–154
number, 83, 94 
Oxford, 129, 132
Queen’s University of Belfast, 159
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

184 
INDEX
research, 7, 63–64, 65, 83, 84–85, 91, 
92, 95, 97, 138
Southern Methodist University, 167
Stanford, 132
(and other institutions of higher 
education) students, numbers, 85f
Surrey, 145
Sussex, 121, 159
teaching, 90–91, 138
tenure, 4, 5
Texas at Austin, 130, 140, 142, 167
Toronto, 150
UMIST, 119–120
Universite Libre de Bruxelles, 134
US
enrollment, 85f, 90f
funding, 61
science and engineering doctorate 
holders, 51f, 53f
University Development, 1957 to, 1962 
(White Paper), 94P
University Funding Council, 95
University Grants Committee, 62, 77P, 
93–95, 94P, 96
venture research, 36
see also transformative research
Venture Research initiative, 14–15, 29, 
35–36, 38, 45, 72–73, 74, 77, 78, 
79, 102–112
Venture Research Unit (BP), 35n, 36n, 
101–112, 114–115
board of approval, 102, 107
conferences and workshops, 108–109, 
110, 111
costs, 112, 115
expenditure, 103, 113, 115
Industrial Mathematics and Gravity 
Group, 171f, 172
projects, 108, 114–172
selection of researchers, 53–54, 
104–108, 115
set up, 101–102, 114, 115
termination, 102, 110, 114
viruses, 58
vitamin C, 63
Wallen, Lincoln, 130–132
Walters, Sir Peter, 110n
water in conﬁ ned geometries, 165–167
Watkins, Zac, 156
Watson, James D., 6P, 47f
Watson, Thomas, 29
Watson-Watt, Robert, 84
Waugh, William, 97
Weiner, Norbert, 22n
Wellcome Trust, 77P, 128
Wheeler, John, 170
Wilkinson, Chris, 117, 127–129
Wilson, Robert, 33–34, 35, 70
Wimo, Anders, 58
wonder, 8P
World War II, 5P, 14, 15, 30, 59, 60–61P, 
61, 84
Wu, Chieng Shiung, 44P
Yang, Chen Ning, 44P
Zerhouni, Elias A., 52
zero, 110
Ziman, J. M., 63n
Zuckerman, Solly, 27n
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [23/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

