AUST & NZ JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY (March 1976) 9 (25-35)
25
ROLE CONDITIONING THEORY: AN EXPLANATION
FOR DISPARITY IN MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY?
Jocelynne A Scutt"
Nothing lovlier can be found
In woman
than to study household good,
And good works in her husband to promote.
MILTON
Lombroso (1895) explained the considerably less numbers of female than male
criminals in terms of sexual selection: only the more handsome and better
endowed females were preserved for procreative activities. In ancient, time, he
contended, deformed females were swiftly dispensed with by cannibalism.
Although this proposition today sounds rather extravagant,' a second explanation
put forward by Lombroso is more acceptable, and has been subject to vigorous
discussion recently. That" is, he considered that the social life commonly led by a
woman was more conducive to non-conflict with social mores than was the life
of a man: " . . . the female, on whom falls the larger share of the duty of
bringing up the family, necessarily leads a more sedentary life, and is less
exposed than the male to the varying conditions of time and space in her
environment ... [T]he
struggle
for "life, both
for
parents and
progeny,
devolves primarily upon the male."2
That the conditioning process which begins in babyhood and childhood, and
continues throughout the life of each individual, is of prime importance in
determining
criminality
has
been
subjected
to
scrutiny by
writers
and
researchers, criminologists and sociologists." Young girls are taught to emulate
their mothers in play: they treat dolls as children -
put them to bed, wash them,
"feed" them, take them for walks; they play at being mother by "going
shopping"; they dress-up in clothes discarded by mother; in short, they play at
taking the role that will fall upon them when they are "grown-up". Male
children, however, are treated quite differently. They are encouraged to play
aggressive games -
cowboys and Indians, monsters-from-outer-space, bank
robbers, war.
Most of the games they play have little or no relation to
acceptable, "grown-up" reality. A little bank robber cannot grow up into a big
bank robber -
unless he is prepared to accept society's judgement of him as a
lawbreaker; a boy who revelled in the fighting of monsters from other worlds
cannot use the same tactics against the debt collector: the child waging an
imaginary war from bunker to laager, cannot hope for social approval when he
locks himself in the toolshed and begins firing upon his neighbours.
• Research Scholar, Cambridge; LLB (Western Australia), LLM (Sydney), LLM (Michigan), Djur
(Sydney).

26
JOCELYNNE A SCUTT
AUST.NZ]C (1976) 9
Girls are encouraged to be passive and gentle; they are taught not to fight with
each other or with their brothers; they are discouraged from taking part in
boisterous and
"masculine" games.
During childhood they are constantly
reminded of the role expected to be adopted in the future; ever-present is a
mother who represents the adult each will become. Not so with boys. Father is
away from home at the office each day, and for young Johnny to envisage his
parent sitting at a desk, working away (at -
what?), is too difficult a task. After
harbouring dreams of sailing the high seas, to eventually take a position among
the filing cabinets is a complete contradiction in terms of career expectation!
Further, boys are encouraged to be "manly", to be aggressive, to "fight their
own battles". The adult world where one is expected to go to law rather than to
seek personal satisfaction or revenge is far removed from that of the school-boy,
where fighting is the more readily adopted approach to solving differences, and
is looked upon by indulgent or expectant adults as the best way of training a
child in "manliness".
With
the
role
conditioning theory of
criminality it
is considered
that
differences in upbringing and role expectation mean that girls will be more likely
to accept the roles of wife and mother allotted to them, whilst boys will be more
likely to experience feelings of rebellion and non-acceptance of the conventional
roles for which they are destined. It will be more easy for boys to accept illegal
dealings, to step outside the law, to agree to disregard or stretch the law where
this suits their purpose. Most girls, because of a more conservative attitude, an
acceptance of law as it is, have no dreams of "something more" to interfere with
their acceptance of the conventional wife-and-mother role.
The theory sees the differences in attitude and expectation as revealed in the
crimes women commit. It is stressed that young girls who are chastised or
brought before the court on charges of transgressing the law are most often
guilty of acts which, were they committed when the girls were older, might not
have come to the attention of law enforcement agencies at all, or be the subject
of the criminal law." That is, many young girls who are sexually precocious (in
the eyes
of the law) are merely acting out social
roles which would be
conventionally acceptable were the girls above the age of minority.5
Where, for example, a girl comes before the court as a person " . . . in
danger of falling into vice" or being" . . . in moral danger" when she has been
discovered living with an older youth, if she were not a minor she might well
have married the boy and taken up the wife-mother role society expects of her;
as she is under age, the court steps in to declare her delinquent. A male minor
who is found transgressing the law is, however, not likely to have offended by
setting up house prematurely. His transgressions are more likely to be of a class
such as at any age would be looked upon as contrary to legal mores." A boy who
shot at and damaged a road sign would be guilty of offending a legal rule
whatever his age;" similarly with larceny, "joy riding", breaking and entering. His
offences are not usually derived from precociousness in the adoption of a role
which would be legally acceptable were he older in years.
The role conditioning theory thus rests on ·several notions. Primarily, it
surmises that boys and girls are conditioned differently -
that girls are
conditioned to be passive, accepting, law abiding; that boys are conditioned to
be aggressive, rebellious, less accepting of rules and authority. It rests upon the

MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY
27
idea that girls will grow up to become wives and mothers, and as they have an
ever present role model, this role will easily be adopted. The boy's role model is
often not present during the child's growing-up period -
being absent at work
all day; the boy therefore does not have an ever present figure, doing what he
will be doing when grown-up, to emulate; boys' games do not centre around the
usual grown-up role.
The third proposition is that upon attaining adulthood and taking up the adult
male role, the shock of reality is great for boys; for girls there is no career shock
-
girls are doing what they expected to be doing, and what others expected
them to be doing. Finally, it is proposed that from the inability to realise
childhood
expectations
frustration
arises,
aggression
is
expressed,
and
lawbreaking comes into being. In this way (male) childhood expectations are
realised; (male) childhood "dreams" do "come true".
The primary proposition of conditioning as leading to female passivity is
discussed in a varied and extensive range of contemporary literature." Whether
or not there are any genetic differences in males and females in terms of
"passivity"
and
"aggression",
"assertiveness"
and
"submission"!"
it
is
undoubtedly true that societies define sex roles in terms of the "ideal man" and
the "ideal woman":-
"All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women should
be collectively rebellious to the power of men . . . All women are brought up
from the earliest years in the belief that their ideal of character is the very
opposite to that of men; not self-will and government by self-control, but
submission and yielding to the control of others." -
John Stuart Mill (1867).1l
"The ideal woman is perfectly stupid and perfectly submissive ... " -
Simone de Beauvoir (1953).12
"A whistling woman, a crowing hen
are neither good
For God nor men . . . "- Anonymous.
"Psychoanalysts have contributed to the view of women as weak, inferior,
passive, fragile, soft, vacillating, dependent, unreliable, intuitive rather than
rational, castrated, and handicapped. Men have been polarized as aggressive,
controlling, strong, superior, proud, independent, venturesome, competitive,
hard, and athletic ... " -
Lester A Gelb (1973).13 14
"Woman's traditional triple role instructs girls in how to get on in the world by
pleasing men, how to care for children and how to manage a household." -
Elizabeth Janeway (1971),15
That such views of the ideal exist must influence, to some extent at least, the
attitudes of girls in their relations to society. The typical Freudian view, which
has gained popular currency, is that the perfect female is an
"ideal life
companion for a man". Perfect women:" ... are ideal collaborators who often
inspire their men and are themselves happiest in this role. They seem to be easily
influencable, and adapt themselves to their companions . . . They are the
loveliest and most unaggressive of helpmates and they want to remain in that
role; they do not insist on their own rights; quite the contrary. They are easy to
handle in every way . . . If gifted in any direction, they preserve the capacity
for
being original and productive, but without entering into competitive
struggles . . . They have an extraordinary need of support . . . "16

28
JOCELYNNE A SCUTT
AUST.NZJC (1976) 9
Numerous studies have been undertaken which show clearly that the majority
of girls and their families subscribe to the traditional view of the female. Aberle
and Naegele undertook a study of middle-class fathers, revealing that the
acceptance of aggression in boys was complete -
" . . . we know that some
boys are holy terrors in their play groups" -
no father expressing concern that
his boy child might be a bully: indeed, some of the fathers proudly surmised
their sons might be "devils". For the girl-children, however, the behavior desired
was that the girls be "nice", "sweet", pretty, affectionate, well-liked; a "bossy"
daughter was looked upon as a problem child." Douvan and Adelson's study of
adolescent boys and girls showed the girls-as listing marriage, home and family
as the main
aims in life,
with achievement being measured in terms of
acceptance, popularity and praise.!" Similarly a study conducted with a group of
college girls as subjects found that the majority adopted an orthodox view of the
female role. They considered the woman's primary role as being in the home,
over 87% of the girls in the study ranking "horne and family" as top priority."
Thus it seems that the role conditioning theory is correct on one point -
that
girls
generally
have
an
easily
identifiable
grown-up
role,
and
most see
themselves as emulating this paradigm.
An objection which could be levelled at the theory, however, is that it is untrue
that the girls are in a unique position of having a constantly present role model,
andtherefore are more advantaged in opportunity for viewing the role model in
close proximity than are the boys. Many mothers do indeed work outside the
home, just as the fathers do. This has been true since the beginning of the
industrial revolution.P and may mean that girls are equally disadvantaged as
boys in realising their adult roles; or that advantages and disadvantages of boys
and girls are equal. In fact, the boys might be more advantaged, in that the girls'
conflict may well be greater, in that the traditional outlook of "female as wife
and mother" seems to be in direct conflict with what actually occurs. In
accepting so wholeheartedly the wife-mother, fulfillment-in-the-home paradigm,
the girls
may well be deluding themselves, and accepting a false model.
However, in a 1960 study it was found that the attitude of working women
toward their jobs was to perceive their work as an extension of the nurturant,
mothering role; they were working to improve the welfare of their families, and
this was seen as in concert with, rather than in conflict with, the wife-mother
role. The study also found that children perceived the mother's role in this way."
Thus the role conditioning theory of the female with a steady perception of role
to be attained, and attainment of that role without frustration, leading to
non-activity in the criminal sphere, may be borne out.
In addition to the conditioning which takes place through family interaction,
attitudes within the educational sphere are extremely relevant, The attitude of
education authorities has been to regard the female career in culminating in the
orthodox role, work being a temporary, or at least a secondary, facet: "The little
girl's first storybooks and primers, for example, hardly ever show a woman as
working or active outside the home. It makes no difference that over five million
American children under twelve have full-time working mothers. The little girl is
expected to shape herself in the image of the maternal housekeeping women in
thesestories, and never mind what certain unfortunate mothers may be obliged
to do ...
"22

MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY
29
Similarly,
the
Newsome
Report
on
the
education
of
girls
in England
emphasised the "homemaking" aspects of the female career: "One line of
advance lies in courses built around broad themes of home making, to include
not only material and practical provision but the whole field of personal relations
in courtship, in marriage, and within the family ... [G]irls can be brought to
see that . . . they will themselves have a key role in establishing the standards
of the home and in education of their children . . . "23
Whatever one's private thoughts might be on the unbelievably archaic,
unimaginative, bigoted, discriminatory and totally boring nature of these views
-
incredibly expressed in 19631 -
it certainly seems that with continual
pressures operating through the educational system on girls to conform and
adopt the traditional, passive, home-making role, and the apparent acceptance
of this by the majority of girls,24 a girl may thus be more ready than a boy to
accept the status quo -
the social and legal rules currently in force. The simple
expedient of casting one's eyes upon the current social scene confirms the idea
that the majority view conforms with the housewifery-as-a-career concept.
Although the work she may take up as a prelude to marriage, or during her
"marriage career" may not be stimulating, if it is looked upon simply as a "fill-in"
before adopting the "proper role", or as an extension of the mothering-role, then
this would seem not to be in conflict with but to conform to the expectations of
the female in terms of role. 25
If the boy's father is not continually at home acting as role model in the career
sense, are there additional factors operating in the social or educational systems
which may account for a different attitude toward laws in boys? Is the boy
educated for acceptance or non-acceptance of social and legal mores? For
fulfillments or non-fulfillment of his boyhood dreams of "being a man"?
Although the educational system has generally been structured in a less
restricted
way
for
boys
than
for
girls,
in
providing
males
with
many
opportunities for realising ambitions, this apparent freedom may be illusory.
Recently criticisms of the supposed educative ideal have been voiced. Goodman,
a severe critic of the system, has said:-
"Thwarted or starved (by the school system), in important objects proper to
young capacities, . . . boys and young men naturally find or invent deviant
objects for themselves; this is the beautiful shaping power of our human nature.
Their choices and inventions are rarely charming, usually stupid, and often
disastrous; we cannot expect average kids to deviate with genius. But on the
other hand, the young men who conform to the dominant society become for the
most part apathetic, disappointed, cynical, and wasted . . .
"[T[he problems ... belong primarily, in our society, to the boys: how to be
useful and make something of oneself. A girl does not have to, she is not
expected to, 'make something' of herself. Her career does not have to be
self-justifying, for she will have children, which is absolutely self-justifying, like
any other natural or creative act. With this background, it is less important, for
instance,
what
job
an
average
young
woman
works. at
till
she
is
married . . . our 'youth troubles' are boys' troubles -
female delinquency is
sexual: 'incorrigibility' and unmarried pregnancy ..."26
The sexist bias of this statement would certainly be recognised by increasing
numbers today.F Notwithstanding this, it is undoubtedly true that the criticism

30
JOCELYNNE A SCUTT
AUST.NZJC (1976) 9
of the system itself has an increasing number of adherents in terms of students,
teachers, and the general public." School does not provide the stimulus and
opportunity that boys, at least, are led to except from life.
Although opportunities for boys in the work-world, too, may presently be
greater than they are for girls, current social attitudes certainly lead boys to
expect greater opportunities, and it may be that the promulgation of such hopes
in boys, the inculcation of the need to "achieve" may lead to dissatisfaction. The
expectations of boys may indeed exceed the reality.
For girls, the attitudes expressed in the Newsome report and in the statement
by Goodman are currently those of the majority. Some girls may be expected to
achieve in different ways, however most boys are expected to achieve. Where a
girl has high expectations of advancement in a career other than "homemaking"
she may well suffer frustration. Indeed, the frustration m.ay be greater then
anything a boy suffers in lack of opportunity: some careers are simply banned
for women because they are women; however the point is that the general social
expectations relating to females in the career world are not those applicable to
the male.
One estimate places the number of persons engaged in "assembly line" jobs at
approximately (2 per cent of the work Iorce.P) Certainly it is more likely to be
the girl rather than the boy who today "lives among the filing cabinets"30 yet
many positions filled by men are recognised as being "unfulfilling"." Of course
boys may become pilots, spacemen, judges, busdrivers -
but not everyone .can
fill the role of his childhood dreams; many adult roles simply fail to realise
youthful expectation.32
Thus
a
considerable
degree
of
dissatisfaction
and
frustration
may be
experienced by males on attaining adulthood." and males, because of their
generally less restrictive upbringing may be
more likely than females to
outwardly
express
their
dissatisfactions.
However,
dissatisfactions
and
frustrations do not necessarily lead to unlawful aggression." Aggressions and
childhood expectations may be realised in ways other than through work,
without the necessity for recourse to crime. Indeed, if all boys are brought up
without the "true" adulthood role of the father constantly before him, as is the
contention of the role conditioning theory, and expectations are not realised, all
men, because they are supposedly not conditioned as are girls to acceptance of
law as it is, should transgress. If this is so, then a great number must "get away
with it".
Further, one writer had contended that" ... the more a person remains
dependent on others the more aggression will be latent within him. To be
dependent on another person is to be in the power of that person; and therefore
to feel their power as a restrictive influence which must be overcome."35 U this is
so, then it appears that if the conventional model of the female as a more
dependent being than the male is accepted, females are more likely to harbour
aggressiveness than are males!
On this latter point, however, the social conditioning argument would be
relevant as suppressing the aggression rather than enabling the female to express
aggression outwardly in any manner, social or antisocial. Indeed, in the study on
female frustration in realisation of roles which was carried out by Frieden, it is
significant that although dissatisfied the women did not turn to disregarding

MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY
31
laws. More, they appeared to accept the world, social mores, their position in the
world and society as housewives, mothers, supporters of their husbands' egos
and so on. Their reaction to dissatisfaction was to criticise this feeling within
themselves rather than to criticise the social standards which contributed to their
sense of isolation from the world. This tendency to see faults within the self
rather than within the system certainly supports the role conditioning theory of
women accepting the status quo, men perhaps being more likely to disregard
it. 36 Is this, then, the reason for Frieden's housewive's ague?
Criticism has been levelled at the Parsons exposition of the role conditioning
theory in that if male delinquency is validly attributed in part to" ... isolation
from occupational activities of their fathers ..." leading to frustration and
consequent delinquency, then delinquency rates in rural areas should be almost
equal: in the country boys are able to identify with the adult male occupational
role. Sutherland points out that "apprenticeship training" in role expectation is
received by both boys and girls living in rural areas, probably to the same
degree, yet Toby has shown that delinquency rates differ considerably for boys
and girls in those areas, whilst urban-district delinquency rates" ... are more
nearly the same for the two sexes'l.'" Vold's study similarly supports this view."
Nye has put forward a variation on the theme of role conditioning.P' His
proposition is that delinquency is the norm, and that behavior is adjusted to
societal norms through the development of internal controls arising from
education.and upbringing. Because the upbringing and education of girls is more
restrictive than that of boys, girls will be more likely to be socialised out of their
delinquent orientation. Becker's view coincides with this idea in his contention
that the " . . . normal development of people in our society (and probably in
any society) can be seen as a series of progressively increasing commitments to
conventional norms and institutions.T'" 41
The idea that man is intrinsically "bad", or "bad" in his primitive state until
socialised into "goodness" has been strongly rejected by Montagu and others."
Montagu's thesis is that "badness" or hostility, aggression or antisocial behavior
are learned; that to see antisocial activity as the norm is: " . . . in addition to
perpetrating (a) wholly erroneous interpretation of human nature ... to divert
attention from the real sources of man's aggression and destructiveness, namely,
the many false and contradictory values by which, in an overcrowded, highly
competitive, dehumanised, threatening world, he so disoperatively attempts to
live ...
"43
Nevertheless, whether the "intrinsically bad" or "all behavior -
good or bad
-
is learned" theory is adopted, the more protective, more intensely supervised
socialisation ofFemales may playa significant part in the apparent difference
between males and females in adoption of a criminal role."
However, it is surprising that the major area of delinquency on the part of the
female is that of misbehavior in the realm of sexual activity." This is one area in
which the greatest restrictions are imposed, where the social attitude toward the
female is far more restrictive than toward the male. Thus it would seem that if
the restrictive, "protective" education amd mode of rearing girls was the major
or the only consideration in effecting conformity, sexual activity would be the
one area in which conformity to contemporary (adult imposed) standards would
be greatest. In the realm of socialisation, however, an additional factor -
that of
the peer culture and attitude -
must be taken into consideration.

32
JOCELYNNE A SCUTT
AUST.NZJC (1976) 9
A study by Ball and Logan in 1960 revealed the overwhelming effect of peer
group attitudes on activities labelled "deviant". Forty five girls, most of them
incarcerated as a result of their sexual "misbehavior", were questioned as to their
behavior in an effort to determine causes of their "deviance". The study found
that the sexual experience of most girls occurred on dates; that the girls regarded
premarital intercourse as "morally wrong"; yet the girls also regarded sexual
intercourse as a normal, expected part of the dating pattern. The conclusion was
that the behavior of the group was conditioned by the norms of the girls'
adolescent associates. Although the girls believed the conduct to be "wrong";"
they engaged in it " . . . for the sake of status among their respective peer
groups.":" In a similar study, Whyte found that" . . . a well-defined code of
sexual conduct exist[ed] side-by-side with illicit sexual relations. "48
Although the role conditioning theory purports to explain female delinquent
behavior in the sexual field, in that it attempts to show that this activity, rather
than being intrinsically antisocial as is male juvenile delinquent behavior, is
simply social activity adopted prematurely, this type of argument appears to be
somewhat spurious. That is, the girls are supposedly socialised into being more
accepting of social rules. A social rule which is applied with considerable force
to females is that they will eventually become wives and mothers-but that they
will certainly not become wives and mothers before the appointed time. Thus
girls in adopting the sexual role before the "appointed (socially approved) time"
will, in social terms of the greater society, only be able to view themselves as
deviating -
from the standards imposed from above. Any conformity in the
field is to their own group standards.
Although the majority of delinquent girls deviate in too early adoption of a
role which would be acceptable -
indeed desired of them -
at a later age, the
point is, surely, that at the time they are classified "delinquent" they see
themselves very clearly as being deviant in the eyes of adults.
Other studies similarly show the importance of peer group attitudes and
beliefs in both social and antisocial activities," and it is reasonable to presume
that conformity or non-conformity is effected by standards other than or in
addition to those imposed by the greater society. Therefore it seems that
although there may be some validity in the role conditioning theory -
girls are
treated differently from "boys, and their expectations appear to be affected by
the difference in attitude, consideration must be given to additional factors.
Particularly, that girls are able to subscribe in voice to the belief that imposed
adult attitudes toward pre-marital sex are "right", yet to disregard this in their
actual mode of living, and to use as a practical guide the standards of the peer
group, shows that peer group beliefs are stronger in adoption of deviant
activities, for girls at least, than are standards imposed from above.
NOTES
1
See: Lombroso, Caesare (1895) The Female Offender (London: Allen <\( Unwin) at 108, 109.
There appears to be no evidence to support this theory. Lombroso simply quotes the instance of
the Australian aboriginal who, when queried as to the paucity of old women in his country,
answered: "We eat them all!" When remonstrated with, he replied: "For one whom we lose, a
thousand remain." Even if the aboriginal's story were true, the killing of "old women" (beyond
the childbearing age?) would hardly affect breeding. In relation to cannibalism generally,

MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY
33
research has S~Ow? that there
i~ evide~ce in various parts of the world that a considerable
degree of cannibalism occurred In certain eras. However no current theory adopts the idea
t
forward by
Lombroso as a motivating force in cannibalism: Helmuth, Hermann
(1~)
"Kannibalisrnus
in
Palaanthropologie
und
Ethnologie"
9
Ethnographisch-Archao}ogische
Zeitschrigt 101; translation by the author: "Cannibalism in Paleoanthropo}ogy and Ethnology" in
Man and Aggression (Montagu, Ashley Ed) (1973) (2nd Ed) (NY: GUf') 229.
2
Lombroso, C (1895) op cit, at 109 (citing Viazzi).
3
See, for example: Parsons, Talcott (1949) Essays in Sociological Theory (USA) at 219, 257-259;
Greer, Germaine (1970) The Female Eunuch (London: MacGibbon & Kee); Konopka (1966) The
Adolescent Girl in Conflict (NJ : Prentice Hall).
4
See, for example: Gold, Sally (1970) "Women, The Criminal Code, and The Correction System"
in Woman's Role in Contemporary Society (NY Commission on Women's Rights) (1972) (NY:
Avon) 512; (1971) "Equal Protection for Juvenile Girls in Need of Supervision" 17 NY [Jaw
Forum 570; Tappan, Paul (1947) Delinquent Girls in Court (NY: Col Uni Press); Vedder, Clyde
B and Sommerfield, Dora B (1970) The Delinquent Girl (Sp, III : Charles C Thomas).
5
In most jurisdictions the age of minority is set at 16 years. Some jurisdictions differentiate
between the actions of married and unmarried females -
as where a law provides that an
unmarried girl between certain stipulated ages may be adjudged delinquent where she is
considered to be in "manifest danger of falling into vice (or habits of vice)". (Such a law doubly
discriminates against the single girl- neither a married female nor a married or single male may
be adjudged delinquent under such a law).
6
()f course one acknowledges that most jurisdictions enforce an irrebuttable presumption that a
child under the age of eight years (in most jurisdictions; sometimes it is six years) cannot be
guilty of a crime; he is held not to be able to form the requisite intent. Most jurisdictions also
provide that between the ages of 8 and 14 years (usually) the presumption that the child cannot
form the requisite intent is rebuttable.
7
See fn 6 (ante) in relation to this and the other examples here cited.
8
That is, the shock of a mundane "nine-to-five" job, the mediocrity of the working world.
9
See, for example: Frieden, Betty (1963) The Feminine Mystique (NY: Dell); Janeway, Elizabeth
(1971) Man's World, Woman's Place (NY: Dell); Millett, Kate (1970) Sexual Politics (NY:
Doubleday); Mitchell, Juliet (1971) Woman's Estate (NY: Random House); Schulman, Kates
Alix (1973) Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen (NY: Alfred A Knopf).
10
This is the allegation of the researches in the field of "brain sex". It is said that these traits
develop as a result of the interaction of hormones before birth. (Cf. Gray, Jeffery and Buffery,
Tony (1971) "The Biology of Sex Differences ... " A study carried out within the Department
of Experimental Psychology, Oxford University, published in The Times (11th December,
1971); (1972) "Sex -Differences in the Development of Spatial and Linguistic Skills" in Gender
Differences: Their ontogeny and Significance (Ormsted and Taylor, Eds) (London: Churchill-
Livingstone). For a comprehensive review of the studies, see: Bardwick, Judith M (1971)
Psychology of Women (NY : Harper &
Row), who says that although the experiments
U
•
•
• have been few and the evidence limited . . . there is a suggestion that sex differences in
the brain of a mammal influence not only sexual activity but other forms of behavior as well."
For discussion and criticism of the application of the supposed differences to criminality, see:
Scutt, Jocelynne A (1974) Sex-Based Discrimination in Criminal Law
(unpublished paper,
University of Michigan Law School).
11
Mill, John Stuart (1867) The Subjection of Women (UK).
12
Beauvoir, Simone de
(1953) (translation) The Second Sex (NY : Alfred A Knoph) at 189,
commenting on the writings of Montherlant.
13
Gelb, Lester A (1973) "Masculinity-Femininity: A Study is imposed inequality" in Psychoanalysis
and Women (Miller, Jean Baker Ed) (NY: Pelican) 364 at 367.
14
See also: Seidenberg, A (1971) "Oedipus and Male Supremacy" in The Radical Therapist
Collective 147; Roth, Robert; Dayley, Melvin K and Lerner, Judith (1973) "Into the Abyss:
Psychiatric Reliability and Emergency Commitment Statutes" 13 (°3) Santa Clara Lawyer 400;
Chessler, Phyllis (1972) Women and Madness (NY: Doubleday).
15
Janeway, Elizabeth (1971) op cit, at 130.
16
Deustch, Helene (1944) Psychology of Women (Vol I "Girlhood") (NY: Grune & Stratton) at
196.
17
Aberle, David F and Naegele, Kasper D (1952) "Middle-Class Occupational Roles and Attitudes
Toward Children/Fathers" 22 Am ] Orthopsychiatry 366.

.34
JOCELYNNE A SCUTT
AUST.NZJC (1976) 9
18
Douvan, Elizabeth and Adelson, J (1966) The Adolescent Experience (NY: Wiley).
19
Davis, R and Olsen, Virginia (1965) "The Career Outlook of Professionally Educated Women"
28 Psqchlatru 334.
20
See: O'Faolain, Julia and Martines, Lauro (Eds) (1973) Not in God's Image (NY: Harper &
Row); Smuts, Robert W (1959) Women and Work in America (NY: Col Uni Press); Bird,
Caroline (1971) (Revised ed) Born Female (NY: Simon & Schuster).
21
Hartley, Ruth E (1960) "Children's Concepts of Male and Female Roles" 6 (°3) Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly 153.
22
Bettelheim, Bruno (1962) "Growing Up Female" in Harper's Magazine (October, 1962) 121.
23
Newsome, John (1963) Half Our Future: A Report of the Central Advisory Council for
Education (UK: HMSO) 136.
24
Of course, with growing changes in female expectation, the wife-mother-marriage-career idea
currently being subject to pressures, validity of the role conditioning theory as an explanation for
female crime and female attitudes toward crime may vary accordingly. However it is very clear
that at this stage many continue to accept such views as those expressed by Newsome.
25
See: Douvan, E and Adelson, J (1966) op cit; Davis, R and Olsen, V (1965) op cit; Bird, Carolyn
(1971) op cit; Schulman, Kates Ali" (1972) op cit.
26
Coodman, Paul (1956) Growing Up Absurd (NY: Random House).
27
See, for example: Figes, Eva (1970) Patriachal Attitudes (NY: Stein & Day), at 28-30 and
generally: Bird, Carolyn (1971) op cit, pp 40-60; Epstein, Cynthia Fuchs (1970) Woman's Place
(Uni Cal Press); Frieden, Betty (1963) op cit. However, it must again be pointed out that
recognition of a bias would by no means be universal; as with Newsome's views on girls'
education, Goodman's idea that a girl need strive for nothing more than to produce babies as her
life-task would be wholly acceptable to numbers of men and women, boys and girls -
indeed,
very probably to the majority.
28
See: Freidenberg, Edgar S (1963) Coming of Age in America (NY: Random House); Farber,
Jerry (1969) The Student as Nigger (NY: Simon & Schuster); Illich, Ivan (1970) Deschooling
Society
(NY : Harper &
Row);
Kozol, Jonothan (1967) Death at an Early Age (NY :
Houghton-Mifflin); Silberman, Charles (1970) Crisis in the Classroom (NY: Random House).
Reports of violence in schools appear to be becoming more numerous: perhaps rather than
seeing this as indicative of "something wrong" with the students, as some authorities apparently
do, the pressing need for revision of the system should be faced up to.
"
29
Estimate of the US Department of Labor; based on an analysis of the statistics for the number of
"operatives" and other job categories likely to have "assembly line" features; ie the number of
"classically alienating jobs (eg on the assembly line) that allow the worker no control over the
conditions of work and that
seriously affect his mental and physical functioning of the
job . . .
H See: Work in America: Report of the Special Task Force to the Secretary of the
Department of IIealth, Education and Welfare (Foreword by Elliot L Richardson) (1973) (MIT
Press) at 15.
30
Clerkingand secretarial jobs are "female" in today's work-world. See: Bird, Carolyn (1971) op
cit, 61-83 Ch 4 "The Sex Map of the Working World".
31
Terkel, Studs (1972) Working (NY : Pantheon). Terkel states: "For many, there is hardly
concealed discontent. The blue collar blues is no more bitterly sung than the white collar moan.
'I'm a machine', says the spot-welder. 'I'm caged', says the bank teller, and echoes the motel
clerk. 'I'm
a
mule',
says
the
steel
worker.
'A monkey could
do what I do',
says the
receptionist . . . Blue collar and white collar workers alike call upon the identical phrase: 'I'm a
robot'." (Introduction: pp xi-xii).
32
Ibid, see also: Work in America: Report of Special Task Force (1973) op cit; Campbell, A A and
Convers, P E (1972) (Eds) The Human Meaning of Social Change (NY: Basic Books). A
Michigan survey by Kohn, Robert (1972) "The Work Module" cited Work in America showed
major dissatisfaction with such factors as quality of supervision and the "chance to grow on the
job" on the part of both white collar and blue collar workers (survey 1970-1971). Less than half
those interviewed claimed to be satisfied with their jobs "most of the time". When asked "What
type of work would you choose if you could start all over again?" 76~ of the blue collars and
571; of the white collars intimated that they would choose different work.
33
At least one writer has well-documented considerable dissatisfaction experienced by women in
realization of adult roles: Frieden, Betty (1963) op cit (see comments post).
34
Sutherland, E H and Cressey, D R (91966) op cit.
35
Storr, Anthony Human Aggression (1968) (NY: Atheneum) at 48.

MALE AND FEMALE CRIMINALITY
35
36
See also: Schulman, Kates Alix (1972) op cit.
37
Toby, Jackson (1957) "The Differential Impact of Family Dis-organisation" 22 Am Sociological
Rev 505.
38
VoId, George B (1941) "Crime in City and .Country Areas" 217 The Annals 38.
39
Nye, F I (1958) Family Relationships and Delinquent Behavior (NY).
40
Becker, Howard S (1963) Outsiders (NY: Free Press), at 27.
41
This is the theme of the William Golding novel, Lord of the Flies (1954) (NY: Harcourt, Brace &
Co), where without the restrictions of adult imposed institutions, the intrinsically "bad" natures
of the children are allowed to develop without social limitations.
42
See: Man and Aggression (1973) Ashley Montagu, Ed (NY: OUP (2nd ed)).
43
Montagu, Ashley (1973) "The New Litany of 'Innate Depravity' or Original Sin Revisited" in
Man and Aggression op cit, at 16.
44
That is, differences in numbers of male and female criminals and in the types of crime each
commits as revealed in official statistics and self-reports.
45
That is, the majority of girls adjudged "delinquent" and institutionalised by the juvenile courts
are so designated on grounds of sexual misbehavior, or in relation to activities which are
classified as breaches of the sexual code by the authorities.
46
Sixty nine per cent of the girls said that the premarital sex was "wrong"; 24~ of the girls held that
it was "sometimes wrong"; only three of the girls said that premarital coitus was not wrong; the
remainder maintained that they "didn't know whether or not it was wrong".
47
Ball, John C and Logan, Nell (1960-1961) "Early Sexual Behavior of Lower-Class Delinquent
Girls" 51 ]rn Criminal Law and Criminal 209.
48
Whyte, William (1943) "A Slum Sex Code" 49 Am ]rn of Sociology 24.
49
See, for example: Becker, Howard S (1963) op cit; Haller, A 0 and Butterworth, C E (1960)
"Peer Influences on Levels of Occupational and Educational Aspiration" 38 Social Forces 289;
Reiss, Albert J (1964) "The Social Integration of Peers and Queers" in The Other Side (Becker,
Howard s ed) (NY: MacMillan) 181.

