Mimi-PAGE, an open-source
implementation of the PAGE09
integrated assessment model
Frances C. Moore1, James Rising2, Niklas Lollo3, Cecilia Springer3, Valeri Vasquez3,
Alex Dolginow3, Chris Hope4 & David Anthoff3
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) have become critical tools for assessing the costs and beneﬁts of
policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Three models currently inform the social cost of carbon
dioxide (SCCO2, the net present value of damages from one additional ton of CO2) used by the US
federal government, several states, and Canada. Here we present a new open-source implementation
of one of these models (PAGE09) in the Julia programming language using a modular modeling
framework (Mimi). Mimi-PAGE was coded using best coding practices (such as multiple code reviews by
different individuals during development, automated testing of newly-committed code, and provision
of documentation and usage notes) and is publicly available in a GitHub repository for community
inspection and use under an open source license. In this paper we describe the Julia implementation of
PAGE09, show that output from Mimi-PAGE matches that of the original model, and perform
comparisons of the run time between the two implementations.
1Environmental Science and Policy, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA. 2Grantham Research Institute
on Climate Change and the Environment, London School of Economics, London, WC2A 2AE, UK. 3Energy and
Resources Group, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA. 4Cambridge Judge Business
School, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1AG, UK. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to F.C.M. (email: fmoore@ucdavis.edu).
OPEN
Received: 8 January 2018
Accepted: 3 August 2018
Published: 25 September 2018
www.nature.com/scientificdata
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
1

Introduction
Open-Source IAMs
IAMs model the global economy, climate system, and connections between them via greenhouse gas
emissions and climate damages. They are useful tools for policymakers as well as scientists and
economists seeking to understand the relationship between energy policy and the costs of climate change-
induced damages. Federal regulators in the United States use estimates of the SCCO2 informed by three
IAMs, as does Canada and several US states1–4. However, to maximize their usefulness, the IAMs that
support both policy recommendations and academic research could be made more accessible and
available for each community’s use5. Several key standards can enable sound, reproducible, and
communicable science using IAMs: open-source code, a platform for model inter-operability, consistent
programming conventions, reduced computational processing time, automated testing for new commits
to the repository, and documented methodology6.
Our endeavor meets these standards ﬁrst by translating a model (PAGE09)7, which formerly relied on
proprietary software (speciﬁcally Microsoft Excel and the @RISK Excel plug-in), into an open-source and
high-performance computing language, Julia, which follows much of the syntax of the widely-used
MatLab language. Second, our model version uses a component-based modelling framework (Mimi) that
allows for the swapping out of various new model components and therefore facilitates community
development and model inter-comparison. Third, via its placement on a public GitHub repository under
a permissive open-source license (the MIT license), Mimi-PAGE is available for inspection, use, and
further development by all researchers. Fourth, our consistent programming conventions, along with
how-to-read and how-to-run guides, are documented in the public GitHub repository.
The ﬂexibility now enabled by modular IAMs such as Mimi-PAGE was recommended by the 2017
National Academy of Sciences committee reviewing estimation of the SCC8. Modularity increases
functionality for a range of users such that speciﬁc pieces of a given model can receive targeted
development from the relevant scientiﬁc community. In addition, the NAS panel recommended model
code be available for “review, use, and modiﬁcation by researchers”, something supported by the open-
source implementation that we describe here.
Modular Approach to Modeling and Mimi
Integrated assessment models draw on a wide range of academic disciplines for their equations and
calibrations of key parameters. Ideally one would like to have input from scientists in these different
disciplines in the construction, review and discussion of integrated assessment models. In practice this is
often difﬁcult because most integrated assessment models appear to the outside world like one big black
box model and it can be very difﬁcult to work on say just one speciﬁc aspect of an IAM (e.g. the carbon
cycle). In the past, these difﬁculties have sometimes discouraged domain experts to get involved
with IAMs.
A modular approach to integrated assessment models attempts to alleviate these issues by splitting an
IAM into different components. It then uses a computational platform where these individual
components can be easily identiﬁed, used and investigated in isolation and also easily be replaced by
alternative scientiﬁc formulations. The integrated assessment model is then a container of coupled
individual model components, an approach recommended by the recent National Academy of Science
report on the Social Cost of Carbon Dioxide8.
We use the Julia Mimi.jl package to achieve these goals. Mimi allows us to split a large model like
PAGE09 into a number of smaller components, that each correspond to a well deﬁned area of the
problem domain, that in many cases has a clear disciplinary link. Each component can be tested and used
individually, and then easily be combined with the other components to form the complete PAGE09
model. Mimi.jl has been used previously for other models, for example the FUND model has adopted it
as its platform, and a recent publication used a port of the RICE model to the Mimi platform9,10.
The Policy Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect (PAGE) Model
Mimi-PAGE is an open-source recreation of the PAGE09 model, the latest iteration of the PAGE
model, originally developed in 1993 (refs7,11,12). PAGE09 is an eight-region model that takes income,
population and emissions policy as inputs, and models the effect of emissions of four different
greenhouse gases - carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and a collection of other greenhouse gases
(termed ‘linear gases’ in PAGE because of the linear relationship between concentration and radiative
forcing).
PAGE09 uses a radiative balance climate model to simulate global and regional temperature changes
and sea-level rise. Warming and sea-level rise cause damage in 4 different sectors: market sectors (e.g.
agriculture, forestry, tourism etc), non-market sectors (e.g. mortality and ecosystem damages), sea-level
rise (i.e. coastal ﬂooding) and a stochastic discontinuity (a one-time tipping point resulting in a large loss
of GDP). PAGE also models an exogenously-determined adaptation policy that reduces impacts in three
of the sectors for a price. Finally, the costs of reducing emissions below their business-as-usual path
(called preventative costs in PAGE) are also calculated. PAGE09 simulates outcomes at variable time-
steps starting in the default model at 2008 and ending in 2200.
A key feature of PAGE09 is the inclusion of uncertainty distributions (triangular distributions in the
default version of the model) for over 100 key scientiﬁc and economic parameters. This allows PAGE to
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
2

be run probabilistically through a Monte Carlo procedure to generate outcome distributions. More details
on PAGE09 are given in Hope (2013)7. Figure 1 gives a diagram showing the components of PAGE09 as
implemented in Mimi-PAGE.
Results
Validation Exercises
Model output was validated by comparison with output from PAGE09 run in its native Excel using the
@RISK plug-in, both for a deterministic run with mean values for the inputs, and for the full probabilistic
implementation. Additional details on component and model testing is given in the Methods section.
Both PAGE09 and Mimi-PAGE can run any user-deﬁned emissions scenarios, but validation results
presented here focus on the business-as-usual emissions scenario (Policy A in PAGE09). Mimi-PAGE
was also tested against a mitigation policy scenario (Policy B in PAGE09), with results similar to those
presented here for the business-as-usual scenario. Tests of the Policy B emissions scenario are available
for inspection in the GitHub repository (see Code Availability).
Figure 2 shows the evolution of key variables in the business-as-usual scenario for both PAGE09 and
Mimi-PAGE under the deterministic run of the model (using mean parameter estimates). It shows the
very close match between the two model implementations for both socio-economic variables (population
and GDP, which are calculated within the model from speciﬁed baseline values and growth rates), climate
variables (CO2 concentration and global temperature) and economic results (climate impacts and
adaptation costs). The ﬁnal model output ‘Total Effect’ variable (the discounted costs of climate damages,
adaptation, and prevention for all regions and time periods), which depends on results from all model
components, agrees to within 0.003%. The match for other example variables is even closer, as
documented in Table 1. To the best we can determine, the differences documented in Table 1 result
from the use of ﬁnite precision ﬂoating point arithmetic, a standard approach in almost all
computational work.
For the full probabilistic version of the model we validated 7 quantiles (0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9 and
0.95) of the distribution of 4 model endpoint variables – total discounted damages, total discounted
preventative costs, total discounted adaptation costs, and total effect (described above). Distributions of
all four variables are based on 100,000 Monte Carlo simulations of both Mimi-PAGE and PAGE09.
Figure 3 shows a comparison between the quantiles of the distributions with 95% conﬁdence intervals
based on the sampling uncertainty associated with Monte Carlo sampling13. Sampling uncertainty is
introduced in the validation of Monte Carlo procedures because input parameters are random draws
meaning output distributions would be expected to converge only asymptotically. Even with 100,000
draws, sampling uncertainty might be expected to be signiﬁcant, particularly in the tails of the
distributions. Figure 3 suggests that any difference between the Mimi-PAGE and PAGE09 is well within
sampling error (i.e. all conﬁdence intervals include zero).
Key:
Climate 
Temperature
Sea-Level Rise
Sea Level Rise 
Market
Non-Market
Discontinuity
Damages
Components
Categories
Adaptation Costs
Abatement Costs
Equity Weighting
Climate Model
Economic Model
CH4, CO2, Linear Gases, N2O, Sulphates
Emissions
Cycle
Forcing
Mimi-PAGE
GDP
Population
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the component structure of Mimi-PAGE. For visual simplicity, where a
certain type of component is replicated multiple times (e.g. CH4, CO2, Linear Gases, N2O, and Sulphates each
have an emissions component), we have shown it only once as a “category” and identiﬁed the multiple
instances that it appears in the model. The full set of components with exact names included in Mimi-PAGE is
given in Box 1 (Methods).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
3

Speed comparison
One major beneﬁt of the Julia language is its improved computational speed over many other
programming languages14. In this context it means that Monte Carlo simulations can be done faster in
Mimi-PAGE compared to PAGE09. Table 2 provides a comparison of processing times for 1,000 and
10,000 Monte-Carlo simulations run in Julia (Mimi-PAGE) and in Excel (PAGE09) using the @RISK
plugin. All tests were performed on the same computer (an Intel Core i7-4770 @3.4 GHz CPU with 16GB
of main memory).
Table 2 shows a substantial speed advantage of the Julia implementation. Using only a single core, the
Mimi-PAGE version is 11.9 times faster than PAGE09 for both one and ten thousand Monte-Carlo runs.
The @RISK plugin does support multi-threading, something not currently possible with Mimi-PAGE.
However, even the multi-threaded runs of PAGE09 on this quad-core processor ran more than three
times slower than the equivalent single-threaded runs in Julia.
Discussion
The results presented above demonstrate the faithful replication of PAGE09, both of the single run using
central parameter estimates and of the full Monte Carlo distribution, in Mimi-PAGE. Beneﬁts of this new
implementation of the model include substantially-reduced processing time and the use of free, open-
source software that increases accessibility of the PAGE09 model to researchers and policy-makers. The
component-based implementation of Mimi-PAGE is designed to enable future community development
and improvement, as well as easier inter-comparison with other IAMs.
Figure 2. Time-series plots for key variables under business-as-usual emissions from Mimi-PAGE (circles)
and PAGE09 (crosses).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
4

The Mimi project is still on-going and does not as yet support all the functionality of PAGE09. As
noted above, Mimi-PAGE cannot yet be run using multiple-threading. In addition, PAGE09 can be run
in an optimization mode (see for example Hope15). While there are good optimization packages available
in Julia, there is not yet a built-in optimization capability in Mimi-PAGE. Future work on the Mimi
platform and on the Mimi-PAGE model will introduce these features.
Model Variable
% Difference (Mimi-PAGE vs PAGE09)
Global Temperature in 2200
0.001
Global GDP in 2200
1.39e-8
Global Preventative Costs in 2200
1.45e-6
Global Adaptation Costs in 2200
5.61e-7
US Per-Capita Consumption after All Damages in 2200
0.0003
Total Effect
0.003
Table 1. Numerical differences in example model variables for deterministic runs of Mimi-PAGE and
PAGE09 under the business-as-usual emissions scenario.
Figure 3. Comparison of quantiles from the distribution of 4 endpoint variables obtained from 100,000
Monte Carlo runs of Mimi-PAGE and PAGE09. Error bars show the 95% conﬁdence interval associated with
sampling uncertainty of the Monte Carlo procedure.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
5

The recoding of PAGE09 by an independent team in a new platform is also itself an important exercise
in model validation and replication. Nordhaus16 has pointed out the potential for errors or bugs in
complex computational models and notes that independent recoding of the model from scratch can be a
valuable conﬁrmation of the original model. We note that we were able to recreate PAGE09 almost
entirely from the thorough documentation of model structure already published, using the original model
only for validation and testing of a working version of Mimi-PAGE.
Methods
Overview of Mimi-PAGE
The Mimi.jl coding platform allows for modular model development by dividing models into constituent
components. Figure 1 gives a schematic of the component structure developed for Mimi-PAGE. In all
there are 32 components, listed speciﬁcally in Box 1. Each component is initialized with speciﬁc
parameter values or exogenous input data and is connected to other components through shared
variables (i.e. variables calculated in one component are used as input into another component). Each
component calculates a single time-step at a time, and the components are executed in an order so that
each depends only on components excuted before it.
Mimi-PAGE also supports the Monte Carlo functionality of PAGE09. Components containing one or
more of the more than 100 random variables can be initialized with random draws from the uncertain
parameter distributions. This can be iterated multiple times in a Monte Carlo procedure in order to
simulate distributions of outcome variables. The default distributions are triangular distributions, but
these could be modiﬁed by the user if desired to any of the 42 continuous univariate distributions
supported by the ‘Distributions.jl’ package in Julia, or to one of the multivariate distributions
provided there.
Mimi-PAGE was coded using documentation provided in Hope12 and Hope7 using best coding
practices. Model equations were coded directly from the model documentation, without reference to the
PAGE09 model, which was only used for validation and testing of a working version of Mimi-PAGE.
Each component underwent a scientiﬁc review (to check consistency with model documentation) and a
technical review (to catch code errors and bugs) by two different people before being merged into the
Model
Number of Runs
Multi-Threading?
Time (seconds)
Mimi-PAGE
1,000
FALSE
8
PAGE09
1,000
FALSE
95
PAGE09
1,000
TRUE
31
Mimi-PAGE
10,000
FALSE
79
PAGE09
10,000
FALSE
937
PAGE09
10,000
TRUE
260
Table 2. Speed comparisons of Monte Carlo runs of Mimi-PAGE run in Julia and PAGE09 run in
Excel using the @RISK plugin.
Default Time Periods: 2008 (initial baseline), 2009, 2010, 2020, 2030, 2040, 2050, 2075, 2100, 2150, 2200.
Default Geographic Regions: Europe (EU), the United States (US), other countries in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the former Soviet Union (USSR), China, South-East Asia
(SEAsia), Africa, and Latin America (LatAmerica)
Components:
1)
Climate Components: CO2emissions, CO2cycle, CO2forcing, CH4emissions, CH4cycle, CH4forcing,
N2Oemissions, N2Ocycle, N2Oforcing, lgemissions, lgcycle, lgforcing, totalforcing, sulphateforcing,
climatetemperature, sea-level-rise
2)
Socio-Economic Components: population, gdp
3)
Damage Components: slrdamages, marketdamages, nonmarketdamages, discontiuity
4)
Policy Cost Components: abatementcosts_CO2, abatementcosts_CH4, abatementcosts_N2O,
abatementcosts_Lin, totalabatementcosts, adaptationcosts_sealevel, adaptationcosts_economic,
adaptationcosts_noneconomic, totaladaptationcosts
5)
Discounting and Equity-Weighting Components: equityweighting
Box 1. Details on Mimi-PAGE Structure and Components
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
6

master code version. A full suite of automated validation tests were developed to compare the output of
individual components and the full model against values from PAGE09 (additional details in Results and
Products Provided sections). These tests are automatically run for new commits to the code repository
and will produce errors if changes to the model result in failure of the validation tests. Other best coding
practices include full documentation (described in detail below), use of version control via git, use of an
open-source language, and consistent conventions6. In addition, the data and repository for the
replication of this paper have been made available (see Code Availability).
Mimi-PAGE requires the Julia language to run as well as the open-source Mimi package. The ﬁle
“main_model.jl” in the source folder, “src”, includes code for a single run of Mimi-PAGE using the means
of the parameter distributions. The ﬁle “montecarlo.jl” includes code for running the full Monte Carlo
model. The number of iterations as well as the variables output from the Monte Carlo simulations can be
set by the user here. Additional information on using Mimi-PAGE can be found in the “Getting Started”
and “Technical User Guide” sections of the model documentation.
Code Availability
Code for Mimi-PAGE, as well as input data, validation tests, and documentation are available in a public
Github
repository
at
https://github.com/anthofﬂab/mimi-page-2009.jl17.
Code
to
reproduce
the
validation ﬁgures and tables included in this paper are available at https://github.com/anthofﬂab/
paper-2018-mimi-page-replication18.
Products Provided
This section describes the work products released to the community as part of the Mimi-PAGE
repository, as organized within the model source code repository.
Model Source Code.
The source folder (“src”) contains all equations making up the PAGE09 model,
divided into core model components as described in the previous section, contained in the “components” sub
directory. These were implemented in Julia based on documentation of the PAGE09 model provided in
Hope7 and Hope12. The code is designed to easily connect the Julia equations to those provided in the
original documentation. Comments in the code refer back to page or equation numbers in the
documentation. Variable naming convention retains the variable names from PAGE09 with an additional,
longer description. For example, the variable ‘rtl_g_landtemperature’ retains the PAGE09 naming
convention of referring to global land temperature as rtl_g while adding the additional descriptor
“landtemperature”. The source code folder also contains scripts to run the model either using just the mean
of the uncertainty distributions or in full Monte Carlo mode, or to run only the climate portion of the model.
Tests.
The test folder (“test”) contains code that tests each individual component and the full model
against output from the standard PAGE09 model version. These tests ensure the Mimi-PAGE replication
is faithfully reproducing the original version. Each component has an associated test ﬁle in the test folder,
with the naming convention ‘test_ocomponent>.jl’.
In each test, components are initialized using data from the original default PAGE09 model and then
their output variables are compared to the same variables from PAGE09. For example, testing the climate
system component requires initializing it using radiative forcing from the original model and then
comparing calculated warming against warming from PAGE09. Tolerance of individual tests can be set
by the user as input to the @test Julia function. The entire model can be tested by running
‘test_mainmodel.jl’ which compares output of the full Mimi-PAGE model against PAGE09 for a
business-as-usual emissions scenario. Tests are also provided for a mitigation policy scenario
‘test_mainmodel_policyb.jl’ and for the stochastic Monte Carlo runs of the model (‘test_montecarlo.jl’).
Model Data and Parameters.
Input data used to initialize the PAGE model is included in the data folder
(“data”) as .csv ﬁles. These are original data from the default PAGE09 model that were extracted from the
Excel version using a script and then saved as .csv ﬁles by the author team. Key input data include
population, income, and business-as-usual emissions growth rates for each of the 8 regions over the model
time period (2008-2200). An alternative emissions scenario is also included in the ‘policy-b’ folder.
The data folder also contains model parameters used to initialize PAGE that vary by region or time-
period as .csv ﬁles. In particular, the large number of region- and sector-speciﬁc variables describing the
exogenously set adaptation policies are included here. Scalar parameters are directly included in the
relevant component source ﬁles, in the “addocomponent>” function. PAGE09 includes distributions
that capture uncertainty in over 100 key parameters allowing the model to be run in Monte Carlo mode.
For components that include uncertain parameters, the parameters of the triangular distribution are
given in the “randomizeocomponent>” function within the relevant component ﬁle.
Data on endogenous variables calculated within PAGE09 are also supplied as part of the component
testing functionality. The “validationdata” folder, within the “test” folder, contains output of key variables
from the original PAGE09 model that are used to initialize individual components or to test their results
(see example in previous section). Key variables used for testing include emissions and atmospheric
concentration of greenhouse gases, radiative forcing, temperature change, sea-level rise, climate damages,
and abatement and adaptation costs.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
7

Documentation.
The Mimi PAGE repository also includes substantial scientiﬁc and technical
documentation in the “docs/src” folder, complementing documentation of PAGE09 in Hope12. Sections
include documentation on how to get started running Mimi–PAGE in Julia (including required Julia
packages), description of the Mimi model components and validation of the model against the original
PAGE09 output, and technical documentation on the Mimi component-based modeling environment
and coding conventions.
References
1. Environment and Climate Change Canada Technical Update to Environment and Climate Change Canada’s Social Cost of
Greenhouse Gas Estimates (Environmental and Climate Change Canada, 2016).
2. Inter-Agency Working Group Technical Support Document. Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under
Executive Order 12866 (United States Government, 2010).
3. Larson, A. Subsidies Proposed for New York’s Upstate Power Plants http://www.powermag.com/subsidies-proposed-for-new-
yorks-upstate-nuclear-power-plants/ (2016).
4. Schlatter, L. Findings of fact, conclusions, and recommendations: carbon dioxide values (State of Minnesota, Ofﬁce of Adminis-
trative Hearings, 2016).
5. Cai, Y., Judd, K. L. & Lontzek, T. S. Open science is necessary. Nat. Clim. Ch 2, 299–299 (2012).
6. Lowndes, J. S. S. et al. Our Path to Better Science in Less Time Using Open Data Science Tools. Nat. Ecol. Evol 1, 1–7 (2017).
7. Hope, C. Critical issues for the calculation of the social cost of CO2: why the estimates from PAGE09 are higher than those from
PAGE2002. Clim, Ch 117, 531–543 (2013).
8. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Valuing Climate Damages: Updating Estimation of the Social Cost of
Carbon Dioxide (The National Academies Press, 2017).
9. Adler, M. et al. Priority for the Worse Off and the Social Cost of Carbon. Nat. Clim. Ch 7, 443–449 (2017).
10. Anthoff, D. & Errickson, F. Mimi-RICE-2010.jl v1.0.1. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1210331 (2018).
11. Hope, C. W., Anderson, J. & Wenman, P. Policy Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect: An Application of the PAGE Model. Energy
Policy 21, 327–338 (1993).
12. Hope, C. W. The Marginal Impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: An Integrated Assessment Model Incorporating the IPCC’s Five
Reasons for Concern. The Integrated Assessment J 6, 19–56 (2006).
13. Wilcox, R. R., Erceg-Hurn, D. M., Clark, F. & Carlson, M. Comparing two Independent Groups via the Lower and Upper
Quantiles. J. of Stat. Comp. and Sim 84, 1543–1551 (2013).
14. Bezanson, J., Edelman, A., Karpinski, S. & Shah, V. B. Julia: A Fresh Approach to Numerical Computing. SIAM Rev. 59, 65–98 (2017).
15. Hope, C. The $10 trillion value of better information about the transient climate response. Phil. Tr. of the Royal Soc. A 373,
20140429 (2015).
16. Nordhaus, W. in Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling Vol. 1, (ed. Dixon, P. & Jorgenson, D. W.) Ch. 16
(Elsevier B. V., 2013).
17. Anthoff, D. et al. Mimi-PAGE-2009.jl v1.0.0 (Version v1.0.0). Zenodo http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1322831 (2018).
18. Moore, F. et al. Mimi-PAGE, an open-source implementation of the PAGE09 integrated assessment model – Replication Data
and Code (Version v1.0.0). Zenodo http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1323925 (2018).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation through the Network for Sustainable
Climate Risk Management (SCRiM) under NSF cooperative agreement GEO-1240507. Anthoff gratefully
acknowledges funding support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation as a part of Resources for the
Future’s Social Cost of Carbon Initiative.
Author Contributions
F.C.M., J.R., N.L., C.S., V.V., A.D. and D.A. coded and validated Mimi-PAGE and wrote the paper. D.A.
developed the Mimi platform. C.H. developed the PAGE09 model and wrote the paper.
Additional Information
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
How to cite this article: Moore, F. C. et al. Mimi-PAGE, an open-source implementation of the PAGE09
integrated assessment model. Sci. Data 5:180187 doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187 (2018).
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in
a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2018
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180187 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.187
8

