BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
1
Section 7 – F/602/2884 
Understand and apply domestic hot 
water system installation and 
maintenance techniques 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
2
F/602/2884 - Understand and apply domestic hot water system 
installation and maintenance techniques 
This combination unit provides learning in the installation, maintenance, decommissioning and soundness 
testing of a basic range of hot water system/component types in dwellings and industrial/commercial 
properties (of similar size and scope to domestic dwellings). The unit covers systems in building up to 3 
storey’s in height with pipework up to 28mm diameter. Upon completion the learner will: 
LO1. 
Know the types of hot water system and their layout requirements 
LO2. 
Know the site preparation techniques for hot water systems and components 
LO3. 
Be able to apply site preparation techniques for hot water systems and components 
LO4. 
Know the installation requirements of hot water systems and components 
LO5. 
Be able to install hot water systems and components 
LO6. 
Know the service and maintenance requirements of hot water systems and components 
LO7. 
Be able to service and maintain hot water systems and components 
LO8. 
Know the decommissioning requirements of hot water systems and components 
LO9. 
Be able to decommission hot water systems and components 
LO10. 
Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of hot water systems and 
components 
LO11. 
Be able to inspect and soundness test hot water systems and components. 
 
Learning Outcomes highlighted in Red indicate that these are covered by practical tasks from the learner 
practical portfolio. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
3
Learning Outcome 1 
Know the types of hot water system and 
their layout requirements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
4
There are fourteen Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 1: 
AC1.1. 
Identify the type of hot water system from layout diagrams 
AC1.2. 
State the factors that need to be considered when the type of hot water system is selected for 
use in a building  
AC1.3. 
Identify the working principles of hot water system components 
AC1.4. 
State the typical pipe sizes used in centralised open vented hot water systems in dwellings. 
AC1.5. 
State the system layout features for the open vent and cold feed pipes of primary and 
secondary open vented hot water circuits. 
AC1.6. 
State the connection requirements for feed and expansion cisterns into open vented primary 
hot water circuits. 
AC1.7. 
State the system layout features for plastic feed and expansion cisterns: 
AC1.8. 
Identify the type and typical sizes of open vented storage cylinder used in hot water systems 
in dwellings 
AC1.9. 
State the system layout features for hot water heaters 
AC1.10. State the typical pipe sizes used with mains fed instantaneous hot water heaters and open 
vented point of use water heaters in dwellings. 
AC1.11. Identify the need for temperature control of hot water systems 
AC1.12. State the factors that can lead to backflow from hot water outlets and equipment in dwellings. 
AC1.13. Identify the standard backflow prevention devices that are used in hot water systems in 
dwellings supplying water to appliances 
AC1.14. State the system layout features for the installation of hot water components 
Before we begin…………… 
The theory behind hot water systems will contain terminology that will be unfamiliar to you. Understanding 
the terminology is key to understanding hot water installations, so, before we investigate hot water systems, 
let us first look at some of the key phrases that you will come across as you work through this section. 
Terminology 
      Meaning  
Centralised hot water systems 
A centralised hot water system that supplies every hot 
water outlet from a hot water vessel, heater or boiler 
usually sited in a central position in the property. 
Localised hot water systems 
A localised hot water system that supplies hot water to a 
single appliance, such as a kitchen sink in an office or 
factory and is usually sited near to where the hot water is 
needed. They are only used for small amounts of hot 
water. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
5
Open Vented systems 
An open vented system contains a vent pipe that is 
permanently open to the atmosphere. This means that 
the water in the system can never exceed 100oC. They are 
fed with water from a cold feed cistern (see Unit 05 Cold 
Water installations). 
Unvented systems 
An unvented hot water system does not contain a vent 
pipe. These systems are supplied with water directly from 
the mains supply. 
Instantaneous hot water systems 
Instantaneous hot water systems heat the water instantly 
as it is required when a tap is turned on. There is no hot 
water storage. These can be both localised and 
centralised multipoint 
Storage hot water systems 
Storage hot water systems store an amount of hot water 
in a central location for distribution to all hot water 
outlets and taps. They can be both open vented systems 
and unvented systems. 
AC1.1 Identify the type of hot water system from layout diagrams 
There are a number of hot water systems in use in the UK. Some of these are open vented systems that 
remain open to the atmosphere and some provide instantaneous hot water through combination boilers and 
multipoint water heaters. The differences between each system will become apparent as we work through 
the system layouts. We will look at: 
 
Direct systems 
o Containing a back boiler 
o Containing a hot water immersion heater 
 
In-direct systems 
o Single feed, self-venting systems  
o Double feed systems with a hot water heating coil 
 
Thermal store 
 
Instantaneous hot water heaters 
o Single point (point of use) heaters 
o Multipoint heaters 
 
Combination (Combi) boilers   
Open Vented Direct hot water storage systems 
Direct open vented hot water storage systems are named after the type of hot water storage cylinders that 
the systems use. They use a direct-type hot water storage cylinder, which is heated either by a) a small hot 
water only boiler, or b) an electric immersion heater 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
6
The direct hot water storage cylinder does not contain 
a heat exchanger. The water is heated directly by either 
the hot water only boiler or an electric immersion 
heater. This type of cylinder is NOT suitable for use on 
central heating systems. The connections to the 
cylinder are usually male-type threads for the cold feed 
pipe and the hot water draw-off connections and 
female-type threads for the primary flow and primary 
return connections. A drawing of the hot water storage 
cylinder is shown left. 
Direct system hot water storage system 
with small hot water only boiler 
Here, the water is heated by a 
hot water only boiler. These 
can either be a small gas fired 
boiler called a ‘circulator’ 
designed to heat the water 
directly or the water can be 
heated by a small back boiler 
situated behind a solid fuel 
fire. However, back boilers do 
not 
conform 
to 
Building 
Regulations 
Document 
L: 
Conservation 
of 
fuel 
and 
power, and should not be 
fitted on new installations as 
they cannot be adequately 
temperature controlled and 
are susceptible to boiling.  
Because the water in the 
cylinder is in direct contact 
with the heat source, any 
boiler that is installed must 
NOT be made of a material 
that is likely to rust or 
contaminate the domestic hot 
water supply. This is to prevent 
dirty or rusty water being 
Direct hot water storage system with small water boiler 
The direct cylinder 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
7
drawn from any hot outlet or tap. Suitable materials are: 
 
Copper, 
 
Bronze, or; 
 
Stainless steel 
The hot water circulates from the heat source via gravity using the principle of convection (see Unit 03: 
Scientific Principles). The heated water in the boiler rises through the primary flow connection, heating the 
water before cooling and returning to the boiler through the primary return pipe. In this way, the water in 
the storage cylinder heats up to the required temperature. However, the cylinder does not heat up uniformly. 
The hottest top part of the cylinder is around 10oC hotter than the bottom. This is called ‘stratification’ and 
is necessary in hot water storage vessels to maintain good circulation. 
The primary flow and return pipework should be of 28mm size to ensure good circulation. An Open Vented 
Direct hot water storage system using a gas fired circulator is shown on page 482: 
b)  Direct system hot 
water storage system 
with electric immersion 
heater 
These systems use a 3KW 
immersion heater to heat the 
water instead of a hot water 
only 
boiler. 
Many 
existing 
systems are fitted with a single 
top entry immersion heater but 
modern systems utilise two 
smaller 
300mm 
immersion 
heaters installed on the side of 
the storage cylinder. The top 
immersion heater only heats the 
top third of the cylinder for 
daytime hot water top up, whilst 
the bottom cylinder heats up 
the 
entire 
cylinder. 
The 
immersion heaters are time 
controlled to take advantage of 
cheaper over-night electricity. 
The temperature settings on the immersion heaters should be limited to no more than 55-60oC. 
The direct hot water storage system with immersion heaters 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
8
Open Vented Indirect hot water storage systems 
Again, like the Direct systems, Open Vented Indirect Hot Water Storage systems are named after the hot 
water storage cylinders that are fitted to the system. There are two very different systems using two equally 
different storage cylinders. These are: 
a) The Open Vented Double Feed Indirect Hot Water System incorporating an Indirect Double Feed Hot 
Water Storage Cylinder, and; 
b) The Open Vented Single Feed (self-venting) Indirect Hot Water System incorporating an Indirect 
Single Feed (Primatic) Hot Water Storage Cylinder 
Indirect hot water storage cylinders, outwardly, look very similar to Direct types. The difference between the 
cylinders is internal. Indirect Hot Water Storage Cylinders contain a heat exchanger to transfer the heat into 
the water. Indirect Cylinders can be used with central heating systems and it is the central heating boiler that 
is the primary heat source for the system. The heat exchanger in the storage cylinder separates the domestic 
hot water that we use at taps and outlets (known as secondary hot water) from the primary heating water 
from the boiler. 
a) 
The Open Vented Double Feed Indirect Hot Water System incorporating an 
Indirect Double Feed Hot Water Storage Cylinder 
This system utilises a double feed indirect hot water storage 
cylinder shown in the diagram.  
The coil, which is made from copper tube (stainless steel storage 
cylinders with stainless steel coils are also available), is the 
primary heat exchanger for the hot water supply. This type of 
hot water storage cylinder is suitable for use with central heating 
systems. It is called indirect because the water is heated 
indirectly by the primary water in the boiler via the heat 
exchanger.  
The double feed indirect system has two cisterns. A large cold 
feed cistern that supplies the cold water to the hot water system 
via the cold feed pipe and a smaller feed and expansion cistern 
to supply water to the boiler, hot water heat exchanger and central heating system. Here the hot water 
circulates via the primary flow and return pipes, with the aid of a circulating pump or without a circulating 
pump through gravity (see Unit 003 Scientific Principles). The system is shown in the drawing below.  
The Double Feed Indirect Hot Water Storage Cylinder allows the use of central heating boilers that use 
differing metals, such as copper and aluminium. There is no risk of rusty or contaminated water reaching any 
of the hot water outlets because the water in the cylinder is separate from the water in the heating system.  
The double feed indirect hot water storage cylinder 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
9
The system is designed so that the water in the central heating system is not changed once the system is full. 
Some water is lost through evaporation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The secondary hot water that is drawn through the hot water outlets is heated by the coil through conduction 
(see Scientific Principles) as the water in the cylinder is in contact with the coil heat exchanger. It is the coil 
that heats the water. 
The feed and expansion cistern feeds the primary part of the system and must be large enough to 
accommodate any expansion of water when the water is heated. Modern systems use a sealed central 
heating system which eliminates the need for a feed and expansion cistern, the system being filled via a filling 
loop and the expansion of water being accommodated in an expansion vessel (see drawing left). This updated 
system does not rely on gravity circulation to heat the water. Instead, the water is circulated through the coil 
by means of a circulating pump.     
The indirect hot water system with pumped primary circulation 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
The Open Vented Single Feed (self-
venting) 
Indirect 
Hot 
Water 
System 
incorporating an Indirect Single Feed 
(Primatic) Hot Water Storage Cylinder. 
The Single Feed system incorporates a storage cylinder with 
a special heat exchanger that uses air entrapment to 
separate the secondary water from the primary (heating) 
water.  
The indirect hot water system with gravity primary circulation 
The single feed self venting indirect hot water cylinder 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
11
Because the cylinder 
only requires a single 
cold 
feed, 
it 
is 
installed in the same 
way as a direct hot 
water storage vessel. 
There is no need to 
install a second (feed 
and 
expansion) 
cistern. When the 
system is filled with 
water, the secondary 
water is separated 
from 
the 
primary 
water by two bubbles 
of air that form at the 
top and bottom of 
the heat exchanger. It 
is these two pockets 
of air that prevent 
the two systems from 
mixing. 
The 
full 
system is shown left. 
Occasionally, the air 
bubbles 
rupture 
causing the primary 
water and secondary 
water to mix. When 
this happens, dirty 
water can be seen at the hot water outlets. This often occurs if the heating system is too big for the cylinder 
heat exchanger. The excessive expansion of water when it is heated forces the bubbles downwards into the 
secondary water, eventually causing the bubbles to burst. If the bubbles rupture, the system should be left 
to cool down. The air bubbles will then reform naturally allowing the water to be heated again.  
Building Regulation Document L: Conservation of fuel and power no longer allows this system to be installed 
and you will only come across it during routine maintenance and replacement of the boiler or the hot water 
storage cylinder. The hot water circuit is gravity only. Pumped circulation through the heat exchanger is not 
possible as this would destroy the air bubbles at the heart of the system. 
Instantaneous hot water heaters 
Instantaneous water heaters do not contain any stored hot water. They heat the water directly from the cold 
The indirect, single feed hot water system 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
12
supply as and when it is needed. There are several different types: 
a) Thermal stores 
b) Instantaneous multipoint water heaters 
c) Combination (combi) boilers  
d) Single point (point of use) heaters 
a)  
Thermal stores 
Thermal stores (also known 
as water jacketed tube 
heaters) 
are 
centralised 
instantaneous 
multipoint 
water heaters that work by 
passing water direct from 
the cold water main through 
a series of heat exchangers. 
These heat exchangers are 
completely surrounded by 
water at around 80oC inside 
a large hot water vessel that 
is directly heated by a boiler. 
They look very similar to 
indirect hot water storage 
cylinders but actually work 
in reverse.  Water from the 
mains cold supply enters the thermal store, passing through the first heat exchanger where the water is 
warmed. After passing through the expansion chamber, the water flows through the second heat exchanger 
where it is heated to full hot water temperature. Because hot water should not exceed a temperature of 60 
– 65oC, the water is blended with cold water through an adjustable thermostatic blending valve on the outlet 
of the thermal store.  
The water in the hot water vessel is completely separate from the domestic hot water and is heated by a 
boiler. The system can be used for properties with central heating systems. 
b) 
Gas-fired Instantaneous multipoint water heaters 
Fired by gas, instantaneous multipoint water heaters use the principle of pressure difference. When a tap is 
opened, the movement of water through a venturi tube creates a difference in pressure over a rubber 
diaphragm inside the pressure differential valve. The difference in pressure flexes the diaphragm inside the 
valve and this opens a gas valve. The gas passes through to the gas burner where it is ignited by either a pilot 
light or piezo ignitor. The water is then heated. When the tap is closed, the pressure across the pressure 
differential valve equalises and a spring in the valve closes the valve, shutting off the flow of gas. 
A thermal store also known as a water jacketed tube heater 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
13
Instantaneous gas water heaters can provide enough hot water for a small domestic dwelling but the hot 
taps should only be used one at a time as these hot water heaters cannot generate enough flow rate to 
supply two open hot taps simultaneously. 
Electric-type multipoint water heaters are also 
available. 
c) 
Combination (combi) boilers  
Combination boilers are fast becoming one of the main sources of hot water supply in small to medium sized 
dwellings in the UK. They combine hot water supply and 
central heating in a single appliance that can be sited 
virtually anywhere in the property.  
‘Combi’ boilers use the same principle as thermal stores 
by heating the water through a water-to-water heat 
exchanger. Known as a ‘plate heat exchanger’, the heat 
exchanger can alternate the flow of water through a 
diverter 
valve 
to 
heat 
either 
the 
hot 
water 
instantaneously or the central heating system. They are 
hot water priority appliances, which means that if the 
central heating is on and a hot tap is opened, all energy 
created by the appliance will be transferred into 
generating hot water supply to the open tap. 
There are many different types of combination boilers 
available ranging from 24kW to 50kW in output. Some 
A combination boiler
An instantaneous hot water system 
A gas fired instantaneous water heater 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
14
combis even have a small amount of hot water storage (less than 15 litres), which means hot water is 
delivered quickly to the hot taps. They are fitted in the same way as multipoint instantaneous hot water 
heaters. 
d)  
Single point (point of use) heaters 
Localised hot water systems are installed in places where connection to the 
main source of hot water is difficult or impractical. They are often referred 
to as point of use heaters. They are usually installed over or under the 
appliance that they are serving with the water being discharged usually 
from a swivel spout for over sink types. They can be fuelled by either gas or 
electricity and are usually inlet controlled, meaning that the water is turned 
on as it enters the heater. Some storage type single point heaters are outlet 
controlled. There are two specific types: 
a) 
Instantaneous single point water heaters 
b) 
Storage single point water heaters. 
Instantaneous single point water heaters 
These provide instant hot water to a single appliance and are usually fuelled 
by electricity. There are two basic types: 
o Hand wash type – small water heaters, usually around 3kW output, that are fitted over a single 
washbasin. They are inlet controlled. The temperature of the water depends on the flowrate through 
the heater. The faster the flowrate, the cooler the water. Flow rates are generally poor but adequate 
for hand washing. 
o Electric showers – outputs up to 12Kw, many electric showers feature sophisticated microchip 
technology allowing temperature stabilisation at low and 
high flow rates. Electric showers feature a low pressure 
cut-out to guard against scalding if the pressure or flow 
rate suddenly drop. Flow of water is controlled by an 
electrically operated solenoid valve that operates when 
the electricity supply is on to the heater. 
Storage single point water heaters 
Storage point of use heaters are small water heaters that 
store a small amount of hot water, usually of less than 15 
litres capacity, for use at a single appliance or small range 
of appliances. They can be either outlet or inlet controlled 
depending on the type. There are 3 basic types: 
A point of use water heater 
An electric shower 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
15
1 
   Over sink point of use storage water 
heaters – usually inlet controlled, these have a 
swivel spout to direct the water to where it is 
needed. One unusual feature of this type of heater 
is their tendency to drip water from the spout. This 
only occurs when the water is being heated and 
stops when the water has reached its set 
temperature. It is a safety feature because the 
spout acts as a vent and releases the expanded 
water when it is heated. It prevents the heater 
from being over-pressurised due to the water 
heating up and expanding. These heaters MUST be 
inlet controlled to allow the outlet to vent out the 
expanded water.  
2 
Under sink point of use storage water 
heaters – Similar to the over sink type but fitted 
below the appliance rather than above it. They can 
be sited in cupboards below kitchen sinks in offices 
and factories and small dwellings. These are inlet 
controlled through a special tap that allows the 
heater to be vented through the tap spout (see the 
diagram left). 
3 
Unvented under sink point of use storage 
water heaters – These are fitted directly to the 
mains cold supply pipework and deliver hot water 
at or near to mains cold water pressure. They store 
less than 15 litres of hot water so are 
not subject to the Building Regulations 
enforcement. The expansion of water 
that occurs can be taken up within the 
pipework providing the size of the 
pipework is sufficient to accommodate 
it. If not, then a small expansion vessel 
must be fitted (see the diagram left).  
Like larger Unvented Hot Water 
Storage Units, these small unvented 
The unvented under sink storage water heater 
The over sink storage water heater 
The under sink storage water heater 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
16
storage heaters require certain controls both safety and functional: 
o A pressure reducing valve to limit the water pressure to the water heater. 
o A single check valve to prevent hot water from expanding back through the cold water supply as this 
would constitute contamination of the cold water supply. 
o An expansion vessel to allow water to expand within the system without causing creating excessive 
pressure problems. 
o An expansion relief valve to protect the heater in the event of expansion vessel failure and excessive 
pressure. 
o Discharge pipework to remove any water, which may be very hot, away from the location of the 
heater. 
Note: Unvented hot water storage systems are covered at Level 3 
AC1.2 State the factors that need to be considered when the type of 
hot water system is selected for use in a building  
When choosing a hot water system, there are certain factors that must be considered: 
Quantity and usage of hot water required 
The amount of hot water is based on the number of people living at the property. The more people there are, 
the more hot water will be needed.  
Distance of outlet from hot water source 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations gives a maximum distance that hot water pipework can be run 
without the need for a secondary return pipe work system. The longer the distance from the hot water source 
to the tap, the greater is the risk of wastage of water simply because the water in the run of pipe is cold and 
therefore of no use in hot water system and in most cases, the occupier will simply run this to drain while 
they wait for the hot water to arrive. In these cases, only systems that can incorporate a secondary return 
pipe work system should be considered. That excludes most systems that supply instantaneous hot water. 
This subject continues in the next heading. 
Need for a secondary circulation system 
When a hot tap is turned on, there is a certain amount of cold water that is always drawn off before the hot 
water arrives at the tap. This is called a dead leg. If the hot water takes longer than 30 seconds to reach the 
tap, then a secondary circulation system is required to circulate the hot water from the source to the tap and 
back again. 
Secondary circulation is required if the length of the hot water draw-off to the taps exceeds the distances 
shown in the table below: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
17
 
Secondary circulation 
Maximum recommended lengths 
of un-insulated hot water pipes 
Outside diameter 
of pipe 
mm 
Maximum 
length 
m 
12 
20 
Over 12 up to and 
including 22 
12 
Over 22 up to and 
including 28 
8 
Over 28 
3 
 
 The secondary circulation system uses a bronze bodied pump positioned on the 
secondary return pipe, close to the cylinder to circulate the water to the cylinder. The 
secondary circulation connection is usually positioned about 1/3 of the way down from the 
top of the cylinder. Only a bronze bodied pump must be used to prevent rusty water being 
drawn from the hot taps. 
The types of fuel used 
With hot water storage systems, it is often the case that more than one fuel can be used to heat the hot water. 
For instance, the main source might be a gas or oil fired boiler, that also incorporates a central heating system. 
This is often supplemented by an electric immersion heater(s) for use in the summer months when heating is 
not required. Instantaneous systems do not have this capability and so choice of fuel is limited. 
The number of hot water outlets 
Another important point to consider because the more outlets there are, the better the flow rate needed. 
Again, this may exclude combination boilers or instantaneous multipoint heaters simply because they cannot 
supply the flow rate required by the system. 
Installation and maintenance costs 
There are several questions here: 
1. 
What is the initial cost of the appliances and materials? 
2. 
How much will it cost to install them? 
3. 
Will the system meet the requirements of the specification? 
4. 
What are the long term running and maintenance costs? 
A bronze pump 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
18
These four questions need to be balanced against the system design to see which system offers the best cost 
effectiveness while meeting the customer’s requirements. 
Running costs and fuel efficiency 
Some new systems, such as solar hot water supply, offer a 60% saving on running costs over a 12 month 
period, but this has to be balanced against the initial high cost of the solar collector and special storage 
cylinder. The development of more fuel efficient gas and oil boilers have also helped in the regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AC1.3 Identify the working principles of hot water system 
components 
Most of the appliances and components mentioned in this section, such as taps and valves, FoVs, showers, 
and backflow protection were covered in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water 
system installation and maintenance techniques. 
Feed and expansion cisterns 
These small cisterns that are designed for use with vented hot water heating systems. They supply cold feed 
water to a heating system, and accommodates any expansion of the water due to the water being heated. 
The cistern must be large enough accommodate any expanded water and must be sized accordingly. See Unit 
H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques. 
Cold water feed cisterns  
Cold feed cisterns are designed to feed cold water, via the cold feed pipe, to an open vent hot water storage 
system. See Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques. 
Hot water 
supply
Centralised system
Instantaneous
Thermal store
Combi boiler or 
instantaneous 
water heater
Combined Primary 
Storage Units 
Storage
Combination 
Vented 'fortic' 
Systems
Direct
small hot water 
only boiler
Immersion heater
Indirect
Open 
Vented/cistern fed 
system
Direct
Small hot water 
only boiler
Immersion heater
Indirect
Gas storage water 
heater
Unvented/mains 
fed system
Direct
Indirect
Localised or Single 
point system
Instantaneous
Gas fired
Electric 
Storage
Open Vented hot 
water heater
Unvented hot 
water heater
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
19
Directly heated storage cylinders 
The direct-type hot water storage cylinder is heated either by a small hot water only 
boiler, or an electric immersion heater. The direct hot water storage cylinder does 
not contain any form of heat exchanger. The water is heated directly by either the 
hot water only boiler or an electric immersion heater. This type of cylinder is NOT 
suitable for use on central heating systems. 
Indirectly heated storage cylinders:  
Single feed cylinder 
Better known as the Single Feed, self-venting cylinder or ‘primatic’, incorporates a storage cylinder with a 
special heat exchanger that uses air entrapment to separate the secondary water from the primary (heating) 
water. They are no longer fitted due to problems with efficiency and corrosion but still may be fitted in some 
older properties. 
Double feed cylinder 
This cylinder contains a coil-type heat exchanger  
The coil, which is made from copper tube (stainless steel storage cylinders with stainless 
steel coils are also available), is the primary heat exchanger for the hot water supply. 
This type of hot water storage cylinder is suitable for use with central heating systems. 
It is called indirect because the water is heated indirectly by the primary water in the 
boiler via the heat exchanger.  
Combination cylinder 
Not to be confused 
with 
combination 
boilers, 
the 
combination 
cylinder 
combines 
the 
hot 
water 
storage cylinder with the cold water feed 
cistern. They are used where space is 
limited and eliminate the need to install 
a cold water feed cistern in the roof 
space. The cistern has an integrated vent 
pipe and cold feed pipe to vent the 
cylinder and feed the cylinder with 
water. They are available in direct and 
double feed indirect type configurations 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
20
Instantaneous water heaters: 
Mains fed multipoint heaters 
These can either be gas-fired or run by electricity. They heat the water instantly 
as it is drawn from the cold water main. As the water flows when a tap is opened, 
it is passed over a heat exchanger (gas) or heating element (electric), which 
heats the water before it is delivered to the tap. The model shown in photograph 
(right) is an electrically operated model. 
Mains fed combination boilers 
Combination boilers combine hot water supply and central heating in a single 
appliance that can be sited virtually anywhere in the property.  
‘Combi’ boilers use the same principle as thermal stores by heating the water 
through a water-to-water heat exchanger. Known as a ‘plate heat exchanger’, the 
heat exchanger can alternate the flow of water through a diverter valve to heat 
either the hot water instantaneously or the central heating system. They are hot water priority appliances, 
which means that if the central heating is on and a hot tap is opened, all energy created by the appliance will 
be transferred into generating hot water supply to the open tap. 
Mains fed point of use water heaters 
These provide instant hot water to a single appliance and are usually fuelled by 
electricity. There are two basic types: 
o Hand wash type – small water heaters, usually around 3kW output, that are 
fitted over a single washbasin. They are inlet controlled. The temperature of 
the water depends on the flowrate through the heater. The faster the 
flowrate, the cooler the water. Flow rates are generally poor but adequate for 
hand washing. 
o Electric showers – outputs up to 12Kw, many electric showers feature sophisticated microchip 
technology allowing the stabilisation of the temperature at low and high flow rates. Electric showers 
feature a low pressure cut-out to guard against scalding if the pressure or flow rate suddenly drop. 
Flow of water is controlled by an electrically operated solenoid valve that operates when the 
electricity supply is on to the heater. 
Thermostatic Mixing Valves (TMV) 
The maximum temperature of stored hot water is 60oC. However, water at a 
temperature of 51oC can cause serious burns to a child if the skin is exposed 
for 2 minutes. Because of this, Document G limits the temperature of hot 
water supplied to baths in domestic properties to 48 oC and all properties 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
21
where the public have access, such as schools, 
hospitals, nursing homes etc, under the Care 
Standards Act 2000 require that the temperature of 
water delivered to ALL hot outlets at 430C., except 
where food preparation is carried. 
This is controlled by a Thermostatic Mixing Valve.  
A TMV mixes water from the hot and cold supplies 
to a temperature that is safe to use. The length of 
pipe from the TMV to the tap should be kept as short as possible. 
AC1.4 State the typical pipe sizes used in centralised open vented hot 
water systems in dwellings 
Hot water storage systems contain two circuits: 
a) The primary circuit – this circuit heats the water in the storage vessel 
b) The secondary circuit – this circuit delivers the water to the outlets 
The Primary circuit 
The primary circuit connects the hot water storage vessel to the boiler. It consists of a primary flow pipe and 
a primary return pipe. 
Note: In the drawings below, the mains cold water supply to the cistern have not been shown for clarity 
The Pumped Primary circuit 
In the pumped primary circuit, the water is pumped 
from the boiler to the cylinder and back again. As can 
be seen, the heating circuit is also taken from the 
primary circuit. Both the hot water storage vessel are 
controlled by motorised valve(s) (not shown). The 
position of the open vent and cold feed pipes are 
vitally important and must follow a simple rule – 
Vent/Cold feed/Pump or VCP (easily remembered as 
Very Correct Procedure!). As a general rule, the pipe 
sizes for domestic properties are: 
 
22mm for the primary flow and open vent. 
 
22mm for the primary return 
 
15mm for the cold feed pipe.  
The Gravity Primary circuit 
The gravity primary circuit is usually found in older 
systems. The hot water circulates via gravity 
circulation (see Unit J/602/2496 - understand how to 
apply scientific principles within MES). The heating 
circuit is a separate circuit. As a general rule, the pipe 
sizes for domestic properties are: 
 28mm for the primary flow  
 28mm for the primary return 
 22mm for the open vent. 
 15mm for the cold feed pipe.  
 
 
A typical TMV installation
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
22
The F&E cistern, open vent and cold feed can be 
replaced by an expansion vessel and filling loop in 
sealed systems. 
 
The secondary circuit 
The secondary circuit connects the hot water 
storage vessel to the taps. It is the method by 
which the hot water is delivered to the outlets. It 
consists of: 
 
The cold feed pipe – this pipe connects the 
cold feed cistern to the hot water storage vessel. 
It should have a full-way gate valve installed so 
that the hot water may be isolated without the 
need to drain the whole cistern and hot water 
storage 
vessel. 
Pipe 
sizes 
are 
generally 
22mm/28mm depending on the number of 
outlets served. 
 
The open vent pipe – the vent pipe keeps 
the system at atmospheric pressure preventing 
the temperature from exceeding 100oC. it also 
allows the heated water to expand back into the 
cold feed cistern. The vent pipe should terminate over the inside of the cistern but not below the 
Open vent 
22mm
Cold feed 
15mm
F&E 
Cistern
Boiler
Hot water 
storage  
vessel
Pumped primary 
flow 
22mm 
Pumped primary  
return 
22mm
Heating 
circuit
Circulating  
Pump
Open vent 
22mm
Hot water 
storage  
vessel
Primary flow 
connection
Primary return 
connection
450mm 
min.
To the taps and outlets
Cold water feed 
cistern
Cold feed pipe 
22mm/28mm
Hot water 
draw-off pipe 
22mm min.
Cold Water  
rising main 
15mm
Full-way  
gate valve
Open vent 
22mm
Cold feed 
15mm
F&E 
Cistern
Boiler
Hot water 
storage  
vessel
Gravity primary 
flow 
28mm 
Gravity primary  
return 
28mm
Heating 
circuit
Gravity primary circuit 
Pumped primary circuit 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
23
water line. The minimum pipe size of the vent pipe is 22mm. The vent pipe MUST NOT contain any 
form of isolation/gate valve. 
 
The hot water draw-off pipe – this pipe connects the hot water storage vessel to the taps and outlets. 
It should be connected to the top of the hot water vessel. It should rise slowly to the point where it 
connects to the vent pipe. The minimum distance between the centre hot water storage vessel and 
the vent pipe/draw-off intersection must be 450mm. This is to prevent parasitic or one-pipe 
circulation in the vent pipe, which creates heat loss from the hot water in the vessel. It is generally 
accepted that, because the system is a low pressure system, the bath should be connected in 22mm 
pipe directly from the hot water storage vessel. All other outlets can be connected in 15mm pipe, 
except when manufacturer’s instructions state otherwise. 
AC1.5 State the system layout features for the open vent and cold 
feed pipes of primary and secondary open vented hot water circuits. 
This subject is covered in AC1.4 State the typical pipe sizes used in centralised open vented hot water systems 
in dwellings. Please refer to AC1.4  
AC1.6 State the connection requirements for feed and expansion 
cisterns into open vented primary hot water circuits. 
This subject is covered in AC1.4 State the typical pipe sizes used in centralised open vented hot water systems 
in dwellings. Please refer to AC1.4  
AC1.7 State the system layout features for plastic feed and expansion 
cisterns 
Typical Feed and Expansion cistern sizes for small dwellings 
The size of the Feed and expansion cistern will depend on the water volume of the heating system installed. 
This is because the cistern acts not only as a water feed for the system but also the point where the heated 
water can expend into. Water expands by 4% when it is heated and the more water the system contains, the 
greater the expansion of water will be. However, it is generally accepted that a 10 litre cistern will be adequate 
for small/medium domestic dwellings. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
24
Warning pipe (overflow) arrangements, Inlet/outlet position, Position of float operated valve 
and  Position of cistern vent 
 
Further information on cisterns can 
be found in this book in Unit 
H/602/2697 - Understand and 
apply domestic cold water system 
installation 
and 
maintenance 
techniques 
Service valve requirements 
A service valve should be fitted on the rising main as close to the FoV as practicable but there should be NO 
isolation or service valve fitted on the cold feed pipe as this could be accidently isolated leading to starvation 
of water due to evaporation of water from the F&E cistern. 
Cistern base support requirements. 
The cistern should be well supported across the whole of its base to prevent deformation of the plastic 
cistern. See Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques. 
AC1.8 Identify the type and typical 
sizes of open vented storage cylinder 
used in hot water systems in 
dwellings 
Open vented hot water storage cylinders are available in a 
wide range of sizes and capacities. Common sizes are 
shown in the table left. 
Cylinders can also be manufactured to bespoke sizes and capacities for unusual installation situations. 
 
Size 
Capacity 
900mm x 350mm 
74 litres 
900mm x 400mm 
98 litres 
1050mm x 400mm 
116 litres 
900mm x 450mm 
120litres 
1050mm x 450mm 
144 litres 
1200mm x 450mm 
166 litres 
1500mm x 450mm 
210 litres 
Position of the Float 
Operated Valve
Position of the  
feed pipe
Invert of the  
Overflow pipe
Position of the 
Open Vent pipe
Rubber grummit
Access 
50mm
25mm
25mm
Drawing not to scale
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
25
AC1.9 State the system layout 
features for hot water heaters 
Multipoint, instantaneous water heater systems are 
the simplest of all systems to install. Typically, the 
pipework size into and out of the water heater is 
15mm because the hot and cold supplies are both fed 
from the mains cold water supply. This means that 
the system also can be installed in 15mm in its 
entirety. Combination boilers can also be installed in 
this way for the hot and cold water supplies. The 
heating installation, however, is typically installed in 
22mm to and from the boiler itself. 
Open vented and instantaneous point of use water 
heaters are also usually supplied via a 15mm mains 
fed cold water supply. See diagrams below: 
AC1.10 State the typical pipe sizes used with mains fed instantaneous 
hot water heaters and open vented point of use water heaters in 
dwellings. 
Please refer to AC1.9 above 
Water  
heater
Wsh basin
Bath
kitchen sink
I.V.
S.V.
Hot and cold 
pipework can be 
all 15mm
Oversink heater installation 
Under sink heater installation 
Hot water heater system layout 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
26
AC1.11 Identify the need for temperature control of hot water 
systems 
Hot water systems must not exceed 100oC. At this point, water turns to steam often with disastrous 
consequences. The maximum operating temperature for hot water systems is 60 – 65oC but even at this 
temperature the risk of serious burns is ever present. Water at 51oC will cause serious burns to a child if the 
skin is exposed to it for a mere 5 seconds. Because of this, some form of temperature control for hot water 
systems is of vital importance. However, with stored hot water, the risk of legionella becomes greater and 
temperatures below 55 – 60oC, a legionella risk, however small, exists. There are many ways by which 
temperature control can be achieved. Temperature control should consist of: 
 
A thermostat set to the desired temperature – 55oC to 60oC is optimum. 
 
A second thermostat, called a high limit thermostat (or energy cut out) set to operate should the 
maximum temperature be exceeded. This is known as a second tier of control. 
Below is a table of how this can be achieved. 
Hot water storage systems 
containing 
an 
immersion 
heater. 
Immersion heaters have a double thermostat. The 
control thermostat is set to the desired 
temperature of 55oC to 60oC, whilst the second 
energy cut-out thermostat is set to 85oC. however, 
most energy cut-out temperatures can be altered 
and should be set to at least 15oC above the control 
thermostat setting. 
Thermostats are available in re-settable and non-
re-settable types. Non-re-settable thermostats 
must be replaced if the high limit energy cut-out 
activates. 
Hot water storage systems 
using gravity or pumped 
primary circulation. 
Open vented Double feed indirect cylinders with gravity or pumped primary 
circulation must be fitted with a minimum of a cylinder thermostat and a 
motorised zone valve which closes when the water temperature in the 
cylinder reaches a pre-set level. 
 
 
Immersion heater and thermostat 
A two-port zone valve and cylinder thermostat 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
27
Water 
heaters 
and 
combination boilers 
These have a manually adjustable thermostat to control the temperature of 
the hot water. Typical water temperatures are around 40oC. because the 
water is heated instantaneously, the risk of legionella diminishes 
considerably. 
Open vented cylinders with no 
high limit thermostat 
Open vented cylinders with no high limit thermostat can be fitted with a 
temperature relief valve. This spring operated valve is set to open 
automatically at a set temperature to release water safely via a tundish and 
discharge pipework to outside the property. 
AC1.12 State the factors that can lead to backflow from hot water 
outlets and equipment in dwellings 
Hot water is classed as fluid category 2, which states that: 
Fluid category 2 is water that is fluid category 1 but otherwise impaired by taste, colour, odour or 
temperature. 
It is the last factor – temperature – that is of concern here. 
In most hot water systems, the risk originates from mixer valves, such as shower valves and TMVs and mixer 
taps on appliances such as kitchen sinks, baths, bidets and wash basins. Problems of this sort are easily 
overcome by the use of Type EA/EB single check valves, which are designed to prevent the hot water from 
back flowing through the tap/valve and back into the cold water system. Further problems are also 
eliminated by ensuring that the pressures within hot and cold systems are equal. However, the use of single 
check valves is vital to guard against sudden cold water main pressure loss as this is where most backflow 
associated problems originate from. 
Back syphonage 
Other backflow situations in the form of back syphonage may occur with appliances that have a shower hose 
attachement. If the shower hose is submerged in a bath of water, then this constitutes a fluid category 3 risk, 
as the water may, in a back syphonage occurance, be sucked backwards through the shower and down into 
the mains cold water supply, possibly contaminating the water back as far ar the trunk mains in the road. 
To prevent this, there are several precautions that can be taken: 
 
The shower hose can be secured with a retaining ring prohibiting the shower head from being 
submerged in water. 
 
A Type EC/ED double check valve installed on the mains cold water inlet to the shower. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
28
AC1.13 Identify the standard backflow prevention devices that are 
used in hot water systems in dwellings supplying water to appliances 
Please see AC1.12 above. 
AC1.14 State the system layout features for the installation of hot 
water components 
Instantaneous electric showers 
There are many different electric showers on the market, ranging from 8kW 
to 11kW intputs. The cold water supply is usually 15mm. direct from the cold 
water main, although there are some low pressure models available. A hose 
retaining ring should be fitted, especially when installing the unit over a bath, 
to prevent the hose from being able to be submerged in the bath water. A 
double check valve can also be fitted as an alternative. All units should have 
an isolation valve for maintenance and repair. 
The size of electrical cable and the size of the RCD circuit breaker will be 
determined by two important factors: 
1. The distance of the unit from the consumer unit. 
2. The input rating of the unit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The installation of an electric shower 
Mains fed showers  
Mains fed showers are thermostatic mixing valves, often 
referred to as pressure compensating shower valves. As 
mentioned in H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic 
cold 
water 
system 
installation 
and 
maintenance 
techniques, there two types:  
 
Sequential control 
 
Dual control 
Connection to the hot and cold supplies is a fairly 
straightforward operation but it should be remembered that, 
because it is a cross-connection between hot and cold 
supplies, Type EA/EB single check valves must be fitted to 
prevent backflow situations. 
Water  
heater
Wash basin
Mains fed shower
kitchen sink
I.V.
S.V.
Hot and cold 
pipework can be 
all 15mm
I.V.  
Single Check  
Valve
Layout of a mains fed shower 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
29
Gravity fed showers 
The diagram left shows a typical shower 
mixing valve using cistern fed hot and 
cold water supplies. Since both hot and 
cold are cistern fed, the pressures are 
equal. The system is ideal for both 
thermostatic 
and 
non-thermostatic 
mixing valves and, since both hot and 
cold arise from the same cistern fed 
source, single check valves are not 
required. It should be remembered 
though that because non-thermostatic 
valves 
are 
not 
thermostatically 
controlled, the water will become cooler 
the longer the shower is used. 
To give an adequate showering pressure, 
the distance from the bottom of the 
cistern to the shower head must be at 
least 1m 
Gravity fed showers with single impeller boosting pump 
An example of a single 
impeller boosting pump 
was shown in H/602/2697 - 
Understand 
and 
apply 
domestic 
cold 
water 
system installation and 
maintenance techniques. 
These 
installations 
are 
designed to boost the 
mixed water after it has left 
the mixing valve. They are 
usually installed where the 
pipework and the valve are 
concealed and are ideal for 
the drench-type large fixed 
shower heads. 
 
A gravity fed shower installation 
Shower installation with a single impeller shower pump 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
30
Gravity fed showers with twin impeller boosting pump 
An example of a twin 
impeller 
boosting 
pump was shown in 
H/602/2697 
- 
Understand and apply 
domestic cold water 
system 
installation 
and 
maintenance 
techniques. 
This is probably the 
most difficult of all 
shower 
valve 
installations. 
The 
pump increases the 
pressures 
and 
flowrates of both hot 
and cold supplies to 
the 
shower 
valve. 
Here, it is mixed to the correct temperature before flowing to the 
shower head.  
Care must be taken when connecting the boosting pump to the 
cylinder as shower pumps are known to fail very quickly if air gets 
trapped inside the pump. There are two ways of connecting the hot 
connection from pump to cylinder: 
1. 
This method involves installing the hot water draw-off at an 
angle of between 30o and 60o (45o is optimum) (see drawing) with 
the hot water connection to the pump made at an angle of 90o. This 
method allows any air in the system to flow upwards through to the 
vent pipe and away from the shower pump. 
2. 
The second method involves making a dedicated connection 
to the cylinder ¼ of the way down from the top dome using an Essex 
flange with a dip pipe. With this method, the hot water to the pump 
is taken directly from the hot water storage vessel, by-passing the 
cylinder wall and extracting the water from the body of water in the 
storage vessel itself. 
Thermostatic mixing valves 
The installation of TMVs was covered in AC1.3 of this unit.  
Shower installation with a twin impeller shower pump 
Hot shower pump 
connection
Essex flange
Dip pipe
An essex flange 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
31
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
32
Learning Outcome 2 
Know the site preparation techniques for 
hot water systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
33
There are five Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 2: 
AC2.1. 
Identify the sources of information required when undertaking work on hot water systems 
AC2.2. 
Identify the preparatory work required to be undertaken to the building fabric in order to 
install, decommission or maintain hot water systems and components. 
AC2.3. 
Identify the protection measures required to the building fabric or customer property, during 
and on completion of work on hot water systems and components. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to complete work on hot water systems. 
AC2.5. 
State the range of hand and power tools required to complete work on hot water systems  and 
components. 
Much of the information in Learning Outcome 2 has previously been covered in detail in other Units and 
specifically in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques, and where possible, you will be directed to the relevant headings and Assessment 
Criteria within those units. 
AC2.1 Identify the sources of information required when undertaking 
work on hot water systems 
Regulations 
The Regulations  required when designing, installing and maintaining hot water systems are almost the same 
as for the installation of cold water systems. As such, they are covered in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques. Where there 
are differences, they are listed below: 
 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999: Hot water supply is covered in Section 8 of 
Schedule 2 of the Water Supply (Water Fittings) Regulations. 
 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
 
Building Regulations Approved Document G - Sanitation, hot water safety and water efﬁciency 
2010 – 2015 edition with 2016 amendments 
 
In 2010 the Building Regulations were updated and amended. Approved Document G - Sanitation, 
hot water safety and water efﬁciency was extended to bring new areas under the control of the 
Building Regulations, most notably, the installation of systems and water efficiency: 
o G3 – Hot Water Supply and Systems: Enhanced and amended provisions on hot water supply 
and safety, applying safety provisions to all types of hot water systems and a new provision 
on scalding prevention.  
 
The Gas (installation and use) Regulations 1998 
 
The IET (18th Edition) (BS7671:2008) Wiring Regulations 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
34
The British Standards 
British Standards BSEN806:2012 Pts 1 to 5  
BSEN806: Specifications for installations inside buildings conveying water for human consumption 
 
BSEN806 – 1: 2000. General. This document specifies potable water installation requirements and gives 
recommendations on the following aspects of hot and cold water installations: 
o Design  
o Installation  
o Alteration  
o Testing  
o 
Maintenance and operation. 
o Part 1 of BSEN806 also covers the pipework installation from the point of entry when the 
property is supplied with water from a private water source. 
 
BSEN806 – 2: 2005. Design. This document provides technical information so that the following points 
may be achieved from the design and installation: 
o Appropriate pressures and flowrates 
o Water quality at the tap is not contaminated or affected by the location or environment 
o The system avoids wastage of water and leakage. 
o The system is efficient, convenient, reliable and safe.  
o The system has a reasonable working life span. 
 
BSEN806 – 3: 2006. Pipe sizing. Simplified method. This document describes the simplified method for 
pipesizing drinking water standard installations as defined in section 4.2. However, the document 
does not engage in pipesizing for domestic firefighting systems. 
 
BSEN806 – 4:2010. Installation. Specifies the requirements of water installations within buildings and 
gives recommendations for their correct installation. It also covers pipework outside buildings but 
within the premises as outlined in BSEN806 – 1:2000. It applies to new, altered and repaired 
installations.  
 
BSEN806 – 5:2012. Operation and maintenance. This document takes the form of a practice 
specification. It specifies the requirements for the correct operation and maintenance of potable 
water supply installations within buildings and for pipework outside building but within premises in 
accordance with BSEN806 – 1:2000. 
BSEN806 Parts 1 to 5 completely supersede BS6700 in all aspects of hot and cold water supply. BS 8558: 2015 
Guide to the design, installation, testing and maintenance of services supplying water for domestic use 
within buildings and their curtilages - complementary guidance to BS EN 806, now becomes the lead 
document for potable water supply in premises. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
35
 BS 8558: 2015 Guide to the design, installation, testing and maintenance of services supplying water 
for domestic use within buildings and their curtilages - complementary guidance to BS EN 806 
BS8558 was developed primarily to provide complimentary guidance to BSEN806 Pts 1 to 5. 
Together, this complete suite of British Standards provides recommendations into best practice for 
the design, installation, testing, operation, maintenance and alteration of hot and cold water systems 
for domestic buildings. 
BS8558 bridges the gap between BSEN806 and its predecessor BS6700 and provides UK guidelines 
for, not just plumbers, but the water supply industry as a whole.  
 PD 855468:2015 Guide to the flushing and disinfection of services supplying water for domestic use 
within buildings and their curtilages 
Flushing and disinfection of systems used to be part of BS8558:2011. However, the latest version of 
BS8558:2015 excludes flushing and disinfection. Instead, flushing and disinfection of systems is now 
a separate document PD 855468:2015. 
PD 855468:2015 provides guidance on the cleaning, flushing and disinfection of cold water systems 
to control microbiological growth and the removal of debris. This includes guidance on: 
o Deployment of the correct tools and personnel 
o The use of the correct disinfectants 
o How to respond if a microbiological problem is identified 
o Keeping records of cleaning and disinfection 
This new document applies to systems supplying water to domestic purposes within buildings and 
their curtilages, and includes water used in food preparation. 
Manufacturer technical instructions 
The manufacturer’s instructions are probably the most important document to read and consult when 
installing, servicing and maintaining appliances, components and equipment, because they instruct us on the 
best methods to use whilst keeping to current legislation and regulations. In some cases, it may appear that 
these instructions contradict the regulations. This occurs because regulations and codes of practice are only 
updated periodically, whereas manufacturers are constantly reviewing and updating their literature in line 
with modifications and current good practice. Where a conflict exists, manufacturer’s literature should 
always be followed. If not: 
 
The warranty of the equipment may be void. 
 
Regulations may be inadvertently broken 
 
The installation may be dangerous. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
36
AC2.2 Identify the preparatory work required to be undertaken to the 
building fabric in order to install, decommission or maintain hot 
water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.1: Define the 
typical range of activities to be carried out when working on plumbing and heating systems and AC3.8: State 
the work methods for preparing building construction features for installation work 
AC2.3 Identify the protection measures required to the building 
fabric or customer property, during and on completion of work on 
hot water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.4: Identify 
how to protect the building fabric or customer property before the work commences. 
AC2.4 Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to 
complete work on hot water systems 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 2, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC2.1. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
AC2.2. 
State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use in dwellings. 
AC2.3. 
State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold water pipe to existing lead pipe 
work. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings. 
AC2.5 State the range of hand and power tools required to complete 
work on hot water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
37
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 1, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC1.1. 
State the purpose of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and heating 
systems. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the different types of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and 
heating systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
38
Learning Outcome 4 
Know the installation requirements of hot 
water systems and components 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
39
There are eleven Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC4.1. 
State how to take readings of hot water supply pressure and flow rate 
AC4.2. 
State the positioning and fixing requirements of hot water pipework and components 
AC4.3. 
Identify how expansion and contraction may be catered for in hot water pipework containing 
plastics and copper 
AC4.4. 
State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the hot water system pipework and the 
industry recommended spacings 
AC4.5. 
State the positioning requirements of components in hot water systems 
AC4.6. 
Identify how to measure, mark out and drill plastic storage cisterns to receive pipework 
connections 
AC4.7. 
Identify how to make pipework connections to storage cisterns 
AC4.8. 
Identify how to make pipework connections to open vented hot water storage cylinders 
AC4.9. 
State how to position, fix and connect new hot water pipework to outlets and supply sources 
AC4.10. 
Identify suitable methods of making new pipework connections into existing hot water 
system pipework 
AC4.11. 
Identify the insulation requirements of hot water system components 
Much of the information in Learning Outcome 4 has previously been covered in detail in other Units and 
specifically in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques, and where possible, you will be directed to the relevant headings and Assessment 
Criteria within those units. 
AC4.1 State how to take readings of hot water supply pressure and 
flow rate 
Pressure and 
Flow rate 
The methods and equipment required to take flow rate and pressure readings were 
discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system 
installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 5, AC5.1 State how to take 
readings of the incoming water supply pressure and flow rate. Please refer to AC5.1. 
Temperature 
Taking temperature readings of the hot water is important to ensure that the system 
installed is reaching and maintaining an adequate and safe temperature to guard against 
scalding and legionella bacteria formation. This can be done in a number of ways: 
 
By the use of manual thermometers 
 
By the use of digital thermometers 
 
By the use of infrared thermometers 
Examples of these are shown below: 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
40
 
Examples of thermometers: left to right: A digital thermometer,  an infrared thermometer 
AC4.2 State the positioning and fixing requirements of hot water 
pipework and components 
The positioning and fixing of pipework and components was discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning 
Outcome 5, AC5.6 State the positioning and fixing requirements for cold water system pipework and 
components: 
a) In suspended timber floors 
b) In solid floors 
c) Embedded in walls 
d) In areas of the building subject to frost 
e) That may be exposed to warming. 
Please refer to Learning Outcome 5, AC5.6 of Unit H/602/2697. 
AC4.3 Identify how expansion and contraction may be catered for in 
hot water pipework containing plastics and copper 
It is a fact that both copper pipe and plastic pipe expand when they get hot. However, plastic pipes expand 
and contract more than any metallic pipe. Usually it is recommended that the issue of expansion of pipework 
be considered during the design stage.  
Plastic pipe should always be allowed expand and contract freely or problems can occur, such as unsightly 
and unwieldy snaking pipework and stress on joints. If expansion is not catered for it can cause compression 
within the pipework, causing buckling and deformation. At the other end of the scale, it can cause tension 
loads, which could result in the pipe snapping or joints being pulled apart. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
41
 
 
It is important to realise that different materials expand at different rates. The chart shows the different 
expansion rates of the common pipe materials found in modern plumbing systems. Two of the most common 
materials found in hot and cold pipe work are plastic and have the largest expansion rates of all, these being 
Polyethylene (PE) and polybutylene (PB). 
For hot and cold water systems installed in PB, the PB expands/contracts by 1.3 mm/m per 10C change in 
temperature. If the ambient temperature is 10°C and the working temperature is 60°C, the expansion on an 
installed length of 10m PB pipe would be about 65 mm. Compare this to the same system installed in copper 
tube where the expansion rate is 0.168mm/m per 10oC rise and the expansion calculates to 8.5mm over a 
10m length. 
The most cost effective way of accommodating expansion is by using the flexibility of the pipework material 
by designing in changes of direction. The direction of pipe movement is controlled by using anchor points at 
key positions in the pipework. Where there are no changes of direction, such as long straight runs, then 
loops in the pipework can be made using machine ends (for metallic pipes) or fittings such as elbows. 
In some cases, where loops and changes of direction cannot be used, due to the building design, then linear 
expansion devices such as expansion bellows or flexible hoses (for small diameter pipework) can be used. 
These need to be inspected at regular intervals and so must be accessible. With flexible hoses, it is important 
to ensure that they are not twisted during installation in order to maintain their effectiveness. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
42
AC4.4 State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the hot 
water system pipework and the industry recommended spacings 
The types of clips and clip spacings were dealt with in Unit D/602/2682 Understand and carry out site 
preparation, and pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, LO5, AC5.4 
Identify clip and bracket types for domestic plumbing and heating work. 
AC4.5 State the positioning requirements of components in hot water 
systems 
As with all components and appliances, the installation requirements and restrictions can be found in the 
manufacturer’s installation literature and these should be followed to ensure that the components are 
installed correctly and to the enforcing regulations and recommendations of the British Standards. 
Water Heaters/storage cylinders 
The installation of water heaters is subject to the instructions given in the manufacturers installation data.  
Hot water storage cylinders should be installed in a central position, usually in an airing cupboard. The should 
be mounted on a flat level base and raised slightly off the floor. The base should be capable of taking the 
weight of the vessel and the water it contains. The base should be slightly larger than the cylinder base. It 
should be positioned to give access to the primary flow and return connections and also the cold feed 
connection. A drain-off valve should be installed at the lowest point of the cold feed to enable draining, if 
required. 
Cisterns – hot water feed cisterns and feed and expansion cisterns 
The installation of cold water cisterns was covered in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold 
water system installation and maintenance techniques, LO2, AC2.8 State the system layout features for 
protected plastic storage cisterns. 
Drain valves 
Drain off valves should be fitted at low points on the system to enable the complete draining of the pipework 
and components. A drain-off valve should be fitted on the cold feed pipe to the hot water storage vessel as 
low down as possible as the pipework enters the storage vessel. 
Service valves 
Service valves are required to enable systems to be isolated for de-commissioning, maintenance and repair. 
A service valve must be installed on the mains cold water feed to any cisterns. This is a requirement of the 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
43
Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 and a gate valve must be installed on the cold feed pipe to the 
hot water storage vessel. The gate valve should be positioned above the hot water storage vessel. 
Thermostatic mixing valves 
The installation and positioning of thermostatic mixing valves was covered and detailed earlier in this Unit in 
LO1, AC1.3 Identify the working principles of hot water system components. 
Showers – gravity fed mixer, mains fed mixer and instantaneous electric 
The installation of shower mixing valves is subject to the instructions given in the manufacturers installation 
data. Most shower valves follow a similar installation/positioning pattern but the instructions give the specific 
details and requirements.  
The electrical connections to electric showers should be made by a competent electrician. 
AC4.6 Identify how to measure, mark out and drill plastic storage 
cisterns to receive pipework connections 
The marking and drilling of cisterns was discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply 
domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 5, AC5.4 Identify 
how to measure, mark out and drill plastic storage cisterns to receive pipework connections. 
AC4.7 Identify how to make pipework connections to storage cisterns 
Making connections to cisterns was discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic 
cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 5, AC5.5 Identify how to 
make pipework connections to storage cisterns. 
AC4.8 Identify how to make pipework connections to open vented hot 
water storage cylinders 
Hot water storage cylinder connections are usually as follows: 
Cold feed connection 
1” 
male 
or 
female 
thread 
depending on the manufacturer. 
Connections made by a 1” boiler 
union (female thread) or a 1” x 
28mm adapter (male thread) 
Hot water draw-off 
connection 
1” 
male 
or 
female 
thread 
depending on the manufacturer. 
Connections made by a 1” boiler 
union (female thread) or a 1” x 
28mm adapter (male thread) 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
44
Primary flow and return 
connections 
1” male thread  
Connections made by a 1” boiler 
union (female thread) 
 
 
 
 
A 28mm female straight boiler union 
 
A 28mm x 1” male thread adapter 
AC4.9 State how to position, fix and connect new hot water pipework 
to outlets and supply sources 
Positioning and fixing pipework was discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic 
cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 5, AC5.8 Identify how to 
position, fix and connect new cold water pipework to outlets. 
Items not discussed in LO5, AC5.8 are discussed below. 
Hot water storage cylinder 
Hot water storage cylinders are usually sited in a central area of the property 
to ensure that the pipe runs to the hot outlets are not too long as this could 
lead to dead legs and the need for secondary circulation. 
Connections to hot water storage vessels should be accessible and a drain-off 
should be fitted at the lowest point of the cold feed pipe. A gate valve for hot 
water isolation should be positioned on the cold feed pipe below the feed 
cistern but above the storage cylinder. 
The hot water draw-off pipe should rise slowly to the vent pipe with a 
minimum distance of 450mm from the centre of the hot water storage 
cylinder to the vent/distribution pipe. Connections to Hot water cylinders 
should be made as stated in AC4.8 above. 
Thermostatic mixing valve 
A Thermostatic Mixing Valve 
(TMV) mixes water from the hot 
and 
cold 
supplies 
to 
a 
temperature that is safe to use. 
The length of pipe from the TMV 
to the tap should be kept as short as possible. They are generally connected 
to the pipework via compression fittings supplied with the TMV. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
45
AC4.10 Identify suitable methods of making new pipework 
connections into existing hot water system pipework 
This subject was discussed in depth in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system 
installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 5, AC5.9 Identify suitable methods of making 
new pipe work connections into existing cold water system pipework. 
AC4.11 Identify the insulation requirements of hot water system 
components 
Hot water pipework 
insulation requirements 
The insulation of pipework was discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and 
apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, 
Learning Outcome 5, AC5.10 Identify the insulation requirements of cold water 
system components. However, to prevent heat loss from hot water pipework 
the following recommendations should be observed: 
 
Primary circulation pipes for heating and hot water circuits should be 
insulated wherever they pass outside the heated living space or 
through voids, which communicate with and are ventilated from 
unheated spaces.  
 
 Domestic hot water circuits primary circulation pipes are to be 
insulated throughout their length, subject only to practical constraints 
imposed by the need to penetrate joists and other structural elements.  
 
All pipes connected to hot water storage vessels, including vent pipe, 
to be insulated for at least 1 metre from their connection to the 
cylinder or insulated up to the point where they become concealed.  
 
If secondary circulation is used, all pipes kept hot by that circulation 
should be insulated along its entire length 
Pipe diameter (mm) 
Min. Insulation thickness (mm) 
8mm  
20mm  
15mm  
26mm  
22mm  
29mm  
28mm  
31mm  
Hot water storage 
cylinder insulation 
requirements 
Hot Water Storage Cylinders are sprayed with polyurethane insulation foam at 
the factory. The thickness is dictated by the Building Regulations Document L: 
Conservation of Heat and Power, which states that Hot water storage cylinders 
in new build properties must have 50mm thickness of insulation and Hot water 
storage cylinders in existing properties need only 35mm of insulation. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
46
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
47
Learning Outcome 6 
Know the service and maintenance 
requirements of hot water systems and 
components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
48
There are four Assessment Criteria to this Learning Outcome: 
AC6.1. Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job maintenance schedules to establish the 
periodic servicing requirements of system components 
AC6.2. Identify how to carry out routine checks on hot water components and pipework as part of a 
periodic maintenance programme 
AC6.3. State the procedures for dealing with defects in hot water components and pipework 
AC6.4. Identify the types of information to be provided on a maintenance record for hot water 
systems 
As with other Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria in the Unit, much of the information required has 
previously been discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system 
installation and maintenance techniques and where this occurs you will be directed to the appropriate 
Assessment Criteria within the cold water unit. However, in many instances, further information specific to 
hot water systems is required and this will appear in the appropriate Assessment Criteria. 
AC6.1 Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job 
maintenance schedules to establish the periodic servicing 
requirements of system components 
The use of manufacturer’s instructions was discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic 
cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 7, AC7.1 Identify how to use 
manufacturer instructions and job maintenance schedules to establish the periodic servicing requirements 
of cold water system components. 
AC6.2 Identify how to carry out routine checks on hot water 
components and pipework as part of a periodic maintenance 
programme 
The method of carrying out checks on pipework and components was discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning 
Outcome 7, AC7.2 Identify how to carry out routine checks on cold water system components as part of a 
periodic maintenance programme.  
There are, however, components that require periodic maintenance that are specific to hot water systems 
and these will be discussed in turn. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
49
Condition of hot water cylinder/heater and storage cisterns 
The hot water storage vessel/cylinder  
The type of water in the UK varies with the different regions. As we have already discovered, water can be 
either hard or soft. Fresh, oxygenated water, when introduced in to a hot water storage vessel, especially in 
hard water areas, can accelerate electrolytic corrosion.  
But why hard water areas? 
Hard water contains a high parts per million (ppm) of calcium and magnesium carbonate, which allows the 
water to have high electrical  conductivity (soft water has low electrical conductivity) and it is the high 
conductivity that allows electrolytic corrosion to occur rapidly. This usually manifests itself as calcium 
deposits that settle in the bottom of the storage vessel. It creates 
blockages in pipework and attacks brass fittings, making them brittle. It can 
also effect the flow rate through heat exchangers, making the heating of 
the water slow. 
Effective protection from electrolytic corrosion comes in the form of a 
sacrificial anode. 
A sacrificial anode is a rod or small coil of magnesium that is placed into 
cylinder. Instead of the electrolytic corrosion attacking the hot water 
storage cylinder, it attacks the anode instead gradually eating it away, 
thereby protecting the cylinder from corrosion. 
Some storage cylinders are manufactured with the anode in place, 
attached to the bottom, while others have to have the anode inserted by 
dropping a rod of magnesium in through the hot water draw-off 
connection. 
When inspecting hot water storage cylinders and heat exchanger of water heaters, check for: 
 
Signs of a white ‘growth-like’ corrosion on fittings and welded/brazed seams. 
 
Signs of leakage and damp patches. 
 
Deterioration in flow-rate. This could indicate that corrosion or lime-scale could be blocking either 
the feed pipe or the hot water draw-off. 
 
Sluggishness in the time taken to heat the water. Again this could indicate lime-scale in the primary 
flow or return pipes. 
 
The sound of ‘kettling’ (also known as localised boiling) when water heaters/boilers are turned on. 
This could also occur when an immersion heater is used. 
Hot water heaters 
Gas-fired multipoint hot water heaters should be serviced every year by a GASSAFE registered operative. 
The sacrificial anode 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
50
Servicing should be carried out to the manufacturer’s instructions and a check made on the flue gas emissions 
to ensure that they are within the manufacturer’s tolerances. This ensures that complete combustion is 
taking place and the correct CO2 emissions are present at the flue outlet. The operative will also check for: 
 
Signs of leakage and corrosion. 
 
Correct flow rates and time taken to heat the water. 
 
Correct temperatures 
 
The correct operation of all safety controls. 
Effective operation of thermostatic control devices 
Thermostatic Mixing Valves and Showers 
Thermostatic Mixing Valves and showers rely on either a wax capsule or a bi-metallic coil to obtain and 
maintain the correct temperature precisely and continuously. If either of these two components should break 
down, then the required temperatures will not be achieved. In some situations, such as hospitals, nursing 
homes and care homes the correct temperature of the hot water is a matter of health and safety.  
To ensure their continued service, check for: 
 
The correct temperature across a range of temperatures using a digital or infra-red thermometer. 
 
Correct flow rate. 
 
Any signs of corrosion or leakage. 
 
Any adjustments that may be required. This can only be completed by the use of the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 
Electrical thermostats and motorised zone valves 
These are usually found on the primary system of any hot water installation. They control the temperature 
of the hot water stored in the hot water storage cylinder by controlling the flow of water to the heat 
exchanger/coil. Simply put, the hot water cylinder thermostat senses when the temperature has been 
reached and disconnects the circuit to the motorised valve, which then closes. By doing this, circulation to 
the heat exchanger/coil is prevented, thus controlling the temperature of the stored water inside the hot 
water vessel. The temperature of the stored water should not exceed 60oC, so check that: 
 
The cylinder thermostat works correctly across a range of temperatures by adjusting the 
temperature control and observing the operation of the motorised valve. 
 
For any signs of leakage or corrosion. 
 
All electrical connections are secure and no bare wiring is present. 
 
The correct temperature has been set and that the system shuts down at this temperature. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
51
AC6.3 State the procedures for dealing with defects in hot water 
components and pipework 
For the most part, the procedures for dealing with defects was adequately covered in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning 
Outcome 7, AC7.3 State the procedures for dealing with defects in cold water components and pipework. 
However, there some components that are unique to hot water systems and these will be discussed here. 
Hot water storage cylinder/ heater failure 
Hot water storage cylinder failure 
Hot water cylinders generally fail in two quite different areas: 
a. Leakage of the cylinder, usually from a brazed or welded seam due to electrolytic corrosion. Easily 
detectable because water will show in the area where the hot water vessel is installed. 
b. Failure of the heat exchanger/coil allowing black central heating water into the domestic hot water 
system. Again, this is usually caused by electrolytic corrosion of the hot water coil and it is not easily 
detectable. It usually appears as an overflow running from either the cold feed cistern or the feed 
and expansion cistern (whichever cistern is the lowest). First impressions will be that the FoV has 
failed but the overflow will continue to run even after this has been replaced/repaired. This is 
because water is passing from the hot water system through the hole in the coil and backfilling the 
Feed and expansion cistern, raising the level of the water to the overflow, which then starts to run. 
Either of these failures will require the replacement of the hot water storage cylinder. Always remember the 
following points when replacing hot water storage cylinders: 
 
Keep the customer informed as to the problems found. 
 
Correctly isolate the services (water, gas and electricity) and post notices that they are not to be 
turned on. 
 
Drain the entire contents of the hot water storage cylinder and the cold feed cistern in the roof space 
and turn on all hot taps.  
 
Drain the heating system to remove the water from the heat exchanger coil. If the cylinder is in an 
upstairs airing cupboard, then only the top half of the system will need to be drained. 
 
Disconnect the immersion heater by first isolating the electric switched fuse spur and removing the 
fuse. Always ensure that the electrical supply is dead before disconnecting any electrical services. 
 
Remove any external cylinder thermostats. 
 
Loosen and disconnect the cold feed pipe, the hot water draw-off pipe and both primary flow and 
return pipes and carefully remove the cylinder. 
 
Ensure that the new hot water storage cylinder is dressed with any new fittings required and install 
the immersion heater. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
52
 
Place the cylinder in to the correct position and reconnect all pipework, making alterations where 
necessary. 
 
Ensure all fittings are tight before turning on the water. 
 
Refilling the system is best done in two halves 
o First System fill – the hot water storage cylinder: Close off any open drain valves and turn 
off all open hot taps and outlets. 
o Isolate the gate valve on the cold feed pipe and turn on the isolation valve to cold feed cistern 
FoV. Allow this to fill completely before turning on the gate valve on the cold feed. This will 
ensure that the cylinder fills in one go and will ensure that airlocks do not become a problem. 
o Turn on the gate valve on the cold feed pipe and fill the cylinder. While this is filling, check 
the connections to the cylinder to ensure that there are no leaks. 
o Place a hand on the hot water draw-off pipe. When the cylinder is full, it will suddenly go 
cold as the cold water surges through the system. 
o Now, visit every hot tap and draw water through them, clearing any air. 
o Let the cistern fill again until the FoV shuts off and let the system stand for a few minutes. 
o Check the pipework again for leaks. 
o Second system fill – the heating system: close all radiator air valves. 
o Manually open any motorised zone valves. 
o Close off any open drain valves. 
o Open the service valve to the Feed and expansion cistern FoV (or filling loop if the heating 
system is a sealed system type) and fill the heating system, bleeding any radiators of air. 
o Ensure that the heat exchanger/coil is full of water. 
o Check for leaks. 
o Now, carefully reposition any cylinder thermostats and reconnect the electrical connections 
to the immersion heater by following safe electrical procedures and the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 
o Once you are confident that all water and electrical connections have been made and are 
safe, then turn on the services and commission the system. 
o Once the hot water in the storage cylinder is hot, run the hot taps and check hot water 
temperatures and flow rates. 
Hot water heater failure 
Failure of hot water heaters often means that these have to be replaced. Replacement of under and over 
sink point of use heaters is a fairly simple operation that can be completed easily and quickly by following 
the manufacturer’s instructions. On no account should you attempt to replace any gas instantaneous water 
heaters as these can only be replaced by GAS SAFE registered engineers. 
Leakage or ineffective operation of Mixer showers and Thermostatic mixing valves 
Mixer showers 
Mixer showers often leak through spindles and other moving parts because the water tight seals have 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
53
become worn. In most cases, the manufacturer will provide, at a cost, a seal pack and a set of instructions to 
reseal all moving parts within the shower body itself. It must be remembered that ALL sealing washers 
provided must be replaced even if the washer being removed seems to be working perfectly. Use any 
lubrication provided to ensure that the moving parts move freely and thoroughly test in all temperature and 
flow rate configurations once the repairs have been completed. 
In the event that the whole shower valve requires replacement, most shower valves have a centre-to-centre 
measurement of 147mm between the hot and cold connections and all showers have the same arrangement 
of hot/left, cold/right when viewed from the back of the valve. Replacement is usually vis compression fittings 
on the hot/cold connections. Manufacturer’s instructions should be followed. 
Thermostatic Mixer Valves (including thermostatic mixer showers) 
These are fairly simple to repair since the thermostatic mixing control within the valve comes as a like-for-
like cartridge that is simply replaced within the valve. Manufacturer’s instructions must be followed. 
Before replacing the cartridge, it may be a good idea to check the manufacturer’s instructions for any 
diagnostic procedures that may indicate either lack of flow rate or pressure. These can be followed first to 
ensure that it is a replacement cartridge that is needed. This may include: 
 
Temperature check of the hot and cold water. 
 
Flow rate of the hot and the cold supply 
AC6.4 Identify the types of information to be provided on a 
maintenance record for hot water systems. 
For hot water systems, it is advisable to keep a record of all maintenance and repairs for future reference. 
The types of information noted should be: 
 
The name of the maintenance engineer 
 
The date and time the maintenance/repairs were carried out 
 
The type of hot water system being maintained 
 
The type of maintenance/repairs undertaken 
 
Their location 
 
The materials/components or replacement parts used 
 
The location of manufacturer’s instructions/maintenance data. 
 
The flow rates and pressures of outlets, taps and components 
 
The temperature of the hot water for scalding safety and legionella protection 
 
Any corrosion witnessed and where. 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
54
Learning Outcome 8 
Know the decommissioning 
requirements of hot water systems and 
components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hot
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
55
There are five Assessment Criteria to this Learning Outcome: 
AC8.1. 
Identify the working methods that reduce the time periods during which hot water systems 
need to be isolated. 
AC8.2. 
State the information that needs to be provided to other persons before decommissioning 
work takes place. 
AC8.3. 
State how to temporarily decommission hot water system components and connecting 
pipework systems. 
AC8.4. 
Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning hot water components and 
pipework systems. 
AC8.5. 
Identify the methods used during the decommissioning process to prevent the end-user from 
operating hot water system components 
AC8.1 Identify the working methods that reduce the time periods 
during which hot water systems need to be isolated 
AC8.2 State the information that needs to be provided to other 
persons before decommissioning work takes place 
There are instances where hot water systems must be temporarily de-commissioned to allow essential 
works, such as repairs and servicing, to be conducted. The impact of isolation means that some parts, and in 
a worst-case scenario, all of the system will need to be isolated. Also, ensure that all electrical components, 
heaters, thermostats, motorised valves etc. are correctly isolated before work begins.  
There are methods we can employ to lessen the impact of isolation on the customer: 
1) Do as much preparation beforehand as possible. If, for instance, you are connecting an extension to 
the hot water system or replacing an appliance or component, make the final connection to the 
water system the last operation, so that the water is off the minimum amount of time. 
2) Be frank with the customer and tell them how long the system will be off. Point out that this is an 
estimated time and the water will be turned back on as soon as is possible. 
3) Tell the customer which parts of the system you will be working on. 
4) Ask the customer to collect water for drinks in saucepans and jugs and water for ablutions in a bucket. 
They may not be needed but at least the customer will have some water for those essential things. 
Isolating water supplies can be very annoying and inconvenient to a customer but most cases you will find 
that the customer is very understanding of the situation. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
56
AC8.3 State how to temporarily decommission hot water system 
components and connecting pipework systems 
This is where a water system or part of a water system is isolated and drained down so that work may be 
performed on it. Once the work is completed, the water will be turned on and the system put back into 
operation.  
The customer must be the focus when isolating water supplies. Water is vital for the day-to-day running of a 
household. Therefore, keeping them informed of the sequence of operations allows them to make informed 
choices about bathing, clothes washing, food preparation etc. Below is a suggested sequence of events: 
1) Inform the customer that the water supply is going to be isolated and inform them as to how long 
the supply is expected to be off. 
2) Suggest that they might like to collect some water for drinking etc. 
3) Ensure that those appliances that are using or 
may be using water supply are turned off. Ask 
the customer not to turn on any clothes or dish 
washing machines. Ensure that the electrics to 
any combination boilers are turned off. This is 
to ensure that the boiler does not fire up while 
the water is off. It is purely precautionary. 
4) Place a warning notice at the point of isolation 
warning other people that the supply is turned 
off and is not to be turned back on. 
5) Isolate the system or part of the system that is being worked on. 
6) Drain the system of water at the nearest drain point. 
AC8.4 Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning 
hot water system components and connecting pipework systems 
Unlike temporary de-commissioning, permanent de-commissioning of a system literally means that the 
system will not be re-instated. In most instances, this will mean the complete removal of all pipework and 
appliances. The pipework should be cut back to the nearest live connection and capped to prevent stagnation 
of the water supply: 
1) Isolate the water supply at the point where the system is to be decommissioned. For hot water 
systems, this will usually be the mains cold water isolation valve connected to the Float Operated 
Valve to the storage/feed cistern in the roof space. 
2) Open all hot taps and let the water run until the water stops. 
Hot
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
57
3) Completely drain the hot water cylinder at the drain-off and the cold feed pipe. 
4) Isolate and disconnect any electrical controls, such as immersion heaters and thermostats. 
5) Remove all appliances and storage vessels and carefully remove the pipework and clips. 
6) Cut the pipework back to the stop valve or nearest live connection and cap the pipe off. 
7) If necessary, a notice can be left by the stop valve informing that the system has been permanently 
de-commissioned and is not to be turned on. 
AC8.5 Identify the methods used during the decommissioning 
process to prevent the end-user from operating hot water system 
components 
This subject was covered in depth in AC8.1 to AC8.4. Please see above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd


BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
59
Learning Outcome 10 
Know the inspection and soundness 
testing requirements of hot water 
systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
60
There are five Assessment Criteria to this Learning Outcome: 
AC10.1. 
State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection of a hot water system to confirm 
that it is ready to be filled with water. 
AC10.2. 
State how to fill hot water pipework with water at normal operating pressure and check for 
leakage. 
AC10.3. 
Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry requirements on hot water systems 
pipework and components. 
AC10.4. 
State the flushing procedure for hot water systems and components. 
AC10.5. 
Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and testing reveals defects in hot 
water systems 
AC10.1 State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection 
of a hot water system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water 
The checks to be carried out on hot water systems are almost identical to the checks carried out on cold 
water systems and these were covered in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water 
system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 11, AC11.1 State the checks to be 
carried out during a visual inspection of a cold water system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water. 
However, there are some additional checks that should be made when dealing with hot water systems: 
 
Check that all open ends have been capped and/or all valves have been isolated. 
 
Check that all taps and outlets have been turned off and any drain valves are closed. 
 
Isolate any service valves and gate valves. 
 
Check all visible joints to ensure that they have been properly made. Check that capillary joints have 
been wiped clean of any excess flux as this can cause corrosion in later life. 
 
Check that enough pipe clips have been installed and that the pipework is secure. 
 
Check that tap connectors and compression fittings are tight. 
 
Ensure that any automatic air valves are open. 
 
Ensure that a provisional fill level has been set in any cold water cisterns fitted. 
 
Check that all cisterns have been fitted correctly and are well supported. 
 
Check that cistern lids are left in place. 
 
Check that the hot water storage vessel well supported and stable. 
 
If the immersion heater in the hot water storage cylinder has been connected to the electric switched 
fuse spur, ensure that It is isolated and the fuse has been removed 
 
Ensure any electrical components are isolated, i.e. motorised zone valve, cylinder thermostat, 
shower pump, secondary circulation pump etc. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
61
AC10.2 State how to fill hot water pipework with water at normal 
operating pressure and check for leakage 
After the system has been inspected as detailed in AC10.1, the following method can be used for filling the 
system with water. Remember, for a test to be trouble free, there must be a method of releasing any air that 
collects in the system. Isolation valves are a good idea to enable this. 
Testing is best done in stages or by zones: 
1) Isolate the gate valve on the cold feed pipe and turn on the isolation valve to cold feed cistern FoV. 
Allow this to fill completely before turning on the gate valve on the cold feed. This will ensure that 
the cylinder fills in one go and will ensure that airlocks do not become a problem. 
2) Turn on the gate valve on the cold feed pipe and fill the cylinder. While this is filling, check the 
connections to the cylinder to ensure that there are no leaks. 
3) Place a hand on the hot water draw-off pipe. When the cylinder is full, it will suddenly go cold as the 
cold water surges through the system. 
4) Now, visit every hot tap and draw water through them, clearing any air and checking for leaks. 
5) Let the cistern fill again until the FoV shuts off and let the system stand for a few minutes. 
6) Check the pipework again for leaks. 
AC10.3 Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry 
requirements on hot water systems pipework and components 
The testing requirements of water systems was covered in detail in D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out 
site preparation, and pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems 
Learning Outcome 9: Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of domestic plumbing and 
heating pipework 
AC9.2 State how to carry out a soundness test on domestic plumbing and heating pipework 
AC10.4 State the flushing procedure for hot water systems and 
components 
The importance of flushing hot water systems cannot be overstated. Hot water is susceptible to legionella 
bacteria and flushing a system helps to remove any dirt or swarf that may encourage legionella growth. 
Flushing water systems should be done initially with fresh clean water drawn from the water undertaker’s 
mains cold water supply. All pipework and components should be flushed through, including the cold water 
feed cistern and the hot water storage vessel and it is advisable that the latter be drained completely after 
flushing to remove any build-up of dirt or swarf that has found its way into the storage cylinder/vessel.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
62
The following method is a basic flushing sequence that assumes that the system has already been filled in 
accordance with the procedure stated in AC10.2 State how to fill hot water pipework with water at normal 
operating pressure and check for leakage: 
1) Visit each terminal fitting, valve and tap individually and turn on. 
2) Flush the system through until the water runs clear and then let it run for 20 – 30 seconds. 
3) Once all taps have been flushed with cold water, let the cold feed cistern fill until the float operated 
valve shuts off. 
4) Check the immersion heater and set the temperature to 55 – 60oC at the thermostat. Replace the 
immersion heater cover. 
5) Replace the fuse into the immersion heater switched fuse spur (checking that it is a 13amp fuse) and 
switch on the switched fuse spur. 
6) Run the system up to the correct temperature. 
7) Visit each tap in turn and draw off hot water through the tap. 
8) Re-check for leaks. 
9) Isolate the immersion heater switched fused spur and any other electrical circuits that have been 
energised. 
10) Turn off the service valve to the cold feed cistern. 
11) Open all hot taps and run off all the water until it stops flowing. 
12) Place a hose pipe on the cold feed pipe drain off valve and completely empty the hot water storage 
cylinder. This will ensure that any debris in the cylinder is flushed through to the drain. 
13) Turn off the drain off valve and cold feed pipe gate valve. 
14) Turn off all hot aps and outlets. 
15) Re-fill the system as previously stated and check for leaks. 
AC10.5 Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and 
testing reveal defects in hot water systems 
Faults that are immediately obvious during inspection will require rectifying before testing takes place. 
Problems such as loose pipework and general lack of fixings are easily fixed. Some initial problems, such as 
inadequate support for cisterns and cylinders, may take longer to remedy. 
Problems that arise during initial testing are generally centred around leakage that will require fixing as a 
matter of urgency. 
There may also be problems that arise during the commissioning stage, such as failure to meet the 
requirements of the specification, lack of flow rate or pressure or unsatisfactory performance of fitted 
components and appliances. Where problems of this nature occur, then the system designer must be 
informed, and a remedy sought as a matter of urgency. In these cases, reference to manufacturers data 
should be made. 
Occasionally, problems occur with faulty components and appliances, such as faulty shower pumps, mixer 
valves etc. when these are found, the manufacturer should be contacted immediately. In some instances, 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
63
the manufacturer may want to visit the job to ensure that the component has been fitted correctly before 
taking any action. Often, though, they will ask you to return it to the place of purchase and ask for an 
exchange unit. Remember: Keep the customer informed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

