BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
1 
Section 5 – D/602/2682 
Understand and carry out site 
preparation, and pipework fabrication 
techniques for domestic plumbing and 
heating systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
2 
D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and 
pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating 
systems 
This combination unit provides learning in a range of basic pipework competences that underpin work on 
plumbing and heating systems. The unit also provides an introduction to the range of work activities carried 
out in plumbing and heating as well as methods of checking that pipework and plumbing and heating 
components are leak free. On completion of the unit the learner will: 
LO1. 
Know the types of hand and power tools used for domestic plumbing and heating work 
LO2. 
Know the types of domestic plumbing and heating pipe work and their jointing principles 
LO3. 
Know the general site preparation techniques for plumbing and heating work 
LO4. 
Be able to apply general site preparation techniques for domestic plumbing and heating work 
LO5. 
Know how to use clips and brackets to support domestic plumbing and heating pipe work and 
components 
LO6. 
Be able to apply fixings and brackets to domestic plumbing and heating pipe work and 
components 
LO7. 
Know the installation requirements of domestic plumbing and heating pipe work 
LO8. 
Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of domestic plumbing and heating 
pipe work 
LO9. 
Be able to inspect and soundness test domestic plumbing and heating pipe work 
Learning Outcomes highlighted in Red indicates that these are covered by practical tasks from the learner 
practical portfolio and will not appear in this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
3 
Learning Outcome 1 
Know the types of hand and power tools 
used for domestic plumbing and heating 
work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
4 
There are four Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 1: 
AC1.1. 
State the purpose of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and heating 
systems. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the different types of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and 
heating systems. 
AC1.3. 
State how to safely use and maintain hand and power tools to carry out work on plumbing and 
heating systems. 
AC1.4. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
 
AC1.1 State the purpose of hand and power tools used to carry out 
work on plumbing and heating systems 
and 
AC1.2 Identify the different types of hand and power tools used to 
carry out work on plumbing and heating systems 
There are many different tools that a plumber/heating engineer should have in the tool kit. Some general 
tools such as screwdrivers, saws and hammers, but others are specialised, such as pipe cutters, pipe benders 
and soldering equipment.  
In AC1.1 and AC1.2, we will look at some of the more common tools and their uses, as well as investigating 
those tools more specific to plumbers and heating engineers. 
Hand Tools 
Screwdrivers 
Flat Blade Screwdrivers 
Used with slotted screws. The blade of the 
screwdriver is available in many sizes and it is 
important to use the correct sized blade for 
the size of screw. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
5 
Phillips Screwdrivers 
The Phillips head screw driver was designed to 
prevent overtightening by ‘riding out’ when the 
screw became tight. Largely superseded by the 
pozidriv screwdriver. 
 
  
Screwdrivers 
Pozidrive Screwdrivers 
Similar 
in 
appearance 
to 
the 
Phillips 
screwdriver except that the head has an eight 
pointed star instead of four. This ensures a 
better grip in the screw head. It is not 
compatible with Phillips screws. 
 
 
Star head Screwdrivers 
Also known as Torx screwdrivers, these are 
seldom used except in appliances and specialist 
installations. 
 
 
Hammers 
Claw hammer 
These are dual purpose hammers used for 
driving in and extracting nails from wood. The 
head is made from forged steel for strength, 
with the handles being made from a variety of 
materials including steel, wood and carbon 
fibre. 
The claw is used in conjunction with the handle 
to form a lever for extracting nails. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
6 
Club/Lump hammer 
Designed for heavy duty hammering, such as 
breaking masonry and concrete. Can be used 
with masonry and bolster chisels.  
 
Chisels 
Masonry Chisels 
As the name suggests, masonry chisels (also 
known as cold chisels) are used with a 
lump/club hammer for breaking masonry and 
concrete. There are many different types of 
masonry chisels that can be used for a variety 
of applications. Chisel types include plugging 
chisel, bolster chisel and flat cold chisel. Many 
chisels are now supplied with hand guards to 
prevent hand injuries when using these tools.  
 
Wood Chisels 
There are many different types of wood chisels 
available. Plumbers generally use them when 
notching floor joists. 
Care should be taken when using these tools as 
the blades can be extremely sharp, especially 
when the chisels are new. To prevent injury, 
always replace the blade guard after use.  
 
Grips and Pliers 
Combination Pliers 
These are a type of pliers used by electricians 
and other tradesmen primarily for gripping, 
twisting, bending and cutting wire and cable. 
They are also known as Linemen’s Pliers. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
7 
Long nose Pliers 
Also known as needle nose pliers, these are 
especially useful for getting into tight spaces 
because of their long thin jaws. They are 
predominantly used to bend, re-position and 
snip wire. Their long nose gives good control 
while the conveniently positioned cutting edge 
near the pliers' joint makes them particularly 
useful all-round tool. 
 
Circlip Pliers 
Many modern taps and valves have circlips 
keeping the head workings in place inside the 
tap body. Often, the only way these can be 
safely removed without breaking them is by 
the use of circlip pliers. 
Made in a variety of sizes, these are a very 
useful addition to a plumber’s tool kit. 
 
Grips and Pliers 
Water Pump Pliers 
Instantly recognisable as a plumber’s general 
purpose tool, water pump pliers are used to 
grip, tighten and loosen compression fittings, 
unions and nuts and bolts. They are available in 
a range of sizes.  
It is recommended to have at least two pairs in 
various sizes. 
 
Mole Grips 
Also known as the ‘portable vice’, mole grips 
provide a very secure vice-like grip. They are 
especially useful for holding materials in a 
secure position while they are permanently 
fixed, soldered or welded. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
8 
Spanners 
Adjustable Spanner 
Along with water pump pliers, the adjustable 
spanner is probably the most used tool in a 
plumber’s tool kit. It is generally used to 
tighten compression fittings and unions, and is 
particularly useful for use on chromed and gold 
plated fittings as the smooth jaws do not mark 
the plating. They can also be used to tighten 
nuts and bolts. A plumber’s tool kit should 
include 2 or 3 pairs in varying sizes. 
 
Ring Spanner 
Ring spanners are particularly useful when 
servicing appliances, such as gas boilers and 
gas fires. The ones shown in the image are 
ratchet type, which makes the removal of nuts 
and bolts much easier. 
 
Open ended Spanner 
Again, open spanners are very useful when 
servicing appliances.  
 
Box Spanners 
Box spanners are used to tighten taps onto 
sanitary appliances and kitchen sinks. Larger 
versions can be used to install and remove 
immersion heaters. 
 
 
Tap Spanner 
Tap spanners are used to tighten tap 
connectors and other compression fittings 
when they are installed in inaccessible places 
such as at the back of a bath, a washbasin or a 
kitchen sink. There are many different types 
available. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
9 
Wrenches 
Footprints 
Footprints are a traditional plumbers tool that 
are used to tighten and loosen nuts, bolts and 
compression fittings and unions. Care should 
be taken when using these as have a tendency 
to trap the skin on the hands and fingers if not 
used correctly 
 
 
Stilson type wrenches 
Traditionally these adjustable wrenches are 
used by heating engineers and pipe fitters for 
installing and removing Low Carbon Steel 
pipework 
and 
fittings. 
However, 
most 
plumbers would also use them from time to 
time and so are a useful addition to a plumber’s 
tool kit. Various sizes are available. 
 
 
Pipe Cutters 
Pipe Slice 
Like the name suggests, the pipe slice is a tool 
for cutting copper tubes from 10mm up to 
28mm. the stainless-steel cutting blade is 
replaceable. 
For prolonged use, these tools require regular 
maintenance to keep the pipe rollers free from 
dirt and swarf. 
 
Wheel Pipe Cutters 
This is a general-purpose cutter for copper and 
stainless-steel tubes from 10mm up to 54mm 
sizes. 
Like the pipe slice, the cutting wheels are 
replaceable and the pipe rollers require regular 
maintenance to keep them working correctly. 
There are many different types available. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
10 
Plastic Pipe Cutters 
These simple scissor action cutters are 
specifically designed to cut plastic pipes with a 
clean burr-free edge. 
Many different types are available including 
ratchet type cutters. 
 
Saws 
General-purpose Hand Saw 
The general-purpose hand saw is extremely 
useful 
for 
cutting 
wood, 
plasterboard, 
insulation board, plastic pipe and many more 
materials. The saw teeth are hard point, 
designed to last much longer than traditional 
hand saws. 
 
Saws 
Hack Saw 
This saw is used to cut copper tubes, plastic 
pipes and gutters and many types of metal 
including Low Carbon Steel and cast iron. They 
are not suitable for cutting wood. 
When using a hacksaw, always ensure that the 
correct blade type is fitted and that the teeth 
are facing towards the front and that the blade 
tension is adequate. 
 
Junior Hack Saw 
An essential tool for cutting tubes in tight 
positions where access is difficult. Replace the 
blade regularly and always ensure the blade 
teeth face towards the front of the saw..  
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
11 
Floor board Saw 
This saw is designed specifically for lifting 
floorboards. Not only does it have teeth along 
its long edge, but also on the end and partially 
across the top edge. This allows the 
floorboards to be cut whilst they are still in 
position. 
 
Pipe Bending Tools 
Scissor Pipe Bending Machine 
Also known as a ‘handi-bender’, this is a 
portable, lightweight bending machine for 
precision bending of copper tubes in sizes 
15mm and 22mm. 
 
 
Tripod Pipe Bending Machine 
Similar in operation to the scissor bender, the 
tripod bending machine is for bending copper 
tubes from pipe sizes 15mm to 42mm. The 
main difference with this type of bending 
machine is that the main bending roller on the 
bending arm must be manually set to suit the 
size of pipe. If it is set too tightly against the 
bending guide, then throating of the copper 
tube will occur. Similarly, if the roller is set too 
loosely, then the tube will ripple on the inside 
face of the bend. 
 
Internal Pipe Bending Spring 
Largely obsolete since the introduction of the 
scissor bending machine, the internal bending 
spring is used to bend R250 grade copper tubes 
over the knee. 
Always anneal the tube first before bending to 
prevent excessive rippling of the tube and 
damage to the knee. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
12 
External Pipe Bending Spring 
A useful tool for bending 8mm and 10mm 
microbore tubing. 
 
Spirit levels 
Spirit levels 
Used for levelling appliances such as baths and 
washbasins, it is advisable to have two sizes of 
spirit level, 600mm and 1200mm. 
 
 
Torpedo level 
Fitted with a magnetic strip, these are ideal for 
levelling appliances such as boilers. 
 
Soldering tools 
Soldering and brazing torch  
This blowtorch is very portable and does not 
require a separate hose and gas governor. It 
can be used for both soft soldering, silver 
soldering and high temperature brazing as it 
gives a much hotter flame, especially when 
used with MAPP gas. Gas usage tends to be 
high. 
 
Blowtorch with separate governor and hose 
and separate LPG bottle 
This is the traditional plumber’s soldering 
torch. It has a separate gas governor to control 
the flow of gas and a hose. The nozzles of the 
torch are interchangeable with various sizes 
being available for soldering large fittings on 
large size copper tubes. They are not as 
controllable as other blowtorches on the 
market. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
13 
Pipe Threading tools 
Ratchet Stocks and Dies 
This tool is for threading Low Carbon Steel 
pipes. The dies are interchangeable for 
different sizes of pipe. Although they can be 
used in situ, they are best used by fastening the 
pipe into a pipe vice. 
 
Power tools 
Drills 
110V Power drill 
There are many different sizes and types of 
power drill from small hand held drills to large 
hammer drills for drilling large holes with a 
core drill. Most construction power drills use 
the SDS system (Special Direct System) of drills 
and chucks as these are far more secure than 
those using key chucks and keyless chucks. 
Care should be taken with large drills as the 
power of the drill may cause injury to the wrist 
if mishandled. 
 
110V Rotary drills 
This kind of drill has a standard chuck and key. 
The chuck requires regular maintenance to 
prevent it from seizing up. 
 
Cordless drills 
There are many different cordless drills from 
simple screw driver drills to larger SDS drills 
with the power to handle core drill bits. Typical 
voltages are 7.2V up to 36V. They are an 
extremely useful tool on construction sites 
where a reliable 110V electricity supply is often 
limited. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
14 
Electric Power Saws 
Circular saw 
These are useful tools for lifting floorboards 
and notching joists. Most blades are now 
tungsten carbide tipped for long life. Because 
of the high speed that the blade rotates, they 
should never be used without the blade guard. 
There are many different types of circular saw 
including cordless types. 
 
 
 
Jig saws 
Mainly used for cutting out worktops for 
kitchen sinks and washbasins. The blades tend 
to work loose and care must be exercised to 
ensure that the blade guards are in place 
before the tool is used. Many different blades 
are available for both wood, plastics and 
metals. Both 110V and cordless versions are 
also available. 
 
Reciprocating saws 
The reciprocating saw has few uses in the 
plumbing and heating trades as it is mainly 
used for demolition work. However, when used 
with a metal cutting blade it can be useful for 
removing old pipework etc. 
 
Pipe threading tools 
Hand held electric pipe threading tool  
Easy-to-use  and portable, this pipe threading 
machine that can be used either at a pipe vice 
or in situ. Used for threading Low Carbon Steel 
pipes from ½ inch to 2 inch BSP pipe sizes. 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
15 
Copper pipe socket crimping tools 
Copper pipe socket crimping tools 
These are the latest addition to the plumber’s 
tool kit. It is for crimping press-fit fittings on to 
copper tubes. 
A set of jaws crimps the fitting and sealing ring 
to the copper tube to make a perfect, 
watertight joint. These are ideal where ‘hot 
working’ with blow torches is not allowed. 
 
Miscellaneous and specialist tools 
Pipe Bending Tools 
Hydraulic pipe bending machine 
The hydraulic pipe bending machine uses the 
hydraulic power of oil to bend Low Carbon 
Steel pipe. 
Frequent maintenance is essential with 
hydraulic bending machines and the oil level 
should be checked at regular intervals. 
 
Pipe Freezing Kits 
Portable pipe freezing kit (refrigerant) 
Pipe freezing kits create a plug of ice to hold 
back water to allow maintenance and repairs 
to be carried out. This type uses the freezing 
qualities of a refrigerant gas to freeze the 
water. 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
16 
Electric portable pipe freezing kit  
The electric freezing kit relies on the vapour 
compression refrigeration cycle to freeze the 
water. Although more expensive than the 
refrigerant type, electric freezing kits have the 
advantage that they never run out of 
refrigerant. 
Care should be taken when using any freezing 
kit. Gloves should be worn at all times because 
of the risk of frost bite. 
 
 
AC1.3 State how to safely use and maintain hand and power tools to 
carry out work on plumbing and heating systems 
When used correctly, hand tools present little or no danger to the user. Only when unsafe working practices 
are employed do hand tools cause harm. Accidents in the construction industry occur every year because of 
unsafe working practices with both hand and power tools, such as using a hammer with a loose head or lifting 
and lowering an electric drill by its electric flex. Many accidents involving the use of hand tools arise from: 
1. Poor maintenance of tools. 
2. Not wearing Personal Protective Equipment. 
3. Using the wrong tool for the wrong job. 
4. Using the wrong technique or using the tool outside of its safety limits. 
5. Incorrect use of the tool. For example: 
a. Using a screwdriver as a chisel 
6. Ignoring manufacturer’s operating instructions and health and safety guidance on the safe use of 
tools. 
All tools can cause harm but some tools are more likely to cause injury than others. The most common tools 
likely to cause injury are: 
• 
Any sharp-edged tool such as chisels, saws and knives 
• 
Any pointed tool such as screwdrivers and bradawls. 
• 
Hammers can cause severe hand injuries if care is not taken. 
• 
Wrenches, pliers and grips can trap fingers. 
• 
Pipe bending machines can cause serious hand injuries if used incorrectly or not left in a safe position 
after use (the bending arm should never be left in the raised position). 
The safety rules to follow when using hand tools are: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
17 
1. Only use tools for the purpose they were designed for. 
2. Do not use tools you are not trained to use. 
3. Always replace worn or damaged tools. 
4. Be careful when using sharp edged tools and always keep the blades sharp. 
5. Keep moving parts oiled and free from dirt. 
6. When working at height, make sure your tools are secure. Remember, a falling tool is a dangerous 
tool. 
7. Never put sharp, pointed tools in your pocket. 
8. Clean and maintain tools regularly. 
9. Use appropriate PPE i.e. googles, gloves etc. when using chisels, drills and saws. 
Hand tools are an important part of your job. They must be treated, cared for and used in a professional 
manner. By following these safety rules, many hand tool injuries can be avoided. 
Use and Maintain Power tools 
Power tools, like hand tools, need regular inspection and maintenance. Remember: 
• 
Power tools should be PAT tested every 3 months. 
Do’s 
1. Inspect the tool, plug and cord before each use for signs of wear or faults. 
2. Ensure that the tool is compatible with the voltage of the electrical supply. 
3. Make sure the work area is clean, clear of debris and that there is plenty of light. 
4. Ensure the correct method of working with power tools. Grip with both hands and take a firm 
standing position. 
5. Store electrical tools in a secure, dry place after use. 
6. Keep drill bits and blades in good order and sharp. 
7. Use appropriate PPE i.e. googles, gloves and ear protection, when using power tools. 
8. Always take damaged or incorrectly working tools out of service and tag them as faulty. 
Don’ts 
1. Do not lift or lower a power tool by its cord. 
2. Do not drag a power tool or cable/flex across the floor. 
3. Do not use power tools that are visibly damaged or working incorrectly.  
4. Do not use power tools in wet conditions. 
5. Never use indoor-type extension cables in outside conditions. 
6. Do not change blades or drill bits with the tool plugged in. Always switch off and remove the tool 
from the power supply first. 
7. Do not use power tools without the guards/blade covers in place. 
8. Do not over – reach when working with power tools at height. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
18 
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
19 
Learning Outcome 2 
Know the types of domestic plumbing 
and heating pipe work and their jointing 
principles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
20 
There are six Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 2: 
AC2.1. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
AC2.2. 
State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use in dwellings. 
AC2.3. 
State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold water pipe to existing lead pipe 
work. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings. 
AC2.5. 
State the methods of jointing pipe work used in dwellings. 
AC2.6. 
State the methods of bending pipe work used in dwellings. 
 
AC2.1 Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and 
heating work 
and 
AC2.2 State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use 
in dwellings 
Copper tubes to BSEN 1057  
Copper 
tube 
is 
manufactured 
to 
BSEN 1057 and has 
been used in UK 
plumbing systems 
since the 1940s. 
The type of copper 
used 
is 
today 
phosphorus 
de-
oxidised 
copper 
that has a minimum 
copper content of 
99.9%. De-oxidised copper has a melting point of 1083oC 
and can be soldered, brazed and welded with ease. 
Between 20oC and 100oC it has a linear expansion rate 
0.00000166 per oC.  
Chromium coated copper tube is available where there are 
aesthetics considerations and plastic-coated copper 
Copper tube pipe sizes for R250 Grade tube 
Nom. 
Diameter 
(mm) 
Outside 
Diameter 
(mm) 
Copper tube R250 
Half hard light gauge 
tube 
Thickness 
(mm) 
Maximum 
Working 
Pressure 
(N/mm2) 
6 
6 
0.6 
13.3 
8 
8 
0.6 
9.7 
10 
10 
0.6 
7.7 
12 
12 
0.6 
6.3 
15 
15 
0.7 
5.8 
18 
18 
0.8 
5.6 
22 
22 
0.9 
5.1 
28 
28 
0.9 
4 
35 
35 
1.2 
4.2 
42 
42 
1.2 
3.5 
54 
54 
1.2 
2.7 
67 
67 
1.2 
2 
76.1 
76.2 
1.5 
2.4 
108 
108.1 
1.5 
1.7 
Copper tubes  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
21 
(known as kutelex) is available where protection from the elements is essential. 
Copper tubes can be used for hot and cold water services, central heating systems, gas installations, medical 
gas systems, oil systems and sanitation systems. It is available in the UK in 3 grades (see below): 
Grade  
Description  
R220 
Soft copper tube, full annealed and supplied in coils from 10m to 50m in length. It is thicker 
walled than other grades of copper tube. Used for underground water services (sizes 15, 22, 
28mm) and micro-bore central heating systems (sizes 6, 8 and 10mm).  
R250 
The most widely used grade of copper tube for plumbing and heating applications. Supplied in 
straight lengths of 3m or 6m in sizes 15, 22, 28, 35, 42, 54mm. It is known as half-hard tempered. 
R290 
Hard tempered, thin walled and very unsuitable for bending. Not normally used in the UK. 
 
Low Carbon Steel to BSEN 10255:2004 
Not really used in domestic installations and its 
use should be restricted to wet central heating 
systems and gas installations. Low Carbon Steel is 
used extensively on commercial and industrial 
systems for specialised water systems, heating, 
gas, compressed air and many other specialised 
applications. It is often referred to as mild steel 
pipe. LCS is supplied in lengths up to 6m with 
either threaded or plain ends. It is usually painted 
either black or red. It can also be supplied with a 
galvanised coating. There are 3 grades of LCS. The 
grades are related to pipe wall thickness: 
Grade 
Colour Code 
 
Light 
Brown 
Seldom used except with fire suppressant sprinkler systems. The pipe wall is 
thin. 
Medium  
Blue 
The most common grade used in plumbing installations.  
Heavy  
Red 
The same as medium grade but can also be used below ground. The thickest 
pipe wall of all LCS grades. 
Galvanised Low Carbon Steel Pipe 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
22 
Low Carbon Steel pipe sizes are listed in the table left: 
From the table it will be seen that both metric and imperial 
pipe sizes have been given. While both measurements are 
interchangeable, they refer to the internal diameter of the 
pipe, the outside measurement being considerably larger. 
Fittings for LCS pipe are still stamped with imperial 
measurements and not metric, which can cause confusion. 
Plastic pipework  
Plastic pipe materials have transformed modern plumbing 
systems and greatly reduced installation times whilst 
increasing system efficiency with superior flowrates but 
just like a plumber must know their metals, a good 
knowledge of plastics is essential to stop mistakes being made. Using plastic pipe for systems that it is not 
designed for can have a detrimental effect on the system and gives plastic and undeserved bad name. 
There are two types of plastic pipe: 
A. Plastic pressure pipe (for hot and cold water and central heating systems) 
B. Plastic sanitary pipe (for above and below ground drainage, waste pipes and gutter systems) 
Plastic pressure pipe (for hot and cold water and central heating systems) 
Plastic pressure pipe is plastic pipe that can be installed in high-pressure plumbing systems, such as cold 
water supplied from a water main. There are two types of plastic pressure pipe 
o Polyethylene – this is used for mains cold water pipe (coloured blue) and gas pipe (coloured yellow). 
There are two grades: 
§ 
Medium density polyethylene (MDPE) – often 
referred to as ‘alkathene’, it is manufactured to 
Water Standards ISO4427: 2007 for below ground 
use. It is light and flexible, and ideal for carrying 
wholesome, potable water as well as a variety of 
chemicals. However, it does degrade under the 
effects of ultra-violet light. Because of this, it 
should not be used for above ground installations 
and it is recommended that no more than 150mm of blue MDPE be exposed when 
it enters a dwelling. It is available in 25m, 50m and 100m coils in the following pipe 
sizes – 20mm, 25mm, 32mm, 50mm and 63mm. 
§ 
High Density Polyethylene (HDPE). Used for mains cold water pipe until the mid-
Diameter Nominal 
Outside 
Diameter 
(mm) 
(inches) 
mm 
1/8 
6 
10.3 
1/4 
8 
13.7 
3/8 
10 
17.145 
1/2 
15 
21.336 
3/4 
20 
26.67 
1 
25 
33.401 
1 1/4 
32 
42.164 
1 1/2 
40 
48.26 
2 
50 
60.325 
2 1/2 
65 
73.025 
3 
80 
88.9 
MDPE pipe 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
23 
1980’s until replaced by MDPE. Coloured black and available in four grades: A, B, C 
and D. 
o Polybutylene – Produced for pressurised plumbing 
systems and central heating installations. Because it is 
flexible, it can be cabled easily through holes cut into 
timber joists. This ensures that fewer joints are required 
and the installation process decreases the installation 
time. It has: 
1. A high temperature/pressure resistance with low 
noise and thermal transmission.   
2. Smooth internal bore giving it better flowrate characteristics than copper tube.  
3. High resistance to corrosion and scaling.  
However, polybutylene is micro-porous, which allows air to be leeched through the walls of the 
pipe and while this is not a problem for hot and cold water supplies, central heating installations 
would suffer increased corrosion as a result. To counteract this, polybutylene pipe is 
manufactured with an impervious barrier to prevent the air from infiltrating the central heating 
system water. It is available in sizes 10mm, 15mm, 22mm and 28mm in straight lengths of 3m 
and coils of 25m, 50m and 100m lengths. The pipe sizes are compatible with copper tubes to 
BSEN1057 meaning standard compression fittings can be used. 
Plastic sanitary pipe (for above and below ground drainage, waste pipes and gutter 
systems) 
Modern sanitary plumbing systems utilise modern materials. This involves the use of plastics of one type or 
another. Plastics have an extremely smooth internal surface, which helps the flow rate when compared to 
more traditional materials such as cast-iron and clay pipes. There are 4 types of plastics that are used 
extensively in modern sanitary systems: 
• 
PVCu – Unplasticised Polyvinyl Chloride. Manufactured to BS4514, PVCu pipes are used mainly for 
above and below ground sanitation systems, soil and vent pipes, waste pipes and overflows, push-fit 
and solvent weld fittings, gutter systems and rainwater pipework. Despite its good resistance to 
ultra-violet light, PVCu can suffer from photo- degradation and it’s coefficient of linear expansion is 
high. It is available in the following sizes: 
o 150mm and 110mm for soil pipes, vent pipes and below ground drainage systems 
o 50mm, 40mm and 32mm for waste pipes 
o 22.1mm for overflow pipes.                                            
Polybutylene pressure pipe 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
24 
• 
PVCmu – Modified Unplasticised Polyvinyl Chloride. Manufactured to BS5255, PVCmu is mainly 
used for solvent weld waste and overflow pipes. It has better performance than other plastics at high 
temperature and is much more durable than PVCu. It is available in the following sizes: 
o 50mm, 40mm and 32mm for waste pipes 
o  22.1mm for overflow pipes. 
• 
ABS – Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene. Mainly used for soil and vent pipes and mains cold water 
pipework. It is much tougher than PVCu, possessing good impact and mechanical strength but 
degrades quickly when exposed to ultraviolet light. The jointing methods and sizes are the same as 
PVCu. 
• 
Polypropylene. One of the most widely used plastics in the plumbing industry, Polypropylene is used 
for waste pipes, cisterns, WC siphons and overflow pipework. Unlike the other three types of plastic, 
polypropylene cannot be solvent welded. Jointing is normally either push-fit or compression fittings. 
AC2.3 State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold 
water pipe to existing lead pipe work 
Lead pipe was used extensively in plumbing for hundreds of years but as we discovered in the health and 
safety unit, lead is a highly toxic substance. Because of this, it’s use declined when safer alternatives, such as 
copper pipe, became available in the 1940s and 1950s. Finally, in 1986, it’s use was banned under the new 
101 Model Water Byelaws. There are, however, still many thousands of homes and businesses still connected 
to a lead mains cold water supply and there will be situations where these will need to be repaired or 
replaced. The old practice of ‘wiping’ a lead solder joint with a moleskin wiping cloth has also been prohibited 
by the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 and so alternative methods have had to be developed. 
There are two main lead to copper/plastic jointing alternatives: 
• 
The leadlock compression fitting 
• 
The Philmac Universal Transition coupling. 
The LeadLock Compression fitting 
Leadlocks are the most common fitting used to convert lead pipe to copper/polybutylene pipe. Connection 
is made via a rubber ‘O’ ring being compressed against the lead pipe. There are six parts to this fitting: 
• 
The fitting body, made of brass – the physical connection between the copper and the lead pipes 
• 
A compression nut – to hold the lead and copper pipes to the fitting body 
• 
A rubber sealing ring – to make the seal to the lead pipe 
• 
A copper compression ring or ‘olive’ – to make the seal between the copper and the fitting body 
• 
A copper grab ring – to prevent the lead from pulling out of the joint 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
25 
• 
A friction ring – to prevent the tightening process from destroying the rubber sealing ring. 
The most common problem with leadlocks is establishing the correct size of the lead pipe. Lead pipe was 
generally bought by weight as well as size. The following size/weights were common: 
• 
3/8” - 5lb 
• 
1/2” - 6lb 
• 
1/2” - 7lb 
• 
3/4” - 8lb 
• 
3/4” - 9lb 
It is therefore, important to know the size/weight of the pipe before buying 
the leadlock. This was usually stamped into the outside wall of the pipe at 
regular intervals. 
Making a leadlock joint 
1. Firstly, the lead pipe must be as round as possible. This can sometimes prove difficult, especially 
when lead has been buried in floors or underground for many years. If the pipe isn’t round, the fitting 
may be difficult to push on to the pipe and the rubber sealing ring may not seal properly and the 
fitting will leak. 
2. Any markings on the pipe must be removed with a file or a rasp and ensure that the end of the pipe 
is cut square. 
3. Dis-assemble the fitting and slide the compression nut over the pipe. Follow this with the grab ring, 
the friction ring and finally the rubber sealing ‘O’ ring. 
4. Slide the fitting onto the end of the pipe, ensuring that it travels all the way to the pipe stop in the 
fitting. 
5. Now, slide the compression nut/grab ring/friction ring/‘O’ ring combination up to the fitting and turn 
in a clockwise direction until the fitting is hand tight. 
6. Tighten the compression nut with an adjustable spanner. Hold the fitting body with a second spanner 
to stop it from turning. The compression nut will wind down compressing both the rubber ‘O’ ring to 
make the seal and the grab ring, which will bite slightly into the lead preventing it from blowing off 
when the system is pressurised with water. The friction ring will prevent over-tightening of the fitting. 
7. When this is completed, the copper end of the fitting can be completed by following the method for 
making a compression joint, outlined later in this unit. 
8. Turn on the water slowly and test the completed joint. 
Important point: whilst leadlocks are a recognised method of making lead to copper joints, it must be 
 
A leadlock fitting  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
26 
remembered that a lead/brass/copper combination may cause galvanic action (as outlined in Scientific 
Principles) and the lead may corrode quickly, depending on the type of water. Always seek the advice of the 
local water authority before using leadlocks. 
The Philmac Universal Transition coupling 
An alternative to the 
lead lock, which does 
not cause galvanic 
action, is the Philmac 
Universal Transition 
Coupling. This fitting 
is 
designed 
to 
connect 
many 
different types of pipe together using a common fitting body and a selection of different inserts to 
accommodate the different types of pipe available. One of the benefits of using this system is that the fitting 
has a greater tolerance to the lead pipe being deformed or mis-shaped and will accommodate most lead pipe 
sizes with a single adapter or insert. It is also much easier to dis-mantle and refit, if necessary. 
Making a Philmac joint 
• 
Ensure that the lead pipe is cut square 
• 
Any markings on the pipe must be removed with a file or rasp 
• 
The fitting does not need to be dis-mantled. Ensure that the locking nut is open and that 3 turns of 
thread are visible 
• 
Hold the fitting next to the pipe with the pipe end against the stop flange 
• 
Mark the pipe so that you know when the pipe is full inside the fitting 
• 
Push the fitting on to the pipe up to the mark you have made on the pipe 
• 
Now, using a pair of water pump pliers, tighten the compression nut. Use a second pair of water 
pump pliers on the fitting to prevent the whole assembly from spinning 
• 
Ensure that the joint is fully tightened and once both ends of the fitting are complete, slowly turn on 
the water up to full pressure and check for leaks. 
AC2.3 Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings 
For a plumber to be able to their job, they must be able to identify and select the correct fitting for the 
installation. In AC2.3, we will investigate the jointing methods and some of the common fittings used to joint 
A Philmac transitional coupling 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
27 
copper pipe, mild steel pipe and plastic pipes. The fitting types shown are not extensive and manufacturer’s 
data sheets and fittings catalogues should be consulted.  
Common fittings for copper tubes for BSEN 1057 Copper tube 
Fitting 
Compression 
Capillary End 
Feed 
Capillary 
integral 
solder ring 
Push fit 
Press fit 
Couplers 
 
 
 
 
 
Elbows and 
bends 
 
 
 
 
 
Equal tees 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing tees 
– reduced end 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing tees 
– reduced 
branch 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducers 
 
 
 
 
 
Stop/cap ends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
28 
Tap connectors for BSEN 1057 Copper tube 
Fitting 
Compression 
Capillary End Feed 
Capillary integral 
solder ring 
Push fit 
Tap connector 
- straight 
 
 
 
 
Tap connector 
- bent 
 
 
 
 
 
Manifolds and tank connectors for BSEN 1057 Copper tube 
Fitting 
Compression 
Capillary End Feed 
Capillary integral 
solder ring 
Push fit 
Tank 
connectors 
 
 
 
 
Manifolds 
 
 
 
 
 
Stopvalves, isolation valves and gate valves for BSEN 1057 Copper tube 
Fitting 
Compression 
Push fit 
Capillary integral 
solder ring 
Stop taps 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
29 
Gate valves 
 
 
 
Service valves 
 
 
 
 
Fittings for BS EN 10255:2004 (formally BS1387:1985) Low Carbon Steel 
Whiteheart fittings: 
These have a rounded bead 
around the mouth of the fitting. 
 
Blackheart fittings: 
These have a square bead around 
the mouth of the fitting   
 
 
Whiteheart Screwed fittings 
Sockets 
 
Reducers 
 
Equal tees 
 
Unions 
 
Elbows 
 
Nipples 
 
 
 
Bends 
 
 
 
Bushes 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
30 
M/F Elbows 
 
Plugs and Caps 
 
Pitcher tees 
 
 
 
Fittings for Plastic Pressure pipe 
 
All fittings Hep2O 
Couplers 
 
Elbows 
 
Equal tees 
 
Reducing tees – 
reduced end 
 
Reducing tees – 
reduced branch 
 
Reducers 
 
Tap connector 
 
Manifolds 
 
Tank connectors 
 
Service valves 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
31 
Stop ends 
 
Insert 
 
 
Fittings for Plastic Sanitary pipe 
Fitting 
Soil 
(solvent weld) 
Soil 
(push fit) 
Waste 
(solvent weld) 
Waste 
(push fit) 
Waste (universal) 
Socket 
 
 
 
 
Knuckle 
bend 
 
 
 
 
 
Large 
radius 
bend 
 
 
Push fit only 
 
 
 
Junction 
(tee) 
 
 
 
 
 
135o 
bend 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducers  
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
32 
Boss 
pipe 
 
 
Access 
boss 
 
 
Patch 
boss/ 
Strap 
boss 
 
 
Traps 
P Trap 
 
S Trap 
 
Anti-syphon 
Trap 
 
Bottle Trap 
 
Shower Trap 
 
Running Trap 
 
Bath Trap 
 
In-line trap 
 
Washing 
Machine Trap 
 
 
AC2.5 State the methods of jointing pipe work used in dwellings 
In AC2.3, we looked at the different fittings available in copper, low carbon steel and plastics. In AC 2.4, we 
will look at the methods we use to make a water tight, leak free joint. 
Jointing copper tubes 
There are four methods of jointing coper tube used frequently in plumbing and heating systems: 
a) Capillary (BSEN1254: 1998) 
a. Integral solder ring 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
33 
b. End feed 
b) Compression  
a. Type A – non-manipulative 
b. Type B- manipulative 
c) Push-fit 
d) Press-fit 
 
Capillary fittings to BSEN1254: 1998 
Capillary type fittings are heated by a blow torch. They use the principle of capillary attraction to draw the 
solder into the fitting as it is heated. 
 
Integral solder ring capillary fittings 
This type of fitting already contains the solder to 
make a watertight joint. The solder is contained in 
a raised section of the fitting and releases into the 
joint when it is heated by a blowtorch. Extra solder 
is not required. 
 
End feed capillary fittings 
End feed fittings require the solder to be applied 
by the plumber at the mouth of the fitting while 
the fitting is hot. It does not contain its own solder 
 
To successfully make a capillary fitting, the following method should be used: 
a) Cut the copper tube using either pipe cutters or a hacksaw and de-burr the end. 
b) Clean the inside of the fitting and the outside of the pipe using either steel wool or emery cloth. 
c) Apply a suitable flux to the tube end only and insert the tube into the fitting. A slight twist of the 
fitting will ensure that the solder is evenly spread throughout the whole joint. 
d) Apply heat to the fitting from the blowtorch and wait 10 seconds before applying any solder. End 
feed fittings should be fed at the mouth of the fitting. Solder ring fittings do not require this as the 
solder will appear at the mouth of the fitting when it has been successfully soldered. After the 
fitting has been heated, check that the solder has flowed around the entire fitting. Do not use 
excessive heat or the flux will turn black and the solder will not take to the tube. 
e) While the fitting is still hot and the solder fluid, wipe any excess solder away with a cloth. Care 
should be taken to ensure that the fitting is not disturbed or you may cause a leak. 
f) Once cooled, wipe any excess flux away with a damp cloth. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
34 
Fluxes and solders 
Solders 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 require that only led free solders are used when installing 
hot and cold water supply. There are several types of lead free solder available and most are a mixture of tin 
and copper. They are manufactured to BSEN29453 and are known as ‘number 23 tin based solders’ and have 
a melting point range of between 230oC to 240oC. 
Solders that contain lead can be used on systems such as gas installations and central heating. However, 
there is a risk that the wrong solder will be used when installing hot and cold water systems and so its use 
should be avoided if possible. 
Fluxes 
Fluxes are necessary during the soldering process to remove any surface oxides on the copper tube and to 
assist with the free flow of the solder in the fitting itself. Fluxes take two forms: 
• 
Active flux – known as self-cleaning flux, this flux cleans the copper tube and the fitting during 
soldering making pre-cleaning with an abrasive material not necessary. Some active fluxes contain 
hydrochloric acid, which encourages corrosion if not completely cleaned off the copper tubes after 
use. Active fluxes are water soluble and are therefore thoroughly washed out when the water 
systems are flushed through when the initial flushing of systems is carried out. 
• 
Traditional flux paste – traditional flux has been used successfully to make soldered joints for many 
years and contains zinc chloride and amines that act as active agents. However, it is reliant on the 
copper tube and the fitting being totally clean. Therefore, cleaning of both the tube and the fitting is 
required. It is not water soluble, which means it can stay in the pipework for many years after 
soldering has taken place and even after flushing with cold water. Because of this, it should be used 
with care. 
Compression fittings to BSEN1254: 1998 
Compression fittings are mechanical and require spanners to tighten them to make a leak-free joint. Care 
should be taken to avoid overtightening as this will distort the tube and cause the fitting to leak. Again, 
there are two distinct types: 
Type A Non-manipulative fittings – these fittings are called non-manipulative because the copper tube does 
not have to be worked or ‘manipulated’ to enable a leak free joint to be made. Made from brass or gun 
metal, they contain three parts: 
1. The fitting body 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
35 
2. 
The Compression nut 
3. 
The compression ring or ‘olive’. 
When the fitting is tightened, the compression nut 
compresses the olive on to the copper tube slightly 
so that the fitting does not come apart or leak 
when the joint is under pressure.  
To make a successful Type A non-manipulative 
compression joint follow the steps below: 
• 
Cut the copper tube with a pipe cutter or hacksaw and de-burr the end. 
• 
Slip the compression nut and olive over the end of the tube and re-assemble the fitting until it is 
hand tight. 
• 
Using an adjustable spanner, tighten the joint 1 ½ to 2 turns. Do not overtighten as this will deform 
the olive and the copper tube and may cause a leak. 
Note: Manufacturer’s say that compression joints do not require any jointing paste or PTFE to make a 
successful joint. Jointing pastes and compounds should only be used in the event of the fitting leaking after 
normal assembly procedures. 
 
 
 
 
 
Type B Manipulative fittings – These fittings are 
called manipulative because the end of the 
copper tube must be worked or manipulated 
before a joint can be made. The end of the 
copper must be flared out with a swaging tool. 
The fitting is comprised of the fitting body, the 
compression nut, a compensating ring and an 
adapter to allow the copper to make a leak free 
joint with the copper tube. 
Generally, these fittings are used on R220 grade 
soft copper tubes for underground water service 
pipes. 
To make a successful Type B non-manipulative compression joint follow the steps below: 
• 
Cut the copper tube with a hacksaw and de-burr the end. Do not use a pipe cutter because these 
tend to reduce the internal bore of the copper making insertion of the swaging tool difficult. 
• 
Slip the compression nut and the compensating ring over the tube. 
• 
Insert the swaging tool into the pipe end and strike 2 or 3 times with a hammer. This will flare open 
the tube ready for the adapter. 
• 
Ensuring that the adapter is in place in the fitting, locate the flared end of the copper over the adapter 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
36 
and hand tighten the compression nut. 
• 
Using an adjustable spanner, tighten the joint 1 ½ to 2 turns. Do not overtighten as this may deform 
copper tube and may cause a leak. 
Compression Fittings are manufactured from Duplex Brass, Gun-metal or corrosion resistant (DZR) Brass and 
can be used on hot and cold water systems, central heating installations and gas pipework. Brass is an alloy 
made from Copper and Zinc. Gunmetal is a type of bronze – an alloy of copper, tin, and zinc. 
Push-fit fittings for copper tubes 
Push-fit fittings relay on a stainless-steel grab ring and a neoprene rubber seal ‘O’ ring to make a successful 
joint. The grab ring holds the joint together, whilst the rubber sealing ring prevents any leakage. There are a 
number of similar types available and all use this method of jointing. Some fitting types are de-mountable, 
in other words, they can be taken off the 
tube for re-use with the aid of a special 
‘de-mounting’ tool. 
Under normal working conditions, the 
pressures in the table (above) are applicable. 
The fitting itself is made from either copper or 
corrosion resistant brass (DZR) and some 
manufacturer’s use gunmetal (also corrosion 
resistant). 
To make a successful push-fit joint follow the 
steps below: 
• Cut the tube with a tube cutter. The tube 
needs to be rounded and slightly bevelled at 
the end for ease of inserting it into the fitting. 
Do not use a hacksaw as the roughness of the 
tube may damage the rubber sealing ring. 
• 
At this stage, it is better to offer the tube against the fitting and mark the fitting depth on the tube 
with a pencil or marker. This is so you can check to make sure that the tube is fully in the socket once 
the joint has been completed. 
• 
Apply a little silicon lubricant on to the end of the fitting and push the tube fully inside the socket 
until resistance is felt.  
• 
Check against the mark on the tube to ensure that the fitting is fully on the tube. 
Temperature not exceeding Max. Working pressure 
300C 
16 bar 
650C 
10 bar 
900C 
6 bar 
 
A non-demountable push-
fit fitting 
  
 
A demountable push-fit 
fitting 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
37 
Press-fit fittings for copper tubes 
Press-fit fittings are the latest fitting type for copper tubes to 
become available. They use a special electrical crimping tool to 
crimp the fitting on to the tube to ensure a water tight and 
secure joint. They are used widely on commercial and industrial 
installations, especially where hot working with a plumber’s 
blow torch is not allowed. 
As can be seen by the photograph left, the fittings contain a 
rubber ‘O’ ring seal and a grab ring to ensure pipe security and 
water tightness. Tube sizes available range from 12mm up to 
108mm. 
Press-fit can be successfully used on hot and cold water 
installations, heating systems, chilled water installations and 
solar hot water systems. For gas installations, a special fitting 
with a yellow ‘O’ ring seal is available. 
 
 
 
Jointing Low Carbon Steel pipes (BS EN 10255:2004) 
There are 3 methods that are used to join LCS pipes: 
• 
Screw threaded joints using British Standard Pipe (BSP) threads (BS EN 10226-1:2004, BS EN 10226-
2:2005, BS EN 10226-3:2005) 
• 
Compression joints using a special compression fitting 
• 
Welded joints. These are outside the scope of plumbing work and will not be discussed here. 
Screw threaded jointing of Low Carbon Steel pipes 
The screw threads on Low Carbon Steel pipes and fittings are manufactured to BSEN1025: Pipes threads 
where pressure-tight joints are made on the threads. Verification by means of limit gauges 
Low Carbon Steel pipe is usually supplied from the manufacturer’s with threads already cut on to the ends 
of the pipe. Additional threads are cut using either manual stocks and dies or electric threading machines. 
There are two types of thread used: 
Temperature not 
exceeding 
Max. Working 
pressure 
200C 
16 bar 
1100C 
6 bar 
The crimping tool and press-fit fitting 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
38 
 
 
Tapered threads – This is the standard thread cut 
on to the ends of LCS pipes and blackheart male 
fittings. The principle of the thread is that, because 
it is tapered, it tightens the further it is screwed into 
the fitting. However, with some fittings this can 
either lead to the fitting stretching or, at worst, the 
fitting fracturing. 
 
Parallel threads – The parallel thread is so called 
because the thread is of uniform diameter along its 
entire length. It is used on pipe sockets and 
whiteheart female thread fittings. 
Male (m) and female (f) threads 
A male thread is an external thread found on pipes and fittings. Also sometimes referred to as a spigot. These 
can be tapered as shown in the left hand photograph, or parallel. 
A male thread 
 
 
A female thread 
 
There two types of fittings for use on Low Carbon Steel pipes that use these two distinct thread types. Fittings 
for LCS are manufactured from malleable iron to BS EN 10242 and BS 1256.  
Blackheart fittings – These have both tapered male and female threads. They are 
made from malleable cast iron and tend to be quite brittle. Because of this, they are 
susceptible to splitting if the fitting is overtightened. The fittings are marked with 
the letter ‘B’ and are identifiable by a square edged bead around the head of the 
fitting.  
Whiteheart fittings – these have tapered male threads and parallel female threads. 
Again, they are made from malleable iron but the metal has a high ferrite content, 
making them much more malleable than blackheart fittings. They tend to stretch 
rather than fracture when overtightened, making much less susceptible to splitting. 
The fittings are marked with the letter ‘W’ are identifiable by a round edged bead 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
39 
around the head of the fitting. 
Jointing compounds, pastes and tapes 
When a fitting has been made on to a length of pipe, one and a half to 
two threads should be visible when the joint is completed. 
There are several jointing compounds, pastes and tapes that can be used 
in conjunction with threaded pipes and fittings to ensure that the fittings 
do not leak when tested. The table below highlights the most common 
types of compounds available. 
 
Linseed oil based 
compounds  
Used in conjunction with hemp on wet central heating systems and compressed 
air lines.  
Caution: Not suitable for use on natural gas installations. 
Unsintered 
Polytetraflourethylene 
(PTFE tape) 
A thin, white (or yellow if used on gas) tape that can be used on almost all 
installations, from hot and cold water to gas installations. 
PTFE based jointing 
compounds  
A compound specially made for use on potable water systems. Caution: Not 
suitable for use on natural gas installations. 
Heldite jointing 
compound 
A universal compound that can be used on most installation types such oil, gas, 
hot and cold water, central heating, compressed air lines and vacuum lines. 
Manganese paste 
Specialist compounds for use with high temperature hot water and steam 
installations 
Graphite paste 
Gas seal paste 
A compound specifically made for use with natural gas and LPG installations. 
Compression jointing of Low 
Carbon Steel pipes 
Compression fittings for Low Carbon 
Steel are a fairly recent addition to the 
LCS jointing methods. They differ from 
copper compression joints in having a 
rubber compression ring to seal the joint 
rather than a brass olive.  
 
 
Joint with 2 threads showing 
A compression fitting for steel pipe 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
40 
A brass stoptap for MDPE pipe 
Push – fit fittings for plastic pressure  pipe 
Jointing plastic pressure pipes  
There are 3 types of plastic pressure pipes used by plumbers: 
• 
Polyethylene (PE, HDPE and MDPE) 
• 
Cross – linked polyethylene (PE-X) 
• 
Polybutylene (PB) 
Each of these different materials can be jointed by the same techniques: 
1. Push-fit – plastic push-fit fittings use the same method of jointing as seen earlier. The main difference 
here, is that, because the pipe wall is relatively soft, the pipe requires reinforcing with a stiffened 
pipe insert to prevent the fitting from pulling off when the water is under pressure. 
Polyethylene 
Cross-linked polyethylene 
(speedfit) 
Polybutylene 
(Hep2O) 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Compression for MDPE pipe – compression fittings for 
MDPE come in 2 different styles: 
a. 
Compression fittings made from brass – these are 
specifically made to fit the diameters of MDPE pipe. The method 
of installation is the same as the compression fittings mentioned 
earlier but with one exception. The pipe requires a copper or nylon 
insert to be placed inside the pipe to strengthen the pipe wall. 
Because these are used on underground water supplies, they are 
made from corrosion resistant brass or gunmetal.  
b. 
Compression fittings made from plastic (philmac) – these 
are designed so that any kind of pipe from MDPE, HDPE, copper 
etc. can be joined to other different pipework materials. The pipe 
fitting remains the same but each different pipe material has a 
different colour coded insert.  
MDPE Compression brass 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
41 
Using compression fittings on PE-X and PB 
Both PE-X (speedfit) and PB (Hep2O) are manufactured to standard copper tube sizes (10mm, 15mm, 22mm). 
This means that standard compression fittings for copper tubes to BS EN 1254 can be used to joint them 
provided a pipe insert is used inside the pipe to support the pipe wall. The method of use and installation is 
the same as for copper tubes. 
Jointing plastic soil and waste pipes  
There are 3 basic methods of jointing soil and waste pipes. These methods depend on the pipe material. They 
are: 
1. Solvent weld – for PVCu and ABS soil and waste pipes 
2. Push-fit: 
a. for PVCu waste pipes 
b. for polypropylene waste pipes 
3. Compression – a universal fitting to connect pipework of differing materials. 
Solvent weld – for PVCu and ABS soil and waste pipes 
Solvent weld fittings use a solvent cement that literally melts the surface of the plastic and fuses the fitting 
and the pipe together. Care should be taken when using solvent weld adhesive as the fumes given off can be 
overpowering. It is recommended that its use should only be restricted to outside or a well-ventilated room. 
To make a solvent weld joint on PVCu, muPVC and ABS, the following procedure should be followed: 
1. Cut the pipe with either a hacksaw or a multi-purpose saw and remove the burr from the inside and 
outside of the pipe with a file 
2. Wipe the dirt and manufacturer’s oils off the pipe with a clean, soft cloth 
3. Clean the inside of the socket and the outside of the pipe with the correct solvent cleaner 
4. Apply the solvent weld cement to the inside of the socket first, and then to the outside of the pipe. 
This will allow more time to make the joint as the cement cures much quicker when exposed to air. 
5. Insert the pipe into the socket and slowly twist it into place. The twisting action allows for an even 
spread of cement throughout the socket. 
6. Wipe off any excess cement with a clean, dry cloth. 
After completion, the joint must be left up to 24 hours before testing can begin. 
Solvent weld soil fitting 
Solvent cement 
Solvent cleaner 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
42 
Push-fit – for PVCu and ABS soil pipes 
Push-fit joints are probably the most common jointing method for soil and vent pipes. The fittings have a 
single neoprene chamfered rubber sealing ring in them which allows for easy jointing. There are two points 
to remember when making push-fit joints: 
1. Always chamfer the pipe before you try to push the fitting and the pipe together 
2. Always use a silicon lubricant to help ease the pipe into the socket. Do not be tempted to use washing 
up liquid or similar soap because as this dries out, the joint will seize up and movement will be 
restricted. Also, soap eventually corrodes the rubber seal and so the joint may leak in the future. 
To make a push-fit joint on PVCu, muPVC and ABS, the following procedure should be followed: 
1. Cut the pipe with either a hacksaw or a multi-purpose saw and remove the burr from the inside and 
outside of the pipe with a file 
2. Chamfer the end of the pipe to about 45o with a rasp or a file 
3. Wipe the dirt and manufacturer’s oils off the pipe with a clean, soft cloth 
4. Apply a little silicon lubricant grease to the end of the pipe and to the rubber seal inside the fitting 
5. Push the pipe all the way into the socket 
6. Withdraw the pipe 10mm. This will allow for expansion of the pipe. Pipes must be supported by a 
pipe clip or bracket to ensure that the fitting/pipe does not slip. 
Push-fit soil fitting 
Silicon spray lubricant 
Push-fit fitting for Polypropylene 
waste pipe systems 
 
 
 
 
Push-fit – for Polypropylene waste pipes 
Polypropylene waste pipe fittings are push-fit containing a single neoprene rubber ring seal.  It cannot be 
solvent welded as polypropylene is unaffected by the solvents used in solvent weld cement.  
To make a push-fit joint on polypropylene, the following procedure should be followed: 
1. Cut the pipe with either a hacksaw or a multi-purpose saw and remove the burr from the inside and 
outside of the pipe with a file 
2. Chamfer the end of the pipe to about 45o with a rasp or a file 
3. Wipe the dirt and manufacturer’s oils off the pipe with a clean, soft cloth 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
43 
4. Apply a little silicon lubricant grease to the end of the pipe and to the rubber seal inside the fitting 
5. Push the pipe all the way into the socket 
A note about solvent weld and push-fit waste pipes and fittings – push-fit and solvent weld fittings are not 
compatible with each other. They have different outside diameters and the fittings will only fit their 
recommended pipe. 
AC2.6 State the methods of bending pipe work used in dwellings. 
In this next section, we will look at the methods we can use to bend the different types of pipe.  
Bending copper tube 
Bending copper tube is a skill that becomes easier with practice. The art to good pipe bending is knowing the 
limitations of the bending machine you are using, whether that machine is a scissor bender, tripod bender 
or spring. 
Using a bending machine 
Using a bending machine is an economical way of installing copper pipes as each bend we produce saves 
time and money on fittings purchasing, preparation and completion. Where lots of changes of direction must 
be performed, these can be completed by bending the pipe much more precisely and much neater than by 
using fittings. The end result is a professional looking installation with less leakage potential. 
Both the scissor bender (also known as the handibender) and the tripod bender use the same technique to 
bend the pipe. The following methods can be performed on either of these two machines easily and to the 
same degree of accuracy. 
As you work through the different bends, it will become apparent that the accuracy of the bends relies upon 
determining the bending point and the position of the tube in the machine. Accurate templates and marking 
of the tube are also vitally important if an acceptable degree of accuracy is to be obtained. 
These notes assume that you will be performing most your bends on a scissor bending machine. 
90o Bends 
There are two ways of performing a 90o Bend: 
• 
90o bend from a fixed point 
• 
90o bend using a short piece of tube 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
44 
90o bend from a fixed point 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
45 
90o bend using a short piece of tube 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
46 
Sets and offset bends – 45o sets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
47 
Sets and offset bends – offsets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
48 
Passover bends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
49 
Partial Passover bends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
50 
Bends in two planes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
51 
Rippling or throating of Tube in Machine Made Bends 
Bending machines are designed to produce a bend with a 
diameter of 4 x the diameter of the tube. So, for instance, a 
90o bend on 15mm tube will have a centre radius of 60mm. 
The bending former on the machine supports the tube 
through the bending process at its throat and sides, whilst the 
bending guide supports the top of the tube. When bending 
takes place, two actions occur simultaneously: 
1.  The outside of the bend is subjected to stretching 
2. The inside of the bend (called the throat) is subjected to 
crushing. 
The bend is dependent on the bending guide 
being placed in the correct position and the 
correct pressure being applied from the 
bending roller, through the bending guide to 
the tube. If this pressure is incorrect, or the 
guide is positioned incorrectly, then, again 
two outcomes could be possible: 
3. 
Too much pressure will result in the 
tube ‘throating’ excessively. In other words, 
the bend will show signs of crushing 
deformation on its throat. 
4. 
Not enough pressure will result in 
the tube rippling along its throat. 
Look at the drawing left. The top drawing 
shows that the bending roller on the 
bending machine has not been tightened 
sufficiently. Both the roller and the guide are 
too far forward. This will result in the tube 
rippling on its throat. The slack roller is 
indicated in the bottom drawing. When the 
bending arm is placed tin the correct upright 
position, a gap appears between the roller and the guide, indicating that the roller isn’t tight enough. For the 
bend to be performed correctly in this instance, the roller must be tightened. 
The rollers on tripod and bench bending machines can be adjusted successfully. With scissor benders, 
Figure 4: Bend radius 
Figure 5: How to avoid rippling and throating 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
52 
however, the rippling effect occurs over time as the machine is used. This is because the bending former is 
made from aluminium, which, being a soft, light metal, stretches with use. Because the roller is fixed, it 
cannot be re-adjusted and so rippling occurs. As a temporary measure, a thin strip of metal the thickness of 
a hacksaw blade can be placed on the top of the bending guide to close the gap between the roller and the 
guide. Usually, though, it’s an indication that the bender has come to the end of its useful life. 
Using a bending spring 
Bending springs are used to support the wall of the pipe during the bending process. Springs are available to 
suit copper tube grades R220 and R250, so it’s 
important that the correct size of spring is used as 
these two grades of copper have different wall 
thicknesses. 
The bending radius with spring bends, at 5 
diameters of tube, is slightly larger than for 
machine made bends but 4d can be achieved 
comfortably. 
The big advantage with spring bending is that the 
radius of the bend can be varied as it is not fixed 
by a bending former. This allows centre to centre 
measurements to be continued around bends. 
See the drawing left. 
Setting out 90o spring bends 
On R250 grade copper tube, spring bends should be limited to 15mm and 22mm as bending over this size is 
not only difficult but can also damage the knee. The point to remember is that the tube will appear to ‘gain’ 
length when it is bent. If wastage of tube is to be avoided, then we must calculate the actual length of the 
bend. 
1. Decide on bend radius. Yorkshire Copper Tube recommend 5D. Any radius can be determined by a 
drawing a template first. 
The length of the pipe taken up by a 90° bend can be calculated using the formula: 
𝑹𝒂𝒅𝒊𝒖𝒔 (𝑹) 𝒙 𝟐 𝒙 𝝅 (𝟑. 𝟏𝟒𝟐) 
𝟒 
2. Assuming that a 15mm pipe is to be bent to a radius of 5D, to find out how much pipe will be taken 
up by the bend: 
 
Figure 6: Concentric spring bends 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
53 
Radius of bend is 5D 
= 
 5 x 15  
=  
75mm.  
Using the formula: 
𝟕𝟓 𝒙 𝟐 𝒙 𝟑. 𝟏𝟒
𝟒
= 𝟏𝟏𝟕. 𝟖𝒎𝒎 𝒓𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒆𝒅 𝒕𝒐 𝟏𝟐𝟎𝒎𝒎 
Length of bend  
=  
120 mm 
3. Mark off the required distance from 
the end of the tube to the centre-line of 
the 
bend 
(the 
end-to-centre 
measurement) 
4. Divide the calculated length of tube by 
three (for 15mm tube this will be three 
equal measurements of 40 mm) 
5. 
From the original measurement, 
mark 40mm forward and 80 mm back  
6. The bend can then be pulled between 
the second and third marks  ensuring that 
it is kept within the three 40 mm 
measurements, this will keep the centre of 
the bend the correct distance from the 
fixed point. 
                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
54 
Setting out offset spring bends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
55 
Bending Low Carbon Steel 
There are two common methods of bending Low Carbon Steel pipe: 
1. By hydraulic bending machine. Hydraulic bending machines use hydraulic oil in a pressurised cylinder 
to exert enough force to bend the steel pipe via a bending former. Unlike copper bending machines, 
LCS bending machines do not need a bending guide as the pipe can withstand the effects of bending. 
This prevents problems such as rippling occurring. The LCS pipe tends to spring back a little when a 
bend has been formed and so it is recommended to overbend the bends slightly as the pipe will 
spring back into its correct position once the pressure on the pipe has been released. This method 
generally known as cold bending. 
2. By using heat. This is mainly used on industrial installations and involves the use of oxy/acetylene 
torches to heat the steel pipe enough to allow bending to take place by hand. This method generally 
known as hot bending. 
The following bends are performed using the cold bending method in a hydraulic bending machine. 
Bending a 90o bend using a hydraulic bending machine 
 
 
1. Measure the distance required and mark a line on the pipe to the centre line of the required bend. 
2. From this mark, measure back towards the pipe end or fixed point 1 diameter of the internal bore of 
the pipe to point A. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
56 
3. Place point A at the centre of the bending former on the bending machine. The centre point will be 
marked on the bending former. 
4. Pump the handle of the bending machine until an angle of 900 + 50 (this allows for the pipe springing 
back) has been achieved. Always stand to the side of the machine. DO NOT stand in front of it whilst 
bending is being performed. 
Bending an offset bend using a hydraulic bending machine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Mark a line at the first bend onto the pipe 
2. Place pipe in machine on that line. Do not make any deduction. The measured distance mark goes 
on the centre of the former. The measurement A is from the fixed end of the pipe to the centre of 
the set 
3. Bend the pipe to the offset angle (usually 30o or 45o) and check the angle using a template or a set 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
57 
square. 
4. Release the pipe from the bending machine and place a straight edge against the back of the pipe. 
Measure the required offset distance and mark bending point B. 
5. Place the pipe back into the machine and line up point B with the centre of the former. Make sure 
that the first bend is pointed away from the machine. Bend the second bend and check with the 
template or set square.  
Bending a Passover bend using a hydraulic bending machine  
1. Mark on the tube the position of the initial bend at the centre of the obstacle. Now, go forward of 
that mark ¼ of the obstacle diameter e.g. if the obstacle is a pipe of 35mm diameter then: 
𝟑𝟓 ÷  𝟒 =  𝟖. 𝟕𝟓𝒎𝒎 𝒐𝒓 𝟏𝟎𝒎𝒎 𝒓𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒆𝒅 𝒖𝒑 
Now mark the pipe 10mm past the fixed end point. This is where the initial pipe bend will be made. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
58 
1. Find the correct angle to allow clearance of the obstacle by multiplying the diameter of the obstacle 
(if it’s a pipe) by 3 and then deducting this distance from a 600mm rule and opening a 600mm folding 
rule at this distance e.g. if the obstacle is a pipe of 35mm diameter then: 
𝟑𝟓 𝒙 𝟑 =  𝟏𝟎𝟓 
𝟔𝟎𝟎 –  𝟏𝟎𝟓 =  𝟒𝟗𝟓 
So, the folding rule will need to be opened to a distance of 105mm, creating the bending angle. 
2. Place the pipe in the machine ensuring that the bend mark (not the fixed end point) is in the centre 
of the former. Bend the pipe taking care not to over bend. 
3. Making sure that the bend clears the obstacle, place a straight edge over the bend and mark both 
sides. Now, complete a cross on the marks that correspond to the centreline of the pipe. These are 
the bending marks for the completing return bends. 
4. Position the pipe in the machine so that the cross falls in the centre of the former. Care is needed 
here to make sure that the bend is not twisted in the machine. Bend the return bend taking care to 
check for pipe twisting and the correct return angle. 
5. Now, turn the bend around and follow the same procedure again to complete the cross over. 
Bending plastic pressure pipe (polybutylene and cross-linked polyethylene) 
 
 
 
 
Plastic pressure pipe can be bent by hand without the use of a bending machine. However, to prevent pipe 
distortion, it is recommended that cold forming bend fixtures of the type shown left should be used wherever 
possible. Cold forming bend fixtures are metal braces that hold the pipe  at 90o.  It is also possible to brace 
the bend by the use of pipe clips positioned to ensure the correct bend radius as shown in the table. 
 
 
 
 
Bend radii for plastic pressure pipes 
Diameter of pipe - mm 
10 
15 
22 
28 
Radius dimension A - mm 
80* 
120* 
160* 
224* 
*can vary depending on the  manufacturer of the pipe  
Cold forming bend fixture 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
59 
Learning Outcome 3 
Know the general site preparation 
techniques for plumbing and heating 
work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are eight Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 3: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
60 
AC3.1. 
Define the typical range of activities to be carried out when working on plumbing and heating 
systems 
AC3.2. 
State what information should be passed on to the customer when carrying out work on 
domestic pipework systems. 
AC3.3. 
Identify how to check for pre-existing damage to the building fabric or customer property 
before the work commences. 
AC3.4. 
Identify how to protect the building fabric or customer property before the work commences: 
AC3.5. 
Identify the method of storing tools, equipment and materials when working in new buildings 
and existing dwellings 
AC3.6. 
Identify the range of hand and power tools required to complete work on domestic pipework 
systems. 
AC3.7. 
State the checks to be carried out on tools and equipment to ensure that they work correctly 
and are correctly calibrated. 
AC3.8. 
State the work methods for preparing building construction features for installation work 
 
AC3.1 Define the typical range of activities to be carried out when 
working on plumbing and heating systems 
Plumbing systems require designing, planning, installation and commissioning. 
a. Designing and selecting materials and equipment – this involves calculation of flowrates, heat losses 
from the building fabric, capacities of cisterns and pipe sizes. It also includes planning the installation 
with regard to the positioning and selection of components and appliances. 
b. Preparing work sites - The preparatory work we perform before we can begin the installation is as 
important as the installation itself. More often than not, good prep work ensures that the installation 
is trouble free. Preparatory work includes removing furniture, lifting carpets and floorboards, 
removal of old equipment and pipework and protecting the customers property. As with all good 
installations, consulting the right documents is an important aspect of the job. 
• 
Statutory regulations – these are vital because they state clearly what we can and 
cannot do. All regulations are enforceable in a court of law: 
o The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations – important in the installation of 
bathrooms, kitchens, wet rooms, shower rooms, utility rooms, underground 
water services, water metering and backflow protection. 
o The Gas (installation and use) Regulations – should be consulted when 
preparing to install wet central heating, boiler replacements, gas fires, gas 
cookers and all domestic gas pipework. 
o The Building Regulations – important when structural alterations become part 
of the installation, such as conversions of garages into flats and bedsits, loft 
conversions etc. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
61 
o The IET Regulations – where any plumber’s work involves the planning, 
installation or alteration of electrical work, these should be consulted to ensure 
compliance with the law and the safety of the customer. 
• 
Industry standards – the British Standards take the form of recommendations. By 
ensuring that the installation meets the requirements of the British Standards, the 
installation will meet the strict requirements of the regulations. 
• 
Manufacturer technical instructions – no one knows the equipment better than the 
people that designed and built it. Again, by following manufacturer’s preparation and 
installation requirements, the installation will not only meet the Regulations, but will 
also ensure that the manufacturer’s guarantee is valid and in force. 
• 
Building plans – these show the intended position of the equipment and appliances. 
Some building layouts also show the position of any existing services and pipe work etc. 
• 
Specifications – these not only state what equipment is being installed, but, often the 
make of the equipment and, often, the British Standard also. A specification should not 
be altered without the permission of the customer or the Architect. 
c. Installing systems and components – this should be conducted with care and professionalism. 
Always follow the manufacturer’s instructions when installing equipment and appliances and always 
consult the British Standards and Regulations when necessary. 
d. Maintaining and dealing with faults on systems and components – once the system has been 
installed, maintenance is the key to keeping it in good working order. Maintaining systems prolongs 
the systems life, encourages early diagnosis of potential problems and prevents breakdowns. If a 
component should fail, always use the manufacturer’s instructions for a proper diagnosis of the fault. 
e. Decommissioning systems and components – temporary and permanent – this is where a system is 
either permanently or temporarily taken out of service. 
f. Soundness testing systems and components – once the installation is complete, soundness testing 
will determine if there any leaks on the system. Different pipework materials have different testing 
regimes and the Regulations and British Standards, as well as the manufacturer’s instructions, should 
be consulted before testing begins. 
g. Commissioning systems and components – when the system has been installed and tested, then 
commissioning can begin. Commissioning is where the components and appliances are ‘set up’ for 
everyday use. It is also where we find if our design calculations are correct. Flow rates, temperatures 
and component operation must all be checked to ensure that they meet the specification, design and 
customer satisfaction. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
62 
AC3.2 State what information should be passed on to the customer 
when carrying out work on domestic pipework systems. 
Many customer complaints centre around the lack of information given to them regarding the installation of 
their new bathroom or central heating system etc. In almost all cases, this is down to poor customer liaison 
and by following a few simple rules, can be avoided. Before the installation begins: 
ü Make sure that the customer is completely in agreement on what day and time the job is going to 
start. Agree a start time and stick to it. Early morning starts are not always welcome as families need 
to prepare their day in privacy without having to worry about their routine being placed into chaos 
by the arrival and disruption of a working plumber. 
ü Point out any carpets and furniture that will need to be removed from the area that you will be 
working in and ask the customer to remove them. It may be that the customer is happy for you to 
remove them but the customer must be given the opportunity to remove their possessions first. This 
is especially important with carpets and floor coverings as old carpets can fray easily and have been 
the cause of many customer/plumber disputes in the past. 
ü Agree the position of appliances and equipment BEFORE you install them. It may be that the wall 
where a radiator is going to be installed is needed for a piece of furniture etc. This is especially 
important when exposed pipework cannot be avoided as customers do not like to see pipework, no 
matter how neat it is. 
ü Keep the customer informed about any problems that you come across, especially if there is an added 
cost involved. Non-agreed extras can come as a shock and, if they have not been agreed in writing 
beforehand, there is no legal requirement for the customer to agree to payment. 
ü Keep the customer informed when services – gas, water, electricity – are going to be turned off, or 
appliances, such as WCs are going to be decommissioned and removed. Always ensure the customer 
has enough water in the short term and, if working on central heating systems during the winter, try 
to ensure that they have other forms of heat, such as fan heaters etc. 
AC3.3 Identify how to check for pre-existing damage to the building 
fabric or customer property before the work commences. 
Before work commences, it is advisable to liaise with the customer to identify any existing damage to the 
property both internally and externally. Although a time-consuming task, this will ensure that there are no 
misunderstandings later as the job progresses. Before discussing this with the customer, make sure that you 
are aware of the problems before hand and make written notes. Check for: 
• 
Internal damage to walls and wall coverings, including marks and dents on walls, loose, torn and 
missing wall coverings, damaged skirting boards, architraves and doors. Cracked or broken window 
panes etc. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
63 
• 
Visible damage to carpets, furniture, personal possessions and appliances such as cookers, washing 
machines, tumble dryers, fridges and freezers, tables and chairs etc. 
• 
Damaged visible wiring and existing plumbing 
• 
External wall damage to brickwork, rendering, guttering, rainwater pipework, facia boards and 
soffits. 
• 
Damage to any vehicles, cars, motor bikes etc. This is especially important if some of the work is to 
be done externally. 
Also point out: 
• 
Loose and creaky floorboards, badly fitting internal doors etc. 
• 
Existing holes in brickwork both internally and externally. 
• 
Missing roof and ridge tiles (if working outside). 
This may seem a little excessive, but often the customer is unaware of these issues and when they are 
suddenly discovered, it is all too easy to put the blame on the last person to work on/in the property. 
REMEMBER! It is easy to ask the customer to move or remove something that may be in danger of being 
damaged because of the work activity. For example, car paintwork can be damaged by brick dust and debris 
as a result of installing a boiler flue or new soil stack. These situations need to be avoided as claims on 
company public liability insurance can be costly when the premium has to be paid after such a claim. 
AC3.4 Identify how to protect the building fabric or customer property 
before the work commences 
Use of dust sheets  
Ensure that you cover with suitably clean dust sheets all furniture, fixtures, fittings and carpets that cannot 
be removed in the areas where you are working, including halls, stairs and landings etc.  
Protection from flame damage 
When using soldering equipment, always ensure that you protect the customers property and decoration by 
the use of a heat mat or flame retarding gel. Never point the nozzle of the blow torch directly at walls or 
skirting boards as this creates a lot of heat/fire damage. 
Use of walking boards – lawns/flower beds 
When working outside, always ensure that the customers lawns and flower beds are protected by boarding, 
especially in areas where ladders and tower scaffolds are to be erected, to prevent damage by access 
equipment and tools. 
Application of packaging to protect components during partially completed works 
Where equipment has only been partially installed, it is a good idea to use the packaging that the equipment 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
64 
came in to protect it during the installation process. This is especially critical with bathroom and kitchen 
equipment that can become easily damaged during installation. 
Circumstances in which furniture, breakable items and carpets need to be removed from the work area 
Any carpets that have to be removed should be rolled up and stored in a safe place. Removed furniture 
should be placed in a room where there is no work activity and they should be suitably covered over. Liaising 
with the customer is a good idea when this is being done so that removed furniture and carpets are not 
placed in areas where they will cause a nuisance or inconvenience. 
Circumstances in which damage to vehicles may occur 
When working outside, always ask the customer to move their vehicles to prevent falling masonry, tools and 
materials from damaging them. 
AC3.5 Identify the method of storing tools, equipment and materials 
when working in new buildings and existing dwellings 
The storage of tools and materials is an important part of planning any installation. Tools left on site or in a 
customer’s care overnight are often not insured unless it can be proven that they were securely locked away. 
Plumbers often have £1000s worth of tools that are expensive to replace if they are stolen. More often than 
not, stolen tools are never recovered and the cost of replacement can be a shock to the bank account, which 
is often doubled if the insurance company refuse to pay for the replacements. By following some simple 
rules, these disrupting occurrences can be prevented: 
1. Lock all tools and materials in a secure lock-up or site cabin when they are not being used 
2. Return all unused materials to the stores and make sure they are signed back in. 
3. Ensure that fragile materials, such as WCs, washbasins etc are kept in a safe area of the stores and 
ensure they are not stacked too high. They can also be covered for extra protection. 
4. Ensure tools are kept away from materials. It is usual to keep tools to the front of the stores to 
prevent damage to fragile items. 
5. If working for a private customer, agree a place where the materials can be stored and ensure they 
do not disrupt the normal family activities. 
6. Keep all delivery advice notes in a file so that a check can be made on the stock held against stock 
used. 
7. Protect partially installed appliances such as washbasins, WCs and baths, from damage. 
AC3.6 Identify the range of hand and power tools required to 
complete work on domestic pipework systems 
A full range of hand tools and power tools that a plumber may use was identified in LO1, AC1.1 of this unit. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
65 
AC3.7 State the checks to be carried out on tools and equipment to 
ensure that they work correctly and are correctly calibrated. 
Tools and equipment are expensive items and should be kept in good condition for a prolonged working life. 
Before use, always check them for damage and loose parts. Ensure that any working parts are suitably 
checked and working and oiled if necessary. Check hammers for loose heads. Electrical tools should be 
checked to ensure: 
• 
Blades and cutting edges are secure and set to the correct depth for cutting 
• 
Safety guards are in place 
• 
The tool casing, cable and plug are not damaged in any way 
• 
Drill chucks are oiled and working correctly 
A full list of hand and electrical tool safety checks can be found in LO1, AC1.3 of this Unit. 
AC3.8 State the work methods for preparing building construction 
features for installation work 
Preparing the work area  
Much of the work we do in private dwellings will involve installing pipework under floors and in/through 
walls. These are skills that, to some degree, we learn on the job. However, there are tried and tested methods 
to do this work and certain unwritten rules that will help save time and damage to the customer’s property. 
Lifting and removing floorboards 
There are two methods we can use to lift and remove floor boards: 
• 
Lifting floorboards using electrical tools 
• 
Lifting floorboards using hand tools 
Lifting floorboards using electrical tools 
Before attempting to lift floorboards ensure that you have the correct tools available: 
• 
A circular saw (110V or cordless) 
• 
A sharp bolster chisel 
• 
A nail punch 
• 
A claw hammer 
• 
A pencil 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
66 
To lift floorboards using power tools 
1. Decide which boards you need to remove and number them. This will help in laying them when you 
have finished 
2. Locate the joists where the boards are to be cut. This can be done easily by looking for a row of nails 
that hold the board to the joist 
3. Mark across the centre of 
the joists position on the 
board. This is where you are 
going to cut the boards 
4. Using a nail punch, punch 
the nails in the boards being 
removed below the surface of 
the board and into the joist 
below 
5. Set the depth of cut on the 
circular saw to just above the maximum depth of the floorboard. This will ensure that any pipework 
or cables below the boards are not damaged in any way. Now carefully cut across the boards that 
are being lifted with the circular saw. 
6. If the boards are tongued 
and grooved types, run down 
the tongue on both sides of the 
board. This will ensure that the 
board is removed without 
splintering or damage. 
7. Using the bolster chisel, 
carefully prise up the board. 
There should be no resistance 
and the board should come up 
cleanly and without damage.  
Lifting floorboards using hand 
tools 
Before 
attempting 
to 
lift 
floorboards ensure that you 
have the correct tools available: 
Number the boards 
blade just above floorboard thickness 
Carefully remove the boards 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
67 
• 
A sharp floorboard saw 
• 
A sharp bolster chisel 
• 
A nail punch 
• 
A claw hammer 
• 
A pencil 
To lift floorboards using hand tools 
1. Follow points 1 to 4 of the previous method 
2. Carefully cut through the tongue of the floorboard with the floorboard saw. Alternatively, carefully 
drive the bolster chisel through the tongue with a claw hammer. 
3. Now carefully cut across the boards that are being lifted with the floorboard saw. 
4. Using the bolster chisel, carefully prise up the board. There should be no resistance and the board 
should come up cleanly and without damage. 
Lifting chipboard flooring using power tools 
Chipboard flooring is very different to traditional floorboards. It is laid in 2m x 0.6m sheets that are glued at 
the tongue and groove and often they are also glued to the joist. They are very susceptible to movement and 
quite often break when they are being removed. Chipboard flooring needs support at every edge and so, if 
part of the board is lifted, it will require support noggins to be installed before the board is re-laid. Lifting 
chipboard is best done using power tools. 
To lift chipboard flooring using power tools 
1. Decide which boards you need to remove and mark them with a pencil. There is no need to mark the 
joists as the long joint in the chipboard indicates where these are. You only need to mark the area of 
board to be lifted as shown in the drawing left.  
2. 
Using a nail punch, punch any nail 
heads below the surface of the board and 
into the joist below 
3. 
Set the depth of cut on the circular 
saw to just above the maximum depth of 
the chipboard. This will ensure that any 
pipework or cables below the boards are 
not damaged in any way. Now carefully cut across the marks, on the boards that are being lifted, 
with the circular saw. 
Mark the boards 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
68 
4. Using the bolster chisel, carefully prise up the board. There should be no resistance and the board 
should come up cleanly and without 
damage providing it has not been 
glued to the joist. 
5. When replacing the board, the 
edges need to be supported by 
wooden noggins. This can be done as 
shown in the drawing left:  
Notching and drilling joists 
Joists need to be notched or drilled to accommodate the pipework and fittings below the floor. These 
operations should be carried out properly and with extreme care if weakening of the joists and structural 
damage is to be avoided. The structural integrity of the joist must in no way be compromised. Notches that 
are too deep or incorrectly positioned and holes that are too large or too close together can weaken a joist 
to the point where its use as a load bearing structural support capability is diminished significantly. 
Look at the drawing below: 
 
Notch position 
In calculation form: 
𝑳𝒆𝒏𝒈𝒕𝒉 𝒐𝒇 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒋𝒐𝒊𝒔𝒕 =  𝟓𝒎 
𝟕% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 =  𝟓 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟎𝟕 =  𝟎. 𝟑𝟓 =  𝟑𝟓𝟎𝒎𝒎 
Fixing noggins 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
69 
𝟐𝟓% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 =  𝟓 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓 = 𝟏. 𝟐𝟓=  𝟏. 𝟐𝟓𝒎 
Therefore, any notches made in the joist must start 350mm from the beginning of the joist span and must 
finish 1.25m from it. This gives 900mm in which to make the notches and can be done from both ends on a 
5m joist. 
Notches must not exceed 12.5% (or 1/8th) of the depth of the joist. So, if a joist measured 300mm in depth, 
then the depth of the notches must be no more than: 
𝑫𝒆𝒑𝒕𝒉 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒋𝒐𝒊𝒔𝒕 =  𝟑𝟎𝟎 
𝟏𝟐. 𝟓% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒅𝒆𝒑𝒕𝒉 =  𝟎. 𝟏𝟐𝟓 =  𝟑𝟎𝟎 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟏𝟐𝟓 =  𝟑𝟕. 𝟓𝒎𝒎 
Drilling or cutting holes in joists follows a similar procedure. Holes must only be drilled within an area that 
begins at a distance equal to 25% of the span measured from the end of the joist and ends at a point equal 
to 40% of the span. The hole size must not be greater than 25% of the depth of the joist when measured 
from the centre line. Circular holes must be at least 3 diameters of the hole size apart measured centre to 
centre. Look at the drawing below:  
In calculation form: 
𝑳𝒆𝒏𝒈𝒕𝒉 𝒐𝒇 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒋𝒐𝒊𝒔𝒕 =  𝟓𝒎 
𝟐𝟓% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 =  𝟓 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓 =  𝟏. 𝟐𝟓𝒎 
𝟒𝟎% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒏 =  𝟓 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟒 =  𝟐𝒎 
In this example, holes can be cut or drilled in the joist providing that they fall within a 750mm area that starts 
1.25 m from the end of the joist and finish no more than 2m away from the same end. Again, this can be 
done at both ends, so 2 sets of holes can be drilled if required. 
To calculate the hole size: 
𝑫𝒆𝒑𝒕𝒉 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒋𝒐𝒊𝒔𝒕 =  𝟑𝟎𝟎𝒎𝒎 
The position of holes in joists 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
70 
𝟐𝟓% 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒅𝒆𝒑𝒕𝒉 =  𝟑𝟎𝟎 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓 =  𝟕𝟓𝒎𝒎 
This measurement must be equidistant either side of the centre line of the joist. 
Note: No holes must be drilled in a joist within 100mm of a notch. 
Cutting chases in walls 
Cutting chases in walls is sometimes necessary to conceal pipework, cables and the like, especially if the 
customer has requested that there be no visible pipework after the installation is completed. Inevitably, this 
will involve the use of an angle grinder fitted with an appropriate stone or concrete/masonry grinding wheel 
to cut the outline of the chase into the wall before removing the unwanted 
brickwork with a bolster chisel and lump/club hammer. This needs careful 
consideration as there are potentially serious health and safety implications: 
• 
Always wear the correct PPE for this operation. This will include the use of 
o Appropriate eye protection to guard against flying chips of 
masonry and dust. Full goggles should be used as safety glasses 
do not offer adequate all round eye protection’ 
o Gloves to protect the hands, 
o Overalls, and; 
o A good quality dust mask. Masonry dust can do serious harm to the lungs if breathed in. A 
respirator type dust mask of the type shown in the image would be appropriate. 
• Always check the angle grinder beforehand. Make sure that: 
o The grinder has a current PAT certificate and is in good condition. 
o The correct cutting wheel is in fitted. 
o The wheel is secure and the wheel guard is in place. 
It is important to remember that grinding out chases in walls creates a huge amount of both surface and 
airborne dust and undertaking grinding in rooms that contain furniture and carpets is not advisable. 
However, if this is unavoidable, sheeting down all carpets/furniture must be carried out. Ensure that there 
are no interconnecting doors open that will allow the dust to spread to other rooms and if possible, open a 
window to let air in and some of the dust out. Chases in walls must not exceed: 
• 
Horizontal chases no deeper than 1/6 of the wall thickness 
• 
Vertical chases no deeper than 1/3 of the wall thickness. 
A note about hot and cold water pipes – the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 state that no 
A respirator dust mask 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
71 
pipe shall be buried in any wall, floor or ceiling unless the pipework is accessible. Obviously, if a pipe is going 
to be buried in a wall, then the question of access becomes of paramount importance. If in doubt, advice 
should be sought from the Water Regulations Advisory Service (WRAS). 
Making good the building fabric 
During any installation, there will be times when the building fabric will need to be altered, whether it’s a 
simple task, such as drilling holes, or breaking out brickwork to fit a boiler flue. Whatever the reason, making 
good after the installation is an important aspect of our work, and unless it’s stipulated otherwise in the 
contract of work, any holes, chases or plaster patching will need to be completed by you, the plumber. 
Making good involves having a few basic skills that we would normally associate with other trades such as a 
brick layer or a plasterer. 
• 
Making good to brickwork – holes made by drills and masonry bits can be filled with a 4:1 mixture 
of sand and cement mortar (4 parts sand to 1 part cement) mixed to a fairly stiff consistency. Larger 
holes may need the replacement of bricks. New bricks will need to match the existing bricks. The wall 
should be neatly pointed up using a pointing trowel and brushed over with a soft brush.  
• 
Patching plaster work – the type of plaster to be used in the repair will depend on the type of wall 
that is being repaired. Plasterboard walls require a board finish type plaster, whilst masonry walls 
will require a good multi-finish plaster. The two types of finish are quite different. Board finish is 
harder to skim to a smooth finish because it dries quickly. The art to plastering is have a clean, smooth 
trowel and plenty of water for the smoothing or ‘skimming’ process. 
Finally, after making good wall surfaces, ensure that all waste materials are cleared away and the area 
cleaned thoroughly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BUY NOW VIA BPEC.ORG.UK/SHOP 
 Ideal for those completing an ACS assessment
 An invaluable point of reference for qualified engineers
EBOOKS FROM  
JUST £6.99 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
73 
Learning Outcome 5 
Know how to use clips and brackets to 
support domestic plumbing and heating 
pipework and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
74 
There are four Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 5: 
AC5.1. 
State how to measure and mark out for fixings to pipework and plumbing and heating 
components. 
AC5.2. 
Identify the range of general fixing devices 
AC5.3. 
Identify the range of specialist fixing devices 
AC5.4. 
Identify clip and bracket types for domestic plumbing and heating work 
 
AC5.1 State how to measure and mark out for fixings to pipework and 
plumbing and heating components 
Each different pipework material has different requirements for fixing and clipping. The distances between 
clips and brackets often reflect the type of pipework material that is being installed. For example, when 
installing clips for Low Carbon steel, the distances between the clips will be greater than for those for, stay, 
polybutylene pressure pipe. This is simply because the steel is much stronger and less likely to be damaged 
or sag between the pipe clips than the polybutylene.  
In AC4.1, we will investigate each of the different pipework materials and their clipping distances in line with 
the British Standards and manufacturer’s data. 
Clipping distances for copper tubes 
Below is a table showing the clipping distances of the common sizes of copper tubes: 
It will be seen that the vertical and horizontal 
clipping distances are quite different. The 
distance between vertical clips is greater than 
for horizontal clips. This is because when fixed 
horizontally, pipework is more likely to sag 
than if the pipework was fixed vertically. For 
this reason, horizontal clipping distances are 
reduced to take into account the semi-rigid 
nature of copper tubes. 
The correct clipping of copper tubes is 
essential as clipping prevents noise, vibration, excessive movement and water hammer. Fittings failure is also 
less likely to occur if the pipework is protected from excessive movement. Clipping also helps to guard against 
accidental and intentional pipework damage. 
Copper tube is easily jointed and bent and can produce installations that not only look good but are 
economical both in terms of copper tube usage and installation costs. Careful planning of pipework routes, 
Tube size 
Horizontal distance 
between the clips 
Vertical distance 
between the clips 
10mm 
0.8m 
1.2m 
15mm 
1.2m 
1.8m 
22mm 
1.8m 
2.4m 
28mm 
1.8m 
2.4m 
35mm 
2.4m 
3.0m 
42mm 
2.4m 
3.0m 
54mm 
2.7m 
3.0m 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
75 
use of pre-fabrication techniques and installation techniques that are sympathetic to the building in terms of 
visible, well-clipped pipework ensure that the installation performs to the design criteria. 
Clipping distances for Low Carbon Steel Pipes 
The clipping distances for low carbon steel are listed in the table. 
As with copper tubes, the vertical and horizontal 
clipping distances differ. In all cases, the 
distances are much greater for LCS and this 
reflects the rigid nature of the pipe. The clips 
and brackets used need to be robust as they will 
need to carry the weight of the pipe. The types 
of clips and brackets for LCS are limited and will 
be discussed later in the unit. 
Clip distances for PVCu soil and waste pipes 
Clipping distances for PVCu soil and waste pipes are listed in the table below: 
When we install plastic pipework, 
the use of the manufacturer’s 
recommended clipping distances 
becomes a necessity, especially in 
multi-storey buildings where care 
must be taken to ensure the 
provision of expansion and thermal 
movement. Plastic is light and easily 
broken if mistreated and, if installed 
in direct sunlight, will sag as the pipe 
becomes warm. PVCu pipes cannot 
be bent in any way because of its 
brittleness. 
The 
manufacturer’s 
place great importance on the clipping of PVCu pipes to ensure that the system remains efficient and reliable 
once installed.  
Clip distances for Polypropylene push-fit waste pipes 
Clipping distances for polypropylene push-fit waste pipes are listed in the table below: 
 
 
Pipe size 
Horizontal 
Vertical 
½” 
1.8m 
2.4m 
¾” 
2.4m 
3m 
1” 
2.4m 
3m 
1 ¼” 
2.7m 
3m 
1 ½” 
3m 
3.6m 
2” 
3m 
3.6m 
Clipping distances for PVCu pipes 
 
Maximum support distance 
Maximum distance 
Vertical 
Horizontal 
between 
expansion joints 
Pipe size - soil 
82mm 
2m 
0.9m 
4m 
110mm 
2m 
1m 
4m 
160mm 
2m 
1m 
4m 
Pipe size – waste 
32mm 
1.2m 
0.5m 
2m 
40mm 
1.2m 
0.5m 
2m 
50mm 
1.2m 
0.9m 
2m 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
76 
Polypropylene, 
although 
more 
robust than PVCu, starts to soften at 
around 70oC and, if it is not clipped 
correctly, will sag between the clips. 
Waste 
pipe 
manufacturer’s 
recommend that the waste pipe 
should be clipped at every change of 
direction, close to the fittings to 
support the fitting and to prevent 
sagging. 
Like PVCu, polypropylene has a high rate of expansion and so should be clipped at 2m intervals between any 
expansion joints. 
Clipping and supports for Polybutylene and Cross-linked Polyethylene pipe 
Plastic pressure pipe is extremely flexible and can sag between clips if not clipped to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Cross-linked Polyethylene is slightly more rigid than polybutylene and can be difficult to 
straighten out, especially when installed directly from the coil. This tendency to coil back up again can cause 
problems if it is not clipped correctly, which can put excess pressure on joints and changes of direction. The 
clipping distances are shown in the table below: 
Plastic pressure pipe can be run 
successfully through joists under 
floors without clipping, provided it is 
adequately supported and provided 
that: 
1. The pipe does not form part of an 
open vent to a hot water or central 
heating system where the pipe is likely to become hot 
2. The pipe is not part of a distribution system or circuit where poor pipe alignment may affect the 
venting of air 
3. Any hot water pipe is not likely to come into contact with cold water pipework 
4. Where there is no risk of the pipe coming into contact with abrasive or sharp edges. 
Select and fix clips and brackets appropriate to the system pipework and the 
industry recommended spacing 
The type of brackets and clips that we use on an installation are chosen depending on the following 
requirements: 
Clipping distances for polypropylene pipes 
 
Maximum support distance 
Maximum distance  
 
Vertical 
Horizontal 
between 
expansion joints 
Pipe size – polypropylene waste pipe  
32mm 
1.2m 
0.5m 
2m 
40mm 
1.2m 
0.5m 
2m 
50mm 
1.2m 
0.6m 
2m 
Clipping distances for Polybutylene pipes 
Pipe diameter 
mm 
Horizontal spacing 
m 
Vertical spacing 
m 
10 
0.3 
0.5 
15 
0.3 
0.5 
22 
0.5 
0.8 
28 
0.8 
1.0 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
77 
• 
The type of pipework material being installed. This could be copper tubes, LCS pipes or plastic 
pressure pipe. Copper and plastic are more likely to be used in domestic installations, which simplifies 
the choice of pipe clips. 
• 
The type of building, whether it is domestic or industrial/commercial. 
• 
Whether the pipework is to be: 
o Surface mounted, fixed to internal or external walls. 
o Fixed below ground or in roof spaces 
o Installed in pipe boxings or ducts 
o Hung from ceilings. 
Copper tubes 
Domestic properties are probably the easiest installation to select brackets and clips for. In most cases, where 
the pipework is visible, the pipework will be copper tube and will be fixed to the wall using surface mounted 
clips that are screwed directly to the wall surface. Wall mounted clips are generally made of white 
polypropylene and are available in several forms to suit different installation situations: 
• 
Single clips, with or without a securing clip over to keep the pipe in place. 
• 
Double clips, particularly useful when 2 pipes need to be installed side by side (hot and cold pipework 
or central heating flow and return) 
• 
Interlocking clips. These are used to create banks of multiple pipes of differing sizes. They ensure that 
pipe centres are maintained along the entire pipework run, maintaining neatness. 
Care should be exercised when installing plastic clips in external situations because, over time, direct sunlight 
affects and breaks down the plastic structure and this is likely to lead to failure of the clips, meaning that the 
pipework will be unsupported and vulnerable to damage. For outside situations, brass schoolboard clips offer 
a greater, longer lasting solution. 
In all cases, the clip centres and distances should be maintained as specified in section 4.1. bends, elbows 
and changes of direction should be supported as near to the bend as practicable. 
Clipping copper tubes in commercial/industrial installations 
In most cases, plastic clips do not offer the strength required for pipework installed in commercial and 
industrial buildings. In these situations, the pipework is often subjected to severe knocks and strains. More 
robust options are available in all situations: 
• 
Pipework fixed to walls both internally and externally can be completed using 1 of 2 options: 
o Brass schoolboard clips, either strip brass or cast brass type offer a good, sturdy method of 
wall mounting copper pipework. 
o Brass munsen rings and backplates, although slightly more expensive, offer the best 
protection for copper pipework when fixed to walls. 
• 
Pipework that is to be installed at high level can be completed using: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
78 
o Munsen rings used with either 10mm tapped rod and backplates or direct fixing anchor bolts, 
or; 
o Unistrut type channel, where multiple runs can be installed without the need for many ceiling 
fixings. 
Plastic pressure pipe 
Where plastic pressure pipe is to be installed, strict control of the clip distances mentioned for plastic 
pressure pipe in section 4.1, should be maintained if damage to the pipework is to be avoided. Because of 
the soft, flexible nature of plastic pipe, sagging is likely, which puts greater pressure on joints and fixings. 
Plastic pipe has the advantage that it can be ‘cabled’ through joists in continuous, unbroken lengths, making 
installation easier. However, plastic pipe also expands much more than copper exacerbating the problem of 
sagging. In general, it’s accepted practice that, if plastic pipe is installed, any visible pipework will be 
converted to copper for aesthetic reasons. 
Low Carbon Steel 
The big advantage with LCS is that it is very rigid. However, it is also very heavy, so any type of bracket or clip 
needs to be robust enough to carry the weight of the pipework. Brackets for LCS are very limited to just 3 
different types: 
• 
Malleable iron school board clips,  
• 
Munsen rings with either back plates or direct anchoring, or; 
• 
Munsen rings in conjunction with unistrut 
In the majority of industrial installations, the pipework is hung at high level. Modern unistrut systems are 
ideal for this because many runs 
of pipework can be installed with 
the minimum of anchorages. 
This also allows pipework of 
different materials, and even 
electrical supplies, to be run 
almost side by side saving space 
and installation time. Double 
munsen 
rings 
add 
another 
advantage allowing pipes to be 
placed one above the other, thus 
making better use of the space 
available. Again, the pipework 
spacings mentioned in section 4.1 for LCS pipe should be adhered to. 
 
Drawings by author 
Using unistrut 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
79 
AC5.2 Identify the range of general fixing devices 
Fixing devices can be classified into five groups: 
• 
Nails, both masonry and timber 
• 
Screws 
• 
Heavy duty fixings 
• 
Lightweight and plaster board fixing 
• 
Chemical fixings 
Nails, both masonry and timber 
Masonry nails - used for making fixings to masonry surfaces. Manufactured 
from hardened zinc 
 
Floor brads – used to fasten floorboards in older properties. These are 50mm 
long. 
 
Galvanised clout nails – for fixing slates and roof tiles 
 
Round bright wire nails – used generally for carcass joinery work where 
appearance is not important. 
 
Oval bright wire nails – Suitable for joinery work where appearance is 
important. The head is lost when driven into the timber with a nail punch. 
 
The table above shows just some of the many hundreds of different nail types that are available. It is not 
necessary to know ALL nail types but the ones shown here are the ones that you are more likely to come 
across. 
Nails are described by the size of the head and by their length. So, a 40mm long galvanised clout nail with a 
2.65mm head may be described as a 40 x 2.65 clout nail. All nails are sold by their weight in kilograms (kg). 
Screws 
Slotted head Countersunk Screw. Not often used. Mainly joinery applications. 
The head sinks flush or a little below the wood surface.  
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
80 
Cross Head/Pozi Drive Screw (Countersunk). Used for general work but unlike 
the counter sunk screw, it needs a pozidrive head screwdriver, which does not 
slip out of the screw head. A general purpose screw. 
 
Round Head Screw. Used for fixing copper saddle clips. 
 
 
Spider/star head screw. Designed to give a much more positive drive into the 
fixing without the risk of slipping. 
 
Mirror Screw. Used for fixing mirrors and bathroom fittings such as bath 
panels. The chromed cap screws into the screw head to hide the screw.  
 
Chip Board Screw. Used for securing chipboard and Medium Density 
Fibreboard (MDF). Various types of heads are available. 
 
Screws can be made from a variety of metals including steel, stainless steel and brass. A range of head types 
is also available. They are often coated with a protective coating to prevent corrosion. Screws are specified 
by the length of the screw in mm and the gauge. Below is a screw chart showing the standard gauges and 
lengths: 
Gauge 
Metric equivalent 
Pilot hole 
Clearance hole 
Masonry plug colour 
3 
2.5mm 
1.0mm 
3.0mm 
Yellow 
4 
3.0mm 
1.5mm 
3.5mm 
Yellow 
6 
3.5mm 
2.0mm 
4.0mm 
Red 
8 
4.0mm 
2.5mm 
4.5mm 
Red 
Brown 
10 
5.0mm 
3.0mm 
5.5mm 
Brown 
12 
5.5mm 
3.5mm 
6.0mm 
Brown 
14 
6.5mm 
4.0mm 
7.0mm 
Blue 
for plumbing installations, the most common sizes range from 15mm x 6 for fixing saddle clips to 50mm x 10 
for hanging radiators. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
81 
Plastic wall plugs 
Plastic wall plugs are a tried 
and tested method of fixing 
radiators, 
sanitary 
appliances and many other components securely to wall surfaces such as brick, stone and concrete. They are 
available in many different sizes to accommodate the many sizes of screws available. Each plug size is colour 
coded to a specific drill bit size so that, once drilled, the plug fits perfectly in readiness of the screw. 
Using plastic wall plugs 
1. First, carefully mark the hole to be drilled. 
2. Choose the correct sized masonry bit for the plastic wall plug.  
3. Using an electric drill or battery drill, carefully drill the hole to the correct depth. Remember to pay 
attention to all health and safety requirements. Wear the correct PPE at all times and check the drill 
before use. 
4. Insert the wall plug to slightly below wall surface. 
5. Insert the screw and carefully tighten until resistance is felt. 
AC5.3 Identify the range of specialist fixing devices 
Heavy duty fixings 
There are a number of heavy duty fixings that plumbers use from time to time. These are: 
• 
Coach screws 
• 
Fischer bolts  
Coach screws. These usually come with purpose made wall plugs. They are used 
for fixing heavy fixings such as mounting boilers. Can be tightened with a spanner 
but some have pozidrive screw heads. 
 
 
Colour 
Screw 
gauge/size 
Plug length 
mm 
Hole diameter 
mm 
Yellow 
No. 4 - 10 
25 
5 
Red 
No. 6 - 12 
35 
6 
Brown 
No.10 - 14 
45 
7 
Orange 
No. 8 - 12 
25 
6.5 
Grey 
No. 8 - 10 
35 
5.5 
White 
No. 8 - 12 
35 
6.5 
Blue 
No.10 - 14 
35 
8 
Plastic wall plugs 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
82 
Fischer bolts – these are also known as a heavy-duty expansion anchors. They are 
easy to use with good load-carrying capacity and can be used in all masonry and 
concrete types for fixing heavy appliances and large diameter pipework. 
 
 
 
Plaster board and light structure fixings 
Plasterboard, because of its lightweight nature, is notoriously difficult to fix to. Most plasterboard walls will 
not take the weight of a substantial appliance, such as a boiler. However, some components such as radiators 
can be hung without fear of them coming off the wall. In all situations, a proper plasterboard fixing, used 
correctly, will suffice. The common plasterboard fixings are shown below: 
 
Unistrut pipe hanging system 
The unistrut system is ideal on commercial and industrial installations where banks of pipes are to be hung 
in straight lines. 
Collapsing cavity fixings – a good, strong plaster board fixing. 
Used to hang sanitary ware, radiators and many other types of 
appliances. 
 
Self-drill plaster board fixings – Used to hang small appliances 
and radiators. The body of the fixing is self-drilling and is screwed 
directly into the plaster board, without the need to drill a hole 
first.  
 
Spring loaded toggle bolts – also known as butterfly bolts. 
Suitable for hanging radiators and other small appliances. 
Figure 7: Plaster board fixings 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
83 
Unistrut uses a galvanised steel channel that can be fixed to the ceiling with pipes hung from it or with 
pipework fixed directly to the unistrut 
Unistrut can be used with all pipes and tubes across all pipe sizes. 
Chemical Resin fixing methods 
Chemical or resin anchors are used to bond steel studs, bolts and other anchorages directly into the 
substrate, usually brick or concrete. They are ideally suited to high loads and normally result in a bond far 
stronger than the substrate itself. They are ideal for use in substrates of low compressive strength such as 
thermalite blocks. 
Chemical fixings are a relatively new method of securely fixing pipes and appliances to walls, floors and 
ceilings. There are a number available: 
1. Polyester resin – used instead of rawlpugs, rawlbolts and anchors, polyester resin is used to fill a pre-
drilled hole. Once filled, the tapped rod is inserted into the hole and the resin allowed to cure. This 
provides a good bonding in stone, concrete, brick and blockwork. 
2. Vinylester resin – uses are similar to polyester resin. It is an injection resin for the bonding of studs, 
sockets and fixings into concrete and masonry substrates.  
AC5.4 Identify clip and bracket types for domestic plumbing and 
heating work 
There are many different types of clips, brackets and fixings for pipes and tubes. Some will be familiar to you, 
others maybe not so. In this section, we will look at the various pipework materials and the brackets and clips 
we can use to make them secure. 
Clips and brackets for copper tubes and plastic pressure pipe 
Copper Saddle clips 
 
 
Generally used when fixing pipework to 
skirting boards. Not suitable for fixing 
pipework to plastered walls or masonry, 
stone or concrete. 
Nail-on clips 
 
 
Useful for fixing pipework under floors 
against wooden joists. Caution should be 
exercised as pipework expansion can 
loosen the clips making the pipework 
susceptible to sagging. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
84 
Interlocking clips 
 
 
Ideal when banks of pipework are to be 
installed. The clips simply slide together 
meaning runs of different sized pipework 
can be fixed easily and quickly. 
Single plastic clips 
 
 
The standard clip for most pipework 
installations. Can be used with copper or 
plastic pressure pipework. 
 
 
Double plastic clips 
 
 
Excellent for use on heating installations 
or hot and cold pipework when more 
than one pipework run is required. 
Strip brass school board clips 
 
 
Usually used where the pipework fixing 
needs to be a little more robust, such as 
schools, commercial buildings and 
industrial installations. 
Cast brass school board clips 
 
 
Munsen rings 
 
 
Munsen rings and backplates provide a 
very robust fixing for copper pipework. 
Munsen rings can be combined with 
10mm tapped rod and backplates for 
when pipework is to be hung from the 
ceiling or with unistrut channel type 
fixings.  
Back plate 
 
 
Clips and brackets for low carbon steel pipe 
Low Carbon Steel, by its nature, is very heavy. Because of this any clips or brackets need to be very robust to 
be able to carry the weight of the pipework. There are two types of clip that are readily available for fixing 
Low Carbon Steel: 
Figure 8: Clips and brackets for copper tubes 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
85 
malleable iron school 
board clips 
 
 
School board clips are a very robust bracket for 
single pipework runs. Care must be exercised 
when these are being installed as they can bend 
if they are mis-treated. 
Munsen rings for 
10mm tapped rod and 
Malleable iron 
backplates 
 
 
 
Again, munsen rings with backplates are the 
bracket of choice when undertaking heavy 
industrial installations. Munsen rings can also be 
used with rawlbolt anchors when being hung 
from concrete structures and ceilings. 
Double munsen rings are also available for 
multiple pipework runs. 
Clips and brackets for plastic Soil and Waste pipes 
 Soil and vent pipe clips 
110mm Plastic saddle clips  
 
 
Both of these pipe clips are suitable for 
fixing 110mm soil and vent pipes. The 
top pipe clip is more suited to domestic 
installations. The bottom bracket is 
used where the installation needs to be  
tough enough to withstand knocks. 
 110mm Galvanised metal pipe 
clip 
 
 
Waste pipe clips 
32mm, 40mm and 50mm Plastic 
saddle clips  
 
A simple plastic band suitable for 
clipping 32mm, 40mm, 50mm waste 
pipes in most installation situations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
86 
Learning Outcome 7 
Know the installation requirements of 
domestic plumbing and heating 
pipework 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
87 
There are two Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 7: 
AC7.1. 
Identify the methods of installing domestic plumbing and heating pipework 
AC7.2. 
Identify how to select pipework materials and fittings from instructions including plans and 
drawings 
 
AC7.1 Identify the methods of installing domestic plumbing and 
heating pipework 
The installation of pipework, whether it is for hot water, cold water, central heating or sanitation, needs 
careful thought. It is a fact that not all pipework we install can be hidden and there will be occasions when 
surface mounted pipework will need to be used because of the constraints of the building or the 
requirements of the regulations. This being the case, surface mounted pipework will need to be as 
unobtrusive and as neat as possible. A pipe that is not level or plumb is an eyesore. It is, therefore, of great 
importance, that we think about where and how we are going to position our pipes beforehand. 
Surface mounted pipework 
Planning is the key to good surface mounted pipework. It should, if possible, take the shortest route. This is 
not only important from a visual point of view, but also in respect of the design. Flow rates and pressures 
can be adversely affected by large numbers of bends and elbows. 
Marking out for pipework, especially in occupied premises, should be kept to a minimum to avoid defacing 
the customer’s decorating. Use a pencil rather than pen or markers. Carpets and furnishings should be well 
protected with dust sheets and coverings. 
The selection of clipping method for the surface mounted pipework requires careful thought. The question 
to be asked is, where is the pipework being installed? Think about the following: 
• 
Pipework mounted to skirting boards would look too bulky if stand-off type clips, such as plastic clips, 
were used. Instead, consider the use of copper saddle clips that lie flat to the timber. When the 
pipework is painted, it would not look as unsightly as a pipe that is standing away from the timber 
skirting boards. 
• 
Try to hide surface mounted pipework in the corners of rooms where they may be successfully boxed 
in. Once decorated, these tend to blend into the wall a little and become less noticeable. 
• 
If a number of pipes are to be installed in the same location, arrange them in banks using interlocking 
clips. Not only does this require less drilling and screwing but also keeps the pipework runs parallel 
across the entire run. This is particularly useful when installing pipework in airing cupboards, boiler 
room and roof spaces where long lengths of pipework may be placed in the same direction. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
88 
• 
Consider the type of building. Whilst plastic clips and saddle clips are useful in domestic properties, 
they would not stand up to the everyday knocks of life in, say, a factory or a supermarket. Similarly, 
large bulky clipping methods usually used in commercial buildings would look out of place in a home. 
Concealed pipework 
Installation of pipework often means that most of the pipework be concealed out of sight. When first fixing 
takes place, this is where the majority of the pipes would be hidden from view under the floors or buried in 
studded walls and sometimes even placed behind the dot and dab plasterboard on the inside of external 
walls. 
Whilst the idea of concealed pipework means that the walls of the property are ‘pipework free’, we also have 
to take into account the requirements of regulations and British Standards with regard to concealed 
pipework. Consider this from the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999: 
Schedule 2, Regulation 7 states: 
7. (1) No water fitting shall be embedded in any wall or solid floor. 
(2) No fitting which is designed to be operated or maintained, whether manually or electronically, or 
which consists of a joint, shall be a concealed water fitting. 
This means that if we cannot install the pipe behind the wall without joints, then the pipe should not be 
installed in the wall and we should consider surface mounted pipework. Why is this? Simply, every joint is a 
potential leak. Even if no leaks are found during testing, that doesn’t mean that the joint won’t leak in the 
future. Leaks in walls are notoriously difficult to find because water can travel some distance before it 
emerges into view. These are points that should be considered at the planning stage. 
Sleeving pipework 
Sleeving pipework through masonry and concrete walls is essential to prevent the masonry/concrete wall 
from having an adverse effect on the pipework. Sleeving a pipe has several functions: 
• 
It prevents the pipework from coming into contact with the wall surface, thereby preventing 
abrasion, and corrosion from the effects of the masonry or concrete materials. 
• 
It allows for thermal movement. 
• 
It prevents damage from building movement due to subsidence etc. 
The sleeve should be at least one pipe size larger than the pipe being passed through the wall and should be 
sealed on the inside and outside with an approved silicon sealant to prevent the ingress of rain/snow etc. 
and insects/vermin. Where sleeves are carrying gas pipework, the sleeve should only be sealed on the INSIDE 
of the property. The external end of the sleeve should be left open. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
89 
Fire stopping pipework installations 
Pipework that passes between floors must be fire stopped to prevent the spread of fire. This can be done in 
two ways: 
• 
By the use of an intumescent collar, or; 
• 
By the use of intumescent sealant. 
The photograph (left) shows an intumescent collar, 
which is placed around the pipework as it passes through 
a floor. Should a fire occur, the heat from the fire causes 
the bonded material inside the collar to expand, 
completely sealing the space around the pipe preventing 
the spread of fire, smoke and hot gases to other areas. 
This helps to: 
1. 
Contain the fire in the room where it started 
2. 
Maintain escape routes 
3. 
Reduce the damage caused by the fire and reduce 
the effects of smoke. 
Intumescent sealant works in the same way but is injected into the space around the pipe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measure, mark and cut pipework materials for Installation 
There are many methods used when installing plumbing systems. Each plumber will have their own way of 
installing pipework, setting out, marking out and fabrication. In many cases, pipework may even be 
prefabricated before it arrives on site to be installed. Many plumbing systems and components are now 
supplied ‘pre-plumbed’ making the plumber’s job that much easier. 
An intumescent collar 
Fitting an intumescent collar 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
90 
Prefabrication of pipework 
Prefabrication takes place on large housing contracts where many of the same type of buildings are being 
constructed or where a large block of identical apartments is being built. Pre-fabrication of bends, fittings 
and pipework has the advantage of saving time and can be of benefit where ‘hot working’ with blow torches 
is forbidden. 
Prefabrication off-site means that the measurements for the pipework can be taken from either on-site or 
taken from the working drawings. Often, it’s much better to work from measurements taken on site because 
plans and drawings can sometimes change and the actual building be slightly different from that drawn. 
Whichever way is chosen, the pipework is measured, marked, cut, formed and jointed in the workshop and 
then transported to site for installation.  
Fabricating pipework to clear obstacles 
Working on site will also involve pre-fabrication of pipework. Precise measurements, cutting, bending and 
jointing will all take place to suit the obstacles that we come across. Consider the drawing: 
By using the correct setting and marking out procedures, and using the correct bending methods, it is possible 
to bend the pipe from fitting 7, through bends 1 to 6 and up to fitting 8, out of a single piece of copper tube.  
When marking out the tube for one-piece bending, there are several pieces of information that we need to 
know: 
1. 
The size of the tube 
2. 
The ‘X’ dimension 
of any fittings required. In 
this case 2 end feed capillary 
elbows.  
3. 
The distance from 
the wall to the centre of the 
clip 
4. 
The dimensions of 
the space where the tube  
5. 
will finally rest 
6. 
The pipe gain of 
the machine-made bends. 
Look at the drawing. The pipe is going to be installed around a concrete nib, located in a small space. The 
overall dimension is: 
1100mm or 1.1m wide, 600mm deep, with a raised nib measuring 500mm wide by 450mm deep. There are: 
• 
6 machine-made bends, 4 internal and 2 external, and; 
'x' dimensions 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
91 
• 
2 endfeed capillary elbows. 
We can assume that: 
• 
The tube size is 15mm copper 
• 
The ‘X’ dimension of a 15mm endfeed elbow is 
12mm as shown by the drawing 
• 
The distance from the wall to the centre of the clip 
is 15mm 
• 
The pipe gain of a machine made bend is 1.5 times 
the pipe diameter. Therefore, pipe gain is 22.5mm. 
rounded down to 22mm. 
Method 
Total up the amount of pipe needed. 
From elbow 7 to bend 1 the distance is 600mm and because pipe clips are fitted inside and outside of the 
space, the distance is not altered. There is an endfeed elbow at elbow 7 and this has a 12mm ‘X’ dimension, 
which we need to deduct: 
600 – 12 = 588mm 
So, from elbow 7 to bend 1 - the first machine bend 1 can be marked 588mm from the end of the pipe. 
From bend 1 to bend 2 is 400mm centre to centre of pipe. From this we need to deduct 2 clip distances 
totalling 30mm. 400mm – 30mm = 370mm (this is the measurement after the deduction of 2 clips to the 
centre). Bend 2 can be marked at this distance. 
From bend 2 to bend 3, the distance is 300mm and since there are clips on the front of the nib, this is the 
distance we use. 
Bend 3 to bend 4 carries the tube around opposing sides of the nib and because the clip centre is 15mm we 
add 2 x 15 = 30mm to the overall nib size. Therefore, 300 + 30mm = 330mm. 
Bend 4 to bend 5 is the same as bends 2 to bends 3, as the two dimensions are identical. 300mm. 
Bends 5 to bend 6 are identical as from bend 1 to bend 2, so the same dimension can be used. 400mm – 
30mm = 370mm. Mark the bend at this distance. 
From bend 6 to elbow 8 is identical as from elbow 7 to bend 1. Therefore, 600 – 12 = 588mm 
There are 6 machine made bends on the tube, so pipe gain is as follows: 6 x 22mm = 132mm. this will need 
to be deducted once the measurements have been added together: 
Measuring the 'X' dimension of a fitting 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
92 
𝟓𝟖𝟖 +  𝟑𝟕𝟎 +  𝟑𝟎𝟎 +  𝟑𝟑𝟎 +  𝟑𝟎𝟎 +  𝟑𝟕𝟎 +  𝟓𝟖𝟖 =  𝟐𝟖𝟒𝟔𝒎𝒎  
Now deduct the pipe gain: 
𝟐𝟖𝟒𝟔 –  𝟏𝟑𝟐 =  𝟐𝟕𝟏𝟒𝒎𝒎 𝒐𝒓 𝟐. 𝟕𝟏𝟒𝒎 
So, to complete the installation in a single piece, without joints, we would need 2.714m of 15mm tube. 
In-situ working 
When working in customer’s properties, at some point the need to work on an existing installation will occur. 
This can be challenging, especially in older properties where we might encounter pipework of a different size 
or material. Over the years, there have been many different materials used for plumbing, such as copper, 
lead, stainless steel and plastic and many of these have sizes and jointing techniques that are uncommon to 
us. Problems occur when connections must be made to old pipework of imperial size that differ from the 
metric sizes now in use. Fortunately, for many of these pipe sizes, converters to metric sizes exist. In-situ 
work includes: 
• 
Cutting in isolation valves, tees and branches to existing pipework 
• 
Capping or plugging off existing pipework 
• 
Removing and replacing old bath, WC pans, washbasin and sink taps, 
• 
Replacing cold water cisterns  
• 
Work on existing central heating systems and pipework. 
7.2 Identify how to select pipework materials and fittings from 
instructions including plans and drawings 
Select pipework materials and fittings from instructions 
On some occasions, the materials and fittings we use on an installation will be dictated by the component or 
equipment installation instructions. Gas boilers, for example, specify that copper should be used to connect 
to the boiler and that plastic pipe should not be connected to within 1m – 1.5m of the boiler itself. It is 
important that we follow these instructions otherwise the manufacturer’s guarantee may be invalidated. 
Select pipework materials and fittings from specifications, drawings and plans 
Often, materials and fittings for a contract are selected by either the designing engineer or even sometimes 
the customer. In these cases, a specification would tell us materials to be used, their sizes and often, which 
make of fitting to use.  
Working drawings give an insight into the layout of the building. From these, the routes of the pipework can 
be planned and a materials list taken. On large contracts, the designer may well have produced a full working 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
93 
drawing showing pipework routes and fitting types. 
Installing pipework 
Installing pipework falls into 2 distinct categories: 
1. First fix – This is when all of the main runs of pipework are installed – the hot and cold water, central 
heating, gas and main soil and vent stacks – before any internal floors/ceilings are laid. At this stage, 
it’s important to follow the rules regarding drilling and notching of joists mentioned earlier in the 
unit. Also at this stage, any pipework that is to be concealed behind plasterboard walls are fixed into 
place. Installed pipework should be capped to prevent debris from entering the fixed pipework. Pipes 
in walls should be clearly marked and plastic pipework covered with a metallic tape to ensure that it 
can be found by cable and pipe sensing equipment. A soundness test should be performed at first fix 
stage to ensure that there are no leaks prior to floor and ceilings being installed. 
2. Second fix – after the internal work – plastering, doors, skirting boards and architraves – then the 
second fix can begin. Second fix is where all appliances, boilers, radiators, bathroom and kitchen 
equipment etc are installed. Any exposed pipework must be clipped in line with the specifications 
mentioned earlier in the unit. Manufacturer’s installation instructions regarding pipework, fittings 
and materials must be followed. It should be remembered that a good second fix can only take place 
if the first fix was correct, since the second fix continues the pipework that has previously been 
installed at first fix stage. 
First/second fix in occupied properties 
First fixing and second fixing in occupied properties takes on an even greater importance because of the 
customers property and possessions. All exposed pipework should be agreed beforehand and this should be 
neatly installed and clipped to specification. The position of the radiators and boiler should be discussed and 
agreed upon before installation takes place. Any floorboards removed should be replaced as soon as possible. 
Disruption to the customer should be kept to an absolute minimum at all times. Connections to existing 
pipework should be left until all other work has been completed to keep the disruption to water, gas and 
electrical services to a minimum. 
BS8000-0:2014: Workmanship on construction sites. Introduction and general principles should be 
followed.  
Joint pipework to specifications 
Using the jointing techniques that you will learn as you work through this unit takes time to perfect. Knowing 
which joint can be used and where, often comes with experience of working within the plumbing industry. 
There are, however, certain points that you should be aware of if mistakes are to be prevented. These can 
be seen as a series of do’s and don’ts: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
94 
Do’s 
Don’ts 
When soldering capillary fittings in properties, 
ensure that the risk of fire is kept to a minimum. 
Always carry a powder fire extinguisher when 
soldering takes place. 
Don’t take risks when soldering fittings. Consult 
the company risk assessment. 
Remember to protect the customer’s wall paper 
and decorations when soldering fittings. Use either 
a heat proof mat or cooling gel around the area to 
be soldered. 
Don’t put the flame of a blow torch directly on to a 
decorated wall. You will ruin the paper. Be aware 
of combustible items at all times. 
Always check soldered fittings to ensure that the 
solder has flowed all around the joint. 
Don’t leave making soldered joints until last. Solder 
them as you work. 
Always tighten compression fittings as you are 
working. 
Don’t leave tightening compression fittings until 
the last minute.  
Ensure that the correct type of compression fitting 
is being used. 
Don’t use type A compression fittings below 
ground. They are likely to fail on soft copper 
installations. 
Ensure that all push-fit joints are correctly made on 
both copper and plastic pressure pipe. 
Don’t forget to use pipe inserts when making 
plastic push fit pressure pipe joints. 
When installing soil and waste pipes, ensure you 
follow the manufacturer’s instructions with regard 
to expansion gaps. 
Don’t make solvent weld joints in confined spaces. 
Make sure the area is well ventilated at all times. 
Ensure that correct clipping distances is taking 
place across all pipe work types and sizes. 
Don’t leave pipes unclipped. They will sag and 
eventually fail. 
Ensure that you follow good health and safety 
practices at all times. If you are in doubt, ask your 
supervisor. 
Don’t put yourself at risk with regard to health and 
safety. If you are in doubt, ask your supervisor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
95 
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
96 
Learning Outcome 9 
Know the inspection and soundness 
testing requirements of domestic 
plumbing and heating pipework 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
97 
There are two Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 9: 
AC9.1. 
Identify the requirements of, and carry out a visual inspection of pipework to confirm that it 
is ready to be filled with water. 
AC9.2. 
State how to carry out a soundness test on domestic plumbing and heating pipework 
 
AC9.1 Identify the requirements of, and carry out a visual inspection 
of pipework to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water 
Filling any system with water is the time when we see if the system is watertight. Pressure testing confirms 
the water tightness ready for the next stage of bringing the system into operation. Before these operations 
can take place, a visual inspection of the system should be made to confirm that the installation is correct 
and meets the required standards: 
• 
Check that all open ends have been capped and/or all valves have been isolated. 
• 
Check all visible joints to ensure that they have been properly made. Check that capillary joints have 
been wiped clean of any excess flux as this can cause corrosion in later life. 
• 
Check that enough pipe clips have been installed and that the pipework is secure. 
• 
Check that tap connectors and radiator valves are tight and that any radiator air release valves are 
turned off. 
• 
Ensure that any automatic air valves are open. 
AC9.2 State how to carry out a soundness test on domestic plumbing 
and heating pipework 
The type of testing procedure will depend on the pipe work material used. Hot and cold water systems testing 
is detailed in BSEN806 pts 2 and 4, central heating systems testing is detailed in BSEN14336:2004 Heating 
systems in buildings — Installation and commissioning of water based heating systems. Above ground 
sanitation systems should be tested in accordance with Document H of the Building Regulations. 
The recommendations of BSEN806 Pts 2 and 4 
For many years the recommendations of BS6700 and the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 19991 
stated that a hot/cold water system should be tested at 1.5 times the maximum operating pressure of the 
system. However, since the introduction of BSEN806, the test pressures for hot and cold water systems has 
been updated and is no longer as straightforward as it once was. 
                                                             
1 Schedule 2 of the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 currently recommends 1.5 times normal operating 
pressure. It has NOT been updated to reflect the Recommendations in BSEN806 pt 4 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
98 
Calculating the test pressure 
BSEN806 pt 1 gives a definition of the Maximum Design Pressure or MDP of a system. It states that the MDP 
is: 
 
‘the maximum hydrostatic pressure at which the potable water installation is designed to work.’ 
BSEN806 pt 2, clause 3.4.2 states that: 
‘To ensure adequate strength, all components of the system shall be designed to meet the test 
pressure requirements of the local and national laws and regulations. The test pressure shall be at 
least 1.5 times the allowable Maximum Operating Pressure.’ 
So, the maximum design pressure as stated in BSEN806 pt 1 is: 
𝑀𝑎𝑥. 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑥 1.5 = 𝑀𝑎𝑥. 𝐷𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑀𝐷𝑃) 
BSEN806 pt 4, which covers the installation and commissioning of hot and cold water systems, identifies in 
clauses 6.1.2 and 6.1.3 that the test pressure shall be: 
𝑀𝐷𝑃 𝑥 1.1 
Or: 
𝑀𝑂𝑃 𝑥 1.65 
How does this work in practice? 
If a system is designed to operate at a Maximum Operating Pressure of 2 bar pressure, then? 
2 𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑀𝑂𝑃) 𝑥 1.5 = 3𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑀𝐷𝑃) 
3 𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑀𝐷𝑃) 𝑥 1.1 = 3.3 𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒) 
Or 
2 𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑀𝑂𝑃) 𝑥 1.65 = 3.3 𝑏𝑎𝑟 (𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒) 
This results in a test pressure that is slightly higher than that required by the Water Supply (water fittings) 
Regulations 1999 in Schedule 2, Paragraph 5 (1.5 x MOP). 
The testing procedures 
BSEN806 Part 4 states that there are 3 systems for testing pipework and these testing procedures are 
determined by the material from which the pipework is made. The testing procedures are classed as: 
a) Test A 
b) Test B 
c) Test C 
The table below illustrates which pipe material is associated with each of the tests: 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
99 
Table taken from BSEN806 Part 4 page 20 
Type of material  
Hydrostatic test procedure 
Linear elastic materials (i. e. metals) 
Test procedure A  
Elastic materials (PVC-U, PVC-C, etc.) and multi-layer materials 
Visco-elastic materials (i. e. PP, PE, PEX, PA, PB, etc.) with DN/OD < 
63mm 
Visco-elastic materials with DN/OD > 63mm (i.e. PP, PE, PEX, PA, PB, 
etc.) 
Test procedure B or C  
Combined system with DN/OD < 63mm (metals and plastics) 
Test procedure A  
Combined systems with DN/OD > 63mm (metals and plastics) 
Test procedure B or C  
 
Test A requirements page 21, BSEN806 pt 4 
The system should be filled with water and all air vented 
to atmosphere. All outlet valves and vents should be 
sealed once the air is removed. Apply the test pressure 
calculated (equal to 1.1 times MDP) for a period of 10 
minutes. The test pressure must stay constant for 10 
minutes. If there is any pressure loss, the system must 
be maintained at the test pressure until all leaks have 
been found. The test is shown in graph form right. 
Test B requirements page 21, BSEN806 pt 4 
The system should be filled with water and all air vented 
to atmosphere. All outlet valves and vents should be 
sealed once the air is removed. Apply the test pressure 
calculated (equal to 1.1 times MDP) for a period of 30 
minutes. Inspect the system to identify any leaks. 
Reduce the pressure by bleeding water from the system 
until the pressure reads 0.5 times the test pressure. 
The pressure must remain constant for a period of 30 
minutes after pressure reduction. Check the system 
visually for leaks. If, after the pressure has been reduced 
there is a further pressure drop, there is a leak on the 
system. The test pressure must be maintained while the leak is identified. Again, the test is shown in graph 
form. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
100 
Test C requirements page 22, BSEN806 pt 4 
The system should be filled 
with water and all air vented 
to atmosphere. All outlet 
valves and vents should be 
sealed 
once 
the 
air 
is 
removed. 
Apply 
the 
test 
pressure calculated (equal to 
1.1 times MDP) for a period of 
30 
minutes. 
Inspect 
the 
system to identify any leaks.  
Note the pressure after a 
period of 30 mins and recheck 
for leaks. 
Note the pressure after a 
further 
30 
mins. 
If 
the 
pressure drop is less than 0,06 
MPa or 0.6 bar, the system can be considered to be sound. Continue the test without further pumping. 
Continue the test for a further 120 minutes (2 hours). If the pressure drops more than 0.02 MPa or 0.2 bar in 
this time, then this would indicate that the system has a leak. Maintain the pressure and identify the leak. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC offer the new Level 3 Diploma in 
Plumbing and Domestic Heating that sits 
within the Plumbing and Domestic Heating 
Technician Apprenticeship Level 3 standard
Level 3 Diploma
in Plumbing and 
Domestic Heating

BPEC have developed a range of free resources to assist in 
the delivery of this qualification:
• Knowledge workbooks
• Practical workbooks and guides
• End of phase practical and knowledge assessments
• Onsite performance assessment portfolios
• PowerPoint presentations and schemes of work
The BPEC Phase 1 textbook was developed alongside the 
qualification, and offers specific guidance and tutor support 
throughout the programme, with content aligned to our free 
resources. The book was written exclusively for BPEC by 
renowned plumbing author Mike Maskrey. Textbooks for 
Phase 2 and Phase 3 are currently in development.
The textbook is available at www.bpec.org.uk/shop
Level 3 Diploma in Plumbing 
and Domestic Heating
What next?
Contact us on 01332 376000 
Email us at aoadmin@bpec.org.uk
www.bpec.org.uk
Why BPEC?
We are specialists in Plumbing, 
Heating and Gas Qualifications 
We have a wide range of tutor 
support materials available
Our high level of customer support 
with fast response time to enquiries 
Benefit from our knowledgeable and 
experienced team 
BPEC is an approved End-point 
Assessment Organisation 

