BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
1
Section 8 – Y/602/2888 
Understand and apply domestic central 
heating system installation and 
maintenance techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
2
Y/602/2888 – Understand and apply domestic central heating 
system installation and maintenance techniques 
This combination unit provides basic learning in the installation, maintenance, decommissioning and 
soundness testing of a basic range of wet central heating system/component types in dwellings and 
industrial/commercial properties (of similar size and scope to domestic dwellings). The unit covers systems in 
buildings up to 3 storeys in height and with systems up to a maximum of 40kW heat output and pipework up 
to 32mm diameter. Upon completion of the unit the learner will: 
LO1. 
Know the uses of central heating systems in dwellings 
LO2. 
Know the types of central heating system and their layout requirements 
LO3. 
Know the site preparation techniques for central heating systems and components 
LO4. 
Be able to apply site preparation techniques for central heating systems and components 
LO5. 
Know the installation requirements of central heating systems and components 
LO6. 
Be able to install central heating systems and components 
LO7. 
Know the service and maintenance requirements of central heating systems and components 
LO8. 
Be able to service and maintain central heating systems and components 
LO9. 
Know the decommissioning requirements of central heating systems and components 
LO10. 
Be able to decommission central heating systems and components 
LO11. 
Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of central heating systems and 
components  
LO12. 
Be able to inspect and soundness test central heating systems and components. 
Almost every home in the UK has a central heating system and, for most those homes, it is some form of wet 
central heating containing a boiler and radiators or underfloor heating. Over the years many different 
systems have been developed, designed and installed, and many of these older systems are still providing 
good service today, despite their lack of today’s energy saving controls. 
Modern systems use energy saving appliances and boilers linked with energy saving controls and components 
to give the best possible heating both for the end user and for the environment. 
In this Unit, we will look at the layouts and types of some of the systems of the past and the modern systems 
that you will install on a day-to-day basis. You will see how they have developed from the basic to the 
sophisticated as we investigate this most difficult of subjects. 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
3
Learning Outcome 1 
Know the uses of central heating systems 
in dwellings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
4
There are two Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC1.1. 
State the purpose of central heating systems used in dwellings. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the different types of space heating systems used in dwellings 
Good central heating starts with good design, the recommendations for which are set out in a series of 
documents, both legislative and advisory. In this first Learning Outcome, we will investigate the purpose of 
central heating. In other words, what makes us thermally comfortable and why and what can we do to 
achieve this. 
AC1.1 State the purpose of central heating systems used in dwellings. 
The purpose of central heating is to provide a set of conditions within a building that make us feel thermally 
comfortable. It’s not just about heat and warmth. There are a number a different factors that must be taken 
into account and when these factors are in balance, then the conditions within the building make us feel not 
just warm, but thermally comfortable. These conditions will change with age, health, activity and the clothing 
we wear. They can be divided into two very distinctive groups – Physical and Personal: 
Physical factors – Air condition 
Humidity 
Humidity is best described as the amount of moisture in the atmosphere within an 
environment. It is given as a percentage (%) of moisture. Ideal conditions for humans are 
between 40 – 60% humidity. Below 40% can make the eyes sore and the mouth and 
throat dry. The reason for this is the atmosphere is leeching water from the body making 
the body dry and hence the body’s need for water in the form of thirst. Above 60% makes 
the atmosphere damp, clammy and uncomfortable. Even the slightest physical exertion 
will make the body sweat. This condition also make the body crave water in an effort to 
quench thirst.  
Air changes 
When humans breathe, they take in air (which is 20% oxygen) and expel Carbon Dioxide 
(CO2). If there is not enough oxygen in the room, then the person will begin to feel sleepy 
and lethargic. This is because the atmosphere is CO2 rich. Air changes are required to 
remove a CO2 rich atmosphere and replace it with Oxygen rich air. Air changes need to 
be taken into account when designing central heating and the number of air changes per 
hour worked into the heat loss calculations. 
Different rooms will have different air change requirements. For example a lounge will 
require 2 air changes per hour but a bathroom or kitchen 3 air changes per hour. A 
bedroom will only require 1 air change, since the purpose of the bedroom is for sleeping. 
Air temperature 
The temperature of the air required for comfort will depend largely on the sex, age, 
health, activity and the clothing of the persons in the building. Studies have shown that 
women like temperatures on average 2oC higher than men. The elderly and the infirm 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
5
also prefer temperatures higher than the average person. On average, 22oC in the winter 
and 23oC in the summer are the optimum temperatures for human comfort. 
Air velocity 
The air velocity refers to the speed at which air travels through the building. If the air is 
travelling too quickly, the occupants will feel a draught. If the air travelling too slowly, 
then the air change requirements for the building will not be satisfied. The optimum 
velocity is 0.2 to 0.25 m/s. However a variable air velocity is much more beneficial to 
human comfort than a constant air velocity 
Personal factors - Human 
Activity within the 
building 
The more work we do, the hotter we become and the less heat will be required in the 
building. In this instance the air temperature may need to be adjusted to suit the type of 
activity within the building. On average, 22oC in the winter and 23oC in the summer are 
the optimum temperatures for human comfort provided the occupants are sedentary. In 
other words, provided they are seated and inactive. When people begin to move, then 
the body temperature rises and the need for heat becomes less.  
Clothing  
This refers to the type of clothing worn by the occupants of the building. The more 
clothing is worn, then the less the air temperature will need to be. Adding and removing 
clothing or simply having a hot or cold drink can make a positive change in thermal 
comfort: 
BEHAVIOUR 
EFFECT 
TEMP. OFFSET 
Jumper/Jacket on or off 
Changes Clothing by ± 0.35 
± 2.2oC 
Tight fit/Loose fit clothing 
Changes Clothing by ± 0.26 
± 1.7 oC 
Collar and tie on or off 
Changes Clothing by ± 0.13 
± 0.8 oC 
Seated or walking around 
Varies Metabolism by ± 0.4 
± 3.4 oC 
Stress level 
Varies Metabolism by ± 0.3 
± 2.6 oC 
Consume cold drink 
Varies Metabolism by -0.12 
+ 0.9 oC 
Consume hot drink/food 
Varies Metabolism by +0.12 
- 0.9 oC 
Operate desk fan 
Varies Velocity by +2.0m/s 
+ 2.8 oC 
Operate ceiling fan 
Varies Velocity by +1.0m/s 
+ 2.2 oC 
Open window 
Varies Velocity by +0.5m/s 
+ 1.1 oC 
Table - The effect of adaptive behaviour’s on optimum comfort temperatures. Taken 
from BRE 
What is interesting about the above table, is that it shows that drinking a cold drink 
makes you hotter and drinking a hot drink makes you cooler! 
Age and health 
This is a major factor in good heating design. The age and the health of the building’s 
occupants have a direct effect on the temperatures that the system is designed to meet. 
Older and infirm people quite often feel the cold in a way that the young and abled 
bodied persons do not. In nursing homes and hospitals, for instance, the temperature 
should be a constant 23 - 24oC. this will mean significant changes in the heating 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
6
calculations and the heating system design. 
So, it can be said that thermal comfort has been achieved when a balance between the body and its 
surroundings has been achieved. How we achieve that balance is down to personal thermal preference and 
good heating design. 
AC1.2 Identify the different types of space heating systems used in 
dwellings 
Full central heating 
Definition – The simultaneous heating of all spaces in a dwelling so as to maintain 
specified temperatures based upon calculated heat losses. 
These are systems that have been designed correctly using recognised heating data 
and calculation methods. They are designed to best practice conditions as 
recommended in the Domestic Heating Compliance Guide and installed using good 
quality materials, components and appliances. They are commissioned and 
maintained to give optimum performance and energy efficiency. 
Background heating 
Definition – The simultaneous heating of all or some of the spaces in a dwelling to 
temperatures below those specified based upon calculated heat losses. 
This type of installation is based mainly on the cost of the materials. Smaller boilers 
and heat emitters only provide enough heat to take the chill from the room. 
Recommended air temperatures are not achieved simply because the heat emitters 
do not have the required output to achieve them. It is often used to reduce the risk 
of condensation in certain rooms. This kind of installation is no longer acceptable 
under Building Regulations Document L1a – Conservation of fuel and power in new 
Dwellings because of efficiency and environmental issues. 
Selective heating 
Definition – The simultaneous heating of some of the spaces in a dwelling so as to 
maintain specified temperatures based upon calculated heat losses. Often called part 
house central heating. 
This heating system only heats certain parts of a building, although the heated parts 
still achieve the recommended temperatures based upon calculated heat losses, heat 
emitter sizes and pipe sizes. This system is extremely rare for domestic properties but 
may readily be found in some commercial buildings where certain spaces will 
generally be unoccupied for most of the time. 
Two and one pipe 
systems. 
One and two pipe systems refers to the type of pipework system employed to heat 
the building: 
One pipe systems use a single circuit of pipework that runs from the boiler and back 
to the boiler, connecting each radiator in turn. They are inefficient and no longer 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
7
installed in domestic properties. These will discussed later in the Unit. 
Two pipe systems were developed in the early 1970’s and still form the basis of all 
good central heating systems that are currently installed. They use two circuits of 
pipework – a flow circuit and a return circuit – to distribute the heated water to the 
heat emitters. They are more efficient than one pipe circuits and reduce the heating 
time of the building considerably. Again, these will be discussed later in the Unit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
8
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
9
Learning Outcome 2 
Know the types of central heating systems 
and their layout requirements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
10
There are ten Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC2.1. 
Identify the working principles of central heating systems 
AC2.2. 
Identify the type of central heating system from layout diagrams 
AC2.3. 
State the system layout features for filling and venting systems 
AC2.4. 
State the layout features for the systems that include micro and minibore pipework. 
AC2.5. 
State the general operating principles of solid fired heat producing appliances 
AC2.6. 
State the general operating principles of oil fired heat producing appliances 
AC2.7. 
State the general operating principles of gas fired heat producing appliances 
AC2.8. 
State the operating principles of heat emitters 
AC2.9. 
State the operating principles of central heating control components 
AC2.10. State the operating principles of devices used in central heating systems to minimise the build-
up of sediment. 
Before we investigate these systems, we will look at some of the key phrases and terms you will come across 
as we work through the wet central heating subject. 
Phrase  
Meaning 
Low pressure heating 
A heating system that operates at temperatures below 100oC 
because it includes an open vent pipe.  
Open vent 
The open vent prevents heating systems from exceeding 100oC and 
assists with accommodating the expansion of water due to the water 
being heated. 
Sealed heating 
A heating system that does not contain a vent pipe or feed and 
expansion system. It is filled with water from the mains cold water 
supply using a temporary filling loop or some other no less effective 
device that creates an airgap between the heating system and the 
water main. 
Gravity  
A method of heating water that uses conduction. When water is 
heated, it expands and loses density, the lighter, hotter water then 
flows upwards to the heat exchanger. When the water cools, it 
becomes denser and circulates back to the boiler. This continuous 
cycle is called gravity circulation 
Microbore  
A system of heating that uses very small pipe work to the radiators. 
Typically sizes of 8mm and 10mm pipework. 
Manifold  
A fitting or component that allows multiple pipe connections in one 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
11
place. 
Feed and Expansion Cistern 
A small, usually 10 litre capacity, cold water cistern that is connected 
to a low-pressure heating system for the purposes of system filling 
with water and to allow water to expand in to it when the water is 
heated. 
Filling loop 
A temporary connection between the mains cold water supply and 
the heating system for the purposes of filling and pressurisation. It 
should be removed after the filling, venting and pressurization tasks 
are completed. 
AC2.1 Identify the working principles of central heating systems 
AC2.2 Identify the type of central heating system from layout 
diagrams 
Traditionally the most popular form of heating system in the UK, wet central heating systems rely on the 
circulation of heated water around a circuit of pipework to heat some form of heat emitter or, in the case of 
underfloor heating, the floors of the structure of the building itself. The heat is then transferred into the 
building using conduction, convection and radiation (see Scientific Principles). The heating of the water can 
be performed by the use of gas, oil or solid fuelled appliances or by environmentally friendly sources, such 
as air source and ground source heat pumps, micro co-generation sources and biomass boilers. 
There are many different wet systems that have been installed over the years, and some of these are still in 
use today. Modern systems still use some of the theory and design that was developed many years ago but 
now use modern installation techniques, materials and controls to give much better use of the energy they 
use and the heat they generate. Heating systems, both new and old, include: 
1. One pipe low pressure systems 
a) Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) 
2. Two pipe low pressure systems 
a) Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) 
b) C Plan systems  
3. Fully pumped low pressure systems 
a) Fully pumped, 3 port valve (mid position/diverting) (Y/W plans) 
b) Fully pumped, 2 x two port valves (S plan) 
4. Two pipe sealed systems (using system boilers or sealed system components) 
a) Fully pumped, 3 x two port valves (S plan+) 
b) Microbore systems 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
12
c) Systems using combination boilers 
5. Underfloor heating systems. 
1 
One pipe low pressure systems 
One pipe systems use a continuous loop of pipework that travels to and from the boiler. Each heat emitter 
was taken from the single loop. When they were first designed, they were purely a gravity system, working 
without the aid of a circulating pump, and there were many variations, such as the one pipe drop, one pipe 
ladder, one pipe upfeed systems.  
In the late 1950s, the central heating circulating pump was developed and this greatly improved the heat-up 
time of gravity systems, enabling smaller pipework to be used, typically 28mm and 22mm loops with 
radiators installed and connected in 15mm. 
In domestic dwellings, the main system used was the Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) 
system. 
a) 
Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) 
The diagram shows a typical domestic pumped one pipe semi gravity system. Here, the hot water storage 
cylinder heats up by gravity circulation, with the heating water to the radiators being pumped by a circulating 
pump installed on the return part of the pipework loop.  
 
Each radiator is connected to the heating circuit that flows from the boiler and back to the boiler in a single 
unbroken loop of pipework. The radiators are usually connected via swept tees, as shown in the diagram, 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
13
with the flow pipe connected to the top connection on the radiator. The reason for this is that although the 
water in the circuit is pumped, the water is not actually pumped through the radiators. When water is 
circulated mechanically, it takes the least line of resistance. Radiators offer too much resistance to flow and 
so the water in the radiator heats up through gravity. By installing the flow at the top of the radiator, the hot 
water is circulated directly to the top section of the radiator, where it immediately begins to cool by a few 
degrees. The cooler water begins to descend through the radiator a lot more quickly than the heated water 
rises through it, so the radiator heats up more rapidly than if the hot water had entered at the bottom of the 
radiator. This creates a better gravity circulation. 
A detrimental feature of this system was that each successive radiator is fed with water that is around 4oC 
cooler than the previous radiator. The first radiator on the system will always be the hottest, usually around 
70oC, but the cooler water leaving the radiator mixes with the pipework loop, making the loop water 
somewhat cooler. This cooler water is then circulated through the next radiator, leaving the radiator cooler 
still and when mixed with the water in the loop, it cooled down further and so on, and so on. If we look at 
the four radiators on the diagram, the first radiator will be around 70oC but the last radiator, just before the 
loop enters the boiler, will be considerably cooler at around 56oC. The net effect of this is that a greater 
surface of heat emitter was required to heat the room. In other words, the radiators got bigger in proportion 
to the heat output. 
Thermostatic control of both the hot water and the heating within this system was solely reliant on the boiler 
thermostat, which often meant that the hot water in the storage cylinder was excessively hot, especially in 
cold weather when the heating temperature was increased. 
2 
Two pipe low pressure (semi gravity) systems 
Two pipe systems were a direct development of the one pipe system and gave an immediate improvement 
both in heat up times and temperature outputs of the heat emitters. Two pipe systems use two circuits; a 
flow circuit that goes from the boiler to every heat emitter and a return circuit that travels from every radiator 
back to the boiler. The benefit of this is that every radiator, in effect, has its own circuit to and from the 
boiler. This ensures that all radiators achieve similar temperatures because each radiator is supplied with 
water at the same temperature.  
a 
Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) 
With this system, the secondary water hot water storage cylinder is heated by the heat exchanger in the 
cylinder. The primary flow and return are heated by the boiler and the water circulated through the coil heat 
exchanger by gravity circulation. 
The heating circuits are heated with water that is pump circulated from the boiler. The pump is installed on 
the flow pipe, as this gives better flow rates through the radiators, because the hotter, less dense water is 
easier to circulate through the system. A simple room thermostat helps to control the room temperatures 
by switching the pump off when the thermostat is satisfied. It is used in conjunction with thermostatic 
radiator valves. The main disadvantage with the two pipe system is the lack of secondary hot water 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
14
temperature control, as there is no thermostat fitted on to the primary flow and return. This means that the 
temperature of the secondary hot water in the cylinder will be dictated by the temperature of the heating 
circuit. Look at the diagrams below: 
 
Pumped heating with gravity hot water (semi-gravity) (top) and heat sink radiator for use with a solid fuel 
boiler (bottom) 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
15
Solid fuel appliances are not as controllable as gas or oil. This makes them exceptionally difficult when it 
comes to heat control because as long as there is fire in the boiler, heat will be generated. The circulation of 
water by gravity relies on the fact that heat rises and cool descends. In gravity systems this is achieved by the 
flow pipe being hotter than the return pipe. Where solid fuel appliances are concerned, the inability to 
effectively control the heat output from the fuel means that, eventually the return pipe will be almost as hot 
as the flow. At this point, gravity circulation will cease and the system will boil, sometimes with disastrous 
consequences. The idea of the heat leak radiator is to allow any excess heat to disperse to the surrounding 
atmosphere and this will ensure at least a minimum amount of continued gravity circulation through the 
system. A heat leak radiator MUST be controlled by LOCKSHIELD-TYPE radiator valves at either end of the 
radiator to prevent tampering. 
The basic layout for a system using a solid fuel boiler is very similar to other semi-gravity type systems. There 
are however, subtle differences: 
 
Solid fuel appliances use mechanical temperature control to control the heat output from the boiler. 
Any electrical temperature controls will need to added to the pipework. 
 
It is essential that a heat sink loop is installed with solid fuel systems and that only vented systems 
are used. Sealed system components MUST NOT be installed on solid fuel heating systems. 
For this reason, solid fuel systems are usually fitted with the following controls: 
 
A room thermostat and a single channel time clock to control the circulating pump. 
 
A pipe thermostat installed on the gravity flow set to 45oC. The pump must not run if the temperature 
is below this. The pipe thermostat prevents heat from the stored hot water in the cylinder from being 
‘dumped’ around the heat sink if the heat sink cools down. This is a major cause of condensation and 
corrosion within the system. 
 
A second pipe thermostat, this time set to 90oC to automatically energise the pump if the 
temperature exceeds 90oC to dissipate the heat through the heating system. This must be set to 
override all other controls. 
 
The system must include a heat leak circuit/radiator fitted with lockshield valves to prevent 
tampering. 
 
An ‘anti-gravity’ valve can be included on the upstairs heating circuit to prevent unwanted gravity 
heating circulation, especially during the summer months. 
 
A large capacity hot water storage vessel. 
b 
C Plan (semi gravity) systems 
The Honeywell C Plan system is almost identical to the previous system. The only difference here is the 
inclusion of a two-port motorised zone valve on the primary flow into the cylinder. This is linked to a cylinder 
thermostat placed on the hot water storage cylinder about ¼ of the way up from the bottom of the cylinder 
to control the secondary hot water temperature.  The system is now fully temperature controlled. The C Plan 
is recognised as a possible upgrade to the two pipe (semi gravity) system for existing systems only by 
Approved Document L of the Building Regulations 2013 (with 2016 amendments). 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
16
 
C Plan system 
3.  
Fully pumped systems 
As Domestic Heating systems developed, the need to eliminate gravity circulation became apparent. Gravity 
circulation is very wasteful in terms of heat energy and fuel and so, by the inclusion of a motorised valve or 
a series of motorised valves, heating systems became fully pumped. In other words, the circulating pump 
now pumped the water around the heat exchanger/coil in the storage cylinder, as well as the heating system 
itself. Temperature control was maintained by using a room thermostat to control the heating and a cylinder 
thermostat to control the secondary hot water. Three initial systems were developed: 
a) The Honeywell Y Plan using a three-port motorised mid-position valve, 
b) The Honeywell W Plan using a three-port motorised diverter valve, and; 
c) The Honeywell S Plan using two, two-port motorised zone valves 
Fully pumped systems give a greater choice of system design, especially when positioning components such 
as the hot water storage cylinder. No longer was it necessary to have the cylinder higher than the boiler 
because gravity circulation had been eliminated. Other benefits are greater choice of boiler position and 
quicker hot water heating times. These are just a selection of the benefits of the fully pumped system. 
a) 
The Honeywell Y Plan using a three-port motorised mid-position valve 
The Y Plan uses a three-port mid-position motorised valve to control the flow of water from the boiler. The 
valve reacts to the demands of the system. If both heating and hot water are needed, the valve enters a mid-
position allowing water to flow around both the heating and hot water circuits. If heating only is required, 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
17
the valve swings to close off the hot water port (Port B on the valve) to allow 
water to flow around the heating system only. If hot water only is required, 
then the valve swings to close off the heating port (Port A on the valve). When 
both hot water and heating are satisfied, the system will shut down completely 
until heat is required to either of the circuits and the valve returns to the mid-
position. Water temperatures are controlled by the room thermostat and the 
cylinder thermostat, with individual room temperatures controlled by 
thermostatic radiator valves (TRVs). A system by-pass is fitted to allow water 
circulation through the boiler to keep the boiler below its high energy cut-out 
temperature (around 85oC), as this would result in the boiler overheating and the boiler ‘locking out’ 
preventing the system from operating 
 
The various positions of the mid-position valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
The Honeywell W Plan using a three-port motorised diverter valve 
The W Plan system uses a three-port diverter valve. The three-port valve can either open the heating circuit 
3-port mid-position valve 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
18
or the hot water circuit but not both at the same time. One circuit is closed when the other circuit is open. It 
is designed to give priority to the hot water circuit, which means if both hot water and heating circuits are 
calling for heat, the heating circuit will not be opened until the hot water circuit is satisfied and up to the 
required temperature. This system is not recommended where high hot water demand is likely as it could 
lead to the space temperature dropping below the normal comfort levels. The system layout is identical to 
the Y Plan system. 
c)  
The Honeywell S Plan system using two, two-port motorised zone valves 
 
The S Plan system uses two, two-port motorised zone valves to independently control 
both the heating and hot water circuits. The room thermostat operates the heating 
zone valve and the cylinder thermostat operates the hot water zone valve. A system 
by-pass is installed in case the system needs to circulate water through the boiler to 
maintain the system temperature below the high energy cut-out temperature. TRVs 
maintain individual room temperatures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The next development – sealed, fully pumped systems 
In the late 1990s, Domestic Heating systems underwent another design change but still based on the two 
pipe system. Boilers became smaller and more efficient, and feed and expansion cisterns, with the 
introduction of the expansion vessel, became obsolete overnight. No longer was a second (feed and 
expansion) cistern needed in the roof space. Systems could be filled direct from the mains cold water supply 
2-port motorised zone valve 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
19
through a temporary filling loop. Gone, too, was the open vent pipe that kept the system at atmospheric 
pressure and safeguarded against the boiler heating the water to excessive, potentially boiling, 
temperatures. These new systems operated at pressures above atmospheric pressures.  
They became known as ‘Sealed Heating Systems’. 
What is a Sealed Heating System? 
A sealed heating system is a system that does not contain an open vent pipe and is, in effect, sealed off from 
the atmosphere. It does not have a Feed and Expansion cistern to fill the system or take up the expansion of 
the water when it is heated. Instead, it contains an expansion vessel to accommodate the expansion of water, 
a pressure/expansion relief valve to relieve excessive pressure created by expansion vessel failure and 
temporary filling loop to fill the system directly from the mains cold water supply. It is called ‘temporary’ 
because once the heating system is full, the filling loop MUST be disconnected to create an air gap between 
the water main and the heating system. This is because the water in a domestic heating system could contain 
chemicals to prevent corrosion, called inhibitors. The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 classify 
the water contained in a central heating as fluid category 3. Water from the water main is classified as fluid 
category 1. The filling loop, in effect, creates a cross connection between water at fluid category 1 and water 
at fluid category 3, which, under the Water Regulations is not allowed without protection against back 
pressure or back syphonage. Because of this, the filling loop arrangement must also include an EC/ED back 
flow prevention device, better known as a double check valve. 
Heating the water that is around 1 bar pressure gives benefits that were not present in older systems: 
1 
Air infiltration through the open vent pipe is eliminated. 
2 
Higher water pressure means better flow rate through the system. 
3 
Higher temperatures can be used if required. 
4 
Less pipework required 
5 
No need for pipework in the roof space 
6 
Systems can be fitted in flats and apartments where installing an F&E cistern at high level is 
problematic. 
Initially, the sealed system components were installed externally to the boiler, the expansion vessel and filling 
loop being fitted to the return pipework, close to the boiler. Later, system boilers were designed where all 
the necessary components were installed within the boiler casing. 
3 
Two pipe sealed systems (using system boilers or sealed system components) 
a) 
Fully pumped, 2 x two port valves (S Plan) system using external sealed system components 
The S Plan sealed system layout is almost the same as its low-pressure version. The main difference is the 
absence of a Feed and Expansion cistern, cold feed and open vent pipes. These are replaced by a temporary 
filling loop, expansion vessel, pressure relief/expansion valve and a pressure gauge to monitor the system 
pressure. The system cold pressure is 1 bar. This will rise to around 1.5 bar when the system is hot. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
20
 
b) 
Fully pumped, 3 x two port valves (S Plan Plus) system using a sealed system boiler 
The S Plan Plus system was designed as a result of a change in the Building Regulations Approved Document 
L1, which states that all dwellings must be zoned between the living space and the sleeping space in a 
dwelling to give individual time and temperature control across these zones. Here, the upstairs heating circuit 
The S Plan Plus with sealed system boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
21
can be individually controlled from the downstairs living space by the inclusion of a third 2-port zone valve 
on the upstairs circuit. The third motorised valve is controlled by its own room thermostat and time 
control/programmer. The temperature of the individual rooms are controlled by programmable thermostatic 
radiator valves.  
The drawing shows an S Plan Plus system with a sealed heating system boiler, where all components such as 
the expansion vessel, filling loop and pump are factory installed inside the boiler casing. This has the effect 
of simplifying the installation and uses less pipework. 
Modern boilers must be the energy saving condensing type boiler, which has been designed to extract as 
much of the generated heat out of the combustion of gas and oil as possible. 
c)  
Heating systems incorporating a combination (combi) boiler 
These are probably the easiest of all heating systems in terms of design and installation. Heating systems that 
incorporate a combination boiler simply require flow and return pipework to and from the boiler. The flow 
pipe from the boiler must be separated into two separate systems using two, two-port motorised zone 
valves, one for the living space circuit and one for the sleeping space circuit. These should be separately 
controlled by individual time clocks/programmers and room thermostats. A circuit to the hot water coil/heat 
exchanger is not required in this case, since combination boilers use an instantaneous method of hot water 
supply. 
Heating system with combination boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
22
AC2.3 State the system layout features for filling and venting systems 
The filling and venting requirements for open vented and sealed heating systems are very different. It is 
important that we know how to fill these systems correctly and how to avoid common filling problems, such 
as air locks, which can be difficult to clear.  
Trapped air is one of the biggest problems in central heating systems. It can cause pump cavitation, leading 
to pump failure, excessive system noise and system corrosion. 
Open Vented Systems 
Feed and expansion cistern position  
 The Feed and Expansion cistern (F&E Cistern) has three roles to play: 
a) It feeds the heating system with water during filling. 
b) It allows water to expand into it when the water is heated (some expansion also takes place up the 
open vent pipe). Water, when heated, expands by 4%. This expansion needs to be accommodated 
within the system otherwise the system may become over-pressurised raising the temperature of the 
boiling point of the water. The expansion takes place up the cold feed and back into the F&E cistern, 
raising the water level inside the cistern. Once the system cools, then the water contracts and the 
water level in the cistern returns to normal. 
c) It provides a static head to the system. In other words, it gives the systems a head of pressure i.e. 3m 
head = 0.3bar pressure. 
The F&E cistern should be 
ideally placed in the roof space 
either on the same level or 
lower than any domestic cold 
water feed cistern or cold 
water storage cistern. The 
reason for this is because 
should a problem develop with 
the heat exchanger/coil in the 
hot water storage cylinder, 
water will pass through to the 
heating system raising the 
water level in the F&E cistern, 
causing the overflow to run. 
This will safeguard against dirty heating water entering the domestic hot water system. There MUST be at least 
1.5m head of pressure between the F&E cistern and the central heating circulating pump. 
 
F&E Cistern
Cold Feed Cistern
Heating open vent
Hot water open vent
Heating cold feed
Hot water cold feed
Mains cold  
water supply
Position of the F&E cistern 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
23
Pump position and Cold feed and open vent pipe connections 
In fully pumped, open vented systems, the pump must be positioned on the flow pipe from the boiler with the 
cold feed and the open vent pipe installed on the suction (-) side of the pump. Take a look at the drawing 
below:  
 
Left hand drawing – this shows the system under negative pressure. Activating the pump in this configuration 
would literally push water back up the cold feed and over the vent pipe. Circulation around the heat emitters 
would be almost impossible.  
Middle drawing – here the heating feed and the heating vent pipe are installed either side of the pump. This 
would circulate water to and from the F&E cistern causing aeration of the water, which could lead to system 
corrosion. Circulation through the heat emitters would 
not occur. 
Right hand drawing – in this drawing, the cold feed and 
the open vent are positioned correctly on the suction side 
of the pump. Because both cold feed and open vent are 
positioned in the same place, the suction pressure on the 
cold feed and the open vent is equal. This means that a 
state of equilibrium occurs and the connections create a 
neutral point (see the drawing left). For the neutral point 
to remain in balance, the distance between the open vent 
and the cold feed should be no more than 150mm. 
An easy way to remember the order is: 
Vent, Cold feed, Pump = VCP = Very Correct Position. 
Methods of releasing air from the system 
Where heating systems contain motorised zone valves, the valves must be open manually to ensure that the 
water reaches all parts of the system.  
Air is released from open vented heating systems as the system fills. To prevent air locks within the pipe work, 
it is advisable to release the air from the furthest and lowest radiator first, working back towards the boiler 
The neutral zone 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
24
until all downstairs radiators are full. Then, progress to the upstairs furthest radiator and work back to the 
boiler once more 
Air is released from all of the radiators and pipework via air release valves positioned 
in one of the top radiator connections. A special radiator air release key is used and 
this is shown in the image left. Do not be tempted to remove the small air release 
plug from the air release valve. The air release valve should be open enough so that 
the escaping air can be heard. It is advisable to have a dry cloth handy to wipe up any 
water that escapes from the valve 
Automatic air valves (AAVs) are also used to remove air in heating systems. These are usually positioned at 
high points in the pipework where trapped air may present a problem.  
Sealed systems 
Sealed system are filled with water directly from the water 
undertakers cold water mains supply via a temporary filling 
loop. They do not contain a Feed and Expansion Cistern. There 
are certain components of a sealed system that are unique the 
system. 
Expansion vessel position  
The expansion vessel contains a neoprene rubber diaphragm. 
One side of the diaphragm is full of air and the other side, 
which is connected to the heating system, contains the 
heating system water. The expansion vessel plays a vital role 
in sealed heating systems.  
As we have already seen, when water is heated, it expands by 
4%. In sealed heating systems that are already subjected to 
pressurised water, the expansion 
vessel 
accommodates 
the 
expanded water preventing over-
pressurisation of the system. The 
expansion 
vessel 
should 
be 
positioned on the return pipework 
as this is around 20oC cooler than 
the flow pipework. If this is not 
possible, expansion vessels can be positioned on the flow pipe but they must be connected on the suction 
side of the pump so that the pump does not artificially raise the pressure causing activation of the pressure 
relief valve. 
 
Air release key 
Sealed system components 
Air @ 0.8 bar
Air @ 1 bar
Water @ 1 bar
Air @ 1.5 bar
Water @ 1.5 
bar
The operation of the expansion vessel 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
25
Pressure gauge, pressure relief valve and filling loop position 
The filling loop – should be positioned on the heating return pipe. Once the system is full and has been 
vented, the filling loop MUST be disconnected to comply with the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 
1999. Filling loops must contain a Type EC Verifiable Double Check Valve to protect the water undertakers 
cold water main against backflow. 
The pressure gauge – this shows the pressure within the system. It should also be installed on the heating 
return pipe, close to the expansion vessel. 
The pressure relief valve – This component (also known as the expansion relief valve) should be installed 
close to the expansion vessel. It is a spring operated valve that provides a safety release of water and pressure 
should the expansion vessel malfunction. Most pressure relief valves are set to operate at 3 – 3.5bar. 
Pump position 
Positioning the pump on sealed systems is not as critical as for the open 
vented system. The lack of open vent on the system means that there is little 
chance of pulling air into the system. In general, pumps should be placed on 
the flow pipe as shown in the diagram above, pulling the heated water from 
the boiler. In most instances, sealed system boilers, where the pump is 
included inside the casing, place the pump on the return pipe, pulling the 
return water back to the boiler. 
Methods of releasing air from the system 
Air is released in the same manner and order as previously stated. It should be remembered that sealed 
systems are filled via a filling loop. The system should be filled initially to 1 bar pressure and the filling loop 
turned off. Fill each radiator until the pressure drops and turn on the filling loop and refill to 1bar. Turn off 
the filling loop and continue to fill the system. DO NOT leave the filling loop turned on whilst filling the system 
with water. It will fill with water far quicker than the air can be released. It MUST be filled in stages. Once the 
system is full of water, the final cold pressure should be no higher than 1 bar. This will rise to around 1.5 bar 
when the system is hot. Always remember to remove the filling loop. 
AC2.4 State the layout features for the systems that include micro and 
minibore pipework. 
Microbore systems 
Microbore systems are a two pipe heating system that uses very small 
diameter pipework, usually 8mm or 10mm piping, to feed the heat 
emitters. The microbore pipework is connected to a manifold, which 
is installed on the main flow and return pipes. A manifold is a special 
fitting that allows multiple connections to a single, larger pipe. They 
Microbore manifolds 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
26
are usually sited centrally in the property to equalise the length of run to each radiator. Two flow and two 
return manifolds are also required, one flow/return manifold pair to supply the living space and one 
flow/return manifold pair to supply the sleeping space, so that the system may be zoned in accordance with 
the Building Regulations Document L1A. The pipework loops to each radiator should not be longer than 15m 
combined (7.5m flow, 7.5m return). 
 
The S Plan Plus microbore system with external sealed heating system components 
AC2.5 State the general operating principles of solid fuel fired heat 
producing appliances 
Solid fuel is still used as a heating fuel in some remote areas where there is no access to a piped gas supply. 
There are several forms of solid fuel, including: 
 
Coal – high carbon, high sulphur content 
 
Coke – smokeless, high carbon content 
 
Anthracite – high calorific value, high carbon content 
 
Biomass wood chips and pellets – carbon neutral fuel 
Each of these fuels require specific solid fuel appliances. The most common solid fuel appliances are: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
27
 
Open fires with a high output back boiler 
 
Room heaters 
 
Cookers (Aga type) 
 
Independent boilers 
High output back boiler 
High output back boilers are installed behind a solid 
fuel fire. Many of this type of boiler have glass fronted 
doors. The heat is distributed into the room by 
convection and radiation. The back boiler supplies hot 
water to the heating system and hot water storage 
cylinder. 
The heat is controlled via a damper in the open 
flue or chimney. The damper controls the flue up-
draught (air flow). The less up-draught, the less 
heat will be produced by the fire bed. 
Typical outputs to the heating/hot water range 
from 6.8 to 10 kW. Radiated heat output is around 
2.6kW. 
Room heaters and log burners 
 
A solid fuel room heater provides heat into the room where it is fitted. Some 
models may provide hot water via a small hot water heat exchanger. They are not 
suitable for providing central heating. 
Cookers (Aga type) 
Solid fuel cookers have been around for many 
years. Solid fuel cookers rely on the fact that the 
fire is permanently lit. The boiler is extremely well 
insulated preventing excessive heat escaping into 
the kitchen. The hot plates are covered with insulated cast iron covers that 
lift up when cooking is required. Many models provide hot water and 
heating as well as cooking. 
Solid fuel cookers are manufactured to burn a variety of solid fuels including 
logs and all have easy-to-clean ash pans. 
Oil fired versions are also available. 
Independent boilers 
Solid fuel, open flued, freestanding boilers are available in many styles and sizes to suit large and small 
Heating  
flow
Heating  
return
Flue
Convected  
heat
Radiated 
heat
A high output back boiler 
A room heater 
AGA
An Aga cooker 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
28
heating systems alike. There are two basic types: 
AC2.6 State the general operating principles of oil fired heat 
producing appliances 
Most oil fired appliances for domestic heating systems use C2 Grade 28 second viscosity oil. It is more widely 
known as kerosene. It is often used in rural areas where access to a mains gas supply is difficult. There are 
two types of oil burning appliances: 
 
Those that use the pressure jet (atomising) burner. 
 
Those that use the vapourising burner. 
 
Gravity feed solid fuel boilers 
Often called ‘hopper feed’ boilers, gravity feed 
boilers incorporate a large fuel storage box, called 
a hopper, positioned above the firebox. Fuel is 
automatically fed through to the fire bed without 
the need for constant stoking. The hopper can 
hold 2 to 3 days’ worth of fuel. An in-built fan, 
which is thermostatically controlled, supplies 
combustion air for a rapid response if there is an 
increase in heat demand. The main danger with 
hopper fed boilers is the risk that the hopper, 
being situated so close the combustion chamber, 
could catch fire and this requires careful 
monitoring and the fire bed needs to be regulated 
with care. 
 
Batch feed boilers 
These are hand fired boilers that require manual 
stoking.  
Although they require more refuelling than 
gravity feed boilers, they are often cheaper to 
run and will continue to operate without an 
electricity supply. 
 
 
A gravity feed boiler 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A batch feed boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
29
The principles of the pressure jet (atomising) burner 
Pressure jet burners work on the principle that the oil must be atomised and mixed with oxygen before the  
oil will ignite. Atomising burners have an electrical 
fan to introduce the air and a fuel pump, to push 
the oil though to the nozzle. The fuel flow is 
controlled by an electrically operated solenoid 
valve. At the nozzle, the fuel is atomised in to an 
aerosol mist and mixed with the air where it is 
then ignited by a spark ignitor. Once lit, the burner 
will continue to burn as long as there is fuel and air 
in the correct ratio. 
Pressure jet type burners are installed on all on all 
oil-fired 
central 
heating 
boilers, 
including 
Traditional 
boilers, 
Condensing 
boilers, 
Combination boilers, Freestanding and wall mounted types. 
The principles of the vapourising 
burner 
Vapouring burners work on the principle 
that the oil feed to the burner is 
supplied via gravity. The oil flows to the 
burner box where it is heated by a small 
heater to encourage the oil to vaporise. 
The vapour is then ignited by an 
electrode. Once the oil is ignited, the 
electrode is no longer required as the 
heat from the burner ensures continued 
vaporisation of the fuel. 
Vaporising burner are now only found in 
older oil-fired cookers, such as aga’s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blast tube and nozzle
Solenoid valve
Fuel pump
Oil feed pipe
Fan
Electric motor
Control box
A pressure jet boiler installation 
A vapourising burner installation 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
30
AC2.7 State the general operating principles of gas fired heat 
producing appliances 
Gas fired central heating systems are the most popular form of heating in the United Kingdom. Over the past 
100 years there have been many different types of boiler from large cast iron multi-sectional types to modern 
low water content condensing types. Modern boilers are available as wall mounted or freestanding (floor 
mounted) models to suit all installations and heat emitters. 
Traditional boilers 
Often called conventional, regular or heat only boilers, the traditional boiler is best suited as replacements 
to dwellings that already have a traditional central heating system installed that contains a hot water storage 
cylinder and a feed and expansion cistern in the roof space. They are very often used where the heating 
system may not be able to take the water pressure of a modern sealed heating system containing a system 
boiler or combination boiler. However, modern components, such as expansion vessels and filling loops can 
be fitted externally, if required. 
Generally, traditional boilers have a low water content for quick heating response and all models are 
condensing type boilers that can take advantage of modern external heating controls such weather 
compensation or delayed start units. 
Traditional boilers are compatible with solar 
hot water heating systems that actively 
encourage a lower carbon footprint and energy 
cost savings. 
System boilers 
A system boiler is a heat only boiler that is used 
where sealed systems are installed. They 
contain all major hot water and heating system 
components built into the boiler casing, 
including the circulating pump, pressure relief 
valve, pressure gauge and expansion vessel. 
They require an external hot water storage 
cylinder for hot water supply. A separate feed 
and expansion cistern is not required as these 
boilers are filled with cold water taken directly 
from the water undertakers cold mains supply 
via a temporary filling loop. 
System boilers are much easier to install than 
conventional boilers and require less pipework. Again, system boilers are compatible with modern 
A system boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
31
environmentally friendly systems such as solar hot water supply and underfloor heating systems. All sealed 
systems are of the condensing-type. 
Condensing boilers 
When natural gas is combusted, the resulting flue 
gases contain CO2 and water vapour. If the gases are 
cooled to their dew point, the water vapour 
condenses back into droplets of water. It is this 
cooling and condensing process that is used in 
condensing boilers. 
Condensing boilers have two heat exchangers. The 
flue gases first pass over the primary heat exchanger 
where about 80% of the heat is extracted. The gases 
then pass over another smaller heat exchanger where 
a further 14% of heat is extracted. It is at this point 
that the gases condense to water to form a plume of 
steam that is evacuated from the flue pipe. 
Condensate water that is collected inside the boiler is 
released through a condensate trap to a drain outside 
of the dwelling. The condensate water is heavily 
saturated with CO2 which makes it extremely acidic. 
For this reason, condensate pipes must be installed in 
plastic solvent weld pipework.  
Condensing boilers are around 94% efficient. This 
means that only 6% of heat is wasted from the flue. 
They are compatible with modern environmentally 
friendly systems such as solar hot water supply and 
underfloor heating systems. 
Combination boilers 
A combination boiler combines the benefits of a 
condensing boiler with instantaneous hot water 
supply. A hot water storage cylinder is not required 
because combination boilers heat the water as it is 
drawn directly from the water undertakers mains cold 
water supply. The heating system is a sealed system 
filled usually from an integral filling loop within the 
boiler. 
A condensing boiler 
A combination boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
32
A combination boiler contains a plate heat exchanger and a diverter valve. The diverter valve diverts the 
heated water from the boiler heat exchanger to either to the heating system or the plate heat exchanger. 
The plate heat exchanger heats the cold water as it comes from the cold mains supply before distributing it 
to the hot taps. 
Combination boilers are known as ‘hot water priority’ appliances. This simply means that when a hot tap is 
opened, the heating system will go cold, whilst all of the heat energy is put through to the hot water supply. 
Once the tap is turned off, the diverter valve will then divert the water to the heating system once more. 
Modern combination boilers give a much better hot water flow than older types, but it should be 
remembered that most combination boilers are not suitable where multiple hot taps may be opened or 
where there is a long run of pipework to the hot taps. 
Flue types used with gas and oil fired boilers and appliances 
All appliances the burn gas, oil and solid fuels need a flue system to evacuate the products of combustion 
away from the dwelling. The basic principle is to create an up-draught or a difference in pressure, whether 
by natural means or whether by the use of a fan, to eject the combustion products safely to atmosphere. 
There are two basic designs: 
 
Room sealed flues 
 
Open flues 
Room sealed flues 
The principle of a room sealed flue is that at no point should any flue gases escape into the room where the 
boiler/appliance is installed. The boiler draws its combustion air directly from outside and evacuates the 
fumes at the same point outside the building. This arrangement makes the appliance much safer, since there 
is direct path for the fumes to escape into the room. The internal combustion process is effectively ‘room 
sealed’. There are two different methods: 
Natural draught room sealed flues 
Natural draught room sealed appliances (better known as balanced 
flues) have been around for many years. Both the products of 
combustion outlet and fresh combustion air inlet are positioned at the 
same location  on an outside wall of a building. The products of 
combustion are cleared from the boiler via a duct that runs from the 
top of the combustion chamber and through the centre of the fresh air 
inlet duct. Fresh combustion air enters the boiler through the outer 
duct. The air pressure acting on both ducts is equal and ‘balanced’, 
hence the term ‘balanced flue’. 
Natural draught room sealed appliances are recognisable because of 
A natural draught room sealed boiler 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
33
their rather large, square or rectangular flue terminals, which are positioned so as not to allow fumes to re-
enter the buildings through any openings, such as doors or windows.. 
Forced draught room sealed flues 
Forced draught room sealed appliance, better known as ‘fan 
assisted’, work in exactly the same way as the natural draught 
room sealed appliances. There are, however, two notable 
differences: 
 
The flue outlet is circular in shape and much smaller. 
 
The products of combustion are evacuated from the 
appliance with the aid of a fan. 
There are two distinct types of forced draught room sealed 
appliance: 
1. 
Positive pressure – where the fan is positioned 
before the gas burner. The fan forces gas and air to a pre-mix 
gas burner where it is combusted. This creates a positive 
pressure inside the boiler casing. Generally used on 
condensing-type boilers. 
2. 
Negative pressure – the fan is positioned on the flue gas 
outlet, where it pushes the products of combustion out of the appliance. This creates a negative pressure 
inside the boiler casing. Generally, this type of fan arrangement is used on pre-condensing appliances. 
Open flues 
The flue is open to the room where the appliance is installed. 
Combustion air is drawn from the room where the appliance is 
installed. The combustion air used must be replaced by air from 
outside of the property through an air brick, usually (but not 
always) positioned on an outside wall in the room. There are two 
types: 
 
Natural draught open flue 
 
Forced draught open flue. 
Natural draught open flues 
Natural draught flues rely on the up-draught of the flue, which is 
created because the heat from the combustion process rises. Up-
draught can be affected by the length of the flue, the height of the 
flue and the number and angle of any changes of direction. 90o 
bends should be avoided as these slow the evacuation of the 
A forced draught room sealed boiler 
A typical open flue 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
34
products of combustion. Natural draught open flues can also be adversely affected by wind and weather 
conditions and can suffer from the effects of condensation caused by the rapid cooling of the combustion 
gases inside the flue. 
Forced draught open flues 
On some appliances, open flues may be forced by the aid of a fan positioned either before the combustion 
chamber or close to the primary flue. The fan helps to create and maintain a positive up-draught by forcing 
the products of combustion up the flue and out to the atmosphere.  
AC2.8 State the operating principles of heat emitters 
In this assessment criteria, we will investigate the common forms of heat emitter that can be used with wet 
central heating systems. 
Panel radiators 
Panel radiators are the most popular form of heat emitter used on central heating systems. They have 
changed very little over the last 40 years but modern panel radiator are much more efficient than their 
predecessors.  
Around 70% of the heat from modern panel radiators is in the form of convection. Almost all modern 
radiators have fins on the back and it is these fins (or convector) that provide the majority of the heat. The 
fins warm the air trapped in them creating upward moving warm convection currents that flow into the room. 
This substantially raises the heat output of the radiator meaning that smaller radiators in most cases can be 
used.  
Positioning of radiators needs to be considered with care. They should be positioned on walls that are clear 
of furniture, if possible, as the furniture can prohibit the effect of the radiated heat. If a radiator is to be 
positioned under a window, then enough space should be provided between the top of the radiator and the 
window sill to allow the free flow of warm air. When hanging radiators on a wall, a distance of 150mm 
between the bottom of the radiator and the finished floor level to allow the free circulation of air through 
the fins. 
Manufacturers provide a wide range of radiator heights and lengths with heights from 300mm through to 
900mm and lengths from 400mm to 3m. 
There are three different panel radiator styles: 
 
Compact  
 
Rolled top 
 
Seamed top 
 
Flat panel 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
35
Compact 
Compact radiators have factory fitted top grill and side panels 
and are more aesthetically pleasing than other radiator types. 
The top grill and side panels can be removed to match seamed 
top radiators if desired. 
Rolled top 
Not as popular as compact radiators, these do not have any 
top grills or side panels. The top of the radiator has a rolled 
seamless appearance with welds along the sides and across 
the bottom. Generally, these are more expensive that compact 
radiators. 
Seamed top 
The seamed top radiators are made by welding two flat plates of steel together. At one 
time, these were the most popular radiator installed but have fallen out of popularity due 
to the introduction of the compact radiator. 
Flat panel  
These are becoming increasingly popular due to the smooth 
finish and stylish design that compliments modern living 
environments. They are very easy to keep clean and have a low 
profile, maximising the wall space. They can be mounted 
horizontally and vertically. 
Domestic panel radiators have ½ inch BSP female threads on all ends for installation of the radiator valves. 
All radiators have an air release valves and plugs. These are usually supplied by the radiator manufacturer. 
The types of panel radiator 
There are many types of panel radiator from single panel to double panel with fins. These are shown in the 
drawing below: 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
36
Connections to radiators 
Radiator connections are classified by their abbreviations. For example: 
 
TBOE means Top-Bottom-Opposite-End (used on heat sink radiators with solid fuel systems and one 
pipe systems) 
 
BBOE means Bottom-Bottom-Opposite-End (the usual method of radiator connection) 
 
TBSE means Top-Bottom-Same-End (used occassionally on one pipe systems) 
Column radiators  
Column radiators are, as the name suggests, made from columns historically 
made from cast iron. The more columns a radiator has, the greater the 
output is. Modern column radiators may be made from cast aluminium or 
steel. They are often called church or hospital radiators because they were 
designed to withstand being installed in large public spaces. They are 
increasingly used on refurbishments where an historic ‘period-feel’ is 
important. 
There are two disadvantages with column radiators: 
1. They contain a lot of water, which means that they may take longer to heat up than convention 
panel radiators. 
2. The heat is predominantly radiated heat with very little in the way of convection. This means 
that the radiators may be on the large side. 
Low surface temperature radiators 
Designed to comply to an HSE Health Services Information Sheet no.6, 
which states that: 
Contact with surfaces above 43 °C can lead to serious injury. Prolonged 
contact often occurs because people have fallen and are unable to move, 
or are trapped by furniture. Incidents often occur in areas where there are 
low levels of supervision, for example in bedrooms, bathrooms and some 
communal areas.  
This standard has been accepted by many local authorities and NHS 
establishments to include any place where the general public have access, including residential homes, care 
homes and schools. Low surface Temperature radiators are also becoming popular in many domestic 
situations too, especially in children’s bedrooms and nurseries, and areas where the elderly or infirm may 
come into contact with radiators. 
Inside each LST is a normal panel radiator. The outer shell is a specific distance away from the direct heat so 
that it never exceeds the 43oC limit. Bottom grill and top grill allow the passage of cooler air in and heated 
air out, so that the room is warmed sufficiently. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
37
Fan convectors 
Fan convectors work by using an electrically operated fan blowing warm air into the 
room. The heat exchanger is usually a coil of copper pipe with aluminium fins 
attached that is connected to the flow and return pipes of the heating system. The 
fins trap the air and heat it quickly before the fan forces it out. A thermostat 
operates the fan by switching off the electricity once the temperature is reached. 
They are connected to the electricity supply via a switched fuse spur. There are two 
common types of fan convector:  
Wall mounted 
These are usually large in size. They can be successfully used on sealed heating 
systems where the temperatures can be slightly higher than open vented systems. 
Heat outputs vary with heater size and manufacturer’s data should be checked for 
specific installation requirements. 
Kick space heaters 
These are specifically designed to fit below 
kitchen cupboards for use in kitchen areas with 
limited space for a radiator. They work in the 
same way as fan convectors. 
Tubular towel warmers 
Bathroom towel warmers are available in many sizes, styles and finishes and are 
often referred to as designer towel rails. Many have dual fuel capability, being used 
with wet central heating in the winter and using a small electrical element to heat 
them during the summer when the heating system is not 
used. They are usually vertically mounted 
Towel warmers with integral panel radiators 
Not as popular as tubular towel warmers, these combine 
a towel warmer with a radiator. The idea is to warm the 
towel but not affect the convection currents warming the 
bathroom. They are usually used in period bathrooms, where modern heating 
efficiency meets classic styling. 
AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control 
components 
Modern central heating components can be divided into two main groups: 
A fan heater 
Fan
Copper heating 
coil
Cool air in
Warm air out
A kick space heater 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
38
 
Those components that are mechanical in nature 
 
Those components that are electrical 
Mechanical central heating components 
Mechanical central heating components do not require an electricity supply to operate but still provide an 
important function in the efficient running of the system 
 
Thermostatic Radiator valves 
These control the temperature of the room by controlling water flow. TRVs  
contain heat sensitive head workings that reacts to air temperature. The head is 
usually filled with wax or a heat sensitive liquid that expands and contracts with 
heat. When the room heats up, the wax/liquid in the head of the valve expands, 
which pushes down on a central pin. The pin opens/closes the valve in response 
to the expansion/contraction of the wax/liquid. Each TRV has a range of 
temperature settings to allow different temperatures as required by the end user. 
Most TRVs can be installed on either the flow or the return. 
Building Regulations Approved Document L1A/B requires that TRVs be fitted in all 
rooms except where a room thermostat is sited.  
Manual Radiator valves  
There are two types of manual radiator valve. These are the 
wheel head and the lockshield type. Radiator valves do not 
contain a washer. Instead the water flow is shut off by a metal 
to metal seating that is carefully designed stop the flow of water 
through the radiator. Wheel head valves can be controlled by 
the end user by turning clockwise to turn off and anti-clockwise 
to turn on.  Lockshield type valves do not have an operating 
wheel head as they are designed to be set by the plumber during 
the balancing operation at the commissioning stage of the 
heating installation. They have a cover designed to prevent 
tampering with the valve once it has been set. 
 
Automatic air valves 
Automatic air valves are used to automatically release the air from the system. They are usually placed 
in positions where air is expected to collect, usually at high points in the system pipework. They 
operate by allowing the air to escape and then resealing themselves when water arrives at the air 
release point. 
A trv 
A wheel head radiator valve 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
39
 
 
How do AAVs work? 
When the water reaches the AAV, the float and the float arm inside the valve rises as the water enters 
the valve until the valve closes. As more air arrives at the valve, the float momentarily drops and the 
valve opens releasing the air from the system. They are often used in conjunction with a single check 
valve as this would prevent air from being drawn into the system through the AAV. 
Automatic bypass valves 
The automatic by-pass valve is a spring operated valve that 
controls the flow of water across the flow and return circuits 
in situations where no flow is possible due to motorised valve 
and thermostatic radiator valve closure. This condition can 
occur in S Plan and S Plan Plus systems, especially when the 
hot water circuit is closed and the TRVs on the heating circuit 
begin to close one by one when all thermostatic heads have 
been satisfied. As the TRVs close, the by-pass valve will 
gradually open in response, maintaining minimum circulation 
through the boiler. This prevents boiler over heat and the 
operation of the high-limit thermostat on the boiler.  
By-pass valves can be set to respond to the flow rate of the system. They are marked in litres/second 
(l/s) through the valve. 
The automatic by-pass valve 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
40
 
Thermo-mechanical cylinder control valves 
These are non-electrical valves that are used in existing semi-gravity 
systems to control the temperature of the hot water. They are 
positioned on either the primary flow or the return with the 
temperature sensing capillary fastened to the wall of the hot water 
storage cylinder.  
According to the Domestic Heating Compliance Guide they are: 
‘For replacement systems where only the hot water cylinder is being 
replaced and where hot water is on a gravity circulation system, a 
thermo-mechanical cylinder thermostat should be installed as a 
minimum provision.’  
Thermo-mechanical valves operate on the same principle as thermostatic radiator valves in that the 
flow of water is controlled by a thermostatic head. In this instance, the head is controlled by the 
temperature of the water inside the hot water storage cylinder via the temperature sensing capillary. 
The temperature sensing capillary should be positioned about ¼  to 1/3 of the way up from the bottom 
of the storage cylinder. 
 
Anti-gravity valves 
Anti-gravity valves work in the same way as a single check valve by only allowing water flow in one 
direction.  
Anti-gravity valves stop unwanted gravity circulation of heat to the upstairs radiators of semi-gravity 
heating systems when the system is on hot water only. They are particularly important on systems 
fuelled by solid fuel and, since they do not contain a spring,  should be positioned on the vertical flow 
pipe to the upstairs heating circuit so that the valve drops to the closed position when the pump is 
off and is forced open when the pump is operating. 
A thermo-mechanical cylinder 
control valve 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
41
Drain valves 
Drain valves should be positioned at all low points in the heating system to 
allow total draining of the system water. If the radiators are connected via 
pipe drops from above, then every radiator should have its own drain-off 
valve to facilitate draining. Radiator valves with built-in drain-off valves are 
available. 
 
Feed and expansion cisterns 
These small cisterns that are designed for use with vented hot 
water heating systems. They supply cold feed water to a 
heating system, and they accommodate any expansion of the 
water due to the water being heated. The cistern must be large 
enough accommodate any expanded water and must be sized 
accordingly. See Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply 
domestic cold water system installation and maintenance 
techniques. 
Feed and expansion cisterns should be installed so that 
the cold water content when the system is full is only 
about 100mm from the bottom of the cistern to the 
water line. This is so that there is enough room for the 
water to expand without it causing the cistern 
overflow pipe to run when the system is hot. 
Air Separators 
An air separator is designed to help with the 
positioning of the feed and open vent connections to 
the system pipework. When positioned correctly, the 
air separator creates a turbulent flow of water within 
the air separator itself and this helps to eject any 
unwanted air from the system.  
Electrical central heating components 
Modern, energy efficient central heating controls are 
necessary to provide the functional, efficiency and 
safety requirements of Building Regulations Approved 
Document L1A/B Conservation of Fuel and Power. 
Before we investigate the various controls and their functions, it is worth considering what the requirements 
of Document L1A/B actually are: 
Radiator valve with drain-off 
An F&E cistern 
Use and position of an air separator 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
42
The following information is quoted verbatim from the TACMA-guide-to-Part-L1A/B. 
CONTROLS FOR NEW DWELLINGS 
Part L1A, England and Wales:  
CONTROLS FOR EXISTING DWELLINGS 
Part L 1B, England and Wales. 
1. Provide installations that are fully pumped. 
2. Provide independent time & temperature control to 
both the heating and hot water circuits. Part J, 
Scotland requires the installation of 7-day timing. 
3. Provide control systems with a boiler interlock.  
Note 1 
4. Install an automatic by-pass valve if a bypass is 
fitted. Note 2 
 
5. Split the heating circuit into zones using either: 
a. room thermostats or programmable room 
thermostats in all zones. 
b. a room thermostat or programmable room 
thermostat in the main zone and Thermostatic 
c. 
Radiator Valves (TRV’s) on all radiators in the 
other zones. 
6. Ensure installation of a cylinder thermostat and a 
zone valve to control stored hot water. Note 3 
7. Provide time control by the use of either: 
a. a full programmer with separate timing to each 
circuit. 
b. two or more separate timers providing timing 
control to each circuit 
c. 
programmable room thermostat(s) to the 
heating circuit(s), with separate timing of the 
hot water. 
8. For dwellings with a total usable floor space greater 
than 150m2 , then: 
a. the heating circuit should be split into a 
minimum of two zones plus a hot water service 
zone and: 
b. each zone should be separately timed by the 
use of a multi-channel programmer or multiple 
heating programmers or programmable room 
thermostats 
9. Any Boiler Management Control System that meets 
the specified zoning, timing & temperature 
requirements is a wholly acceptable alternative. 
When a new installation is fitted, the controls should be 
as for a new dwelling. When replacing the boiler and/or 
the hot water vessel, the opportunity to improve the 
controls should be considered. To be confident that the 
requirements of the Building Regulations are met this 
would entail the following: 
1) Provide fully pumped installations with a boiler 
interlock. Note 1 
2) Install an automatic by-pass valve, if a bypass is fitted. 
Note 2 
3) Provide time and temperature control to both the 
heating & hot water circuits, for fully pumped 
installations. 
4.1) Separate the space heating system into zones and: 
a. if a room thermostat is already fitted fit TRV’s on 
at least all radiators in the sleeping areas and 
check 
if 
a 
new 
room 
thermostat 
or 
programmable room thermostat should be 
fitted. 
b. if there is no room thermostat, install either a 
room thermostat or programmable room 
thermostat and fit TRV’s on at least all radiators 
in the sleeping areas. 
4.2) Provide time control by the use of either: 
a) a full, standard or mini programmer, or 
b) one or more separate time switches, or 
c) programmable room thermostat(s). 
5) For semi-gravity installations, the recommended 
option is to convert it to fully pumped. The controls 
should then be as detailed above. 
5.1) If either the new boiler or hot water storage vessel 
can only be used on a pumped circuit, the installation 
must be converted to fully pumped. Install controls as 
detailed above. 
5.2) If the new boiler or storage vessel is designed for 
gravity hot water, or it is impractical to convert to a fully 
pumped installation, provide the following controls: 
a. a cylinder thermostat & zone valve to control 
the hot water and provide a boiler interlock. 
Note 3 
b. a room or programmable room thermostat. 
c. 
a programmer or time switch. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
43
d. TRV’s on at least all radiators in the bedrooms. 
6) Any Boiler Management Control System that meets 
the 
specified 
zoning, 
timing 
& 
temperature 
requirements, is a wholly acceptable alternative. 
Note 1: Boiler interlock is achieved by the correct use of the room thermostat(s) or programmable room 
thermostat(s), the cylinder thermostat and zone valve(s) in conjunction with the timing device(s). These should be 
wired such that when there is no demand from the heating or hot water both the pump and boiler are switched off. 
The use of TRV’s alone does not provide interlock. 
Note 2: Although the regulations may not always require a bypass to be fitted, the performance of any installation 
with multi-zoning or TRV’s is improved by the use of an automatic by-pass valve.  
Note 3: The use of non-electric hot water controllers does not meet this requirement. 
 
Central Heating Circulating Pump 
The circulating pump operates by circulating the water around the system. It is not a pump in the true sense 
of the word, since it needs water both sides of the impeller to operate correctly.  
Domestic circulating pumps have either a 6m or 10m head of pressure capability meaning that they will lift 
the water vertically either 6m or 10m. This is normally sufficient for most domestic systems. 
Timeclocks and programmers 
Timeclocks provide a simple way of activating a central 
heating system. They are only suitable for switching on 
or off one circuit, such as the heating circuit. This 
makes them ideal for systems that incorporate a 
combination boiler. Mechanical and digital types are 
available. 
Programmers are two-way timeclocks, able to switch 
two circuits at multiple times throughout the day. 
There are three types: 
 Mini programmers – these allow the heating and 
hot water circuits to be on together, hot water independently but not heating independently.  
 
Standard programmers – these use the same time settings for all circuits. 
 
Full programmers – these allow multiple independent settings for both circuits. Each circuit can be 
used on its own or together. 
A typical programmer 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
44
Room thermostats 
A room thermostat controls the air temperature of the room. 
It is basically a thermostatically controlled switch that either 
makes or breaks an electrical connection controlling the 
heating circuit.  
Some room thermostats are programmable, allowing different 
temperatures at different times of the day and on different 
days of the week and many provide a ‘night setback’ facility 
where a minimum temperature can be maintained throughout 
the night. This is particularly useful during the winter months. 
 
 
Cylinder thermostats 
These control the temperature of the hot water that is stored in the hot water storage 
cylinder. They are strapped to the cylinder about ¼ of the way up from the bottom of the 
storage vessel. They are used in close conjunction with a motorised zone valve or 
diverter/mid position valve to provide accurate temperature control. 
Frost and pipe thermostats 
Frost thermostats and pipe thermostats work together to provide protection for the 
vulnerable parts of the system that may be affected by freezing temperatures: 
 
The frost thermostat is wired to the boiler and any other vulnerable components 
and is designed to override all other controls and programmers/timeclocks. They should 
be set to around 3oC and should be positioned in places where frost and freezing 
temperatures are likely to affect the system such as boilers installed in room spaces and 
unheated garages. 
 
Pipe thermostats should be wired in series to the frost thermostat. A pipe stat is fastened to 
vulnerable pipework near, say, to a boiler installed in a garage. The pipe stat senses the temperature 
of the water in the system and will only activate if this approaches 0oC. 
When both frost and pipe thermostat are activated, then the system will fire up, 
protecting the system from freezing. 
Motorised valves 
There are three motorised valves that can be used to control domestic heating systems: 
 The two port motorised zone valve 
 The three port motorised mid-position valve 
A hive room thermostat 
Frost thermostat 
Pipe thermostat 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
45
 
The three port motorised diverter valve 
The two port motorised zone valve 
These are used primarily on S Plan and S Plan Plus heating systems but may also be 
used on C Plan Plus systems. Each valve is wired to control either a room thermostat 
or a hot water cylinder thermostat. They are mostly used to ‘zone’ parts of heating 
systems for better thermostatic and energy efficiency control of heating systems. 
The three port motorised mid-position valve 
These are used exclusively on Y Plan domestic heating 
systems. The valve is linked to both room and cylinder thermostats and operates by 
opening or closing the heating or hot water circuits. With the mid position valve, at 
least one circuit is open all of the time. It is not possible to close both hot water and 
heating circuits simultaneously. When both circuits are required, the valve swings to 
the mid-position allowing hot water to flow to both circuits. 
The three-port motorised diverter valve 
These are very similar in appearance to the three port mid-position valve but they 
will only open one circuit at a time. There is no mid-position function. They are 
specifically designed for the W Plan fully pumped system.  
AC2.10 State the operating principles of devices used 
in central heating systems to minimise the build-up of 
sediment  
The effects of dissimilar metals used on central heating 
systems 
Corrosion in central heating systems occurs because of the different 
metals that the system contains. Electrolytic corrosion takes place where 
dissimilar metals are placed in close proximity with each other in the 
presence of an electrolyte – in this case the electrolyte is water (see unit 
J/602/2496 Understand how to apply scientific principles within MES). 
This leads to the formation of magnetic black oxide sludge and sediment 
that settles in low spots in the system, around the magnetised impeller 
in the pump and at the bottom of radiators and heat emitters.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
46
Corrosion can attack systems extremely quickly and begins almost as soon as the system is filled with fresh 
oxygenated water from the mains cold water supply. The problem then 
accelerates once the water gets hot.  
Corrosion can be prevented by using the correct flushing procedures to remove excess flux residues and 
swarf and then adding corrosion inhibitors and descaling additives to the system water when the system is 
still new. For existing systems, magnetic filters prove effective at removing sludge and sediment as it 
circulates through the system in the system water.  
It should be remembered, however, that not all corrosion in central heating systems is magnetic. Black oxide 
sludge is magnetic because it is derived from the ferrous steel used in the manufacture of the radiators but 
corrosion of non-ferrous metals, such as copper and aluminium also takes place, and this cannot be removed 
by the use of magnetic filters. Protection of central heating systems is a combination of the following: 
 
System flushing to remove residues 
 
Adding corrosion inhibitors and scale preventers 
 
The use of magnetic filters 
These three points, together with regular servicing and maintenance will protect the system and ensure its 
continued efficient service throughout its life. 
Magnetic central heating filters 
The concept of magnetic central heating filters is to remove the magnetic 
sludge and sediment by the use of a very powerful magnet that attracts the 
sediment as it circulates through the central heating system. The magnetic 
filter should be installed on the return pipe, close to the boiler and should 
be regularly inspected and cleaned to prevent sediment build-up. 
A NOTE OF CAUTION: It is recommended that people with heart 
pacemakers etc should not handle the magnet inside the magnetic filter. 
When the filter is correctly installed and inside its water tight compartment, 
the strength of the magnetic field is around 1/10 of that of the average fridge 
magnet and so poses very little risk. Always follow the manufacturer’s 
installation and servicing instructions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
47
Learning Outcome 3 
Know the site preparation techniques for 
central heating systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
48
There are five Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC3.1. 
Identify the sources of information required when undertaking work on central heating 
systems: 
AC3.2. 
Identify the preparatory work required to be carried out to the building fabric in order to 
install, decommission or maintain central heating systems. 
AC3.3. 
Identify the protection measures required to the building fabric or customer property, during 
and on completion of work on central heating systems and components. 
AC3.4. 
Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to complete work on central heating 
systems ensuring that they are not damaged. 
AC3.5. 
State the range of hand and power tools required to complete work on central heating 
systems. 
Much of the information in Learning Outcome 2 has previously been covered in detail in other Units and 
specifically in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques, and where possible, you will be directed to the relevant headings and Assessment 
Criteria within those units. 
AC3.1 Identify the sources of information required when undertaking 
work on central heating systems 
Regulations 
The Regulations  required when designing, installing and maintaining hot water systems are almost the same 
as for the installation of cold water systems. As such, they are covered in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques. Where there 
are differences, they are listed below: 
 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 
 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
 
Building Regulations Approved Document L1A/B – Conservation of fuel and power 
 
Building Regulations Approved Document J – Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 
The British Standards 
 
BS EN 12828:2012+A1:2014: Heating systems in buildings. Design for water-based heating systems.  
 
BS EN 12831-1:2017: Energy performance of buildings. Method for calculation of the design heat 
load. Space heating load, Module M3-3 
 
BS EN 14336:2004: Heating systems in buildings. Installation and commissioning of water based 
heating systems  
 
BS EN 1264-1:2011: Water based surface embedded heating and cooling systems. Definitions and 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
49
symbols 
 
BS EN 1264-3:2009: Water based surface embedded heating and cooling systems. Dimensioning. 
 
BSEN 1264-4:2009: Water based surface embedded heating and cooling systems. Installation.  
 
BS EN 442-1:2014: Radiators and convectors. Technical specifications and requirements 
 
BS EN 442-2:2014: Radiators and convectors. Test methods and rating 
 
BS 7593: 2006: Code of practice for treatment of water in domestic hot water central heating 
systems 
Recommendation and advice documents 
 
The Domestic Building Services Compliance Guide 2018 – A free document that can be down loaded 
from : 
https://logiccertification.com/media/72302/domestic-building-control-compliance-guide_2018.pdf 
This document offers practical assistance when designing and installing to the Building Regulations 
requirements for space heating and hot water systems. It also includes advice on mechanical 
ventilation, comfort cooling, fixed internal and external lighting, and renewable energy systems. 
 
The Central Heating System Specifications (CHeSS) 2008 – this publication offers advice for 
compliance with good practice and best practice for the installation of central heating systems. 
 
Chartered Institute of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) Heating Guide B1 2016 – this was 
produced to assist heating engineers to specify and design wet central heating systems.  
Manufacturer technical instructions 
The manufacturer’s instructions are probably the most important document to read and consult when 
installing, servicing and maintaining appliances, components and equipment, because they instruct us on the 
best methods to use whilst keeping to current legislation and regulations. In some cases, it may appear that 
these instructions contradict the regulations. This occurs because regulations and codes of practice are only 
updated periodically, whereas manufacturers are constantly reviewing and updating their literature in line 
with modifications and current good practice. Where a conflict exists, manufacturer’s literature should 
always be followed. If not: 
 
The warranty of the equipment may be void. 
 
Regulations may be inadvertently broken 
 
The installation may be dangerous. 
AC3.2 Identify the preparatory work required to be undertaken to the 
building fabric in order to install, decommission or maintain central 
heating systems  
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.1: Define the 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
50
typical range of activities to be carried out when working on plumbing and heating systems and AC3.8: State 
the work methods for preparing building construction features for installation work 
AC3.3 Identify the protection measures required to the building 
fabric or customer property, during and on completion of work on 
central heating systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.4: Identify 
how to protect the building fabric or customer property before the work commences. 
AC3.4 Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to 
complete work on central heating systems ensuring they are not 
damaged 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 2, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC2.1. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
AC2.2. 
State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use in dwellings. 
AC2.3. 
State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold water pipe to existing lead pipe 
work. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings. 
AC3.5 State the range of hand and power tools required to complete 
work on central heating systems  
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 1, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC1.1. 
State the purpose of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and heating 
systems. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the different types of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and 
heating systems. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
51
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
52
Learning Outcome 5 
Know the installation requirements of 
central heating systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
53
There are ten Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC5.1. 
State the procedures required to assemble valves to radiators and mount radiators on wall 
surfaces. 
AC5.2. 
State the positioning and fixing requirements of central heating pipework and components 
AC5.3. 
Identify how expansion and contraction may be catered for in central heating pipework 
containing 
AC5.4. 
State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the hot water system pipework and the 
industry recommended spacings 
AC5.5. 
Identify how to select joints for use in central heating system pipework 
AC5.6. 
State the positioning and fixing requirements of components in central heating systems 
AC5.7. 
Identify suitable methods for making new central heating pipework connections to 
components 
AC5.8. 
State how to position, fix and connect new central heating pipework to components 
AC5.9. 
Identify suitable methods for making new central heating pipework connections into existing 
central heating circuits 
AC5.10. Identify the insulation requirements of central heating system components 
Much of the information in Learning Outcome 5 has previously been covered in detail in other Units and 
specifically in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and 
maintenance techniques, Unit F/602/2884 Understand and apply domestic hot water system installation 
and maintenance techniques and Unit D/602/2682 Understand and carry out site preparation, and 
pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, and where possible, you will 
be directed to the relevant headings and Assessment Criteria within those units. 
AC5.1 State the procedures required to assemble valves to radiators 
and mount radiators on wall surfaces 
Before the radiator is hung on the wall – dressing a radiator 
Dressing a radiator involves preparing the radiator ready for hanging by positioning the valves, the air release 
valve and the blanking plug. The process is: 
1. Remove the radiator from its packaging. Inside the packaging are the radiator brackets, the air 
release valve and the blanking plug.  
2. Take out the factory fitted plugs. Care must be taken when working in a furnished property as the 
radiator may contain a small amount of water from when the radiator was factory tested.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
54
3. Split the valves at the valve unions and wrap PTFE tape around the valve tail. 10 to 15 wraps of PTFE 
around the tail will ensure that the joint between tail and 
radiator does not leak. Jointing compound may also be 
used if necessary. 
4. Make the tail into the radiator using a radiator spanner 
and re-assemble the valve.  
5. Screw in and tighten the air release valve and blanking 
plug using an adjustable spanner. Do not use water pump 
pliers as most air release valves are finished in chrome and 
these may become damaged if water pump pliers are used. Alternatively a ratchet-type ring spanner 
of the correct size may also be used 
Hanging the radiator on the wall  
1. Consult with the customer and decide on the position of the radiator. 
2. Mark the centre of the radiator and the position of the hangers on the radiator itself. 
3. Mark the centre of where the 
radiator is to be hung on the wall 
and place the radiator centre 
against that mark. 
4. Mark the position of both 
brackets on the wall. Using a  
spirit level draw two vertical lines 
where the radiator brackets are 
going to be positioned 
5. Place the radiator bracket in position on the radiator and measure from the bottom of the bracket 
to the bottom of the radiator. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
55
6. Add 150mm (A) and the distance from the bottom of the radiator to the bracket (B) together. This 
will be the position of the radiator brackets on the wall. Draw a horizontal line at that distance on 
the wall using a spirit level. Make sure it connects with the vertical bracket position lines. This will 
ensure that the bottom of the radiator is the recommended distance of 150mm from finished floor 
level. 
7. Radiator brackets usually have two positions a) one that will make the radiator close to the wall, and 
b) one that will leave a gap behind the radiator. Decide which way the brackets are to be fixed and 
position the bracket so that it touches both the bottom line and the vertical upright line (see diagram 
below). 
8. Mark the radiator brackets fixing holes on the wall. 
9. The wall can now drilled to fix the brackets.  
a. If the wall is made of masonry/brick etc. drill the four holes using a 110V or cordless drill 
using a masonry bit. A 7mm bit with brown wall plugs is normally suitable. Use the 
appropriate PPE, goggles etc. 50mm x 10 gauge screws are usually adequate but this will 
depend on the wall structure. 
b. For plasterboard walls use suitable wall fixings that will carry the weight of the radiator and 
the water inside. 
10. Hang the radiator on the brackets and check for level using a spirit level. 
AC5.2 State the positioning and fixing requirements of central heating 
pipework and components 
The positioning and fixing of pipework and components was discussed in detail in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning 
Outcome 5, AC5.6 State the positioning and fixing requirements for cold water system pipework and 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
56
components: 
a) In suspended timber floors 
b) In solid floors 
c) Embedded in walls 
d) In areas of the building subject to frost 
e) That may be exposed to warming. 
Please refer to Learning Outcome 5, AC5.6 of Unit H/602/2697. 
AC5.3 Identify how expansion and contraction may be catered for in 
central heating pipework  
This subject was dealt with in Unit F/602/2884 Understand and apply domestic hot water system 
installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 4, AC4.3 Identify how expansion and 
contraction may be catered for in hot water pipework containing plastics and copper.  
AC5.4 State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the hot 
water system pipework and the industry recommended spacings 
The types of clips and clip spacings were dealt with in Unit D/602/2682 Understand and carry out site 
preparation, and pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, LO5, AC5.4 
Identify clip and bracket types for domestic plumbing and heating work. 
AC5.5 Identify how to select joints for use in central heating system 
pipework 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 2, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC2.1. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
AC2.2. 
State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use in dwellings. 
AC2.3. 
State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold water pipe to existing lead pipe 
work. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
57
AC5.6 State the positioning and fixing requirements of components 
in central heating systems 
Radiator valves – thermostatic and manual valves 
Each radiator in the property will require radiator valves. These should a TRV and a lockshield valve for every 
radiator except the radiator in the room where the room thermostat is situated. This radiator should have 
standard wheel head and lockshield radiator valves. 
Automatic air vents 
Automatic Air Valves can be installed in parts of the system that are susceptible  to airlocks, such as high 
spots in the pipework. These should be fitted with single check valves to prevent air being drawn in to the 
system when the system is running. 
Hot water storage cylinders 
This subject was dealt with in Unit F/602/2884 Understand and apply domestic hot water system 
installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 4, AC4.5 State the positioning requirements of 
components in hot water systems. 
Feed and expansion cisterns 
Please see AC2.3 State the system layout features for filling and venting systems in this unit. 
Motorised valves – two port and three port mid position and diverter 
For the position of motorised valves in central heating systems, please refer to Learning Outcome 2 of this 
unit: 
 
AC2.1 Identify the working principles of central heating systems 
 
AC2.2 Identify the type of central heating system from layout diagrams 
Circulating pumps 
The position of circulating pumps often depends on the age of the system and the system type. Many older 
one pipe systems have the pump positioned on the return., pulling the cooler return water back towards the 
boiler. Modern thinking, however, suggests that it is better to push the lighter, less dense, hot water away 
from the boiler by positioning the pump on the flow. This prevents: 
 
Excessive wear and tear on the pump, and; 
 
Sludge and other sediment from collecting in the pump. 
Modern fully pumped systems would not work properly if the pump was positioned on the return and the 
vent cold feed arrangement on open vented systems dictates the position on the flow pipe. Please see 
diagram on page 566 – AC2.3 State the system layout features for filling and venting systems. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
58
Automatic bypass valves 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
Thermo-mechanical cylinder control valve 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
Anti-gravity valve 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
Drain valves 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
Timing devices – clocks and programmers 
Timeclocks and programmers are usually sited in a position of convenience for the end user. In most 
instances, this is the kitchen or utility area of the property. However, such is the nature of programmers that 
they can be positioned almost anywhere. Consideration should be given to the position of the boiler, since 
many boilers are now available with integrated timing devices on the boiler front facia. This would prove 
inadequate should the boiler be installed in a roof space or garage. In these instances, a separate 
timeclock/programmer positioned inside the property at a convenient location would be required. 
Room thermostats 
The performance of room 
thermostats is affected by 
airflow in the room. If a 
room 
thermostat 
is 
positioned 
incorrectly, 
then the airflow across it 
will not be representative 
of the airflow in the room in 
general and, therefore, the 
temperature control effectiveness will be lost. 
It is difficult to suggest the ‘perfect’ place for a room thermostat since all dwellings and heating systems are 
different, but there are definite places to avoid: 
 In a room with another heat source other than a radiator, such as a cooker, gas fire or open fire etc. 
 An unheated room 
 A room with a radiator fitted with TRVs 
 In direct sunlight 
 Behind curtains 
 A warm or cold draught 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
59
 Directly above or opposite a heat source or radiator 
 Near electrical appliances such as TV, DVD player, PC etc. 
 In the corner of two walls or the junction between wall and ceiling 
 Near a door or window 
In general, it is best to position a room thermostat in a heated room in the zone being controlled, where it 
has a free flow of air around it, preferably on an internal wall, about 1.2m above finished floor level. 
Cylinder thermostats and overheat protection devices 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
Frost and pipe combined thermostat 
Please see AC2.9 State the operating principles of central heating control components, in this unit 
AC5.7 Identify suitable methods for making new central heating 
pipework connections to components 
Pipework connections to heating components and appliances are usually dictated by the manufacturer and 
in most cases involve either male/female screwed joints or compression fittings. 
a) Boilers – these generally require that copper tubes are installed from the boiler for at least 1m before 
any changes i.e. to plastic pressure pipe – are considered. Modern boilers have dedicated 
compression fittings that are designed and made by the manufacturer. 
b) Central heating control system components – again, like boilers, controls such as zone and diverter 
valves have manufacturer designed compression fittings. In some instances male or female threaded 
joints are needed and these can be suitably made with the correct conversion fitting and PTFE tape. 
c) Heat emitters – there are many forms of central heating heat emitter from radiators to underfloor 
heating and many have specialist connections dictated by the manufacturer. In general, radiators 
have ½ “ female connections at all ends of the radiator. Radiator valve connections are via a male 
tapered thread that requires a jointing medium, usually PTFE tape or linseed oil jointing compound 
and hemp wrapped in a clockwise direction around the thread. A special radiator spanner or allen 
key is then used to wind the valve tail into the radiator. Connection to the pipework is by compression 
fitting method. 
d) Hot water storage cylinders – cylinder connections vary from manufacturer to manufacturer and 
this can often be regional. For example, a hot water cylinder purchased in the east midlands area of 
the UK will have 1” female connections for the cold feed and hot water draw-off with 1” male 
connections for the heat exchanger coil. A cylinder purchased in the north of the UK will probably 
have all connections 1” male thread. 
Because of these variations, making the copper pipe on to the hot water storage cylinder will vary. 
For those cylinders that have all male thread connections, a straight union adapter can be used. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
60
Where the connections are female thread, then a male thread to copper adapter will be required. 
e) Feed and expansion cisterns – these are supplied without any connections at all and so each F&E 
cistern installation will require the holes for the connections correctly positioning and cutting out 
using a hole saw. Cold feed connections may be made with compression-type tank connectors. The 
Float Operated Valve and overflow connections are made via a ½ “ tap connector and 21mm pushfit 
or compression overflow pipe connector respectively. 
AC5.8 State how to position, fix and connect new central heating 
pipework to components 
a) Panel radiators – please refer to AC5.1 above 
b) Boilers - positioning, fixing and connecting to boilers is dictated by the boiler manufacturer 
instructions. These should be followed at all times. 
c) Control components – positioning, fixing and connecting to control components is dictated by the 
system design. Control components should be accessible in all cases for repair and/or replacement. 
Again, the manufacturer’s instructions will show the best position/orientation for their components 
and these should be followed at all times. 
d) Hot water storage cylinders – The siting of hot water storage cylinders is usually dependent on the 
property design. Cylinders are usually sited in a centrally placed airing cupboard and positioned on a 
small platform, raised slightly of the finished floor level. Connections to the hot water heating 
coil/heat exchanger are often made using straight female iron to copper straight unions. 
e) Filling and venting components: 
a. Open vented systems – the F&E cistern should be installed in the roof space, alongside any 
cold water storage cistern installed. The F&E cistern should be positioned slightly lower the 
cold water storage cistern as shown in Learning Outcome 2, AC2.3. 
b. Sealed systems – as stated earlier in the unit, the expansion vessel and temporary filling loop  
should be connected to the return pipe to the boiler. The pressure relief valve and gauge 
should be installed close to the expansion vessel. The pressure relief pipework should run 
directly to outside the property via a tundish. 
c. Automatic Air Valves – these should be positioned at high points in the system or where 
there is the likelihood of air being trapped. These were discussed in Learning Outcome 2, 
AC2.9. 
AC5.9 Identify suitable methods for making new central heating 
pipework connections into existing central heating circuits 
The method of connecting to existing heating systems will depend entirely from what type of system it is and 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
61
the material that the pipework is made from. Existing systems can be notoriously difficult to work on, 
especially if the pipework is more than 40 years old. Before 1973, the imperial system of measurement was 
used in the UK. This meant that all pipe sizes were in inches rather than millimetres and in most cases, the 
sizes were not compatible with the SI system sizes. Heating systems have used a variety of materials and 
each one brings its own unique problems when trying to make connections to existing systems. 
Existing one and two pipe systems installed in copper tubes and fittings 
 
BS659 Copper tube – Introduced in the 1950’s, ‘659 copper tube had a much thicker wall than 
modern copper tube. The jointing techniques were very similar to today, with both compression and 
capillary fittings used extensively. Again, the sizes were imperial and so making a joint requires a 
special adapter fitting in most cases. ½ inch tube will fit modern 15mm tube, although it’s a tight fit. 
¾ inch is smaller than modern 22mm tube and so an adapter is necessary. Both capillary and 
compression converter fittings are available. 
 
BS2871 Copper tube – There are no problems connecting to BS2871 copper tube as all sizes are 
compatible with BSEN1057. 
Existing one and two pipe systems installed in Low Carbon Steel 
Making a connection to an existing low carbon steel pipework system is extremely difficult and may require 
the use of hand held, portable threading equipment. In almost all cases, it will require the installation of new 
unions to remove the problem having two fixed ends of pipe with little or no lateral movement in any 
direction, especially when teeing in to existing pipe runs for extra radiator branches. Pipe sizes are the same 
irrespective of age and modern pipe will fit old BS21:1985 pipe threads.  
Existing microbore systems  
Modern microbore systems use either 8mm or 10mm copper tubing or, if the system is installed in 
polybutylene plastic, 10mm plastic pressure pipe. The manifolds are usually 22mm or 28mm. These pipe sizes 
are easy to work with because they are current sizes still in use. Many modern systems have blanked off 
connections on the manifold for easy connection of new pipe runs and radiators.  
With existing microbore systems, the age of the system is a good indication of the pipe sizes that were 
originally used. The imperial microbore pipe was 3/8 “ and this is not compatible with modern microbore 
sizes. It is slightly smaller than 10mm. The manifolds were usually imperial ¾ “ pipe. Fortunately, adapters 
are available to convert imperial to metric in sizes ½ “ to 15mm, ¾ “ to 22mm and 1” to 28mm, and so 
conversion from one size to the other is a simple task. However, the 3/8 “ microbore pipe itself has no 
imperial to metric adapter, as these were discontinued many years ago. In these cases, replacement of the 
pipe is usually the only option available. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
62
AC5.10 Identify the insulation requirements of central heating system 
components 
 
Pipework – all pipework in the roof space should be insulated in accordance with the Water Supply 
(water fittings) Regulations 1999 to guard against freezing. Exposed pipework in the airing cupboard 
should be insulated to the requirements of the Domestic Building Services Design Guide: 
o Primary circulation pipes and secondary hot water circuits should be insulated whenever 
they pass outside the heated living space or through voids that communicate with unheated 
spaces. Extra provision may be required to guard against freezing. 
o All pipework including the vent pipe, that connects to hot water storage cylinders should be 
insulated for at least 1m beyond its connection with the cylinder or up to the point where 
they become concealed i.e. under the floor or in the roof space. 
 
Cisterns – F&E cisterns should be insulated with an insulation jacket in accordance with schedule 2 
of the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
63
Learning Outcome 7 
Know the service and maintenance 
requirements of central heating systems 
and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
64
There are four Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC7.1. 
Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job maintenance schedules to establish the 
periodic servicing requirements of system components. 
AC7.2. 
Identify how to carry out routine checks on central heating components and pipework systems 
as part of a periodic maintenance programme 
AC7.3. 
State the procedures for dealing with defects in central heating components and pipework: 
AC7.4. 
Identify the types of information to be provided on a maintenance record for central heating 
systems. 
AC7.1 Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job 
maintenance schedules to establish the periodic servicing 
requirements of system components. 
The use of manufacturer’s instructions was discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic 
cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 7, AC7.1 Identify how to use 
manufacturer instructions and job maintenance schedules to establish the periodic servicing requirements 
of cold water system components. 
AC7.2 Identify how to carry out routine checks on central heating 
components and pipework systems as part of a periodic 
maintenance programme 
The method of carrying out checks on pipework and components was discussed in Unit H/602/2697 - 
Understand and apply domestic cold water system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning 
Outcome 7, AC7.2 Identify how to carry out routine checks on cold water system components as part of a 
periodic maintenance programme.  
There are, however, components that require periodic maintenance that are specific to central heating  
systems and these will be discussed in turn. 
1) Poor circulation in heat emitters/poor flow rate through the heating system – There are a number 
of issues associated with poor circulation through heat emitters in heating systems and most are 
centred around corrosion. There are checks that can be made to diagnose the problem: 
i) 
Check that the radiator valves are open. This may seem like an obvious solution but if the system 
has been balanced and the lockshield valve is only partially open, the valve can become blocked 
with debris. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
65
ii) Take a sample of water from the radiator and examine it for suspended solids or discolouration 
as this could indicate corrosion: 
(1) A reddish tint to the water suggests red oxide sludge (or rust). This suggests that the system 
is drawing in air. 
(2) A blackish tint to the water or suspended black particles suggests that electrolytic corrosion 
is taking place. These black particles are known as ‘magnetite’ and are small flakes of 
corroded steel from the radiators caused by the corrosion. 
(3) If the water is clear, this suggests that the system is free of corrosion. However, corrosion 
could have taken place in the past or that the system flow rate is so poor that the water 
movement is not enough to keep the particles in suspension and they are settling elsewhere 
in the system. 
iii) If the system is an open vented system, check that air is not being drawn down the vent pipe or 
that water is not being pumped over the vent. Both of these scenarios would lead to corrosion. 
iv) Check the pump. Is it installed correctly and circulating in the correct direction?  
v) Open all of the radiator valves and vent the radiators. Note if the problem is general or localised. 
Are all emitters suffering from poor circulation? It is important to check whether any radiators 
fail to heat up at all as this positively indicates blockage. 
vi) Increased the pump speed to see if this improves circulation. 
vii) Check all TRVs and motorised valves to see that they are free and are not sticking. 
viii) Do any of the radiators have cold spots? If so, where? Cold spots on radiators indicates sludge 
build up. 
ix) Do any of the radiators need regular bleeding to prevent the radiator going cold? This would 
indicate a build-up of hydrogen due to the corrosion process, hydrogen sulphide (due to bacterial 
corrosion see point 2) or a build-up of infiltrated air. 
2) Venting of gas build up within heat emitters – Gas build-up can be from either of two points noted 
above. Take care when venting radiators on existing systems, especially if the gas build-up is caused 
by hydrogen as it is highly flammable.   
3) Operation of control components – Control components such as motorised valves, timeclocks and 
programmers should be checked to ensure that they operating as the end user requires.  
4) Effective operation of thermostats – thermostats should be checked to ensure that they are 
operating accurately. The system should be run and temperatures checked with a digital 
thermometer to ensure that they shut off when the required temperature has been reached. 
5) Operation/adjustment – system filling and venting components: 
i) 
With open vented systems, check that the float operated valve is working correctly and shutting 
off at the required water level. Often, FOVs stick in the up (closed) position. These should be re-
washered as necessary. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
66
ii) With sealed systems, check that the isolation valves on the temporary filling loop are operating 
correctly. Also check that the EC backflow prevention device (verifiable double check valve) is 
operating correctly by removing the test point and checking for water.: 
(1) Ensure that the system is cold and pressurised to 1 bar. 
(2) Ensure that the temporary filling loop is disconnected. 
(3) Remove the test point and check for water. If water id detected then the double check valve 
has failed and needs replacing. No water present indicates that valve is working correctly. 
When these checks have been completed, ensure that the temporary filling loop is removed. 
AC7.3 State the procedures for dealing with defects in central heating 
components and pipework 
1) Failure of control components – most control components use electricity. Do not attempt any 
repairs or replacement of motorised valves, thermostats or programmers/timeclocks. These should 
be checked by a qualified, experienced operative. 
2) Leakage in system pipework – Leakage in pipework will require repairing as a matter of urgency. 
The type of repair will depend upon the pipework material. The system must be isolated and 
drained before any repair can take place: 
a. Isolate the electricity supply to the heating system and check for safe isolation. 
b. Place a notice at the point of isolation warning that the system is off and drained and 
should not be turned  on. 
c. Turn off the water supply to the F&E cistern (open vented system) or ensure that the 
temporary filling loop is disconnected (sealed system). 
d. Attach a hose pipe to the lowest drain point, place the open end of the hose into a suitable 
drain and open the drain off valve. 
e. Open the upstairs air release valves on the radiators to release the water in the radiators. 
f. Open the downstairs air release valves on the radiators to release the water in the radiators. 
g. Once the system is drained, then the repair can be completed. 
3) Leakage from heat emitters – Heat emitters can leak from 4 places: 
a. The radiator itself, usually due to corrosion – this will require that the radiator is replaced. 
b. The radiator valve – check to see where the valve is leaking from:  
i. If it is the union, try tightening it up. If it tight, then turn off the radiator, release the 
water, break the union and apply jointing compound or PTFE to the union face. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
67
ii. If it is the packing gland on the valve spindle, then carefully tighten with an 
adjustable spanner. Care should be exercised. Do not overtighten the packing gland 
or the valve will not operate.  
c. The joints between the radiator and the valve or the radiator and the air release 
valve/blanking plug. These will require removing and re-sealing with PTFE tape. 
d. The air release valve – this will require replacement. Do not overtighten or the air release 
pin will snap inside the valve. 
4) Replacement of control valves – electrical control valves should only be replaced by qualified 
experienced operatives. Remember! Electricity can kill! 
5) Replacement of heat emitters – the following points assume that the leaking radiator is being 
replaced by the same sized radiator. It is desirable when replacing a radiator that the radiator valves 
be replaced also. If this is the case then the system should be first isolated and drained as described 
in point 2: Leakage from system pipework. If the existing valves are going to be reused then follow 
the points below: 
a. Sheet down the immediate area with dust sheets. This is important because old radiators 
often have black water and black sludge in them. This is impossible to remove if it gets on to 
fixtures, fittings and carpets. Protection of property is vital. 
b. Turn off the radiator valves. If a TRV is fitted, the screwdown top to shut off the valve that 
came with the TRV will be required. 
c. Release the air from the radiator. Use a cloth to catch any water. 
d. Place a bowl under one of the radiator valve unions. Break the union and catch the water 
with the bowl. Have a bucket handy so that the bowl can be emptied as necessary. 
e. Once the radiator is drained, break the other union and disconnect both radiator valves from 
the radiator. 
f. Close the air release valve, remove the radiator and turn it upside down so that any 
remaining water falls to the bottom. Take the radiator outside where the residue water in 
the radiator can no longer be a problem. 
g. Remove both radiator tails from the old radiator. 
h. Remove the old radiator brackets from the wall, taking care not to damage any 
decorating/wall paper etc. 
i. 
Unpack and dress the new radiator. Make sure that the old radiator tails are placed in the 
same position on the new radiator i.e. left radiator valve with left hand tail. 
j. 
Mark the position of the new brackets on the new radiator and place the radiator in position 
between the radiator valves. 
k. Transfer the bracket positions from the radiator to the wall. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
68
l. 
Using a spirit level, draw two vertical lines at these marks. 
m. Turn the radiator over, place one of the new brackets in position on the radiator and measure 
the distance from the bottom of the bracket to the centre of the radiator tails. This is the 
distance that the new brackets will be fixed to the wall. 
n. Now, measure from the centre of the union on the radiator valve the same distance on the 
wall and mark it. 
o. Using a spirit level, mark a line on the wall. 
p. Offer the radiator brackets to the wall, mark the holes and drill and fix the brackets. 
q. If necessary, put joint compound or PTFE tape on the radiator unions and hang the new 
radiator on the new brackets. 
r. Retighten both radiator valve unions. 
s.  Ensure that the air release valve is closed. 
t. Turn on both radiator valves, open the air release valve and bleed the radiator of air. Once 
water is detected, close the air release valve. 
u. Run the heating system and check that the radiator gets hot. 
v. Recheck the whole system, re-balancing the system as required. 
6) Replacement of hot water storage cylinders – This was dealt with in Unit F/602/2884 - Understand 
and apply domestic hot water system installation and maintenance techniques , Learning Outcome 
6, AC6.3 State the procedures for dealing with defects in hot water components and pipework. 
AC7.4 Identify the types of information to be provided on a 
maintenance record for central heating systems 
For central heating systems, it is advisable to keep a record of all maintenance and repairs for future 
reference. The types of information noted should be: 
 
The name of the maintenance engineer 
 
The date and time the maintenance/repairs were carried out 
 
The type of system being maintained 
 
The type, model and make of boiler installed 
 
The number and position of heat emitters installed 
 
The date of the last boiler service 
 
Any faults with the boiler recorded 
 
The type of maintenance/repairs undertaken 
 
Their location 
 
The materials/components or replacement parts used 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
69
 
The location of manufacturer’s instructions/maintenance data. 
 
The temperature of the heat emitters 
 
Any corrosion witnessed and where. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
70
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
71
Learning Outcome 9 
Know the decommissioning 
requirements of central heating systems 
and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hot
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
72
There are six Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC9.1. 
Identify working methods that reduce the periods during which central heating systems are 
not available to building users. 
AC9.2. 
State the information that needs to be provided to other persons before decommissioning 
work takes place. 
AC9.3. 
State how to temporarily decommission central heating and connecting pipework systems. 
AC9.4. 
Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning central heating and 
pipework systems. 
AC9.5. 
Identify the procedures for safely draining and disposing of central heating system 
contents. 
AC9.6. 
Identify the methods used during the decommissioning process to prevent the end-user 
from operating the appliance or system 
AC9.1 Identify working methods that reduce the periods during which 
central heating systems are not available to building users 
AC9.2 State the information that needs to be provided to other 
persons before decommissioning work takes place 
There are instances where central heating systems must be temporarily de-commissioned to allow essential 
works, such as repairs, servicing and replacement of components, to be conducted. The impact of isolation 
means that some parts, and in a worst-case scenario, all of the system will need to be isolated. Also, ensure 
that all electrical components, heaters, thermostats, motorised valves etc. are correctly isolated before work 
begins.  
There are methods we can employ to lessen the impact of isolation on the customer: 
1) Do as much preparation beforehand as possible. If, for instance, you are connecting an extension to 
the heating system or replacing an appliance or component, make the final connection to the existing 
pipework the last operation, so that the system is off the minimum amount of time. 
2) Be frank with the customer and tell them how long the system will be off. Point out that this is an 
estimated time and the heating will be turned back on as soon as is possible. 
3) Tell the customer which parts of the system you will be working on and where in the building you 
will be working. 
4) Ask the customer to collect water for drinks in saucepans and jugs and water for ablutions in a bucket. 
They may not be needed but at least the customer will have some water for those essential things. 
Isolating heating systems can be very annoying and inconvenient to a customer, especially in winter, but 
most cases you will find that the customer is very understanding of the situation. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
73
AC9.3 State how to temporarily decommission central heating and 
connecting pipework systems 
This is where a heating system or part of a heating system is isolated and drained down so that work may be 
performed on it. Once the work is completed, the water will be re-filled and the system put back into 
operation.  
The customer must be the focus when isolating heating systems. Therefore, keeping them informed of the 
sequence of operations allows them to make informed choices about alternative forms of heating, should 
they be necessary. Below is a suggested sequence of events: 
1) Inform the customer that the water supply is going to be isolated and inform them as to how long 
the supply is expected to be off. 
2) Suggest that they might like to collect some water for drinking etc, if necessary. 
3) Isolate the electricity supply to the heating system and check for safe isolation. 
4) Place a notice at the point of isolation warning that the system is off and drained and should not be 
turned  on. 
5) Turn off the water supply to the F&E cistern (open vented system) or ensure that the temporary 
filling loop is disconnected (sealed system). 
6) Attach a hose pipe to the lowest drain point, place the open end of the hose into a suitable drain 
and open the drain off valve. 
7) Open the upstairs air release valves on the radiators to release the water in the radiators. 
8) Open the downstairs air release valves on the radiators to release the water in the radiators. 
9) Once the system is drained, then the repair can be completed. 
AC9.4 Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning 
central heating and pipework systems 
Unlike temporary de-commissioning, permanent de-commissioning of a system literally means that the 
system will not be re-instated. In most instances, this will mean the complete removal of all pipework, 
components and appliances. The pipework should be cut back to the nearest live connection and capped to 
prevent stagnation of the water supply: 
1) Isolate the water supply at the point where the system is to be decommissioned. For heating systems, 
this will usually be the mains cold water isolation valve connected to the Float Operated Valve to the 
feed and expansion cistern in the roof space or the mains cold water connection to the filling loop 
2) Isolate and disconnect any electrical supply at the switched fused spur and remove the 3amp fuse. 
3) Drain the system as discussed earlier in the unit. 
4) Remove all appliances, components and heat emitters and carefully remove the pipework and clips. 
5) Cut the pipework back to the stop valve or nearest live connection and cap the pipe off. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
74
6) Any holes left in the building structure due to the removal of the boiler and flue should be made 
good. 
7) If necessary, a notice can be left by the stop valve informing that the heating system has been 
permanently de-commissioned and all pipe work, appliances and controls removed. 
AC9.5 Identify the procedures for safely draining and disposing of 
central heating system contents 
Central heating water is considered to be a low risk in terms of toxicity and, as such may be discharged 
directly to a foul water drain. Central heating water MUST NOT be discharged into a surface water or top 
water drain as these discharge directly to a water course and the water may cause unacceptable pollution 
levels because of inhibitors, de-scalers or de-sludging agents that the water contains. The water authorities 
allow heating water to discharge into foul water drains provided the following conditions are met: 
 
The water must not contain glycol 
 
The water must discharge to a foul water drain 
 
The water must not contain flammable materials such as petrol, poisonous substances or any solid 
material that is likely to block the drain 
 
The flow is such that any discharge will not cause flooding. 
It should be remembered that these are concessions given by the water undertakers and that section 111 of 
the water industry act 1991 considers it an offence to discharge anything to a sewer which will adversely 
affect the sewer network or water recycling centre treatment processes. 
AC9.6 Identify the methods used during the decommissioning 
process to prevent the end-user from operating the appliance or 
system 
This subject was covered in depth in AC9.1 to AC9.4. Please see above.  
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
75
Learning Outcome 11 
Know the inspection and soundness 
testing requirements of central heating 
systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
76
There are four Assessment Criteria in this Learning Outcome: 
AC11.1. 
State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection of a central heating system to 
confirm that it is ready to be filled with water. 
AC11.2. 
State how to fill central heating systems with water at normal operating pressure and check 
for leakage. 
AC11.3. 
Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry requirements on central heating 
systems pipework and components. 
AC11.4. 
Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and testing reveals defects in 
central heating systems 
AC11.1 State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection 
of a central heating system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with 
water 
The checks to be carried out on central systems are almost identical to the checks carried out on cold water 
systems and these were covered in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system 
installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 11, AC11.1 State the checks to be carried out 
during a visual inspection of a cold water system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water. However, 
there are some additional checks that should be made when dealing with central heating systems: 
 
Check that all open ends have been capped and/or all valves and radiator valves have been isolated. 
 
Check that any drain valves are closed. 
 
Isolate any service valves and gate valves. 
 
Check all visible joints to ensure that they have been properly made. Check that capillary joints have 
been wiped clean of any excess flux as this can cause corrosion in later life. 
 
Check that all radiator valve unions and compression joints are tight. 
 
Check that enough pipe clips have been installed and that the pipework is secure. 
 
Ensure that any automatic air valves are open. 
 
Ensure that a provisional fill level has been set in the F&E cistern (vented systems only). 
 
Check that the F&E cistern have been installed correctly and are well supported (vented systems 
only). 
 
Ensure that any filling loop has been connected (sealed systems only) 
 
Check that cistern lids are left in place. 
 
Check that the hot water storage vessel well supported and stable. 
 
Ensure that the electric switched fuse spur is isolated and the fuse has been removed 
 
Ensure that motorised zone valves are manually open. 
 
Ensure that all radiator air release valves are closed. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
77
 
Check that the pump has been removed and temporarily replaced with a short piece of tubing while 
initial filling takes place. 
AC11.2 State how to fill central heating systems with water at normal 
operating pressure and check for leakage 
There are two filling procedures for heating systems depending on the type of system installed. 
 Open vented systems:  
a. Close all radiator valves and radiator air release valves before filling begins. 
b. Check the F&E cistern. Make sure that the FOV shut off level has been provisionally set and 
that all joints are tight. 
c. Replace the pump with a short piece of tubing. This will prevent debris from entering the 
pump. 
d. Open manually all motorised valves and zone valves. 
e. Check that all radiator valve unions are tight. 
f. Turn on the service valve to the F&E cistern and allow the system to fill. 
g. Filling the system should begin at the furthest radiator on the downstairs circuit. Open the 
radiator valves and then the air release valve until water is detected. Work backwards 
towards the boiler filling each downstairs radiator in turn. Filling the downstairs circuit first 
helps to eliminate pockets of air, which can prevent efficient circulation of the heating water. 
When the downstairs circuit is full, proceed to the upstairs circuit and follow the same 
procedure, starting with the furthest upstairs radiator. 
h. Once the system is full, allow it to stand for a few minutes.  
i. 
Visually check for leaks across the system. Visit each radiator and all exposed pipework. 
j. 
Check the water level in the F&E cistern and adjust if necessary. 
k. Drain down the entire system at each downstairs radiator. This is called the cold flush and 
will remove any flux residues, steel wool and swarf that entered the system during 
installation. 
l. 
Refit the pump and turn on the pump valves. 
m. Refill the system.  
2. Sealed systems: 
a. Close all radiator valves and radiator air release valves before filling begins. 
b. Connect the temporary filling loop to the system pipework. 
c. Check the pressure in the expansion vessel at the Schrader valve to ensure it matches the 
manufacturers data plate. 
d. Replace the pump with a short piece of tubing. This will prevent debris from entering the 
pump. 
e. Open manually all motorised valves and zone valves. 
f. Turn on the service valve to the Filling loop and allow the system to fill to 1bar pressure and 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
78
then turn off the service valve. 
g. Filling the system should begin at the furthest radiator on the downstairs circuit. Open the 
radiator valves and then the air release valve until water is detected. Work backwards 
towards the boiler filling each downstairs radiator in turn. Filling the downstairs circuit first 
helps to eliminate pockets of air, which can prevent efficient circulation of the heating water. 
When the downstairs circuit is full, proceed to the upstairs circuit and follow the same 
procedure, starting with the furthest upstairs radiator. As filling progesses, the pressure in 
the system will fall towards zero pressure. When this happens, go back to the filling loop 
each time the pressure drops and fill back up to 1 bar pressure. 
h. Visually check for leaks across the system. Visit each radiator and all exposed pipework. 
i. 
Check the system water pressure at the pressure gauge. 
j. 
Open the pressure relief valve to ensure that water discharges from the valve. 
k. Drain down the entire system at each downstairs radiator. This is called the cold flush and 
will remove any flux residues, steel wool and swarf that entered the system during 
installation. 
l. 
Refit the pump and turn on the pump valves. 
m. Refill the system.  
AC11.3 Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry 
requirements on central heating systems pipework and components 
In domestic heating installations, the pressure testing procedure of domestic heating systems closely follows 
that recommended in the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 and BSEN806. These documents 
suggest that the method of testing is directly related to the pipework material that has been used in its 
installation. These tests were covered in Unit H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water 
system installation and maintenance techniques, Learning Outcome 11, AC11.1 State the checks to be 
carried out during a visual inspection of a cold water system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water. 
However, central heating systems do not form part of any potable water supply or system and as such the 
test pressures stated do not apply.  
British Standard BSEN14336: 2004: Heating systems in buildings — Installation and commissioning of water 
based heating systems is very specific with regard to the test pressures and duration used on wet central 
heating systems. it states: 
‘The heating system shall be pressure tested to a pressure at least 30% greater than the working 
pressure for an adequate period, as a minimum of 2 hours duration.’ 
When preparing a hydraulic pressure testing, the following procedure should be applied: 
a) Blank, plug or seal off all open ends 
b) Remove vulnerable items such as the heating circulation pump 
c) Open all valves in the pipework subjected to the test 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
79
d) Check that all high points have vents, and that these vents are closed 
e) Check that the hydraulic test bucket is functioning, has the correct range and has been recently 
calibrated 
f) Check that there are adequate drain cocks, a hose is available and that it will reach from the cocks 
to the drain 
For a hydraulic pressure testing, the following procedure should be applied: 
a) When filling the system with water, 'walk' the system continuously checking for leaks by the noise of 
escaping air or signs of liquid leakage 
b) Release air from high points systematically up through the system 
c) When the system is full of water, raise the pressure to test pressure  
d) Should the pressure fall, check that any valves are not passing water and then 'walk' the system again 
checking for leaks 
AC11.4 Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and 
testing reveals defects in central heating systems 
Inspection and testing of central heating systems can sometimes reveal problems that need rectification 
before the system is filled and brought into operation. Problems are always best remedied before the system 
is ‘wetted’, especially if it involves altering pipework and making leak free joints.  
a. Dealing with systems that do not meet correct installation requirements – this can often be the 
result of poor working practices or failure to understand instructions. Common problems include 
incorrect positioning of components such as pump, motorised zone valves and feed/vent installation 
problems. Where these are discovered, they must be corrected before the system is put into 
operation. 
b. Remedial work associated with defective pipework bracketing – brackets and clips do two very 
important jobs: 
a. They prevent pipework movement and noise 
b. They contribute to the overall aesthetics and job neatness. 
Installing extra clips may mean the temporary movement or even removal of pipework to facilitate 
the clips being correctly positioned. 
c. Remedial work associated with defective control valves – in most instances, problems of this nature 
will not be found until the system is up and running. Whilst manufacturers try to ensure the quality 
of their components, occasionally defective parts are supplied. Where this is discovered, first contact 
the supplier and tell them of the problem. In most cases, they will tell you to return it and get a 
replacement. Sometimes it may mean contacting the manufacturers technical help line by telephone. 
These telephone numbers are usually included in any manufacturers literature. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
80
d. Remedial work associated with leakage from pipework systems – leakage occurs because of 
defective materials, fittings and poor installation practices. Where leaks are discovered, they must 
be rectified immediately before continuing with any tests and inspections. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

