BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
1
Section 6 – H/602/2697 
Understand and apply domestic cold 
water system installation and 
maintenance techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
2
H/602/2697 - Understand and apply domestic cold water system 
installation and maintenance techniques 
This combination unit provides learning in the installation, maintenance, decommissioning and soundness 
testing of a basic range of cold water system/component types in dwellings and industrial/commercial 
properties (of similar size and scope to domestic dwellings). The unit covers systems in buildings up to 3 
storeys in height with pipework up to 28mm diameter. The scope of the system is from the boundary stop 
valve into the property feeding the water outlets. Upon completion of the unit the learner will: 
LO1. 
Know the cold water supply route to dwellings 
LO2. 
Know the types of cold water system and their layout requirements 
LO3. 
Know the site preparation techniques for cold water systems and components 
LO4. 
Be able to apply site preparation techniques for cold water systems and components 
LO5. 
Know the installation requirements of cold water systems and components 
LO6. 
Be able to install cold water systems and components 
LO7. 
Know the service and maintenance requirements of cold water systems and components 
LO8. 
Be able to service and maintain cold water systems and components 
LO9. 
Know the decommissioning requirements of cold water systems and components 
LO10. 
Be able to decommission cold water systems and components 
LO11. 
Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of cold water systems and 
components 
LO12. 
Be able to inspect and soundness test cold water systems and components. 
Learning Outcomes highlighted in Red indicate that these are covered by practical tasks from the learner 
practical portfolio. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
3
Learning Outcome 1 
Know the cold water supply route to 
dwellings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
4
There are five Assessment Criteria to Learning outcome 1: 
AC1.1. 
State the key stages in the rainwater cycle. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the various water supply sources and the typical properties of water from those 
sources 
AC1.3. 
State the two main types of water supply to dwellings 
AC1.4. 
Identify the mains water treatment process and typical mains water distribution system from 
treatment works to property. 
AC1.5. 
Identify the uses of cold water supplied to dwellings 
Water is a compound consisting of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of 
oxygen. It is tasteless, colourless and odourless but in large amounts it appears 
to have a pale blue tint. Its chemical symbol is H2O. Water, in one form or 
another, makes up around 7/10ths of the earth’s surface and, because of its ability 
to absorb other elements and compounds is known as the ‘universal solvent’. 
This unique dissolving ability plays a vital role in plumbing systems and, as we 
shall see as we investigate water and its properties, can often determine how 
we install and maintain cold water installations.  
 
AC1.1 State the key stages in the rainwater cycle. 
There is no ‘new’ water on planet Earth. The water that exists on and below its surface has been here for 
around 4.2 billion years. Water is in constant movement in a cycle that is known to scientists as the 
hydrological cycle. We know it better as the ‘Rainwater cycle’. 
The rainwater cycle 
The rainwater cycle is a natural 
process where water is continually 
transferred from the atmosphere 
to the ground and back again to the 
atmosphere by means of three 
main transfer processes: 
1. 
Evaporation – water is 
constantly evaporating from the 
oceans, lakes, rivers and streams 
into the air, 
The water molecule 
The Rainwater cycle 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
5
2. Transpiration – water moves through plants until it reaches the leaves where it evaporates into the 
atmosphere, 
3. Precipitation – another word for rain. When water vapour precipitates, it condenses back into 
water droplets and falls to the earth as rain, hail and snow. 
So, how does the rainwater cycle occur? 
Heat from the sun evaporates water on the earth’s surface. The resulting water vapour rises as the air warms 
to form clouds, which are then carried by the prevailing winds around the planet. If the water vapour passes 
over land, more water vapour is added to the point where the cloud becomes saturated with water droplets 
and some of it falls back the ground as rain, hail, sleet and snow. 
When it reaches the ground, some evaporates straight back into the atmosphere, some soaks into the 
ground, where it eventually reaches the geological water table or aquifer, and some runs into rivers and 
streams, where it eventually reaches the sea to begin the cycle over again.  
AC1.2 Identify the various water supply sources and the typical 
properties of water from those sources 
Sources of Water   
3% of all the water on earth is fresh water and most of this is locked in the polar ice caps. Only 0.9% is ground 
and surface water. It is this 0.9%, some 1350 trillion litres, that supplies the entire planet with drinking water. 
In the UK, only around 5% of all rainfall is 
collected for drinking water supplies. The 
rest flows into the sea or is filtered down 
through the earth’s surface where it collects 
in water bearing rocks called aquifers that 
exist deep below the Earth.  
Types of water 
As we discovered in Scientific Principles, 
water is classified as either hard or soft 
depending of the amount of calcium 
carbonate or calcium sulphate the water 
contains. Generally speaking, upland surface water and water that has filtered through peat tends to be very 
soft because CO2 trapped in the peat is added to the water, which makes it very acidic. Water that is derived 
from sandstone aquifers is also very soft because of added CO2. This kind of water is known as ‘plumbo-
solvent’ because of its ability to dissolve lead. Soft water can be found in the North-West of the UK and parts 
Earth's Water Supply
Sea (salt) water
Ice
Ground and surface
water
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
6
of Scotland and is identified by the ease in which soap lathers. Soft water has a pH Value below 7 (pH 7 is 
neutral water). 
Hard water can be either permanently hard or temporarily hard, depending on what the water has filtered 
through. Its hardness depends upon the amount of calcium in parts per million it contains. Hard water is 
classified as having more than 300ppm of calcium and has a pH Value above 7.  
Generally, limestone filtered water is temporarily hard. It can be softened by boiling and leaves behind 
limescale deposits in pipes, taps and other components. Water supplied from Derbyshire and the Peak 
District is usually temporarily hard.  
Permanently hard water filters through calcium sulphates and calcium bicarbonates. This cannot be softened 
by boiling. Soap will not lather in hard water areas. 
Underground water sources 
Deep wells 
 
Usually dug by machine from below the shallowest impermeable strata. The water quality is generally good 
because it is extracted from deep below the earth’s surface. 
Shallow wells 
 
Historically, shallow wells have been 
dug by hand and only penetrate the 
first water-bearing strata or aquifer. 
They 
should 
be 
considered 
as 
dangerous because of the close 
proximity to leaking drains. 
Aquifers  
Aquifers are naturally occurring rock and sand formations that have the ability to hold vast quantities of 
usually clean water deep below the Earth’s surface. Most aquifers are permeable rocks such as sandstone 
and gritstone, gravel silt or clay that soak and hold water like a saturated sponge. Usually excellent quality 
but are vulnerable to contamination from farming nitrates and other pollutants, especially close to towns 
and cities. 
Artesian wells and springs  
The water from Artesian springs rise 
from under the ground under its own 
pressure in situations where the 
spring opening is below the level of 
the water table. The water is usually 
Deep wells, shallow wells and aquifers 
Artesian wells and springs 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
7
very good quality as the water is filtered naturally through the rock due to its constant movement. 
Bore holes  
These are man-made, small diameter wells that are drilled directly 
through the Earth’s surface to a water source where the water is 
extracted for use when water main connection is not an option 
because of location. Very high quality of water, which should be 
carefully monitored before and during use to ensure the quality is 
maintained. 
Surface water sources 
Upland surface water 
This is water that has collected in lakes and rivers without passing 
through the Earth’s surface. This is the main source of water for the 
North-West of England. It is naturally soft, acidic water and usually 
not contaminated. 
Springs 
These occur naturally, flowing directly from the Earth’s surface. Its 
purity is highly dependent on the distance it has travelled from its 
source.  
Rivers 
Rivers begin their life as small streams on high ground and become larger the further they travel. They usually 
terminate at the sea becoming more saline and brackish close to the coast. At their estuaries, rivers are tidal, 
being affected by the rise and fall of the tides. Inland, they are usually poor-quality water due to much 
industrial pollution with high treatment costs for human usage.  
Canals  
Canals are the products of the industrial revolution in the 18th and 19th Centuries, built for the purpose of 
transporting goods by barge from one end of the UK to the other. As the railways developed, they fell into 
disuse and neglect with many being filled in. Canals have been cleaned over the years with many being 
classified as sites of natural beauty. The water quality though, is usually poor with only limited amounts being 
used for agricultural and industrial processes. 
AC1.3 State the two main types of water supply to dwellings 
In the UK, around 97% of properties are fed with water directly from the mains cold water supply provided 
by one of the 22 water companies in the United Kingdom. The other 3% are fed with water from a private 
A typical bore hole 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
8
source.  
The Water Act 2003 (The Water Industry Act 1991) 
The Water Act 2003 combines two previous pieces of UK legislation, the Water Industry Act 1991 and the 
Water Resources Act 1991.  It introduced a series of changes to the regulation of the water industry across 
the UK. Enforced by the Environment Agency, the Water Act governs the following: 
 
Regulation and licencing of water and sewage companies by the Water Services Regulation Authority 
OFWAT. 
 
The obligations of the Water Companies and licenced water suppliers to ensure that they supply 
water that is fit for human consumption. 
 
The enforcement of those obligations by Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
and the Drinking Water Inspectorate. 
 
The control of charges made by the Water Companies and licenced water suppliers to consumers by 
OFWAT. 
 
The protection of consumers (the public) by OFWAT 
The Water Industry Act 1991, however, remains the primary national legislation for all water supplies in 
England and Wales and defines the powers and responsibilities of local authorities in relation to private water 
supplies and the definition of a relevant person(s). 
Water supplied by a Water Undertaker 
The supply of wholesome water to the majority of consumers is the responsibility of the UK water authorities. 
They are known as Water Undertaker’s. It is their responsibility to collect, clean, distribute and maintain the 
water supply in such a manner that the water is fit for human consumption under section 67 of the Water 
Industry Act 1991. Their responsibility ends at the external (boundary) stop tap to the property. From here, 
the responsibility rests with the owner of the property or the plumber. 
Private water supplies 
Private water supplies are water supplies that are not supplied by the Water Undertaker and, as such, are 
solely the responsibility of the owner and user of the water supply. This could be a single dwelling or multiple 
properties supplied from the same source. Private water may be supplied from a borehole, stream, river, 
spring or well. 
The quality of the water supplied from private sources can be variable. Some sources offer good quality water 
where little treatment is necessary but others present a risk to health due to the water quality and require 
careful monitoring. 
The responsibility for regulating private water supplies rests with the local authority but it is also vital that 
owners are aware of the potential risks. Owners should: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
9
 
Ensure that the source is protected against contamination from grazing animals and any 
contamination that may come from upstream. 
 
Install and maintain sufficient equipment that will maintain a satisfactory water quality. 
 
Ensure that the water is adequately disinfected before use. 
 
Ensure that any stored water is stored in such a way as to prevent contamination after storage but 
before use. 
 
Ensure that the water quality is tested regularly. 
Ensuring water quality in the property 
Under provisions laid down by the Water Industry Act 1991 and then later the Water Act 2003, the UK 
government introduced two pieces of legislation that regulate how plumbing systems are installed and 
maintained in domestic buildings in the UK. These are: 
 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999; and, 
 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 
On July 1st 1999, the government issued the Water Supply (Water Fittings) Regulations 1999 that 
standardised working practices across all areas of the United Kingdom. These were initially linked to BS6700 
and then later to BSEN806: Specification for installations inside buildings conveying water for human 
consumption: PARTS 1 to 5 and BS 8558:2015: Guide to the design, installation, testing and maintenance of 
services supplying water for domestic use within buildings and their curtilages. Complementary guidance to 
BS EN 806. 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations were written under section 74 of the Water Industry Act 1991 
to ensure that the systems of plumbing installed in properties prevent the following: 
 
Contamination of water 
 
Wastage of water 
 
Misuse of water 
 
Undue consumption of water 
 
Erroneous metering of water 
It should be remembered that these regulations only apply to water that has been supplied by a Water 
Undertaker and do not apply to water supplied from a private source. 
A free copy of the regulations can be downloaded from www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si1999/19991148.htm. 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
These ensure that water supplied from a private source are safe for people to drink. Changes from the 2009 
Private Water Supply Regulations now classify private water supplies into four categories: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
10
 
Large supplies serving commercial and public buildings such as hotels, restaurants, nursing homes, 
bed and breakfast establishments, village halls and large domestic users using more than 10m3/day 
or supplying more than 50 people per day on average. 
 
Small supplies serving two or more domestic properties but with no commercial usage, using less 
than 10m3/day or fewer than 50 people per day on average. 
 
Single property supplies where water is supplied for domestic purposes only. 
 
Private distribution networks. The scope of the regulations now includes networks where the water 
is distributed further beyond the responsibility of the licenced water company. These include such 
properties as caravan parks, industrial estates or country estates or where water is distributed by 
tanker.  
The Role of local authorities in regulating private water supplies 
The local authority acts as the regulator for the private water supplies in their area and have statutory duties 
under the PWSR. Local Authorities must: 
 
Conduct a risk assessment on every property with private water supply in their area. 
 
Undertake monitoring in order to determine compliance with water standards. 
 
Provide monitoring data to the Drinking Water Inspectorate (DWI). 
The local authority has enforcement powers to ensure that a water supply is improved, should it fall below 
the minimum cleanliness requirement, by the relevant person(s) who control that supply.  
The Role of Drinking Water Inspectorate (DWI) in regulating private water supplies 
The DWI plays a statutory role in acting as technical advisors to Local Authorities in relation to the 
implementation of the Private Water Supplies Regulations 2016. This includes technical and scientific 
assistance on all aspects of drinking water quality on both public and private supplies. 
The Water Supply (water quality) Regulations 2016 
In the United Kingdom, all water, whether from a private source or supplied by a water undertaker, must 
comply with the EU Drinking Water Directive 98/83/EC. It is the duty of every member state to implement 
rules that reflect the directive, which must meet the minimum European Legislation. This legislation reflects 
the recommendations of the World Health Organisation (WHO). 
The law requires that all drinking water is wholesome and clean. It sets down minimum acceptable 
concentrations of potential contaminants. It states that: 
"Water is free from any micro-organisms and parasites and from any substances which, in numbers or 
concentrations, constitute a potential danger to human health." 
More information can be found at http://www.water.org.uk/  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
11
AC1.4 Identify the mains water treatment process and typical mains 
water distribution system from treatment works to property 
Before water can be considered fit for human consumption, it must undergo several stages of cleanliness. 
These stages are: 
 
Screening 
 
Flocculation 
 
Sedimentation  
 
Filtration 
 
Disinfection 
These are known as the water treatment process. 
The water treatment process 
Screening 
First, the water is passed through a series of coarse meshes to remove large debris such as leaves, plant 
material and other fragments 
Flocculation 
Here, a chemical coagulant is added to the water to act as a 
binding agent to remove colour, turbidity and algae. This 
process also allows any dissolved metals such as aluminium 
and iron to precipitate. This leads to the formation of a ‘floc’ 
which can then be removed by other processes. 
Sedimentation 
Sedimentation is designed to slow down the velocity of the water to allow any solid matter, such as grit, mud 
and decaying vegetation missed by the screening process, to sink under gravity to the bottom of the 
sedimentation tanks. This process further reduces turbidity and bacteriological content of the water. After 
further sedimentation, the water is pumped to a storage reservoir before being filtered. 
Filtration 
There are several types of filters used to filter drinking water: 
Turbidity – cloudiness or haziness due 
to millions of microscopic particles that 
would normally be invisible to the 
naked eye. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
12
 
Slow sand filters – these 
provide 
the 
most 
common 
method of filtration.  Here, water 
flows over a bed of graded sand. 
The sand is full of minute algae 
growth which assist in the 
purification process of the water 
by consuming any contaminates 
present. This eventually leads to a 
build-up of sludge, called a 
schmutzdecke 
that 
is 
very 
effective at removing the various 
impurities in the water.  After 
around 6 to 10 weeks, the sludge 
is removed as the filtering slows to 
a point where it is not effectively 
allowing water to pass through it. 
The use of tandem filters means 
the filtration process can continue 
whilst cleaning is taking place. 
 
Rapid sand filters – mainly 
used to remove floc after the 
flocculation 
process 
but 
can 
effectively be used to remove 
algae, iron and manganese from 
raw water. 
 
Pressure filters – here the filter bed is enclosed in a cylinder pressure vessel. They are sometimes 
used where the need to maintain water pressure without the aid of a pump. 
Disinfection  
The final stage of the water treatment process is disinfection. This is where a small amount of chlorine, 
usually less than 1 milligram per litre of water, is added to kill off any bacteria that may have escaped all the 
other processes. This is usually injected into the water just before it enters the water supply. 
Distribution of water supply 
After the water has gone through the treatment process, it is distributed to homes and businesses 
throughout the UK by one of two ways: 
 
By gravity distribution 
A slow sand filter 
A pressure filter 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
13
 
By pumped distribution 
Gravity distribution  
Gravity water distribution 
begins when the reservoir is 
sited on high ground. The 
water, once it has gone 
through 
the 
treatment 
process, is fed to the 
distribution 
network 
by 
gravity. No pumping is 
necessary as the head of 
water 
created 
by 
the 
vertical distance between the reservoir and the outlets is sufficient to create the pressure required at the 
taps and outlets in homes, offices and factories. 
Pumped distribution  
After going through the 
water treatment process, 
the water is pumped to a 
service reservoir held on a 
tower. From here, the 
water distributes to the 
water network via gravity. 
Again, It is the vertical 
distance from the reservoir 
to the outlets that creates 
the head of pressure. 
Water towers are used 
where there is insufficient 
pressure from the main 
itself. This could be due to the size of the water main or the lack of vertical distance from the supply to the 
outlets. 
Distribution of water to cities, towns and villages 
Water is supplied to cities, towns and villages via a grid network of pipes. These are known as trunk mains 
and will vary in diameter depending on the population, the purpose of the cold water main or the likely 
demand for water in a particular area. The pipe size of the trunk mains is generally between 75mm to 2.3m 
Gravity distribution 
Pumped distribution 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
14
depending on the number of outlets and the size of the area 
Many of the trunk mains in the UK were laid during the Victorian 
area and, consequently, are coming to the end of their useful 
lives. Old water mains, mainly made of ductile iron, are 
systematically 
being 
replaced 
with 
modern equivalents that are better able 
to cope with modern water demands as 
towns and cities grow in size. 
In residential areas, the pipework is laid 
out beneath the streets in a grid system. 
This ensures that repairs to water mains 
do not interrupt the supply of water to 
the majority of people in the area and 
that only the minimum amount of 
disruption and inconvenience is caused to 
as few people as possible. 
AC1.5 Identify the uses of 
cold water supplied to 
dwellings 
Wholesome water for domestic purposes  
Water that is supplied directly from the water main has several uses: 
 
Personal hygiene – washing, bathing and ablutions 
 
Cooking and food production 
 
Drinking  
Recycled water  
Recycled water is water that has been previously used for another purpose such as bathing, washing etc, and 
rainwater that has been collected in special cisterns but has not been treated to drinking water standard. 
Both of these types of water are not fit for human consumption but can be used, with care, inside and outside 
the dwelling for limited purposes: 
 
WC flushing,  
 
Water for outdoor use i.e. watering the garden or car washing  
 
Clothes washing. 
Population 
Size of main 
1/2 million 
1.05m to 1.20m 
200,000 
0.75m 
5000 - 20,000 
0.2m to 0.3m 
The grid system of water distribution 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
15
Recycled water systems MUST NOT in any way be cross connected with the cold water mains supply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
16
Learning Outcome 2 
Know the types of cold water 
system and their layout 
requirements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
17
There are nine Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 2: 
AC2.1. 
State the cold water system pipework features between the water undertaker’s main and the 
main internal stop valve in dwellings 
AC2.2. 
Identify the type of cold water system from layout diagrams. 
AC2.3. 
State the factors which affect the selection of cold water systems for dwellings 
AC2.4. 
State the typical pipe sizes used in cold water systems in dwellings 
AC2.5. 
State the factors that can lead to backflow from cold water outlets and equipment in dwellings. 
AC2.6. 
Identify the standard backflow prevention devices that are used in cold water systems in 
dwellings supplying water to appliances 
AC2.7. 
Identify the working principles of cold water system components 
AC2.8. 
State the system layout features for protected plastic storage cisterns 
AC2.9. 
State the methods of linking cold water storage cisterns for use in dwellings. 
AC2.1 State the cold water system pipework features between the water 
undertaker’s main and the main internal stop valve in dwellings 
Connections to water mains 
There are many ways in which a connection for a water main to a property can be made. Many of these 
methods will depend on the material from which the main is made. Water mains made from cast iron, PVCu, 
polyethylene and even cement lined asbestos are not uncommon in the United Kingdom. It is important to 
remember that the water main is the property of the Water Undertaker in the area and any connections, 
maintenance and repairs must only be made by the water undertaker or its contractors. 
Common connection methods 
In many instances, the water main will be made from spun cast iron. Connections to cast iron are made 
through a self-drilling, self-tapping machine, which drills a hole in the water main, threads the hole and 
installs the brass ferrule while the main is still under full pressure. 
For water mains made from PVCu, polyethylene and cement lined asbestos, 
a brass strap type ferrule is used, such as the one shown in the photograph. 
A brass strap and ferrule 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
18
 
Ferrule installed on a cast iron water main 
The Communication Pipe 
The 
communication 
pipe 
is 
installed by and remains the 
property of the water undertaker. 
It connects to the water main via 
a ferrule and terminates at the 
property 
boundary. 
At 
the 
boundary, it is connected to a 
stop valve known as the main 
external stop valve (often called 
the 
boundary 
stop 
tap). 
It 
includes a goose neck bend at the 
water main end. This allows for 
any settlement of the road or pavement.   
The Supply Pipe  
The supply pipe runs from the boundary of the property to the building, terminating inside the building with 
a screw down stop tap manufactured to BS1010. It must be installed at a depth of between 750mm and 
1350mm. A drain-off valve must be installed immediately above the internal stop valve. It is the responsibility 
of the property owner. Together, the communication and supply pipes form the building water service. 
The communication pipe and swan neck 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
19
 
From the street to the dwelling 
The supply pipe to buildings may be arranged in different ways and this sometimes reflects the age of the 
property. Look at the drawing below: 
 
1. 
This is the preferred method of cold 
water supply as no other property is 
connected to any part of it.  
2 and 3. Often found in older properties 
where the communication pipe is long. Here 
the communication pipe connection to the 
water main would be one size larger than for 
an individual property to compensate for the 
extra connection. 
4 and 5. Commonly known as a communal 
supply, this kind of connection is usually 
found in Victorian terraced houses and local 
authority built housing up to the early 1960s. 
As many as 4 houses may be connected to a 
common supply pipe. It is usually the cause of low flow rate in many houses with this type of 
connection. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
20
All modern water supplies are installed using Medium Density Polyethylene pipe of 25mm size for houses 
and bungalows. This increases for large domestic dwellings and industrial/commercial properties. Copper 
pipe to BS EN 1057 R220 can also be used but often the high cost of the copper pipe prevents this. High 
Density Polyethylene pipe (coloured black) was used up until the early 1980s and copper pipe was used from 
the late 1940s. The housing boom of the Victorian era saw hundreds of miles of lead pipe used of various 
sizes and weights, much of which still exists today. 
With all new installations, a water meter is fitted either at the boundary of the property or in a meter housing 
on the outside of the building. Externally fitted meters are usually housed in a ‘groundbreaker’ type meter 
box.  
For existing properties and refurbishments, an internal water meter 
installation is acceptable but it must be fitted in accordance with the 
Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 so that erroneous 
metering is prevented by installing any drain-off valve above the meter so 
that water may not be drawn before the meter installation as shown in the 
drawing left. 
Once inside the property, the water supply should have a screwdown type 
stop tap manufactured to BS 1010-2 installed just above finished floor 
level so that the whole building can be turned off. The Water Regulations 
tell us that: 
 
As far as is reasonably practicable, a stop valve should: 
a. Be located inside the building 
b. Be located above floor level, and; 
c. Be as near as possible to the point where the supply enters the building, and; 
 
The Groundbreaker meter housing 
 
Boundary water meter housing 
An internal water meter installation 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
21
d. Be so installed that its closure will prevent the supply of water to any point in the building. 
The diagram illustrates the 
three methods of entering 
a cold water supply pipe 
into a building depending 
on the type of ground floor 
built into the property. The 
water 
undertaker’s 
recommend that no more 
than 150mm of MDPE pipe 
be showing above floor 
level 
as 
MDPE 
is 
susceptible to ultra violet 
light and will decompose if 
exposed for long periods. 
There are many stop taps 
that are manufactured to 
BS1010-2 and when fitted 
to mains cold water supply, 
these must be made of a 
corrosion resistant brass or gunmetal to prevent de-zincification. Again, the Water Regulations are very clear:  
Every water fitting shall be immune to or protected from corrosion by galvanic action or by any other 
process which is likely to result in contamination or wastage of water.  
Schedule 2 Regulation 3.  
When installing Cold water systems, all fittings that are made of a copper alloy should be either made of 
gunmetal or de-zincified brass. Both metals are easily identifiable as fittings carry a specific mark identifying 
the fact that they are corrosion resistant. A drain off valve manufactured to BSEN1254 should be installed 
immediately above the internal stop valve to the building to allow for complete draining of the system. 
 
 
 
 
Methods of entry of the water supply into a building 
The corrosion resistant mark on a fitting 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
22
AC2.2 Identify the type of cold water system from layout diagrams. 
AC2.3 State the factors which affect the selection of cold water 
systems for dwellings 
There are a number of cold water installation designs that are in use in the United Kingdom. Two of these 
systems are commonly used in domestic dwellings: 
1. Direct cold water system  
2. Indirect cold water system 
Direct Cold Water System 
 
 
The Direct System of cold water supply is the most common system in use in the UK. With this system, all of 
the cold water outlets are fed with water directly off the water undertaker’s mains cold water supply. Storage 
of cold water is only required if the hot water supply is taken from a low pressure hot water storage vessel. 
The direct system for instantaneous and mains fed hot water systems 
The direct system with cold water storage to supply to the hot water storage vessel 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
23
Storage is not required when the hot water supply is supplied from an unvented hot water storage vessel or 
a combination (combi) boiler/instantaneous gas hot water heater. The installation is cheap and quick to 
install. Good flowrate and pressure are a necessity with this system when instantaneous hot water supply is 
used. 
The direct system is mainly used in small to medium sized dwellings where there are a limited number of 
outlets. 
Indirect cold water system 
With the indirect system of cold water supply, the kitchen sink is the only appliance that is supplied with 
water direct from the water undertaker’s water main. All other appliances, bath, washbasin and WC, are 
supplied with water from a cold water storage cistern in the roof space. Because of the increased need for 
stored cold water, the size of the cistern will also increase. The cistern should be installed as high as possible 
to increase the system pressure.  
This system is designed for properties in low water pressure areas, where the water undertaker’s cold water 
main is insufficient to meet the property’s full cold water pressure and flow rate requirement. The system 
also has a back-up of stored water for use in the event of mains cold water failure. 
Table 1: Direct Cold Water installations  
Advantages  
Disadvantages  
It is the most cost effective cold water system 
installation 
The water pressure may drop at times of peak 
demand 
Mains cold water is available at all cold water taps 
and outlets 
There is no cold water storage if the cold water 
main is under repair 
It requires less pipework than any other installation 
Can be noisy due to the high flow rates and 
pressures of the water supply 
Little or no structural support is required for 
cisterns in the roof space 
Greater risk of contamination to the cold water 
main due to the fact that all connections, taps, 
outlets and appliances are connected direct to the 
mains supply 
The most suited installation where mains cold 
water is required by appliances and components, 
such as electric showers and unvented hot water 
systems. 
Greater wear on taps and valves, which can 
increase the noise within the system 
Smaller pipe sizes can be used in the majority of 
installations 
Water hammer can be a problem where poor 
installation practice has been used or where taps 
and valves are worn or faulty 
Good pressure at ALL cold water outlets 
Greater condensation build-up on pipework that is 
often mistaken for a leak 
 
Can cause a lot of water damage due to the high 
pressure and flowrate, should there be a leak 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
24
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Indirect Cold Water installations  
Advantages  
Disadvantages  
Reduced risk of contamination 
The rising main must be protected against 
backflow from the cistern 
Reduced risk of water hammer and reverberation 
noise 
Greater risk of frost damage of pipework and 
cisterns in the roof space 
Low pressure supply reduces the impact of leakage 
damage 
A large amount of water storage is needed 
Reduces the demand on the cold water main at 
times of peak demand 
Cisterns use a lot of storage space in the roof 
Pipework can be sized to give very good flowrates 
despite the lack of pressure 
More structural support required to carry the 
weight of the cisterns when full of water 
Shower valves on low pressure supplies may be 
Greater cost of installation 
The indirect cold water system 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
25
 
AC2.4 State the typical pipe sizes used in cold water systems in 
dwellings 
Direct systems 
Generally speaking, most direct systems utilise a 15mm rising main with 
15mm pipework to all cold water outlets. This is sufficient for small 
installations where a combination boiler supplying hot water is installed, 
without en-suite bathrooms and shower rooms.  
Where the hot water is supplied through an open vented hot water storage 
system, the cold water rising main will terminate at a cold feed cistern 
normally positioned in the roof space. The water storage capacity of the 
cistern must be at least the storage capacity of the hot water storage vessel. 
For those installations where an unvented hot water storage system is to be 
connected, a 22mm minimum cold water rising main should be installed. 
This is because unvented hot water storage systems require a far greater 
flowrate which can only be supplied through a larger size pipe. Installations 
where the hot water is supplied direct from the mains cold water supply 
through a mains pressure hot water heater or unvented hot water storage 
system, the number of outlets is effectively doubled and this will increase 
the size of the mains cold water supply pipework. 
Occasionally, a 28mm rising main may be required depending on the size of 
the property and the number of outlets being supplied.  
Indirect systems 
The indirect system of cold water supply is designed for areas where the 
cold water supply pressure is low and not capable for supplying the full 
water requirements of the system design. It utilizes a 15mm cold water 
rising main, feeding cold water storage cisterns in the roof space. Only the 
kitchen sink and possibly any downstairs cloakroom or utility room are taken 
directly off the cold water main. All other outlets are fed by a low pressure 
supply, minimum 22mm pipework and often 28mm pipework depending on 
the number of outlets, from the storage cisterns. This is known as the cold 
distribution pipework. 22mm pipework should be supplied to the bath to 
give  a good flowrate.  
To give an adequate pressure, the cold water storage cisterns should be 
supplied with equal pressures and flowrates 
Reserve water in the cistern should the cold water 
mains fail 
More pipework needed 
 
Reduced pressure at outlets and taps 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
26
positioned as high as possible. They must also be protected against undue 
warming and frost. 
The amount of cold water stored in the roof space will need to be carefully 
calculated as, in most cases, the cisterns will also supply cold water to an 
open vented hot water installation and so will need to be large enough to 
supply both cold water and hot water household needs. 
AC2.5 State the factors that can lead to backflow from cold water 
outlets and equipment in dwellings 
Before we investigate backflow, back pressure and back syphonage, we must first look at why these 
situations can be dangerous in domestic cold water systems. 
Fluid categories of water and uses of water supplied to dwellings 
Water that is not classified as clean, cold, wholesome and potable by a water undertaker must be regarded 
as a potential hazard. Because of this, schedule 1 of the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations classify 
water into five fluid categories. The following descriptions are given in Schedule 1 of the Water Supply (Water 
Fittings) Regulations 1999: 
Fluid category 1 
Wholesome water supplied by the undertaker and complying with the 
requirements made under section 67 of the Water Industry Act 1991/ the Water 
Supply (Water Quality) (Scotland) Regulations 1990 and any amendment 
Fluid category 1 – this is water supplied by a Water Undertaker under section 67 of the Water Act 1991. It 
must be clean, cold and wholesome and suitable for domestic use and food preparation purposes. 
Wherever possible, drinking water should be supplied from a water undertaker’s mains supply. 
 
Fluid category 2 
Water in fluid category 1 whose aesthetic quality is impaired owing to – 
 
A change in its temperature, or 
 
The presence of substances or organisms causing a change in its taste, odour 
or appearance, including water in hot water distribution systems. 
Fluid Category 2 – the changes in fluid category are aesthetic only and do not constitute a health risk. They 
may occur in: 
o Water heated in a hot water secondary system. 
o Mixed water containing fluid categories 1 and 2 that is discharged from combination taps or 
showers. 
o Water that has been softened by a domestic water softener. 
 
Fluid category 3 
Fluid which represents a slight health hazard because of the concentration of 
substances of low toxicity, including any fluid which contains –  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
27
 
Ethylene glycol, copper sulphate solution or similar chemical additives, or 
 
Sodium hypochlorite (chloros and common disinfectants) 
Fluid Category 3 – typical situations: 
1. In houses, apartments and other domestic dwellings: 
a. Water in the primary circuits of central heating systems irrespective of whether chemicals 
have been added or not. 
b. Water in washbasins, baths and shower trays. 
c. Clothes and dishwashing machines. 
d. Home dialysis machines 
e. Hand-held garden hoses with a flow controlled spray or shut-off valve. 
f. Hand-held fertilizers. 
2. In premises other than single occupancy domestic dwellings: 
a. Domestic fittings and appliances such as washbasins, baths, or showers installed in 
commercial, industrial or other premises may be regarded as fluid category 3. However, if 
there is a potential for a higher risk, such as a hospital, medical premises or other similar 
establishment, then a higher fluid category risk must be applied in accordance with the 
regulations. 
3. House garden or commercial irrigation systems without insecticides. 
 
Fluid category 4 
Fluid which represents a significant health hazard because of the concentration of 
toxic substances, including any fluid which contains –  
 
Chemical, carcinogenic substances or pesticides (including insecticides an 
herbicides), or   
 
Environmental organisms of potential health significance 
Fluid Category 4 – Typical situations: 
1. General: 
a. Primary circuits of central heating systems in properties other than a single occupancy 
dwelling. 
b. Fire sprinkler systems using anti-freeze chemicals 
2. House gardens: 
a. Mini irrigation systems without fertilizer or insecticides, including pop-up sprinkler 
systems and permeable hoses. 
3. Food processing: 
a. Food preparation. 
b. Dairies. 
c. Bottle washing plants. 
4. Catering: 
a. Commercial dishwashers. 
b. Refrigerating equipment 
5. Industrial and Commercial installations: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
28
a. Dyeing equipment. 
b. Industrial disinfection equipment. 
c. Photographic and printing applications. 
d. Car washing and degreasing plant. 
e. Brewery and distilling processes. 
f. Water treatment plant or softeners that use other methods than salt. 
g. Pressurised fire-fighting systems. 
 
Fluid category 5 
Fluid which represents a serious health hazard because of the concentration of 
pathogenic organisms, radioactive or very toxic substances, including any fluid 
which contains –  
 
Faecal material or other human waste: 
 
Butchery or other animal waste: or 
 
Pathogens from any other source.   
Fluid Category 5 – Typical situations: 
1. General: 
a. Industrial cisterns and tanks. 
b. Hose union bib taps in a non-domestic installation. 
c. Sinks, WC pans, urinals and bidets. 
d. Permeable pipes in any non-domestic garden whether laid at or below ground level. 
e. Grey water recycling systems. 
2. Medical: 
a. Laboratories. 
b. Any medical or dental equipment with submerged inlets. 
c. Bedpan washers and slop hoppers 
d. Mortuary and embalming equipment. 
e. Hospital dialysis machines. 
f. Commercial clothes washing equipment in care homes and similar premises. 
g. Baths, washbasins, kitchen sinks and other appliances that are in non-domestic 
installations. 
3. Food processing: 
a. Butchery and meat trade establishments 
b. Slaughterhouse equipment. 
c. Vegitable washing. 
4. Catering: 
a. Dishwashing machines in healthcare premises and similar establishments. 
b. Vegetable washing. 
5. Industrial/commercial: 
a. Industrial and chemical plants. 
b. Laboratories. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
29
c. Any mobile tanker or gulley cleaning vehicles. 
6. Sewerage treatment works and sewer cleaning: 
a. Drain cleaning plant. 
b. Water storage for agricultural applications. 
c. Water storage for firefighting systems. 
7. Commercial agricultural: 
a. Commercial irrigation outlets below or at ground level and/or permeable pipes, with or 
without chemical additives. 
b. Insecticide or fertiliser applications. 
c. Commercial hydroponic systems. 
 
The distinction between fluid category 4 and fluid category 5 is difficult to distinguish since both categories 
constitute a serious risk to health. In general, however, water classified as fluid category 4 has the potential 
to cause harm over a period of days to weeks to months, whereas water classified as fluid category 5 may 
cause harm after only a very short exposure of minutes to hours to days or even a single exposure. 
It must also be remembered that it is forbidden for water from any other fluid category to come into contact 
with water under fluid category 1. 
Backflow prevention 
Schedule 2 paragraph 15 of the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999, deals with backflow 
prevention. Backflow is simply the reversing of the normal direction of the water flow and can be as a result 
of backpressure (where the water pressure downstream is greater than the water pressure upstream) or 
back syphonage (where the water is sucked backwards through the pipework due to sudden loss of pressure). 
This can lead to contamination of the water undertakers mains cold water supply. See the diagrams above: 
a. 
Back pressure                                                  b. Back syphonage 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
30
Cross connection of wholesome water with water from other sources can be another major source of 
contamination by back pressure and back syphonage. Cross connections can occur in the home easily simply by 
connecting mixer taps on hot and cold water supplies. If the mixing tap or valve is a true mixer (not a bi-flow 
mixer), then a cross connection between hot and cold supplies is deemed a cross connection between a fluid cat. 
1 water (cold) to a fluid cat. 2 water (hot). In this instance, the simple installation of a single check valve on the 
cold supply will prevent contamination. However, not all back flow situations are so easily sorted out. 
AC2.6 Identify the standard backflow 
prevention devices that are used in cold water systems in dwellings 
supplying water to appliances 
Appliance 
Risk 
Prevention 
Baths 
Back pressure and back 
syphonage through mixer taps. 
Fluid category 2 and 3 
Where both hot and cold supplies are taken 
from the mains cold water supply and no 
shower hose exists, Type EA/EB single check 
valve installed on the hot and cold supplies. 
Where the supplies come from unbalanced 
sources e.g. high pressure cold and low 
pressure hot and no shower hose exists, 
Type EA/EB single check valves on both hot 
and cold supplies 
Where a shower hose exists e.g. a 
bath/shower mixer tap, Type EC/ED double 
check valve installed on the cold supply. 
AUK2 airgap at the appliance. 
WCs 
Fluid category 5 
AUK1 air gap 
Over the rim bidets 
Fluid category 5 
AUK3 airgap 
Wash hand basins 
Back pressure and back 
syphonage through mixer taps. 
Fluid category 2 and 3 
AUK2 airgap at the appliance 
Where both hot and cold supplies are taken 
from the mains cold water supply, Type 
EA/EB single check valve installed on the 
cold supply. 
Sinks 
Fluid category 5 
AUK3 airgap 
Mixer taps 
This is dependent on the 
appliance that the tap is 
AUK2 airgap – washbasins and baths 
AUK3 airgap – kitchen, utility and cleaners 
Upstream and downstream explained 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
31
serving.  
sinks 
All mixer taps connected to the mains cold 
water supply – Type EA/EB single check 
valve (minimum) 
Outside taps 
Fluid category 3 
Type EC/ED Double check valve 
Shower mixer valves/ 
instantaneous 
showers 
Back pressure and back 
syphonage through mixer 
valves. Fluid category 2 and 3 
Back syphonage through 
instantaneous electric showers. 
Fluid category 3 
Where both hot and cold supplies are taken 
from the mains cold water supply and the 
shower hose is restrained by a retaining ring, 
Type EA/EB single check valve installed on 
the cold and hot supplies. 
Where a shower hose exists e.g. a shower 
mixer valve, Type EC/ED double check valve 
installed on the cold supply. 
Shower valves connected to low pressure 
cistern fed hot and cold supplies do not 
require backflow protection. 
Refrigerators, 
washing machines and 
dishwashers. 
Fluid category 3 
Most domestic dish washing and clothes  
washing machines have inbuilt airgaps to 
accommodate fluid category 3. Where no such 
air gap exists, the cold water supply must be 
protected with a Type EC/ED double check 
valve 
 
Below are examples of the backflow prevention devices listed in the above table: 
 
 
 
 
 
AUK1 air gap with interposed cistern               
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
32
 
 
AUK2 air gap                                                        
 
 
AUK3 air gap  
 
 
Type EA/EB Single Check Valve 
 
Type EC/ED Double Check Valve 
 
AC2.7 Identify the working principles of cold water system 
components 
Baths  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
33
Connections to baths vary depending on the position of the taps. For domestic 
installations, bath taps have a ¾ inch BSP male thread for connection with a 
¾” x 22mm tap connector. 
 
WCs 
All WCs are provided with a float operated valve to the WC cistern. The float 
operated valve (FoV) for WC cisterns can either be bottom fed or side fed and 
all have ½ “ BSP male threads to allow connection to the water supply via a 
½” x 15mm tap connector. The FoV should be provided with a servicing valve 
for maintenance, repair and replacement 
 
Over the rim bidets 
 
Over-rim bidets installed in domestic premises can either have single or 
combination taps installed. All taps fitted to over-rim bidets must have an 
AUK2 air gap  provided between the outlet of the tap and the spill-over level 
of the bidet. The Water Regulations Advisory Scheme (WRAS) Installation 
Requirement Note IRN R010 also stipulates that the water supply to 
combination taps shall have reasonably balanced pressures. Where 
unbalanced water pressures are used, then approved single check valves must 
be fitted immediately upstream of both hot and cold supplies. 
Wash hand basins 
 
Wash hand basins installed in domestic premises can either have single or 
combination taps installed. Single taps have ½ “ male BSP threads while 
combination taps often have 10mm copper tails. All taps fitted to wash basins 
must have an AUK2 air gap provided between the outlet of the tap and the 
spill-over level of the basin. 
Again, Installation Requirement Note IRN R010 also stipulates that the water 
supply to combination taps shall have reasonably balanced pressures. Where 
unbalanced water pressures are used, then approved single check valves must 
be fitted immediately upstream of both hot and cold supplies. 
 
 
Sinks 
 
All sinks for domestic purposes, whether manufactured from ceramics or 
stainless steel must have taps that give an AUK3 air gap. Sink taps can either 
be single high-neck pillar taps, combination taps or wall mounted bib taps, 
depending upon the installation requirements. The water in sinks should be 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
34
regarded as fluid category 5 (see textbook 1). Single taps have ½ “ male BSP 
threads while combination taps often have 15mm copper tails. 
Urinals  
 
Urinals, although not a domestic appliance, require careful consideration. 
Connecting a urinal to the water supply can be completed in one of either two 
ways: 
 
Via an automatic flushing cistern, or; 
 
A manual or automatic flushing valve 
Urinals using automatic flushing cisterns must be installed in such a way that 
does not constitute a wastage of water. WRAS note IRN R075 states that 
urinals using automatic flushing cisterns should be installed to give a flush rate 
not exceeding 10 litres per hour for a single urinal bowl and 7.5 litres per hour 
for each 700mm of a slab urinal or two or more urinal bowls. 
 
Urinals using flushing valves must not deliver a flush exceeding 1.5 litres per single flush per bowl each time the 
valve is operated. 
In each case, the water supply must be protected by an air gap or some such no less effective mechanical device 
in accordance with fluid category 5. 
Refrigerators 
 
Many modern refrigerators contain ice making facilities that can be connected directly to a cold water supply. 
Where this is possible, the refrigerator connection should be installed in accordance with fluid category 2. The 
reason for this is that, although the water is fluid category 1, it undergoes both a change in temperature and 
state for it to become ice. Therefore, this kind of installation must be fitted with a single check valve or an 
approved EA/EB Backflow prevention device. 
Washing machines /Dishwashers 
 
Washing machines/Dishwashers are classified as fluid category 3 and must be protected against backflow. In 
most instances, an air gap to guard against backflow is already built into the appliance by the manufacturer. 
However, where multiple washing machines are installed on the same installation, then some form of 
mechanical backflow prevention is required. This is usually an approved type EC/ED backflow prevention device 
(or double check valve). 
Modern washing and dishwashing machines only require a cold connection to the water supply. Internal heaters 
heat the water as required. 
Taps, outlets and valves 
Mixer taps  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
35
True mixer taps allow both hot and 
cold water to be mixed inside the 
tap  body, and as such, constitute a 
cross connection between fluid 
category 1 and fluid category 2, 
which is not allowed under the 
Water 
Supply 
(water 
supply) 
Regulations 1999. Both hot and 
cold supplies must be protected by 
an 
approved 
EA/EB 
backflow 
prevention device (single check 
valve). 
 
 
Bi-flow mixer taps 
 
Bi-flow mixer taps are essentially two taps within a single tap body. The 
tap is divided through the body and into the spout so that the hot and 
cold water supplies do not mix until they emerge from the spout. They 
do not require backflow protection. 
Pillar taps  
 
These are available with both ½” and ¾” male BSP tails for use on 
washbasins and baths. They are designed to give and AUK2 airgap at the 
appliance, the outlet of the tap being higher than the spill-over level of 
the appliance. 
High Neck Pillar taps 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Similar in design to pillar taps, high neck pillar taps 
are designed for use on kitchen sinks. The high neck 
provides an AUK3 air gap suitable for fluid category 
5, which is a mandatory requirement for 
kitchen/utility sinks, cleaners sinks, Belfast sinks and 
any sink or washbasin installed in a health care 
facility. 
 
Bib taps 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
36
Bib taps are predominantly used in conjunction with Belfast sinks, 
cleaners sinks and situations where an AUK3 air gap is a requirement, 
such as hospitals, dental and doctors surgeries and health care facilities. 
In most cases, they are fixed to the wall using back-plate elbows, 
although as can be seen in the photograph, they can also be installed 
with concealed pipework. 
 
Hose Union Bib taps (Outside taps) 
 
Similar in design to bib taps, hose union bib taps have threaded hose 
connection at the spout for easy connection of a garden hose. These 
must be regarded as a fluid category 3 risk and be protected by an 
approved type EC/ED backflow prevention device (or double check 
valve). 
Stop valves (BS5433 and BS1010) 
 
 
 
Stop valves are designed for 
the isolation of high/mains 
pressure cold water supplies. 
Internally, they are very 
restrictive to the flow of 
water, which makes them 
unsuitable for use on low 
pressure supplies. 
Stop valves are available with 
compression and capillary 
connections 
for 
use 
on 
copper, polyethylene and polybutylene pipe.  
Stop valves have an arrow moulded into the body of the valve to show the direction of the flow of water. 
Taps  
There are three categories of taps: 
 
Taps with rising spindles (BS1010) 
 
Taps with non-rising spindles (BS5412) 
 
Ceramic disc type 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
37
 
Taps with rising spindles (BS1010) 
BS1010 taps contain a tap washer that is attached 
to a jumper plate. The jumper plate is then 
inserted into the rising spindle, which rises when 
the tap is rotated counter-clockwise, turning the 
tap on allowing water out of the tap spout. 
Although BS1010 has been withdrawn for many 
years, BS1010 taps and head workings continue to 
be manufactured, because they are very reliable 
and can be repaired and refurbished easily and 
quickly. 
BS1010 tap head workings are interchangeable, insomuch that tap head workings from one manufacturer will 
fit other taps. 
 
Taps with non-rising spindles (BS5412) 
BS5412 taps do not have a rising spindle. The 
spindle remains in one position, retained by a 
circlip. At the end of the spindle is a thread. When 
the tap is rotated counter-clockwise, the thread 
lifts a hexagonal-shaped barrel with a washer 
attached to it. 
BS5412 taps are for use on washbasins, baths, 
kitchen sink and bidets, in ½“ and ¾“ sizes. 
Unlike BS1010 taps, the head workings are not interchangeable from manufacturer to manufacturer, with 
each company having their own design. 
 
 
Ceramic disc taps 
Ceramic disc taps do not contain a washer. Instead 
they have two thin ceramic plates, one of which is 
fixed while the other rotates through 90o. Each 
plate has a pair of corresponding  slots cut into 
them where the water passes through. 
Ceramic discs tap heads correspond to the type of 
water. Hot tap heads rotate clockwise while cold 
rotate anti-clockwise. They are colour coded for 
easy identification red and blue.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
38
 
Ceramic disc replacement needs to be carefully 
considered as the tap workings are not universal 
and the correct make and model of the tap must 
be available to be able to obtain the correct type 
of replacement. 
 
 
A typical ceramic disc head workings 
Full-way gate valves 
Full-way gate valves are used predominantly to isolate 
low pressure water supplies from storage cisterns. They 
use a ‘gate’ to stop the flow of water without the need 
for a rubber washer. When the valve head is rotated 
counter-clockwise, the gate rises allowing water to flow. 
The design of gate valves allows for water to flow at full 
bore with virtually no restriction in flowrate, hence the 
term ‘full-way’.  
They are not suitable for high pressure water supplies. 
 
Spherical plug valves/ Servicing valves 
These isolation/servicing valves contain a brass ball or 
sphere with a hole through the middle. When the hole is 
in line with the pipe, the valve is on and water will flow. 
When the valve is turned through 90o, the hole is across 
the flow of water and the water flow stops. 
There are many versions of spherical ball valves 
available. Some have handles or levers, such as the types 
shown in the photographs, while others have a 
screwdriver slot to enable the valve to be turned on and 
off. 
 
 
Drain valves (BS2878-2) 
Drain valves, also known as drain-off valve and M/T valves, are used to allow systems to be completely drained 
of water for repair, maintenance or replacement. They should be placed at low points in the system, close to 
places where the drained water will not pose a nuisance. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
39
There are many types of drain valve available, including types with male threaded 
ends and those with or without packing glands. 
Drain valves must be fitted in accordance with the Water Supply (water fittings) 
Regulations. 
Float operated valves (to BS1212 parts 1-4) 
Float Operated Valves or FoVs are used to control the flow of water into cisterns. Manufactured to BS1212, 
they are purposely designed to shut off the inflow of water once it has reached a predetermined level. They 
can be used on high pressure water or low pressure, depending on the type of orifice that the FoV is fitted with. 
A white orifice denotes high pressure supply (marked HP) and a red orifice denotes a low pressure supply 
(marked LP).  
There are four specific types: 
1. B.S.1212 Part 1: Portsmouth pattern and Croydon types 
2. B.S.1212 Part 2: Diaphragm type (brass) 
3. B.S.1212 Part 3: Diaphragm type (plastic) 
4. B.S.1212 Part 4: Torbeck equilibrium type (WC cisterns only) 
B.S.1212 Part 1: Portsmouth pattern and Croydon types 
 
Portsmouth pattern 
This type of FoV discharges water from underneath the 
valve. Because of this, they are prohibited from new 
installations without a back-flow prevention device as 
the outlet may become submerged in water if the valve 
fails, creating a possible back-flow contamination issue. 
However, they may be repaired if they are part of an 
existing installation. 
The Portsmouth-type valve are vulnerable to noise and 
water hammer.  
Croydon pattern 
The Croydon-type FoV again discharges water from 
below the valve making it susceptible to back-flow 
issues. It is instantly recognisable due to the piston being 
in the vertical position. Croydon’s tend to be very noisy 
in operation. The Croydon valve is an obsolete design 
that is no longer manufactured but may still be found in 
older, high level WC cisterns. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
40
B.S.1212 Part 2: Diaphragm type (brass) and B.S.1212 Part 3: Diaphragm type (plastic) 
Parts 2 and 3 FoVs discharge water from the top of 
the valve rather than underneath, making them less 
likely to encounter backflow problems. The main 
difference with this kind of FoV is the size of the 
rubber washer. It is large, flat and very flexible. 
The valve has very few moving parts, making it quieter 
in operation than the part 1 and less likely to be 
associated with water hammer and pipework 
reverberation. 
 
Part 3 FoVs are almost identical to the part 2 except they are made of plastic making them ideal for WC cisterns 
but they are not recommended for storage cisterns in roof spaces due to the risk of freezing and splitting of 
the plastic body. 
B.S.1212 Part 4: Diaphragm Equilibrium type 
(Torbeck) 
Known as the Torbeck valve, it works on the principle 
that when the valve is in the open position, there is 
equal pressure on both sides of the rubber washer. 
When the required water level is reached, the float 
arm closes the pressure relief orifice on the front of 
the valve creating a higher pressure in front of the 
rubber washer. This pushes the washer on to water 
outlet to stop the flow of water.  
These valves are much quieter than other FoV types 
although the valve tends to close with a ‘snap’ action, 
which can create some pipe reverberation. 
These are only for use on WCs. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
41
Water meters  
External installations 
There are two types of external water meter 
installation: 
 
A water meter fitted in an underground 
housing at the boundary of the property, 
and; 
 
The 
‘Groundbreaker©’ 
external 
water 
meter housing fitted on an external wall of 
the property (as shown in the photograph) 
Fitting a water meter externally has several 
advantages  
1. It prevents illegal tampering with the water meter. 
2. The meter can be read without the need to access the building 
Internal installations 
Water meters on existing cold water supplies are 
usually fitted internally close to the internal stop 
valve. It must be fitted in the manner shown in the 
image: 
Stop Valve – Water Meter – Drain Valve – Stop 
Valve 
This is to prevent a breech in the Water supply 
(water fittings) Regulations 1999 with regards to 
erroneous metering of water. Any water drawn 
through the drain valve on a live cold water supply 
would register on the meter as water consumed. If 
the drain valve was fitted below the meter, any 
water drawn off would not register. 
Earth bonding should also be fitted from below the 
first stop valve to above the second stop valve so 
that earth protection is continued. 
 
 
A groundbreaker meter box 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
42
Showers  
Gravity 
Gravity showers use a mixing valve to blend cold water and hot water to the required temperature. There 
are several types: 
 
Manual-type mixing valves (non-thermostatic) 
 
Thermostatic mixing valves 
 
Bath/shower mixing taps 
Manual-type mixing valves (non-thermostatic) 
These do not have thermostatic control. They rely 
solely on the fact that both hot and cold supplies 
are being distributed at the same pressure and 
flowrate. Unlike thermostatic types, manual non-
thermostatic valves do not adjust the water 
temperature or compensate for flow and 
temperature fluctuations. Because of this, it is 
important that the temperature of the hot water 
supply is fairly stable. 
They are usually used on low-pressure water 
supplies, fed from a storage cistern. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A manual mixing valve 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
43
Thermostatic shower valves 
Thermostatic shower valves are fitted in exactly the 
same way as manual non-thermostatic mixing 
valves. The difference is that these shower valves 
maintain the showering temperature despite 
fluctuations in flowrates. The water temperatures 
generally are 15oC for cold water and 55oC for hot 
water will give a showering temperature of around 
38oC to 42oC. There are two types of Thermostatic 
mixing valve: 
 
Wax Capsule – this uses a copper capsule 
containing a heat sensitive wax  to control 
the water temperature. As the wax gets 
hot, it expands, which moves a shuttle 
controlling the flow of hot water. The 
hotter the water, the more expansion of 
wax takes place and the more the 
restriction is put on the flow of hot water.  
 
Bi-metallic coil – These use a coil of two 
different metals with differing expansion 
rates, usually brass and invar steel that are 
joined together. The brass expands more 
quickly than the steel and this causes the 
coil to distort. This distortion movement 
activates a shuttle the either increases or 
decreases the flow of hot water to the 
valve. 
 
A thermostatic bar-type mixing valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A thermostatic mixing valve 
Pressure compensating mixing valves 
These are designed to give greater temperature 
stability when the pressures and flowrates of the 
hot and cold supplies are different. Some types are 
designed for use on high/low pressure differences 
while others are designed for use on high/low 
flowrates where the pressures are equal. There are 
two specific types: 
 
Sequential control – these maintain 
temperature whilst adjusting to subtle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A pressure compensating shower valve  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
44
pressure fluctuations. 
 
Dual control – these have separate mechanisms to control temperature and flowrate. They react 
to differences in pressure but not to differences in temperature. Ideal for combi boilers and 
instantaneous gas water heaters. 
Digital shower valves 
 
These use a digital panel that communicates with 
the shower mixing valve to maintain a strict 
showering temperature regime. The digital control 
panel can be located as far as 10m away from the 
valve, giving greater installation flexibility. 
 
 
 
 
 
A digital shower valve 
Bath/shower mixing taps 
Bath/shower mixing valves rely on equal pressures 
of both hot and cold supplies to work effectively. 
They simply replace the normal pillar-type bath 
taps, using the same tap hole spacing’s, which are 
generic to almost all bath types. 
The example shown left is thermostatic. 
To prevent back-siphonage, bath/shower mixers 
have an inbuilt air gap, known as a HC Diverter. This 
automatically drains the hose and shower head 
when the taps are turned off. Alternatively, single 
check valves (EA/EB Back flow prevention devices) 
can be fitted to both hot and cold supplies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A bath/shower mixing valve 
Shower pumps 
Shower pumps are used to boost low pressure hot and cold supplies from storage cisterns, giving the ‘power 
shower’ feel. There are two different kinds: 
 
Single impeller outlet types, and; 
 
Twin impeller inlet types 
Single impeller outlet shower pumps 
A single impeller type shower pump is fitted AFTER 
the shower valve to boost the mixed water from 
the valve to the shower head. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Single impeller pump 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A single impeller shower pump layout 
A twin impeller shower pump layout 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
46
Twin impeller inlet shower pumps  
Twin impeller shower pumps are installed before 
the shower valve and boost the individual low 
pressure hot and cold supplies to the shower 
mixing valve. They have two identical impellers 
driven by a single motor to ensure that both the 
pressure and the flowrate to both supplies is the 
same.                                                                
       
 
 
 
 
 
 Twin impeller pump 
Instantaneous electric showers 
There are many different 
electric showers on the 
market with power ratings 
from 
8kW 
to 
12kW. 
Instantaneous 
electric 
showers are fed with 
water direct from the cold 
water mains supply. This is 
then heated by a small but 
powerful heater inside the 
shower itself. 
Electric showers should be 
protected 
from 
back-
siphonage by either an 
EC/ED backflow protection 
device (double check valve) or a hose retaining ring that is supplied with the shower. The retaining ring 
prevents the shower hose from entering bath or shower water. 
Care should be taken when installing electric showers. The electrical installation must be completed by a 
qualified electrician so that the correct cable size, fuse and isolation switches are installed.  
Water treatment 
Water softeners  
A water softener removes water hardness in hard water areas. They can be installed in both domestic and 
commercial buildings. It is usual practice to install water softeners as close to the main internal stop valve as 
possible so that the entire cold water installation is served with softened water. 
Most water softeners use a process called ion exchange and are known as ‘base exchange water softeners’. 
The inside of an electric shower 
A typical electric shower 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
47
In this process the 
calcium and magnesium 
salts are replaced with 
sodium. 
Water 
softeners are designed 
to automatically wash 
away the calcium and 
magnesium ions with 
salt water at least once 
a day. Every month, the 
softener 
the 
unit 
requires 
the 
replacement of the salt 
granules. 
Water softeners reduce 
the 
water 
hardness 
from around 350mg/l to 
less than 10mg/l. 
It should be remembered that water softener installation requires that at least 1 tap, usually the kitchen sink, 
remain unsoftened for drinking and culinary purposes. 
Water filters.  
Water filters are designed to improve the taste and appearance of water by removing impurities. There are 
two common types: 
 
Jug filters that are filled from a tap 
 
Plumbed in filters usually sited under kitchen sinks. 
There are generally, six different types of filter: 
Activated carbon Carbon in the form of powder, granules or block is used to remove chlorine, thereby 
improving the taste and odour of the water. The carbon has a large surface area and this 
attracts and absorbs organic substances in the water. 
Ion exchange 
Reduces lime scale formation and other metal-ion contaminants such as lead. They 
generally use granulated sodium salts to remove the mineral contaminant. 
Sediment filters 
These remove fine particles from the water by using a mesh through which the water 
passes. The finer the mesh, the more particles are removed. 
Reverse osmosis These work under high pressure by passing water through a semi-impermeable 
membrane. This process removes the impurities in the water. 
The installation layout of a water softener 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
48
Distillation 
The mineral content is removed by boiling the water to steam and condensing the steam 
back to water. 
Disinfection  
These are usually used with water supplied from bore hole. They use ultra-violet light to 
kill bacteria and other micro-organisms. 
Water conditioners 
These work by supressing lime scale formation. This has the following benefits: 
 
A reduction in the formation of scale in pipework 
 
Easier cleaning of outlets, such as shower heads 
 
Less lime scale formation on taps and outlets 
There are three basic methods of conditioning water: 
Electro-magnetic 
These prevent scale build-up by influencing which type of calcium crystal form. By doing 
this, it ensures that only aragonite crystals are formed, which have a needle-like 
structure, making it difficult for them to adhere to smooth surfaces. 
They are generally used on individual appliances, such as combination boilers, to reduce 
internal scale build-up in hard water areas. 
 
Electro-magnetic water conditioner 
Electrolytic 
These add a microscopic amount of zinc to the water, which prevents the formation of 
calcium crystals. Any crystals that form are washed away by the water flow. 
 
An electrolytic water conditioner 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
49
Electro-chemical 
These conditioners are quite large and require an electrical supply. They are filled with 
ceramic beads and work by causing the magnesium and calcium crystals to precipitate, 
or re-form. 
Cisterns 
A cistern is defined as a vessel containing water at atmospheric pressure. In plumbing, there are several 
different types: 
Cold water storage cisterns (CWSC) 
These store water for distribution in a low-pressure indirect cold water system. It supplies cold water only 
Cold water feed cisterns (CWFC) 
Identical to cold water storage cisterns. The difference is that cold feed cisterns are designed to feed cold 
water, via the cold feed pipe, to an open vent hot water storage system. 
Combined Cold water storage and feed cisterns (CWS&FC) 
These are a combination of the first two cisterns and are primarily for use when the cistern is supplying cold 
water to both a cold water system and hot water system from the same cistern. 
Feed and expansion cisterns (F&E) 
These small cisterns that are designed for use with vented hot water heating systems and, as the name 
suggests, combine two very important roles: 
1. It supplies cold feed water to a heating system, and; 
2. Accommodates any expansion of the water due to the water being heated. 
The cistern must be large enough accommodate any expanded water and must be sized accordingly. 
WC/urinal flushing cisterns 
These are installed with the sole purpose of clearing the contents of WC pans and Urinal bowls. Urinal cisterns 
are usually automatically flushed at set periods and should be fitted with a water saving device such as a 
cistermiser © valve. Urinals can be fitted with flushing valves that flush directly from the mains cold water. 
WCs must be flushed using a cistern fed flush arrangement using either a siphon or a dual flush valve (4 ltrs 
short flush, 6 ltrs long flush). They are covered in greater detail in a later chapter 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
50
AC2.8 State the system layout features for protected plastic storage 
cisterns 
General installation requirements for domestic cisterns 
Schedule 2 paragraph 16 of the Water Supply (water fittings) 
Regulations 1999 states that a cistern supplying low pressure cold 
water to either a cold water or hot water system should be capable 
of supplying wholesome, potable water. Protection measures must 
be included during installation to ensure that the water cannot 
become contaminated in any way. Cisterns, therefore must include: 
a) An effective inlet control device to maintain the correct water level i.e. a float operated valve. 
b) Service valves on inlet and outlet pipework connections to allow for maintenance and repair 
activities. 
c) Screened warning/overflow pipes. 
d) A rigid, close fitting lid, which is not air tight but excludes light and insects. 
e) Insulation against freezing or undue warming. 
f) Installation methods that eliminate the risk of contamination. 
g) Arranged so that water can circulate preventing stagnation. 
h) Support to avoid distortion or damage which could lead to leaks 
i) 
Access for maintenance and cleaning. 
A cistern complying with Schedule 2 para 16 of the Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potable – pronounced ‘poe-table’ 
from the French word meaning ‘to 
drink’ 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
51
Installation requirements for 
domestic cisterns 
Cisterns that are installed in roof 
spaces and filled with water create 
stress on the roof timbers and joists. 
Water is heavy. At 4oC, 1 litre of water 
= 1kg. When this is multiplied by the 
average cistern water capacity of say 
230litres, it has the mass of almost ¼ 
of a metric tonne. Good practice 
dictates that, wherever possible, 
cisterns should be positioned over a 
load bearing, supporting wall, as 
shown left. 
 
Many modern properties do not 
have internal supporting walls 
and if this is the case then a 
suitable platform (often called a 
stillage) must be constructed to 
spread the load across the roof 
trusses. The platform should be 
covered 
in 
marine 
grade 
plywood 
or 
tongued 
and 
grooved boarding at least 21mm 
thickness. The platform should 
be at least 50mm larger than the 
base area of the cisterns on all 
sides 
 
Clearance for access and maintenance of cisterns 
The minimum access requirement for cisterns of less than 1000 litres for cleaning, maintenance and 
inspection is 350mm. This allows the repair and replacement of float operated valves. 
Inlet requirements for domestic cisterns 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 state that a cistern should be fitted with an adjustable 
float operated valve (FOV) or other no less effective device for controlling the flow of water into the cistern. 
Cistern positioned over a load bearing wall 
Cistern installed on a correctly sized platform or stillage 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
52
For domestic cisterns, this is a 
BS1212 FOV conforming to 
BS1212 Part 1 (fitted with 
suitable backflow protection) 
and BS1212 part 2 as these allow 
the adjustment of the water 
level within the cistern. BS1212 
covers FOVs up to 54mm 
diameter. FOV that exceed this 
size must be authorised by the 
local water undertaker. 
Outlet requirements 
for domestic cisterns 
The drawing left indicates 
the position of the outlets 
(cold 
feed 
pipe, 
cold 
distribution 
pipe) 
for 
domestic cisterns. The cold 
distribution pipe must be 
the lowest connection on 
the cistern to ensure that 
water to the hot water 
storage vessel (cylinder) 
via the cold feed pipe is the 
first to cease flow in the event of mains cold water failure. This prevents possible scalding when showers and 
mixing valves are used. The cold distribution pipe should be taken from the bottom of the cistern to prevent 
sediment build up and possible legionella growth. An alternative position for the cold distribution pipe 
(25mm below the cold feed pipe and on the opposite side of the cistern) is shown in the drawing. 
Correctly positioned cistern pipework 
connections helps to prevent water 
stagnation 
by 
ensuring 
that 
water 
circulation takes place within the cistern 
when the outlets are used. If there is only 
one outlet connection, such as a cold feed 
to a hot water storage vessel, then this 
MUST be fitted on the opposite side to the 
FOV. 
Access requirements for cisterns 
Outlet positions for cisterns 
How water flows through a cistern to prevent stagnation 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
53
If two outlets are fitted, then the highest outlet, usually the cold feed to the hot water system, should be 
fitted on the opposite side to the inlet connection (FOV). 
AC2.9 State the methods of linking cold water storage cisterns for use in 
dwellings 
Providing large quantities of water can be problematic where there are space restrictions such as in roof 
spaces. In these circumstances, cisterns will need to be linked. However, there are four points that must be 
remembered if stagnation and possible legionella bacteria growth are to be avoided: 
1. The cistern capacities must be small enough to encourage rapid turnover of water but large enough 
to prevent water running out. 
2. The cisterns must have Inlet and outlet connections at opposite ends. 
3. They should be regularly inspected and cleaned to prevent sediment build-up. 
4. Cisterns should be dressed and installed in accordance with the Water Supply (water fittings) 
Regulations. 
Cisterns can either be interconnected in two ways: 
 
In series 
 
In parallel 
Cisterns connected in series 
Take a look at the 
drawing 
left. 
This 
shows how cisterns 
should be connected in 
series. 
Here, 
the 
cisterns are connected 
at the ends in two 
places – the bottom of 
the cistern and the middle of the cistern. This allows water movement across the whole body of water and 
not just at the bottom. The primary connection i.e. the connection that gets the most usage usually the cold 
feed to the hot water storage vessel, should be connected on the opposite cistern to where the FOV is fitted, 
this encourages water movement and prevents stagnation of water. The secondary connection i.e. the cold 
distribution pipework, can be made on the cistern with the FOV if required. The overflow/warning pipe must 
be connected onto the cistern with the FOV. 
Most importantly, both cisterns MUST be of the same size and capacity and no more than two cisterns should 
be connected in series. 
Cisterns connected in series 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
54
Cisterns connected in parallel 
The drawing left shows 
four cisterns connected 
in parallel. In other 
words, 
they 
are 
connected end-on. This 
method is usually used 
where two or more 
cisterns 
are 
to 
be 
interconnected. 
With 
this 
method, 
every 
cistern has an FOV and 
a service valve and, 
since where a FOV is 
fitted, there should be an overflow, every cistern is fitted with its own independent overflow to outside the 
property. Overflows must not be connected together and must be placed in a visible and conspicuous 
position.  
The cisterns must be arranged so that: 
a. All of the cisterns are connected in the middle and at the bottom to allow good flow-through of 
water. 
b. Cistern capacities should be kept to a minimum to ensure a frequent and rapid turn-over of water to 
prevent stagnation. 
c. Inlets and outlets are kept on opposite ends/sides of the cistern. 
d. All cisterns should have independent gate valves on each outlet pipe. 
e. Two cisterns can be isolated at any time for cleaning and maintenance. While two cisterns are out of 
commission, two cisterns will be working. This allows the cold water to remain in operation at all 
times. 
f. By using delayed action float operated valves, stratification of the water is prevented. 
The materials used for fabricating domestic cisterns 
For domestic properties, cisterns are usually manufactured from two types of plastic: 
 
Polyethylene 
 
Polypropylene 
These two materials are chosen because they have a light weight construction, strength, good resistance to 
bacterial growth and corrosion and have the flexibility to be able to be passed through roof space openings. 
Cisterns must be properly supported over their entire base area. 
Cisterns connected in parallel 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
55
 
 
 
A domestic one-piece cistern  
A circular cistern 
A rectangular cistern 
Holes to allow the fitting of tank connectors must be cut using a hole saw. A 17mm hole saw will allow a ½“ 
x 15mm tank connector to be fitted and a 25mm hole saw will suffice for a ¾“ x 22mm tank connector. The 
following points should be noted when dressing a cistern: 
 
Heated pipework must not be used to make holes in plastic cisterns as this alters the structure of the 
plastic making it brittle and susceptible to cracking and leakage. 
 
No jointing linseed oil-type compound must be used when making connections to plastic cisterns as 
these tend to break down the plastic making it susceptible to cracking. The linseed oil base also 
provides a breeding culture for legionella pneumophila bacteria. 
 
Joints to the cistern can be made with plastic ‘poly’ washers. 
 
Do not overtighten the tank connectors as this may cause the cistern to split. 
Warning and overflow pipes 
Cisterns up to 1000 litres are fitted with overflow pipes, while cisterns 1000 litres+ are fitted with warning 
and overflow pipes: 
 
A warning pipe is a small overflow pipe that is intended to act as an early warning sign that the FOV 
has malfunctioned and that the overflow is about to start running. This is important because overflow 
pipes are generally one size larger than the inlet water pipe and FOV and, once they begin to run, 
they can very quickly waste vast amounts of water. Warning pipes are not required on cisterns of 
less than 1000 litres capacity. 
 
An overflow pipe, sited below the shut off level of the FOV, acts as a sign that the FOV has failed to 
shut off. It has two vital jobs: 
o To show that a FOV has malfunctioned and requires repair. 
o To divert water away from the building that would otherwise leak into the property and 
cause water damage due to FOV malfunction. 
Overflow pipes should be sized correctly so that in the event of total FOV failure and the water running at 
full bore into the cistern, the FOV can never become submerged in water as this could lead to a backflow 
situation and possible cold water contamination.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
56
Domestic cisterns of less than 1000 litres 
capacity 
Where domestic cisterns are concerned, it is 
general practice to make the overflow one size 
larger than the water inlet, so if a 15mm FOV 
is installed, the overflow would be 22mm etc. 
The overflow should have a continuous fall 
along its entire length and should terminate 
outside the dwelling in a visible and 
conspicuous position e.g. over an outside 
door. It should contain a mesh or screen to 
prevent the ingress of vermin and insects and 
should contain a dip pipe to prevent freezing 
air blowing across the surface of the water. 
The overflow should be positioned so that it is 
25mm below the FOV and 25mm above the shut-off water level. 
Cistern Capacities 
The capacities of cold water cisterns will depend upon the system the cistern is supplying. As such, BSEN806 
and BS8558 do not state a minimum or maximum capacity. These documents recommend that cold water 
storage requirements are calculated. Calculations are based upon: 
a) The size of the dwelling 
b) The number of outlets served 
c) The number of occupants. 
 
 
 
 
The overflow requirements for cisterns less than 1000litres 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
57
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
58
Learning Outcome 3 
Know the site preparation techniques for 
cold water systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
59
There are five Assessment criteria in Learning Outcome 3: 
AC3.1. 
Identify the sources of information required when undertaking work on cold water systems 
AC3.2. 
Identify the preparatory work required to be undertaken to the building fabric in order to 
install, decommission or maintain cold water systems and components. 
AC3.3. 
Identify the protection measures required to the building fabric or customer property, during 
and on completion of work on cold water systems and components. 
AC3.4. 
Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to complete work on cold water systems 
AC3.5. 
State the range of hand and power tools required to complete work on cold water systems 
and components. 
 
AC3.1 Identify the sources of information required when undertaking 
work on cold water systems 
Ensuring water quality in the property 
Under provisions laid down by the Water Industry Act 1991 and then later the Water Act 2003, the UK 
government introduced two pieces of legislation that regulate how plumbing systems are installed and 
maintained in domestic buildings in the UK. These are: 
 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999; and, 
 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
Water supplied by a Water Undertaker 
The supply of wholesome water to the majority of consumers is the responsibility of the UK water authorities. 
They are known as Water Undertaker’s. It is their responsibility to collect, clean, distribute and maintain the 
water supply in such a manner that the water is fit for human consumption under section 67 of the Water 
Industry Act 1991. Their responsibility ends at the external (boundary) stop tap to the property. From here, 
the responsibility rests with the owner of the property or the plumber. 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999 
Prior to 1999, each Water Undertaker had their own rules and bylaws based around the 1986 101 model 
water bylaws issued by the UK government. This created problems because each authority had local 
variations with no common standard. On July 1st 1999, the government issued the Water Supply (Water 
Fittings) Regulations 1999 that standardised working practices across all areas of the United Kingdom. These 
were initially linked to BS6700 and then later to BSEN806: Specification for installations inside buildings 
conveying water for human consumption: PARTS 1 to 5 and BS 8558:2015: Guide to the design, installation, 
testing and maintenance of services supplying water for domestic use within buildings and their curtilages. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
60
Complementary guidance to BS EN 806. 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations were written under section 74 of the Water Industry Act 1991 
to ensure that the systems of plumbing installed in properties prevent the following: 
 
Contamination of water 
 
Wastage of water 
 
Misuse of water 
 
Undue consumption of water 
 
Erroneous metering of water 
It should be remembered that these regulations only apply to water that has been supplied by a Water 
Undertaker and do not apply to water supplied from a private source. 
A free copy of the regulations can be downloaded from www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si1999/19991148.htm. 
Private water supplies 
Private water supplies are water supplies that are not supplied by the Water Undertaker and, as such, are 
solely the responsibility of the owner and user of the water supply. This could be a single dwelling or multiple 
properties supplied from the same source. Private water may be supplied from a borehole, stream, river, 
spring or well. 
The quality of the water supplied from private sources can be variable. Some sources offer good quality water 
where little treatment is necessary but others present a risk to health due to the water quality and require 
careful monitoring. 
The responsibility for regulating private water supplies rests with the local authority but it is also vital that 
owners are aware of the potential risks. Owners should: 
 
Ensure that the source is protected against contamination from grazing animals and any 
contamination that may come from upstream. 
 
Install and maintain sufficient equipment that will maintain a satisfactory water quality. 
 
Ensure that the water is adequately disinfected before use. 
 
Ensure that any stored water is stored in such a way as to prevent contamination after storage but 
before use. 
 
Ensure that the water quality is tested regularly. 
The Private Water Supply Regulations 2016 
These ensure that water supplied from a private source are safe for people to drink. Changes from the 2009 
Private Water Supply Regulations now classify private water supplies into four categories: 
 
Large supplies serving commercial and public buildings such as hotels, restaurants, nursing homes, 
bed and breakfast establishments, village halls and large domestic users using more than 10m3/day 
or supplying more than 50 people per day on average. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
61
 
Small supplies serving two or more domestic properties but with no commercial usage, using less 
than 10m3/day or fewer than 50 people per day on average. 
 
Single property supplies where water is supplied for domestic purposes only. 
 
Private distribution networks. The scope of the regulations now includes networks where the water 
is distributed further beyond the responsibility of the licenced water company. These include such 
properties as caravan parks, industrial estates or country estates or where water is distributed by 
tanker.  
The Role of local authorities in regulating private water supplies 
The local authority acts as the regulator for the private water supplies in their area and have statutory duties 
under the PWSR. Local Authorities must: 
 
Conduct a risk assessment on every property with private water supply in their area. 
 
Undertake monitoring in order to determine compliance with water standards. 
 
Provide monitoring data to the Drinking Water Inspectorate (DWI). 
The local authority has enforcement powers to ensure that a water supply is improved, should it fall below 
the minimum cleanliness requirement, by the relevant person(s) who control that supply.  
The Role of Drinking Water Inspectorate (DWI) in regulating private water supplies 
The DWI plays a statutory role in acting as technical advisors to Local Authorities in relation to the 
implementation of the Private Water Supplies Regulations 2016. This includes technical and scientific 
assistance on all aspects of drinking water quality on both public and private supplies. 
The Water Supply (water quality) Regulations 2016 
In the United Kingdom, all water, whether from a private source or supplied by a water undertaker, must 
comply with the EU Drinking Water Directive 98/83/EC. It is the duty of every member state to implement 
rules that reflect the directive, which must meet the minimum European Legislation. This legislation reflects 
the recommendations of the World Health Organisation (WHO). 
The law requires that all drinking water is wholesome and clean. It sets down minimum acceptable 
concentrations of potential contaminants. It states that: 
"Water is free from any micro-organisms and parasites and from any substances which, in numbers 
or concentrations, constitute a potential danger to human health." 
More information can be found at http://www.water.org.uk/  
Building Regulations Approved Document G - Sanitation, hot water safety and 
water efﬁciency 2010 – 2015 edition with 2016 amendments 
In 2010 the Building Regulations were updated and amended. Approved Document G - Sanitation, hot water 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
62
safety and water efﬁciency was extended to bring new areas under the control of the Building Regulations, 
most notably, the installation of systems and water efficiency. 
The amended Regulation Document G is broken down into 7 parts:  
G1 – Cold Water Supply  
Requirements on supply of wholesome water for drinking, washing or food preparation. G1 also deals with 
the provision of water of a suitable quality to sanitary appliances fitted with a flushing device.  
G2 – Water Efficiency  
G2 and Regulations 17K and 20E of the Building Regulations 2000 set out new requirements on water 
efficiency in NEW dwellings.  
G3 – Hot Water Supply and Systems  
Enhanced and amended provisions on hot water supply and safety, applying safety provisions to all types of 
hot water systems and a new provision on scalding prevention.  
G4 – Sanitary Conveniences and Washing Facilities  
Requirements for sanitary conveniences and hand washing facilities.  
G5 – Bathrooms  
Requirements for bathrooms, which apply to dwellings and to buildings containing one or more rooms for 
residential purposes.  
G6 – Kitchens and Food Preparation Areas  
New provision requiring sinks to be provided in areas where food is prepared.  
Water efficiency Calculator for new dwellings 
Sets out the methodology required to allow the calculation of water consumption in dwellings, limiting water 
use to 125 litres (optional 110 litres) per person per day 
Water efficiency Calculator for new dwellings 
The requirement under G2 of the Building Regulations states that: 
G2. Reasonable provision must be made by the installation of fittings and fixed appliances that use 
water efficiently for the prevention of undue consumption of water. 
Water efficiency of new dwellings (Regulation 17K) 
36. 
(1) The potential consumption of wholesome water by persons occupying a new dwelling must not 
exceed the requirement in paragraph (2). 
(2) The requirement referred to in paragraph (1) is either— 
a) 125 litres per person per day; or 
b) in a case to which paragraph (3) applies, the optional requirement of 110 litres per person 
per day, as measured in either case in accordance with a methodology approved by the 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
63
Secretary of State. 
Wholesome water consumption calculation (Regulation 20E) 
37.—(1) Where regulation 36 applies, the person carrying out the work must give the local authority a notice 
which speciﬁes— 
a) which of the requirements in regulation 36(2)(a) or (b) applies to the dwelling; and 
b) the potential consumption of wholesome water per person per day in relation to the 
completed dwelling. 
Requirement G2 applies only when a dwelling is— 
a) erected; or 
b) formed by a material change of use of a building  
The methodology of the Water efficiency Calculator 
The water efficiency calculator uses the water consumption figures that are provided from manufacturers 
data. These must be obtained before the assessment can be attempted. The figures are then entered into a 
series of tables to determine the water consumption per person. Water consumption/flowrate figures are 
required for: 
 
WCs 
 
Washing machines 
 
Taps 
 
Showers 
 
Baths 
 
Water softeners 
 
Dishwashers 
 
External taps. 
Bidets are exempt from the calculation due to their minimal water consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
64
Example of the Water efficiency calculator  
Installation type 
Unit of measure 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Capacity/ﬂow rate 
Use factor 
Fixed use 
(litres/person/day) 
Litres/person/day 
= [(1) x (2)] + (3) 
WC (single ﬂush) 
Flush volume (litres) 
4.42 
0.00 
WC (dual ﬂush) 
Full ﬂush volume (litres) 
1.46 
0.00 
Part ﬂush volume (litres) 
2.96 
0.00 
WCs (multiple ﬁttings) 
Average effective ﬂushing 
volume (litres) 
4.42 
0.00 
Taps (excluding kitchen/utility room taps) 
Flow rate (litres/minute) 
1.58 
1.58 
Bath (where shower also present) 
Capacity to overﬂow (litres) 
0.11 
0.00 
Shower (where bath also present) 
Flow rate (litres/minute) 
4.37 
0.00 
Bath only 
Capacity to overﬂow (litres) 
0.50 
0.00 
Shower only 
Flow rate (litres/minute) 
5.60 
0.00 
Kitchen/utility room sink taps 
Flow rate (litres/minute) 
0.44 
10.36 
Washing machine 
Litres/kg dry load 
2.1 
0.00 
Dishwasher 
Litres/place setting 
3.6 
0.00 
Water softener 
Litres/person/day 
1.00 
0.00 
(5) Total calculated use = (Sum column 4) 
(6) Contribution from greywater (litres/person/day) from Table 4.6 Appendix A, App Doc G 
(7) Contribution from rainwater (litres/person/day) from Table 5.5 Appendix A, App Doc G 
(8) Normalisation factor 
0.91 
(9) Total water consumption = [ (5) – (6) – (7) ] = (8) 
 
(10) External water use 
5.0 
(11) Total water consumption = (9) + (10) (litres/person/day) 
 
British Standards BSEN806:2012 Pts 1 to 5  
BSEN806: Specifications for installations inside buildings conveying water for human consumption 
 BSEN806 – 1: 2000. General. This document specifies potable water installation requirements and 
gives recommendations on the following aspects of hot and cold water installations: 
o Design  
o Installation  
o Alteration  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
65
o Testing  
o 
Maintenance and operation. 
o Part 1 of BSEN806 also covers the pipework installation from the point of entry when the 
property is supplied with water from a private water source. 
 BSEN806 – 2: 2005. Design. This document provides technical information so that the following 
points may be achieved from the design and installation: 
o Appropriate pressures and flowrates 
o Water quality at the tap is not contaminated or affected by the location or environment 
o The system avoids wastage of water and leakage. 
o The system is efficient, convenient, reliable and safe.  
o The system has a reasonable working life span. 
 BSEN806 – 3: 2006. Pipe sizing. Simplified method. This document describes the simplified method 
for pipesizing drinking water standard installations as defined in section 4.2. However, the document 
does not engage in pipesizing for domestic firefighting systems. 
 BS EN 806 – 4:2010. Installation. Specifies the requirements of water installations within buildings 
and gives recommendations for their correct installation. It also covers pipework outside buildings 
but within the premises as outlined in BSEN806 – 1:2000. It applies to new, altered and repaired 
installations.  
 BS EN 806 – 5:2012. Operation and maintenance. This document takes the form of a practice 
specification. It specifies the requirements for the correct operation and maintenance of potable 
water supply installations within buildings and for pipework outside building but within premises in 
accordance with BSEN806 – 1:2000. 
BSEN806 Parts 1 to 5 completely supersede BS6700 in all aspects of hot and cold water supply. BS 8558: 2015 
Guide to the design, installation, testing and maintenance of services supplying water for domestic use 
within buildings and their curtilages - complementary guidance to BS EN 806, now becomes the lead 
document for potable water supply in premises. 
BS 8558: 2015 Guide to the design, installation, testing and maintenance of services 
supplying water for domestic use within buildings and their curtilages - 
complementary guidance to BS EN 806 
BS8558 was developed primarily to provide complimentary guidance to BSEN806 Pts 1 to 5. Together, this 
complete suite of British Standards provides recommendations into best practice for the design, installation, 
testing, operation, maintenance and alteration of hot and cold water systems for domestic buildings. 
BS8558 bridges the gap between BSEN806 and its predecessor BS6700 and provides UK guidelines for, not 
just plumbers, but the water supply industry as a whole.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
66
PD 855468:2015 Guide to the flushing and disinfection of services supplying water 
for domestic use within buildings and their curtilages 
Flushing and disinfection of systems used to be part of BS8558:2011. However, the latest version of 
BS8558:2015 excludes flushing and disinfection. Instead, flushing and disinfection of systems is now a 
separate document PD 855468:2015. 
PD 855468:2015 provides guidance on the cleaning, flushing and disinfection of cold water systems to control 
microbiological growth and the removal of debris. This includes guidance on: 
 
Deployment of the correct tools and personnel 
 
The use of the correct disinfectants 
 
How to respond if a microbiological problem is identified 
 
Keeping records of cleaning and disinfection 
This new document applies to systems supplying water to domestic purposes within buildings and their 
curtilages, and includes water used in food preparation. 
Manufacturer technical instructions 
The manufacturer’s instructions are probably the most important document to read and consult when 
installing, servicing and maintaining appliances, components and equipment, because they instruct us on the 
best methods to use whilst keeping to current legislation and regulations. In some cases, it may appear that 
these instructions contradict the regulations. This occurs because regulations and codes of practice are only 
updated periodically, whereas manufacturers are constantly reviewing and updating their literature in line 
with modifications and current good practice. Where a conflict exists, manufacturer’s literature should 
always be followed. If not: 
 
The warranty of the equipment may be void. 
 
Regulations may be inadvertently broken 
 
The installation may be dangerous. 
AC3.2 Identify the preparatory work required to be undertaken to the 
building fabric in order to install, decommission or maintain cold 
water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.1: Define the 
typical range of activities to be carried out when working on plumbing and heating systems and AC3.8: State 
the work methods for preparing building construction features for installation work 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
67
AC3.3 Identify the protection measures required to the building 
fabric or customer property, during and on completion of work on 
cold water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 3, AC3.4: Identify 
how to protect the building fabric or customer property before the work commences. 
AC3.4 Identify the pipework materials and fittings required to 
complete work on cold water systems 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 2, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC2.1. 
Identify pipe work materials used in domestic plumbing and heating work 
AC2.2. 
State the range of typical pipe material sizes available for use in dwellings. 
AC2.3. 
State the acceptable methods of jointing new hot and cold water pipe to existing lead pipe 
work. 
AC2.4. 
Identify the general fitting types used in dwellings. 
AC3.5 State the range of hand and power tools required to complete 
work on cold water systems and components 
This topic was covered in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, Learning Outcome 1, in the following 
Assessment Criteria: 
AC1.1. 
State the purpose of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and heating 
systems. 
AC1.2. 
Identify the different types of hand and power tools used to carry out work on plumbing and 
heating systems. 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
68
Learning Outcome 5 
Know the installation requirements of 
cold water systems and components 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
69
There are Ten Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 5: 
 
AC5.1. 
State how to take readings of the incoming water supply pressure and flow rate. 
AC5.2. 
Identify suitable methods of connecting cold water system supply pipework to incoming 
service pipework 
AC5.3. 
State the positioning requirements of components in cold water systems 
AC5.4. 
Identify how to measure, mark out and drill plastic storage cisterns to receive pipework 
connections. 
AC5.5. 
Identify how to make pipework connections to storage cisterns. 
AC5.6. 
State the positioning and fixing requirements for cold water system pipework and 
components 
AC5.7. 
State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the cold water system pipework and 
the industry recommended spacings 
AC5.8. 
Identify how to position, fix and connect new cold water pipework to outlets 
AC5.9. 
Identify suitable methods of making new pipe work connections into existing cold water 
system pipework 
AC5.10. Identify the insulation requirements of cold water system components 
AC5.1 State how to take readings of the incoming water supply 
pressure and flow rate 
With modern appliances and hot water systems, it may be necessary to 
check the water pressure and flow rate of the system first before you 
install them. This is to ensure that the water supply is adequate and that, 
once installed, the appliance will conform to the manufacturers 
performance data. 
Taking water pressure and flow rate is easy providing you have the 
correct equipment. A pressure and flow rate kit, like the one shown in 
the photograph, is easily attached to existing taps inside or outside the 
dwelling and gives accurate readings of both static and dynamic 
pressures and system flow rate.  
For a true reading of the pressure and flow rate, the gauge needs to be 
used on the tap that is nearest to the incoming supply stop valve. 
A pressure gauge can be used to take accurate pressure readings from 
existing taps. These simply attach to taps using a rubber hose-type fitting. 
A chain wrapped over the tap keeps the gauge in place while the reading 
is being taken. 
 
A pressure and flow rate kit 
A bourdon pressure gauge 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
70
Flow rate can be taken using a weir cup. However, often the flow rate is 
too much to get an accurate reading with a weir cup, so caution must be 
exercised. 
Other ways of taking flow rate readings 
A very simple method of taking flow rate requires the use of a pyrex 
measuring jug: 
1. 
Turn the tap on full 
2. 
Using a stopwatch (there’s usually one on every mobile phone), 
place the jug under the running water and time it for 6 seconds. 
3. After 6 seconds, remove the jug and check the water content of the jug. 
4. Multiply the amount of water by 10. This will give the flow rate in minutes. For example: 
700 millilitres was registered after 6 seconds, so: 
700𝑚𝑙 𝑜𝑟 0.7 𝑙 𝑥 10 =  7𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑠/𝑚𝑖𝑛 
if the flow rate is required in l/s, then simply divide the answer by 60: 
7 ÷  60 =  0.116 𝑙/𝑠 
Less than 10 litres per minute is considered to be low flow rate. 10 to 15 l/m is acceptable and anything over 
15l/m is considered to be good. 
AC5.2 Identify suitable methods of connecting cold water system 
pipework to incoming service pipework 
Fittings for Medium Density Polyethylene 
incoming cold water main 
The Philmac Universal Transition Coupling 
This fitting is designed to connect many different types of 
pipe together using a common fitting body and a selection 
of different inserts to accommodate the different types of 
pipe available. Push fit versions are also available. 
 
Brass Compression fittings 
These are specifically made to fit the diameters of MDPE 
pipe. The method of installation is the same as the 
compression fittings mentioned earlier but with one 
 
Using a weir jug/cup 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
71
exception. The pipe requires a copper or nylon insert to be 
placed inside the pipe to strengthen the pipe wall. Because 
these are used on underground water supplies, they are 
made from corrosion resistant brass or gunmetal.  
Fittings for Copper incoming cold water 
main 
Type B Manipulative Compression fittings 
These fittings are called manipulative because the end of 
the copper tube must be worked or manipulated before a 
joint can be made. The end of the copper must be flared out 
with a swaging tool. The fitting is comprised of the fitting 
body, the compression nut, a compensating ring and an 
adapter to allow the copper to make a leak free joint with 
the copper tube. 
Generally, these fittings are used on R220 grade soft copper 
tubes for underground water service pipes. 
Capillary fittings 
 
There are two types of capillary fitting. Those that contain 
solder, called ‘solder ring’ fittings and thos where the solder 
has to be applied during the jointing process, clled ‘end 
feed.’ These were discussed earlier in Unit D/602/2682 - 
Understand and carry out site preparation, and pipework 
fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating 
systems, LO2, AC2.5. 
 
Lead 
Leadlocks are the most common fitting used to convert lead 
pipe to copper/polybutylene pipe. Connection is made via a 
rubber ‘O’ ring being compressed against the lead pipe. 
These were discussed in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and 
carry out site preparation, and pipework fabrication 
techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, 
LO2, AC2.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A leadlock fitting 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
72
AC5.3 State the positioning requirements of components in cold 
water systems 
Supply stop valves 
Stop valves must be located as near to the point where the water supply enters the building as possible. They 
must be easily accessible for isolation during repairs and maintenance and should be kept in good working 
order. A drain valve must be installed immediately above the supply stop valve. 
Drain valves 
Drain valves must be fitted at low points in hot and cold water installations to facilitate complete draining of 
the water to prevent stagnation and contamination. They must not be located in positions where they could 
become submerged in water and must not be fitted below ground.  
Water meters 
Water meters must be installed before any draw-offs, appliances or equipment so that the whole of the 
installation is metered. They should, if possible, be located above ground with easy access. It is possible to 
install them below ground in special meter housings. They must be located as near to the point where the 
water supply enters the building as possible. 
Water conditioning devices 
Water softeners should be installed as close to the cold water rising main as possible but it should be 
remembered that drinking water points and/or an outside tap should be installed before the water softener 
connection. 
Service valves 
The Water Regulations state that a service valve should be fitted as close to every float operated valve as is 
practicable. It is not a requirement to install service valves at every tap or appliance. However, installing 
service valves to isolate appliances and zones is considered good practice. 
Backflow prevention devices 
Backflow prevention devices are positioned according to the risk of contamination to the mains water supply. 
There are two methods: 
 Point of use protection – where the backflow prevention device is installed close to the appliance or 
outlet, such as an outside tap or electric shower, or; 
 Zone protection – where the back flow prevention device is installed close to the branch of a zone or 
area to protect the water supply from that zone or area. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
73
AC5.4 Identify how to measure, mark out and drill plastic storage 
cisterns to receive pipework connections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marking and drilling cold water cisterns is a fairly simple task. The following points should be remembered: 
 
The FOV should be positioned 50mm down from the spill over level (top) of the cistern. It should be 
positioned to give easy access to the FOV 
 
The overflow should be positioned on the opposite side to the FOV and 25mm down from the FOV 
centre line. 
 
The position of the hot and cold distribution connections should be considered carefully. The 
connection that has the most use i.e. the hot water cold feed connection, should be position on the 
opposite side to the FOV. This is to encourage water movement and prevent stagnation. 
 
If there is to be only one distribution connection, this should be positioned on the opposite side to 
the FOV, 25mm up from the base of the cistern. 
 
If there are to be two connections – a cold distribution connection and a hot water cold feed 
connection – the hot water cold feed connection must be 25mm higher than the cold distribution 
connection. This is to ensure that, in the event of mains cold water failure, the hot water supply runs 
out first. This is a safety feature to prevent scalding. 
 
If a hot water vent is to be placed inside the cistern, the vent must be positioned so that it does not 
interfere with the operation of the FOV. 
Once the cistern has been marked (with a pencil), the correct size holes can be drilled with a hole saw. Spade 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
74
bits should not be used as these tend to split the cistern. NEVER use the heated end of a piece of copper tube 
to burn the holes through as this alters the molecular structure of the plastic cistern and encourages the 
cistern wall to crack around the holes, causing leaks. 
Once the holes have been drilled, the cistern should be cleaned inside to remove any debris left by the hole 
saws. The debris can work its way through the system causing problems with taps and valves. 
AC5.5 Identify how to make pipework connections to storage cisterns 
Connections to cisterns are made using tank 
connectors, such as the one shown in the 
photograph below. The joint should be made 
only using plastic washers, known as poly-
washers of the correct size placed outside and 
inside the cistern. Jointing compounds and 
pastes, especially those containing linseed oils, 
must not be used as these can alter the molecular 
structure of the plastic cistern. PTFE tape can be 
used if required. 
Once the tap connector has been placed into position, do not overtighten it as this can cause the cistern to 
split. If using capillary-type tank connectors, DO NOT solder the fitting in position as this will melt that cistern. 
AC5.6 State the positioning and fixing requirements for cold water 
system pipework and components 
Pipework installed under suspended timber floors, in solid floors and embedded in 
walls  
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations 1999, Schedule 2, Regulation 7 states that: 
7 – (1) No water fitting shall be embedded in any wall or solid floor.  
(2) No fitting which is designed to be operated or maintained, whether manually or electronically, 
or which consists of a joint, shall be a concealed water fitting.  
(3) Any concealed water fitting or mechanical backflow prevention device, not being a terminal 
fitting, shall be made of gunmetal, or another material resistant to dezincification.  
(4) Any water fitting laid below ground level shall have a depth of cover sufficient to prevent water 
freezing in the fitting.  
(5) In this paragraph ‘concealed water fitting’ means a water fitting which –  
A tank connector and poly washer 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
75
a) is installed below ground; 
b) passes through or under any wall, footing or foundation; 
c) is enclosed in any chase or duct; or 
d) is in any other position which is inaccessible or renders access difficult. 
Obviously, when we install plumbing pipework in dwellings, there are occasions when we have to place pipes 
under timber floors and in studded timber walls. It is simply not possible to install all of the pipework on the 
surface. The Regulations allow the installation of pipes in walls and under floors provided that we follow the 
guidance given in the WRAS Water Regulations Guide. 
Guidance note G7.1 States that: 
Unless they are located in an internal wall which is not a solid wall, a chase or a duct which may readily 
be exposed or under a suspended floor which may, if necessary be readily removed and replaced or to 
which there is access, water fittings should not be: 
a) located in the cavity of a cavity wall 
b) embedded in any wall or solid floor 
c) installed below a suspended or solid floor at ground level. 
The drawings below illustrate what this statement means: 
Pipes laid under floors 
 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a removable cover in a solid floor 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a 
removable cover in a solid floor 
The enclosure within pipe ducts is 
acceptable providing that leaks would 
become apparent and the section of pipe 
can be exposed by the removal of 
superficial surface finishes such as tiles or 
screed. 
 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with no access 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with no access 
This method is only acceptable when there 
are few joints that are enclosed in the duct 
and the pipe can be withdrawn for 
inspection. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
76
 
Pipe in an insulated ground floor 
Pipe in an insulated ground floor 
Acceptable without the need for thermal 
insulation. Regular clipping to the British 
Standards is required. 
 
Pipe located under a non-insulated ground floor 
Pipe located under a non-insulated ground 
floor 
Access must be at intervals of not more 
than 2m and must be at every joint so that 
the whole length of pipe may be inspected. 
Pipes positioned in walls  
 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a removable cover in an insulated 
cavity wall  
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a 
removable cover in an insulated cavity 
wall  
The enclosure within pipe ducts is 
acceptable providing that leaks would 
become apparent and the section of pipe 
can be exposed by the removal of 
superficial surface finishes such as tiles or 
plaster. Frost protection may be required 
 
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a non-removable cover in an 
insulated cavity wall  
Pipe in a purpose made duct with a non-
removable cover in an insulated cavity 
wall  
This method is only acceptable when 
there are no joints that are enclosed in the 
duct. Frost protection may be required. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
77
 
Pipe in a studded wall 
Pipe in a studded wall 
Generally 
acceptable. 
Compression 
fittings should not be placed in studded 
walls and there should be as few joints as 
possible. 
GENERAL: Always position cold water 
pipes BELOW hot water and central 
heating pipes. This will help prevent 
undue warming of the cold water supply. 
Pipework in areas of the building subject to frost 
Pipework that is installed in vulnerable positions within the dwelling must have insulation protection: 
 
Unheated cellars 
 
Roof spaces 
 
Under ventilated suspended floors 
 
Garages 
 
Outbuildings 
Weight distribution of cisterns and heavy components 
By placing components such as cisterns on platforms that have a larger surface area, it distributes the load 
and places less stress on the building structure. Take a look at the example below: 
A plumber is installing a  cistern measuring 1m x 1.1m x 0.9m in a roof space. The cistern has a volume of 
0.99m3. 
𝟏𝒎 𝒙 𝟏. 𝟏𝒎 𝒙 𝟎. 𝟗𝒎 =  𝟎. 𝟗𝟗𝒎𝟑 
To convert this into litres capacity: 
𝟎. 𝟗𝟗 𝒙 𝟏𝟎𝟎𝟎 =  𝟗𝟗𝟎𝒍𝒊𝒕𝒓𝒆𝒔 
Since 1 litre of water weighs 1kg @ 4oC, then 990litres = 990kg 
So, the cistern has a mass 990kg. But what is the weight of the cistern on the roof trusses? Weight is 
measured in Newtons, so we must first convert the kg to N 
𝑲𝒈 𝒙 𝟗. 𝟖𝟏 =  𝑵 
So: 
𝟗𝟗𝟎 𝒙 𝟗. 𝟖𝟏 =  𝟗𝟕𝟏𝟏. 𝟗 𝑵 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
78
Therefore, the cistern has a force of 9711.9 N 
The formula for finding the pressure exerted is:  
Pressure = 𝑭𝒐𝒓𝒄𝒆 ÷  𝑨 𝒓𝒆𝒂= 𝑷𝒓𝒆𝒔𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆 
Area of the bottom of the cistern: 
𝟏𝒎 𝒙 𝟏. 𝟏𝒎= 𝟏. 𝟏𝒎𝟐 
𝟗𝟕𝟏𝟏. 𝟗 ÷  𝟏. 𝟏=  𝟖𝟖𝟐𝟗𝑵 𝒑𝒓𝒆𝒔𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆 
But what if the area of the cistern was enlarged by placing on a platform that covers a greater surface area?  
The plumber decides to build a 1.5m x 1.5m platform to stand the cistern on. 
𝟏. 𝟓𝒎 𝒙 𝟏. 𝟓𝒎 =  𝟐. 𝟐𝟓𝒎𝟐 
𝟗𝟕𝟏𝟏. 𝟗 ÷ 𝟐. 𝟐𝟓= 𝟒𝟑𝟏𝟔. 𝟒𝑵  
Therefore, by increasing the surface area, the weight of the cistern on the trusses is less than half of what it 
was. This puts less strain on the roof structure. 
AC5.7 State how to select clips and brackets appropriate to the cold 
water system pipework and the industry recommended spacings 
The selection and installation of pipe clips was covered in detail in Unit D/602/2682 - Understand and carry 
out site preparation, and pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems, 
LO5, AC5.1 State how to measure and mark out for fixings to pipework and plumbing and heating 
components. 
AC5.8 Identify how to position, fix and connect new cold water 
pipework to outlets 
As with all appliances, there is often more than one way to connect them to the water system, hot or cold. 
In many instances, the tap will dictate how the connection is made. 
Bath taps or shower mixer 
valves, Washbasin taps and Sink 
taps 
In most instances, the type of tap installed will dictate the connection 
made. Bath taps usually require tap connectors, even if a mixer-type tap 
is installed. Washbasin and kitchen sink taps also use tap connectors, 
unless the tap is a monobloc mixer-type. Monobloc taps have 10mm or 
15mm tails for connection with standard copper fittings. Occasionally, 
the connection may be by a flexi-connector with a compression 
connection to connect to the pipework. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
79
Combination boiler 
Combination boilers use manufacturers compression connections to a 
purpose-designed jig. The manufacturer’s instructions must always be 
followed when connecting these appliances as most require that copper 
tube is used and not plastic pressure pipe. 
WC flushing cistern 
WCs usually require tap connectors to the float operated valve. 
However, flexi-connectors may also be used. In all instances, an isolation 
valve must also be fitted. 
Cold water storage cistern. 
A rigid copper tube connection is recommended via a tap connector to 
prevent reverberation and water hammer caused by the float operated 
valve. In all instances, an isolation valve must also be fitted. 
AC5.9 Identify suitable methods of making new pipe work 
connections into existing cold water system pipework 
Existing systems can be very difficult to work on, especially if the pipework is more than 40 years old. Before 
1973, the imperial system of measurement was used in the UK. This meant that all pipe sizes were in inches 
rather than millimetres and in most cases, the sizes were not compatible with the SI system sizes. Over the 
last 100 years, cold water systems have used a variety of materials and each one brings its own unique 
problems when trying to make connections to existing systems. 
Copper 
Copper tube has been around since the 1940’s in one form or another. There are 3 
main types of existing copper tube: 
 
20 thread copper tube – this was thick walled threaded copper tube that used 
brass fittings that screwed on to the pipe in the same way that LCS pipe does 
today. It was called 20 thread simply because the tube and fittings had 20 
threads to the inch. You may still come across this in older properties. Jointing 
is notoriously difficult and requires a special endfeed-type adapter to convert 
it to modern copper tube sizes. 
 
BS659 Copper tube – Introduced in the 1950’s, ‘659 copper tube had a much 
thicker wall than modern copper tube. The jointing techniques were very 
similar to modern copper compression and capillary fittings. Capillary fittings 
were usually made from brass. Imperial sized pipework can be jointed to 
modern sizes provided the correct size adapter is used. These are available 
from most plumbers merchants. 
 
BS2871 Copper tube – There are no problems connecting to BS2871 copper 
tube as all sizes are compatible with BSEN1057. 
Plastic 
Again, there are many types of plastic that have been used for cold water supply over 
the years: 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
80
 
High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) – This was mainly used for below ground 
services that lead from the boundary stop valve to the property. There were 
four grades – A, B, C and D. compression fittings are still available for this pipe. 
Each grade had a different wall thickness, so the correct insert must be used 
when making a joint. 
 
CuPVC (Chlorinated Unplasticised Polyvinyl Chloride) – This was known as 
‘PolyYork’. This pipe system was used in some parts of the UK during the 
1970’s. it used a solvent cement-type jointing system that required much care 
when making the joint. Joints had to be left for 24 before testing could take 
place. It was used for cold water supplies only. It is very brittle and readily 
snaps if mis-handled. Fittings are still available from some plumbing supply 
specialists. 
 
Acorn (polybutylene) – this was the predecessor to Hep2O and Speedfit type 
piping systems and used a very similar type of fitting. Sizes are compatible to 
copper tubes at 15mm, 22mm and 28mm, so Hep20 and Speedfit fittings may 
be used provided a pipe insert is used. Type A compression fittings may also 
be used. 
Lead 
There are still many properties in the UK that have a lead cold water supply and, 
considering the Water Regulations, making joints can be problematic. There are 
occasions when making joints on lead pipes cannot be avoided. Lead to copper joints 
are acceptable providing that we do not reconnect to the lead downstream. Lead – 
copper – lead joints can cause galvanic corrosion to occur, which can cause lead 
contamination at outlets and taps. Leadloks are the most common lead- copper joint 
system but philmac plastic fittings can also be used. It should be remembered, 
however, that the water undertakers suggest that all lead pipework contained within 
a system is removed and replaced with a more suitable medium, such as copper or 
plastic. 
Galvanised steel 
Making a connection to an existing galvanized steel pipework system is extremely 
difficult and may require the use of hand held, portable threading equipment. 
 
AC5.10 Identify the insulation requirements of cold water system 
components 
The Water Supply (water fittings) Regulations states that pipework, fittings and components need to be 
insulated. This is for two reasons: 
a) To stop the water within the system from becoming too warm 
b) To protect the system against freezing in cold weather. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
81
Insulating pipework, fittings and 
components delays the effect of 
warming or freezing. No matter 
how much we insulate, if the 
temperature 
becomes 
cold 
enough, pipes will freeze. The act 
of insulating does not prevent 
the 
adverse 
effects 
of 
temperature, it merely delays 
them. Insulating helps to retain 
the heat already in the system. 
The thicker the insulation, the 
longer the system will retain the 
heat.  
The Water Regulations Guide 
G4.2 states: 
‘All cold water fittings located 
within a building but outside the 
thermal envelope, or those 
outside the building must be 
protected against damage by 
freezing.’ 
Pipework that is installed in vulnerable positions within the dwelling must have insulation protection: 
 
Unheated cellars 
 
Roof spaces 
 
Under ventilated suspended floors 
 
Garages 
 
Outbuildings 
Where pipework is installed in 
roof spaces, the pipework should 
be insulated even if it is placed 
underneath 
the 
fibreglass 
insulation blanket. This is so that 
any heat that passes through the 
ceiling from the room below does 
not unduly heat the water. 
The thickness of the insulation will depend on the size of the pipework and its location. Pipework installed 
outside the dwelling should be insulated with external insulation that is waterproof. 
Typical insulation sizes and thermal properties 
Insulated pipework under roof insulation to prevent undue warming from below 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
82
Cisterns should be insulated with a PVC wrapped fibreglass jacket. Cisterns in roof spaces should have the 
fibreglass roof insulation below them removed. This will allow some heat from below to filter upwards to 
help prevent the cistern from freezing. 
The effectiveness of insulation materials 
Recommended insulation materials are: 
a. Rigid phenolic foam (less than 0.020 W/m2K) 
b. Polisocyanurate foam (0.020 – 0.025 W/m2K) 
c. PVC foam (0.025 – 0.030 W/m2K) 
d. Expanded polystyrene, extruded polystyrene, cross-linked polyethylene foam and expanded nitrile 
rubber (0.030 – 0.035 W/m2K) 
e. Expanded synthetic rubber, cellular glass and standard polyethylene foam (0.035 – 0.040 W/m2K) 
Thermal conductivity of insulation material at 0O  (W/m2K) 
 
0.020 
0.025 
0.030 
0.035 
0.040 
mm 
mm 
mm 
mm 
mm 
mm 
15 
20 (20) 
30 (30) 
25* (45) 
25* (70) 
32* (91) 
22 
15 (9) 
15 (12) 
19 (15) 
19 (19) 
25 (24) 
28 
15 (6) 
15 (8) 
13 (10) 
19 (12) 
22 (14) 
35 
15 (4) 
15 (6) 
9 (7) 
9 (8) 
13 (10) 
42 and over 
15 (3) 
15 (5) 
9 (5) 
9 (5) 
9 (8) 
Insulation thicknesses marked * limit ice formation to 50% after 9,8 and 7 hours respectively. All other 
figures not in brackets limit ice formation to 50% after 12 hours. Insulation thicknesses marked in 
brackets () are those recommended for 12 hour protection from freezing based on an air temperature of 
-6 oC and a water temperature of +7oC 
 
Pipework insulation should conform to BS5422 and be fitted in accordance with BS5970. It should be water 
and moisture proof and resistant to mechanical damage and vermin attack. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
83
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
84
Learning Outcome 7 
Know the service and maintenance 
requirements of cold water systems and 
components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
85
There are four Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 7: 
AC7.1. 
Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job maintenance schedules to establish the 
periodic servicing requirements of cold water system components. 
AC7.2. 
Identify how to carry out routine checks on cold water system components as part of a periodic 
maintenance programme 
AC7.3. 
State the procedures for dealing with defects in cold water components and pipework 
AC7.4. 
Identify the types of information to be provided on a maintenance record for cold water 
systems. 
AC7.1 Identify how to use manufacturer instructions and job 
maintenance schedules to establish the periodic servicing 
requirements of cold water system components 
The maintenance of cold water systems is an important task, which ensures that systems and components 
continue to give good service throughout their working life. The system will require temporary 
decommissioning to allow the maintenance to take place.  
Cold water systems maintenance is usually completed to a set maintenance schedule, often undertaken out-
of-normal working hours if the supply cannot be interrupted during a normal working day. Planned 
maintenance may include: 
 
System inspection and checking for leaks. 
 
Maintenence of Float Operated Valves. 
 
Maintenence of terminal fittings and taps. 
 
Inspection and cleaning of cisterns. 
 
Re-adjustment of water levels in cisterns. 
 
Re-washering of drain valves. 
 
Cleaning of filters and strainers. 
 
Maintenance of water softeners. 
 
Check correct operation of stop valves. 
 
Checking flow rates at outlets 
Where appliance servicing is carried out, the manufacturer’s instructions should be consulted to see if there 
are any special requirements or tasks that need to be performed. Manufacturer’s data usually includes a list 
of replacement parts with part numbers. A record of all repairs and maintenance tasks should be recorded 
on the maintenance schedule, including when and where they were completed and the type and number of 
tests performed. This will provide a record of past problems.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
86
AC7.2 Identify how to carry out routine checks on cold water system 
components as part of a periodic maintenance programme 
Visual inspection of pipework for 
leakage and adequate support 
A visual inspection of any visible pipework should be carried out during 
an annual maintenance to look for: 
 
Any physical signs of leakage, such water around joints, water 
on floors or discolouration of fittings etc. Where pipes are 
concealed, check for damp patches on walls and ceilings as this 
is a good indication that a pipe may have started to leak. 
 
Adequate clipping, such as missing or broken pipe clips and 
brackets, damaged or vandalised pipe work etc. 
Effective operation of terminal 
fittings 
Terminal fittings, such as taps and mixing valves often show signs of 
wear by dripping constantly. A dripping tap could be due a worn 
washer, a worn seat or a combination of both. Taps also show signs of 
leakage through spindles and seals. The most effective way of checking 
a tap is by simply turning it on and off: 
 
Is the tap dripping? 
 
Does turning the tap on cause water to leak through the 
spindle? 
 
Is the tap difficult to turn off? 
 
Are there any signs of dripping elsewhere, such as a mark under 
the outlet of the tap on the appliance? This often shows as a 
blue/green stain on washbasins. 
If the answer to any of these questions is ‘yes’ then the tap washer and 
seating should be checked and repaired as necessary. Spindle leakage 
may mean that the packing gland around the spindle has worn and this 
may need repacking with PTFE tape. 
Effective operation of float operated 
valves 
Float Operated Valves often pass water at night when the pressure rises 
outside the hours of peak demand. Check: 
 
The water level in the cistern where the FOV is fitted. Are there 
any signs of a water line above the present shut-off level? This 
could indicate it may be passing water. 
 
Open a tap and watch the FOV when the water level drops. 
Does the FOV open smoothly? Does it shut off without pipe 
noise or reverberation? 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
87
Effective operation of stop and 
service valves 
See ‘Effective operation of terminal fittings’ above. Since most stop 
valves are based around the same technology as terminal fittings, the 
same methods apply. 
Isolation valves and gate valves should be checked for signs of 
corrosion. To check whether they are working correctly, gently turn 
them off and check to see if they have isolated the appliance or system 
they are serving. If not, they should be replaced. 
Condition of protected cold water 
storage cistern. 
Plastic cold water cisterns should be inspected regularly for signs of 
distortion. Inspect the inside for debris on the bottom of the cistern and 
clean as necessary. Check the base that the cistern is sitting on for signs 
of leakage. Check that the insulation is intact and adequate. 
AC7.3 State the procedures for dealing with defects in cold water 
components and pipework 
Cistern failure 
Cistern failure leads to much damage by flooding. Regular inspections of cistern 
often gives sufficient warning that a problem is developing. However, cisterns 
can suddenly start leaking purely because of the amount of water they hold or 
the way they have been installed. Cisterns can split around the holes made for 
the pipe connections, especially if those holes have been made incorrectly or 
are too big or slightly too small. Galvanised steel cisterns rust and often the 
severity of the rusting is missed during inspections. 
The best way to deal with failures of this sort are: 
 
Isolate the cold water inlet supply to the FOV and place a warning 
notice at the isolation valve that it is not to be turned on. 
 
Open as many taps that are being fed from cistern as possible and 
completely drain the cistern. 
 
Remove and replace the cistern, making sure that it is well supported 
and installed to the Water Regulations and the recommendations of 
the manufacturer. 
Incorrect support to cold 
water system pipework and 
storage cisterns 
Incorrect cistern support creates problems, especially if the cistern is made of 
plastic. Not enough support leads to deformation of the plastic, which causes 
stress on the pipework connections, often leading to leakage. When problems 
of support are found, they should be rectified as soon as possible. Do not try to 
remedy this when the cistern is full. It should be isolated and drained down first 
and any pipework alteration completed to ensure that the problem is 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
88
eliminated. 
Unsupported pipework creates noise and often leads to further damage and 
leakage. This subject is dealt with in the next section. 
Excessive noise in pipework 
systems 
Noise in pipework can be caused by many factors: 
 
Faulty tap washers – these can either squeal or hum when the tap is 
opened. Replacing the washer often cures the problem. 
 
Faulty FOV washers – again these can hum very loudly when water 
passes over them. The noise is amplified by the roof space and the 
pipework. Again, replacement is often the best cure. 
 
Loose pipework – This is not only annoying but can cause further 
damage to pipework and fittings. When pipework bangs when a tap is 
closed, the bang often relates to moving pipework, often around an 
elbow or tee branch. Each bang is the equivalent of twice the incoming 
pressure of the cold water supply. This can often lead to further pipe 
damage and fittings failure. The best way to prevent such noise is to 
locate and secure the pipework. However, if this is not possible, then a 
water hammer arrester can be fitted in the pipework as near to the 
incoming supply stop valve as possible and this may cure the problem. 
 
Excessive noise is also caused by pipework that is too small for the 
amount of outlets it has to supply. Remember! Flowrate + pressure = 
NOISE! 
Leakage of internal cold 
water system pipework and 
fittings 
When dealing with leakage, the first action is to isolate the water and drain 
down the pipework, thereby preventing further damage. The method of repair 
will depend on the type of pipework material. 
Leakage 
from 
below 
ground cold water service 
pipework 
Leakage from below ground pipework often first shows itself as a loss of 
pressure and flowrate at the taps of the property. Leaking pipework of this 
nature not only leads to water loss but can also damage the footings of the 
building. Below ground leakages are notoriously difficult to find and often 
requires the help of the water authority to discover them. In most cases,  a 
below ground leak leads to complete replacement of the supply pipe. 
Remember, if it is the supply pipe that is leaking, it will be the responsibility of 
the building owner, if it the communication pipe, it will be replaced by the 
water authority. 
If the leak can be pinpointed, it will require digging out and the leak repairing. 
MDPE, HDPE and copper pipework can be repaired fairly easily. Lead pipework, 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
89
however, should be completely replaced with new pipework. 
Leakage or ineffective operation of Terminal fittings, Float operated valves and Stop and service 
valves. 
Terminal fittings  
taps are quite easy to repair providing that you follow the procedures set out below: 
The procedure for re-washering a BS1010 tap with a rising spindle 
1. 
Ensure that the water supply is isolated and the pressure relieved by opening the tap. 
2. 
Put the plug into the sink to prevent any dropped small screws and nuts from disappearing down 
the sink waste.  
3. 
Locate the screw which holds the tap head on to the spindle and carefully remove with a 
screwdriver. 
4. 
Carefully remove the tap head. These can often prove difficult to remove especially is the tap has 
not been serviced for a few years, so care must be taken to prevent damage to the appliance. 
5. 
With the head removed, break the joint between the tap head workings and the tap body using an 
adjustable spanner. Use a pair of water pump pliers to counteract the force of the adjustable 
spanner on the head workings. This prevents the whole tap from spinning around. Using a cloth in 
the jaws of the water pump pliers prevents damage to the tap body. 
6. 
Remove the jumper plate and washer from the spindle. If the jumper is a fixed jumper, a little force 
may be needed to free it. 
7. 
Remove the washer from the jumper plate. Some rubber tap washers are held on by a small brass 
nut. Carefully remove the nut and replace the existing rubber washer with a new rubber washer of 
the correct size. When screwing the washer nut back, only screw it hand tight. 
8. 
Remove the packing gland nut and remove the spindle by fully winding in a clock wise direction. It 
can now be taken out and cleaned of any scale build up. 
9. 
Re-grease the spindle only using silicon grease. 
10. Push the spindle back through the packing gland and fully wind until the tap spindle is in the fully 
open position. 
11. Check the packing in the packing gland. Packing glands can often work loose during use, causing the 
tap to leak water through the spindle. Replace the packing with a PTFE grommet if necessary.  
12. Squeeze a small amount of silicon grease into the packing gland before replacing the packing gland 
nut. Do not tighten the nut at this stage. 
13. Re-insert the jumper plate into the spindle. 
14. Check the seat of the tap. The seat is the part where the washer sits to shut off the water. If there 
are any grooves or pits in the seat, it will require re-seating. If the tap requires re-seating, use the 
tap reseating tool with correct size grinding head and reseat as necessary. 
15. Check the fibre sealing washer on the head workings. These create a water tight seal between the 
head working and the tap body. They often break when the tap head is removed. If the fibre sealing 
washer needs replacing, this can be done using PTFE tape. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
90
16. Make sure that tap head workings is in the fully open position and return the head workings into 
the tap body and tighten using the adjustable spanner.  
17. Tighten the packing gland nut. Do not over tighten as this will make the tap hard to turn on. 
18. Replace the tap head but do not secure with the screw at this point. 
19. Turn on the water with the tap open. This will ensure that any debris from reseating will be washed 
out of the tap. 
20. Turn off the tap and check for any drips 
21. Replace the tap head securing screw. 
The procedure for re-washering a BS5412 tap with a non-rising spindle 
1. Ensure that the water supply is isolated and the pressure relieved by opening the tap. 
2. Put the plug into the sink to prevent any dropped small screws and nuts from disappearing down the 
sink waste.  
3. Locate the screw which holds the tap head on to the spindle and carefully remove with a screwdriver. 
4. Carefully remove the tap head. 
5. With the head removed, break the joint between the tap head workings and the tap body using an 
adjustable spanner. Use a pair of water pump pliers to counteract the force of the adjustable spanner 
on the head workings. This prevents the whole tap from spinning around. Using a cloth in the jaws 
of the water pump pliers prevents damage to the tap body. 
6. Fully unwind the spindle clockwise until the hexagonal barrel falls away the head workings. 
7. Carefully remove the rubber washer and replace with the correct size washer. Since there are many 
different sized washers for BS5412 taps, a tap washer kit may be required. 
8. Carefully remove the circlip with circlip pliers and push the spindle downwards. This will  remove the 
spindle from the head workings. 
9. Check and replace the spindle ‘O’ ring seals if required. 
10. Re-grease the spindle with silicon grease, re-insert the spindle into the head workings and replace 
the circlip. 
11. Check the hexagonal barrel for any signs of scale. Depending on how bad it is, this can be cleaned 
with a small, fine file or a cleaning pad.  
12. Re-grease the barrel using silicon grease and carefully re-wind back into the head workings so that 
the tap head is in the fully open position. 
13. Check the tap seating and re-seat using the tap reseating tool if necessary. 
14. Check the rubber ‘O’ ring seal on the tap head workings. Replace if damaged or loose. PTFE tape can 
be used if the correct size ‘O’ ring is not available. 
15. Replace the head workings into the tap body and re-tighten into the tap body. 
16. Replace the tap head but do not secure with the screw at this point. 
17. Turn on the water with the tap open to make sure that any brass shavings from the tap reseating will 
be washed out of the tap. 
18. Turn off the tap and check for any drips 
19. Replace the tap head securing screw. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
91
Maintenance of ceramic disc taps 
Ceramic disc taps can be repaired using a special repair kit. However, the most effective way of preventing 
problems with ceramic disc taps is by simply replacing the head workings. These can be purchased from most 
plumbers merchants or ordered on-line direct from the manufacturer. Most ceramic heads are not generic 
and a like-for-like replacement is often required. 
Float operated valves 
Repairing a BS1212 Part 1 Float operated valve (Portsmouth type) 
Portsmouth valves can only be repaired if a is part of an existing installation.  To repair a Portsmouth valve, 
follow the steps listed below: 
1. Turn off the isolation valve to the FOV. 
2. Remove the FOV by , loosening and un-screwing the union nut. 
3. Remove the end cap on the valve body. 
4. Remove the split pin holding the float arm to the valve body and remove the float arm. 
5. Remove the piston from the valve body and inspect it for signs of wear or scale build up. 
6. For nylon pistons, simply replace the washer. 
7. For brass pistons, the washer is held at the end of the piston by a retaining cap, which will need to 
be unscrewed to allow the washer to be removed. To remove the retaining cap: 
a. Place a flat blade screwdriver in the slot for the float arm and unscrew the retaining cap. This 
can usually be done using a pair of pliers. 
b. Remove the washer and replace. 
c. Replace the retaining cap and tighten. 
8. Remove the orifice from the FOV body and check to ensure that there are no visible signs of wear or 
damage, such as cracks or splits at the orifice opening. Orifice’s can be purchased from local plumbers 
merchants. 
9. Re-assemble the valve making sure that the washer is towards the orifice. 
10. Put back the split pin into the valve ensuring that it passes through the hole in the float arm and open 
it with a screwdriver to ensure that it does not fall out. 
11. Re-install the valve into the cistern, making sure the fibre sealing washer is in place. 
12. Re-tighten the union and turn on the water 
13. Check the operation of the valve, adjusting the water level if needed. 
Repairing a BS1212 Part 2/3 Float operated valve (diaphragm type) 
These have a large diaphragm or pancake type washer that is easily accessible for replacement. To replace 
the washer, follow the steps below: 
1. Turn off the water supply to the FOV. 
2. Remove the FOV by loosening and un-screwing the union nut. 
3. Unscrew the large washer retaining union and float arm at the front of the valve and remove the 
washer.  
4. Replace the washer. It is possible to install these the wrong way round so ensure that it is fitted the 
correct way.  
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
92
5. Replace the large washer retaining union and float arm. There is a small notch at the top of the valve 
to ensure that the plate is fitted upright. Make sure that the corresponding lug on the plate is 
engaged into the retaining notch and hand tighten the union. 
6. Check that the orifice is in good condition with no cracks or splits.  
7. Re-install the valve into the cistern, making sure the fibre sealing washer is in place. 
8. Re-tighten the union and turn on the water 
9. Check the operation of the valve, adjusting the water level as necessary with the float arm 
adjustment screw. 
Stop and service valves. 
Most service valves cannot be repaired and replacement is the only option. Most stop valves can be repaired 
following the procedure for BS1010 taps above. 
AC7.4 Identify the types of information to be provided on a 
maintenance record for cold water systems 
For large cold water systems, it is advisable to keep a record of all maintenance and repairs for future 
reference. The types of information noted should be: 
 
The name of the maintenance engineer 
 
The date and time the maintenance/repairs were carried out 
 
The type of maintenance/repairs undertaken 
 
Their location 
 
The materials/components or replacement parts used 
 
The location of manufacturer’s instructions/maintenance data. 
 
The flow rates and pressures of outlets, taps and components 
 
The temperature of the cold water for legionella protection 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
93
Learning Outcome 9 
Know the decommissioning 
requirements of cold water systems and 
components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
94
There are five Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 9: 
AC9.1. 
Identify the working methods that reduce the time periods during which cold water systems 
need to be isolated. 
AC9.2. 
State the information that needs to be provided to other persons before decommissioning 
work takes place. 
AC9.3. 
State how to temporarily decommission cold water system components and connecting 
pipework systems. 
AC9.4. 
Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning cold water system 
components.  
AC9.5. 
Identify the methods used during the decommissioning process to prevent the end-user from 
operating cold water system components 
AC9.1 Identify the working methods that reduce the time periods 
during which cold water systems need to be isolated 
AC9.2 State the information that needs to be provided to other 
persons before decommissioning work takes place 
There are instances where cold water systems must be temporarily de-commissioned to allow essential 
works, such as repairs and servicing, to be conducted. The impact of isolation means that some parts, and in 
a worst-case scenario, all of the system will need to be isolated. There are, however, methods we can employ 
to lessen the impact of isolation on the customer: 
1) Do as much preparation beforehand as possible. If, for instance, you are connecting an extension to 
the cold water system, make the final connection to the water system the last operation, so that the 
water is off the minimum amount of time. 
2) Be frank with the customer and tell them how long the system will be off. Point out that this is an 
estimated time and the water will be turned back on as soon as is possible. 
3) Tell the customer which parts of the system you will be working on. 
4) Ask the customer to collect water for drinks in saucepans and jugs and water for ablutions in a bucket. 
They may not be needed but at least the customer will have some water for those essential things. 
Isolating water supplies can be very annoying and inconvenient to a customer but most cases you will find 
that the customer is very understanding of the situation. 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
95
AC9.3 State how to temporarily decommission cold water system 
components and connecting pipework systems 
This is where a water system or part of a water system is isolated and drained down so that work may be 
performed on it. Once the work is completed, the water will be turned on and the system put back into 
operation.  
The customer must be the focus when isolating water supplies. Water is vital for the day-to-day running of a 
household. Therefore, keeping them informed of the sequence of operations allows them to make informed 
choices about bathing, clothes washing, food preparation etc. Below is a suggested sequence of events: 
1) Inform the customer that the water supply is going to be isolated and inform them as to how long 
the supply is expected to be off. 
2) Suggest that they might like to collect some water for drinking etc. 
3) Ensure that those appliances that are using or may be using water supply are turned off. Ask the 
customer not to turn on any clothes or dish washing machines. Ensure that the electrics to any 
combination boilers are turned off. This is to 
ensure that the boiler does not fire up while the 
water is off. It is purely precautionary. 
4) Isolate the system or part of the system that is 
being worked on. 
5) Drain the system of water at the nearest drain 
point. 
6) Place a warning notice at the point of isolation 
warning other people that the supply is turned 
off and is not to be turned back on. 
AC9.4 Identify the work sequences for permanently decommissioning 
cold water system components 
Unlike temporary de-commissioning, permanent de-commissioning of a system literally means that the 
system will not be re-instated. In most instances, this will mean the complete removal of all pipework and 
appliances. The pipework should be cut back to the nearest live connection and capped to prevent stagnation 
of the water supply: 
1) Isolate the water supply at the point where the system is to be decommissioned. 
2) Completely drain the system of water at the nearest drain point. 
3) Remove all appliances and carefully remove the pipework and clips. 
4) Cut the pipework back to the stop valve or nearest live connection and cap the pipe off. 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
96
5) If necessary, a notice can be left by the stop valve informing that the system has been permanently 
de-commissioned and is not to be turned on. 
AC9.5 Identify the methods used during the decommissioning 
process to prevent the end-user from operating cold water system 
components 
This subject was covered in depth in AC9.1 to AC9.4. Please see above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
97
Advert 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
98
Learning Outcome 11 
Know the inspection and soundness 
testing requirements of cold water 
systems and components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
99
There are four Assessment Criteria in Learning Outcome 11: 
AC11.1. State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection of a cold water system to confirm 
that it is ready to be filled with water. 
AC11.2. State how to fill cold water pipework with water at normal operating pressure and check for 
leakage. 
AC11.3. Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry requirements on cold water systems 
pipework and components. 
AC11.4. State the flushing procedure for cold water systems and components 
AC11.5. Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and testing reveals defects in cold 
water systems 
AC11.1 State the checks to be carried out during a visual inspection 
of a cold water system to confirm that it is ready to be filled with water 
Filling any system with water is the time when we see if the system is watertight. Pressure testing confirms 
the water tightness ready for the next stage of bringing the system into operation. Before these operations 
can take place, a visual inspection of the system should be made to confirm that the installation is correct 
and meets the required standards: 
 
Check that all open ends have been capped and/or all valves have been isolated. 
 
Check that all taps and outlets have been turned off and any drain valves are closed. 
 
Isolate any service valves and gate valves. 
 
Check all visible joints to ensure that they have been properly made. Check that capillary joints have 
been wiped clean of any excess flux as this can cause corrosion in later life. 
 
Check that enough pipe clips have been installed and that the pipework is secure. 
 
Check that tap connectors and compression fittings are tight. 
 
Ensure that any automatic air valves are open. 
 
Ensure that a provisional fill level has been set in any cold water cisterns fitted. 
 
Check that all cisterns have been fitted correctly and are well supported. 
 
Check that cistern lids are left in place 
AC11.2 State how to fill cold water pipework with water at normal 
operating pressure and check for leakage 
There is little point to pressure testing cold water systems if it leaks at normal operating pressure. The point 
to testing at normal operating pressure first is to see if the installation is at least water tight before the system 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
100
is pressure tested in accordance with the Water Supply (water 
fittings) Regulations 1999. All systems are different, and it is up to 
the installer to determine the best way of filling and testing their 
system. On new build properties, testing should be undertaken at 
the end of the first fix before the pipework that is to be concealed 
behind walls and under floors is covered. In this instance, testing 
would be completed using a test bucket, as shown in the 
photograph. After the system has been inspected as detailed in 
AC11.1, the following method can be used for filling the system with 
water. Remember, for a test to be trouble free, there must be a 
method of releasing any air that collects in the system. Isolation 
valves are a good idea to enable this. 
Testing is best done in stages or by zones: 
1) Seal any open ends of pipe with isolation valves and turn off all isolating valves. 
2) Attach the test bucket at a low point in the system and pump the test bucket until the pressure in 
the system is equal to the normal operating pressure. 
3) Check for leaks. 
4) Visit each isolation valve at each zone or section and turn on. 
5) Pump the pressure up until the pressure gauge reads normal operating pressure. 
6) Check for leaks 
7) At each capped draw-off point, open the isolation valve until water is received at that point. Turn off 
the isolation valve. 
8) Pump the pressure up until the pressure gauge reads normal operating pressure. 
9) Re-check for leaks. 
Once this has been completed, then the system can be pressure tested in accordance with the Water Supply 
(water fittings) Regulations 1999. 
In occupied properties, some installers wait until the appliances are fitted and connected before completing 
the testing of systems and it is up to the discretion of the installer when initial fill and soundness tests are 
completed. 
AC11.3 Identify how to carry out a soundness test to industry 
requirements on cold water systems pipework and components 
The testing requirements of cold water systems was covered in detail in D/602/2682 - Understand and carry 
out site preparation, and pipework fabrication techniques for domestic plumbing and heating systems 
Learning Outcome 9: Know the inspection and soundness testing requirements of domestic plumbing and 
heating pipework 
AC9.2 State how to carry out a soundness test on domestic plumbing and heating pipework 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

BPEC Level 2 Diploma in Plumbing Foundation 
 
 
101
AC11.4 State the flushing procedure for cold water systems and 
components 
Again, like testing, the flushing procedure for water systems differs from installer to installer. Some Plumbers 
like to flush the pipework through before making the final connections to the appliances. The benefits of 
doing this are that the chances of dirt and debris getting into sensitive workings of taps and valves is greatly 
reduced. Others will wait until the system is complete and ready for commissioning before flushing the 
system through. Either way, flushing with water taken direct from the water undertakers cold water main 
before the system is commissioned is a mandatory requirement and an important aspect of the installation 
as it removes dirt and debris as well as the excess flux and jointing pastes used during the installation. 
Remember, systems should be flushed every time the system has been worked on and definitely after major 
alterations or additions. There is no requirement at present to disinfect domestic buildings although large 
systems, such as apartment blocks should be disinfected. Disinfection of water systems is discussed at Level 
3. 
The following method is a basic flushing sequence: 
1) Ensure that all isolation valves and terminal fittings are turned off. 
2) Turn on the internal mains cold water stop valve. 
3) Turn on individual sections from the isolating valves, ensuring there is no leakage. 
4) Visit each terminal fitting, valve and tap individually and turn on. 
5) Flush the system through until the water runs clear and then let it run for 20 – 30 seconds. 
AC11.5 Identify the actions that must be taken when inspection and 
testing reveal defects in cold water systems 
Faults that are immediately obvious during inspection will require rectifying before testing takes place. 
Problems such as loose pipework and general lack of fixings are easily fixed. Some initial problems, such as 
inadequate support for cisterns, may take longer to remedy. 
Problems that arise during initial testing are generally centred around leakage that will require fixing as a 
matter of urgency. 
There may also be problems that arise during the commissioning stage, such as failure to meet the 
requirements of the specification, lack of flow rate or pressure or unsatisfactory performance of fitted 
components and appliances. Where problems of this nature occur, then the system designer must be 
informed, and a remedy sought as a matter of urgency. In these cases, reference to manufacturers data 
should be made. 
 
 
The content of this document is © BPEC Ltd 2020 and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed without prior written consent 
 
Author: BPEC Ltd. Editor: BPEC Ltd. Design: BPEC Ltd

