JAMES C. SCOTT
SEEING

The Institution for Social and Policy Studies at Yale University 
The Yale ISPS Series

Seeing Like a State
How Certain Schemes to 
Improve the Human 
Condition Have Failed
James C. Scott
Yale University Press 
New Haven and London

/  ^
52* s«mw
/VI ^(a!o
> O O
This is a book in the Yale Agrarian Studies Series, James C. Scott, series editor.
Copyright © 1998 by Yale University.
All rights reserved.
This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, in any form 
(beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and 
except by reviewers for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.
Designed by James J. Johnson and set in Aster type by Running Feet Books, Durham, NC. 
Printed in the United States of America by Thomson-Shore, Inc., Dexter, Michigan.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Scott, James C.
Seeing like a state : how certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed / 
James C. Scott.
p. cm.— (Yale agrarian studies) (The Yale ISPS series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-300-07016-0 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Central planning—Social aspects. 2. Social engineering 
I. Title. II. Series. III. Series: The Yale ISPS series.
HD87.5.S365 
1998
338.9—dc21
3. Authoritarianism.
97-26556
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for permanence and durability of the Com­
mittee on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on Library Re­
sources.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Louise, again, always

o w e n : What is happening?
y o lla n d : I'm not sure. But I’m concerned about my part in it. It’s an 
eviction of sorts.
o w e n : We’re making a six-inch map of the country. Is there something 
sinister in that? 
y o lla n d : Not in . . .
o w e n : And we’re taking place names that are riddled with confusion 
and . . .
y o lla n d : Who’s confused? Are the people confused? 
o w e n : And we’re standardising those names as accurately and as sen­
sitively as we can.
y o lla n d : Something is being eroded.
— Brian Friel, Translations 2.1

Contents
-------------------------StEr;,----------
Acknowledgments ix 
Introduction 1
Parti. State Projects of Legibility and Simplification 9
Chapter 1. Nature and Space 11 
Chapter 2. Cities, People, and Language 53
Part 2. Transforming Visions 85
Chapter 3. Authoritarian High Modernism 87 
Chapter 4. The High-Modernist City: An Experiment and 
a Critique 103
Chapter 5. The Revolutionary Party: A Plan and a Diagnosis 147
Part 3. The Social Engineering of Rural Settlement 
and Production 
181
Chapter 6. Soviet Collectivization, Capitalist Dreams 193
Chapter 7. Compulsory Villagization in Tanzania:
Aesthetics and Miniaturization 223 
Chapter 8. Taming Nature: An Agriculture of Legibility 
and Simplicity 262
Part 4. The Missing Link 307
Chapter 9. Thin Simplifications and Practical Knowledge: Metis 309 
Chapter 10. Conclusion 342
Notes 359
Sources for Illustrations 433 
Index 435


Acknowledgments
This book has been longer in the making than I would care to admit. It 
would be nice to be able to claim that it just took that long to think it 
through. Nice, but not truthful. A nearly fatal combination of malinger­
ing and administrative chores accounts for part of the delay. For the 
rest, the scope of the book simply expanded, in an academic version of 
Parkinsons Law, to fill all the space that I would give to it. Finally, I had 
to call an arbitrary halt or else start thinking of it as a life's work.
The scope of the book together with the time it took to complete it 
explain the long list of intellectual debts I have accumulated along the 
way. A full accounting of them would be interminable except for the 
fact that I realize some of my creditors would just as soon not be asso­
ciated with the final product. Though I shall not implicate them here, I 
owe them nonetheless. Instead of turning my argument in the direction 
they urged, I took their criticisms to heart by fortifying my case so that 
it would better answer their objections. My other intellectual creditors, 
having failed to disavow the final product in advance, will be named 
here and, it is to be hoped, implicated.
Some of my debts are to institutions. I spent the 1990-91 academic 
year at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin as a recipient of their hospi­
tality and largesse. The temptation of living for a time in Berlin, just a 
year after the Wall came down, proved irresistible. After physically la­
boring for six weeks on an ex-collective farm on the Mecklenburg Plain 
in eastern Germany (an alternative that I dreamed up to avoid sitting 
for six weeks in Goethe Institute classes with pimply teenagers), I 
hurled myself at the German language, Berlin, and my German col­
ix

x Acknowledgments
leagues. My research hardly advanced in any formal sense, but I real­
ize that many fruitful lines of inquiry opened up then. I want particu­
larly to thank Wolf Lepenies, Reinhard Prasser, Joachim Nettlebeck, 
Barbara Sanders, Barbara Golf, Christine Klohn, and Gerhard Riedel 
for their many kindnesses. The intellectual boon companionship of 
Georg Elwert, my local patron saint, as well as that of Shalini Rande- 
ria, Gabor Klaniczay, Christoph Harbsmeier, Barbara Lane, Mitchell 
Ash, Juan Linz, Jochen Blaschke, Arthur von Mehren, Akim von Oppen, 
Hans Luther, Carola Lenz, Gerd Spittler, Hans Medick, and Alf Liidke 
opened my eyes to lines of inquiry that proved formative. Only the great 
efforts and unfailing friendship of Heinz Lechleiter and Ursula Hess 
brought my German to a (barely) tolerable level.
At various stages in the laborious preparation of this book, I had 
the privilege of making extended visits to institutions filled with large- 
spirited but skeptical colleagues. My good luck was that they so often 
made a project of straightening me out. They might not be satisfied with 
the final result, but I’ll bet that they can see their influence at work. At 
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Marseille, I espe­
cially want to thank my patron, Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, Thomas 
Bierschenk, and their colleagues in the staff seminar. Living in Le Vieux 
Panier and working every day in the magnificent atmosphere of La 
Vielle Charite were unforgettable experiences. At the Humanities Re­
search Centre at the Australian National University in Canberra, I had 
the benefit of an unmatched crowd of humanists and Asian specialists 
looking over my shoulder. Thanks go in particular to Graeme Clark, di­
rector, and Iain McCalman, associate director, who invited me, and 
to Tony Reid and David Kelly, who organized the conference, “Ideas 
of Freedom in Asia,” which was the premise of my visit. Tony Milner 
and Claire Milner, Ranajit Guha (my guru) and Mechthild Guha, Bob 
Goodin and Diane Gibson, Ben Tria Kerkvliet and Melinda Tria, Bill 
Jenner, Ian Wilson, and John Walker in various ways made my stay 
convivial and intellectually rewarding.
This book would definitely have been much longer in the making 
were it not for the fact that Dick Ohmann and Betsy Traube invited me 
to spend the academic year of 1994-95 as a fellow of the Center for Hu­
manities at Wesleyan University. My colleagues there and our weekly 
seminars together were intellectually bracing, thanks in large part to 
Betsy Traube’s capacity to frame each paper brilliantly. The center’s 
ideal combination of solitude and a staff that could not have been more 
helpful allowed me to finish a first draft of the entire manuscript. I am 
enormously grateful to Pat Camden and Jackie Rich for their inexhaust­
ible fund of kindnesses. The astute insights of Betsy Traube and Khachig

Acknowledgments xi
Tololyan mark this work in many ways. Thanks also to Bill Cohen, 
Peter Rutland, and Judith Goldstein.
I would not have had the leisure for reflection and writing in 
1994-95 had it not been for generous grants from the Harry Frank 
Guggenheim Foundation (Research for Understanding and Reducing 
Violence, Aggression, and Dominance) and a John D. and Catherine T. 
MacArthur Foundation Peace and Security Program Fellowship. But for 
their confidence in my work and their assistance, which made possible 
a respite from all administrative and teaching chores, I wouldn’t have 
had a prayer of finishing this study when I did.
Finally, I want to thank my colleagues in the Netherlands and at 
the Amsterdam School for Social Science Research for the opportu­
nity of visiting there in order to give the Sixth Annual W. F. Wertheim 
Lecture: Jan Breman, Bram de Swaan, Hans Sonneveld, Otto van den 
Muijzenberg, Anton Blok, Rod Aya, Roseanne Rutten, Johan Gouds- 
blom, Jan-Willem Duyvendak, Ido de Haan, Johan Heilbron, Jose 
Komen, Karin Peperkamp, Niels Mulder, Frans Hiisken, Ben White, 
Jan Nederveen Pieterse, Franz von Benda-Beckmann, and Keebet von 
Benda-Beckmann. Having Wim Wertheim there to offer advice and 
criticism was a great privilege for me, for I have admired his many 
contributions to social science theory and Southeast Asian studies. I 
learned at least as much from the thesis-writing graduate students in 
my seminar there as they learned from me; Talja Potters and Peer 
Smets were kind enough to read my chapter on urban planning and 
provide searching critiques.
There are a good many scholars whose writings opened up new 
perspectives for me or provided outstanding analyses of issues that I 
could not have hoped to study so comprehensively on my own. Some of 
them have not seen this work, some of them I have never met, and some 
of them would probably want to disown what I have written. Neverthe­
less, I will venture to acknowledge my heavy intellectual debts to them 
all: Edward Friedman, Ben Anderson, Michael Adas, Teodor Shanin, 
James Ferguson, and Zygmunt Bauman. I could not have written the 
chapter on the high-modernist city without taking shameless advan­
tage of the insights of James Holston’s fine book on Brasilia. The chap­
ter on Soviet collectivization and its connection with industrial agricul­
ture in the United States leans heavily on the work of Sheila 
Fitzpatrick and Deborah Fitzgerald. I thank Sheila Fitzpatrick for her 
searching comments, only a few of which are adequately reflected in 
the finished chapter.
The elaboration of the concept of metis I owe to Marcel Detienne 
and Jean-Pierre Vernant. Although our terminology differs, Stephen

xii Acknowledgments
Marglin and I had, unbeknownst to each another, been taking separate 
trains to roughly the same destination. Thanks to the Rockefeller Foun­
dation, Marglin organized a conference, "The Greening of Economics,” 
in Bellagio, Italy, where I had my first opportunity to present some of 
my initial ideas, and Marglin’s work on episteme and techne as well as 
his work on agriculture have influenced my thinking. Stephen Gude- 
man's perceptive comments, Frederique Apffel Marglin’s work on "var­
iolation,” and Arun Agrawal’s work and commentary have helped to 
shape my sense of practical knowledge. Chapter 8, which is about 
agriculture, bears the distinct marks of all that I have learned from the 
work of Paul Richards and from Jan Douwe van der Ploeg. I am an am­
ateur as an Africanist, and the chapter on ujamaa villages in Tanzania 
owes a great deal to Joel Gao Hiza, who wrote a brilliant senior honors 
thesis on the subject while at Yale University and who generously 
shared his voluminous research materials. (He is now finishing a thesis 
in anthropology at the University of California at Berkeley.) Bruce 
McKim, Ron Aminzade, Goran Hyden, David Sperling, and Allen Isaac- 
man read the chapter on Tanzania and saved me from some blunders; 
some undoubtedly remain despite their efforts. Birgit Muller’s fine 
analysis of the role of "fixers and traders” in the East German factory 
economy before unification helped me to understand the symbiotic re­
lationship between planned order and informal arrangements.
Larry Lohmann and James Ferguson read an early draft of the man­
uscript and made comments that clarified my thinking enormously and 
prevented some serious missteps. A few other good friends offered to 
read all or part of the manuscript, in spite of its forbidding length. 
Those who rolled their eyes when offering or whose body language 
suggested mixed feelings, I avoided burdening. The few who genuinely 
wanted to read it, or whose feigned interest was completely convinc­
ing, in every case provided a set of comments that shaped the book in 
important ways. I owe an enormous debt and my warmest thanks to 
Ron Herring, Ramachandra Guha, Zygmunt Bauman, K. Sivaramak- 
rishnan, Mark Lendler, Allan Isaacman, and Peter Vandergeest.
A great many thoughtful colleagues made useful criticisms or 
brought to my attention work that contributed to improvements in the 
argument and evidence. They include Aijun Appadurai, Ken Alder, Greg­
ory Kasza, Daniel Goldhagen, Erich Goldhagen, Peter Perdue, Esther 
Kingston-Mann, Peter Sahlins, Anna Selenyi, Doug Gallon, and Jane 
Mansbridge. I also thank Sugata Bose, Al McCoy, Richard Landes, Glo­
ria Raheja, Kiren Aziz Chaudhry, Jess Gilbert, Tongchai Winichakul, 
Dan Kelliher, Dan Little, Jack Kloppenberg, Tony Gulielmi, Robert 
Evenson, and Peter Sahlins. Others who kindly contributed are Adam

Acknowledgments xiii
Ashforth, John Tehranian, Michael Kwass, Jesse Ribot, Ezra Suleiman, 
Jim Boyce, Jeff Burds, Fred Cooper, Ann Stoler, Atul Kohli, Orlando 
Figes, Anna Tsing, Vernon Ruttan, Henry Bernstein, Michael Watts, 
Allan Pred, Witoon Permpongsacharoen, Gene Ammarell, and David 
Feeny.
For the past five years the Program in Agrarian Studies at Yale has 
been for me the site of a broad, interdisciplinary education in rural life 
and a major source of intellectual companionship. The program has 
given me more that I can imagine ever giving back. Virtually every page 
of this book can be traced to one or another of the wide-ranging en­
counters fostered by the program. I will forgo mentioning fifty or so 
postdoctoral fellows who have visited for a year, but all of them have 
contributed in large and small ways to this enterprise. We invited them 
to join us because we admired their work, and they have never disap­
pointed us. The chief of the Program in Agrarian Studies, Marvel Kay 
Mansfield, has been the heart and soul of the success of Agrarian Stud­
ies and every other enterprise with which I have been associated at 
Yale. This is not the first occasion I have acknowledged my debt to her; 
it has only grown with time. Nor could Agrarian Studies have thrived 
as it has without the initiative of K. Sivaramakrishnan, Rick Rhein- 
gans, Donna Perry, Bruce McKim, Nina Bhatt, and Linda Lee.
My intellectual debts to colleagues at Yale defy accounting. Those 
with whom I have taught—Bill Kelly, Helen Sui, Bob Harms, An- 
gelique Haugerud, Nancy Peluso, John Wargo, Cathy Cohen, and Lee 
Wandel—have, in practice, taught me. Other Yale colleagues whose 
fingerprints can be found on this manuscript include Ian Shapiro, John 
Merriman, Hal Conklin, Paul Landau, Enrique Meyer, Dimitri Gutas, 
Carol Rose, Ben Kiernan, Joe Errington, Charles Bryant, and Arvid 
Nelson, a visiting fellow who is completing a thesis on forestry in East 
Germany and who was an exceptional source of information on the 
history of scientific forestry in Germany. The graduate students in my 
seminar, “Anarchism,” and in a jointly taught seminar, “The Compara­
tive Study of Agrarian Societies," read several draft chapters of the 
manuscript, pulling them to pieces in ways that forced me to rethink 
more than a few issues.
I have been blessed with research assistants who turned what 
began as wild goose chases into serious quests. Without their imagina­
tion and work I would have learned little about the invention of per­
manent last names, the physical layout of new villages, and language 
planning. Here is my chance to thank Kate Stanton, Cassandra Mose­
ley, Meredith Weiss, John Tehranian, and Allan Carlson for their su­
perb work. I owe Cassandra Moseley not only thanks but an apology,

xiv Acknowledgments
because all her fine work on the Tennessee Valley Authority resulted in 
a chapter that I reluctantly cut in order to keep the book within rea­
sonable bounds. It will find another home, I trust.
Yale University Press has been good to me in more ways than one. 
I want to thank particularly John Ryden; Judy Metro; my editor, 
Charles Grench; and the best manuscript editor I have ever worked 
with, Brenda Kolb.
Several variants of chapter 1, each with some material from later 
chapters, have appeared elsewhere: “State Simplifications: Nature, 
Space, and People,” Occasional Paper No. 1, Department of History, 
University of Saskatchewan, Canada, November 1994; “State Simplifi­
cations,” Journal of Political Philosophy 4, no. 2 (1995): 1-42; "State 
Simplifications: Nature, Space, and People,” in Ian Shapiro and Rus­
sell Hardin, eds., Political Order, vol. 38 of Nomos (New York: New 
York University Press, 1996): 42-85; “Freedom Contra Freehold: State 
Simplification, Space, and People in Southeast Asia,” in David Kelly 
and Anthony Reid, eds., Freedom in Asia (forthcoming); “State Sim­
plifications: Some Applications to Southeast Asia,” Sixth Annual W. F. 
Wertheim Lecture, Centre for Asian Studies, Amsterdam, June 1995; 
and "State Simplifications and Practical Knowledge," in Stephen Mar- 
glin and Stephen Gudeman, eds.. People’s Economy, People’s Ecology 
(forthcoming).
I’d like to kick the habit of writing books, at least for a while. If 
there were a detox unit or an analog to the nicotine patch for serial of­
fenders, I think I would sign up for treatment. My habit has already 
cost me more precious time than I care to admit. The problem with 
book writing and other addictions is that the resolve to quit is greatest 
during withdrawal, but as the painful symptoms recede, the craving is 
apt to return. Louise and our children, Mia, Aaron, and Noah, would, 
I know, be only too happy to have me committed until I was “clean." 
I’m trying. God knows I’m trying.

Seeing Like a State


Introduction
This book grew out of an intellectual detour that became so gripping 
that I decided to abandon my original itinerary altogether. After I had 
made what appeared to be an ill-considered turn, the surprising new 
scenery and the sense that I was headed for a more satisfying destina­
tion persuaded me to change my plans. The new itinerary, I think, has 
a logic of its own. It might even have been a more elegant trip had I 
possessed the wit to conceive of it at the outset. What does seem clear 
to me is that the detour, although along roads that were bumpier and 
more circuitous than I had foreseen, has led to a more substantial 
place. It goes without saying that the reader might have found a more 
experienced guide, but the itinerary is so peculiarly off the beaten 
track that, if you’re headed this way, you have to settle for whatever 
local tracker you can find.
A word about the road not taken. Originally, I set out to understand 
why the state has always seemed to be the enemy of "people who move 
around,” to put it crudely. In the context of Southeast Asia, this prom­
ised to be a fruitful way of addressing the perennial tensions between 
mobile, slash-and-burn hill peoples on one hand and wet-rice, valley 
kingdoms on the other. The question, however, transcended regional 
geography. Nomads and pastoralists (such as Berbers and Bedouins), 
hunter-gatherers, Gypsies, vagrants, homeless people, itinerants, run­
away slaves, and serfs have always been a thorn in the side of states. 
Efforts to permanently settle these mobile peoples (sedentarization) 
seemed to be a perennial state project—perennial, in part, because it 
so seldom succeeded.
l

2 Introduction
The more I examined these efforts at sedentarization, the more I 
came to see them as a state's attempt to make a society legible, to ar­
range the population in ways that simplified the classic state functions 
of taxation, conscription, and prevention of rebellion. Having begun to 
think in these terms, I began to see legibility as a central problem in 
statecraft. The premodern.state was, in many crucial respects, par­
tially blind; it knew precious little about its subjects, their wealth, their 
landholdings and yields, their location, their very identity. It lacked 
anything like a detailed "map” of its terrain and its people. It lacked, 
for the most part, a measure, a metric, that would allow it to “trans­
late" what it knew into a common standard necessary for a synoptic 
view. As a result, its interventions were often crude and self-defeating.
It is at this point that the detour began. How did the state gradually 
get a handle on its subjects and their environment? Suddenly, processes 
as disparate as the creation of permanent last names, the standardiza­
tion of weights and measures, the establishment of cadastral surveys 
and population registers, the invention of freehold tenure, the standard­
ization of language and legal discourse, the design of cities, and the or­
ganization of transportation seemed comprehensible as attempts at leg­
ibility and simplification. In each case, officials took exceptionally 
complex, illegible, and local social practices, such as land tenure cus­
toms or naming customs, and created a standard grid whereby it could 
be centrally recorded and monitored.
The organization of the natural world was no exception. Agricul­
ture is, after all, a radical reorganization and simplification of flora to 
suit man's goals. Whatever their other purposes, the designs of sci­
entific forestry and agriculture and the layouts of plantations, collec­
tive farms, ujamaa villages, and strategic hamlets all seemed calcu­
lated to make the terrain, its products, and its workforce more legible 
— and hence manipulable—from above and from the center.
A homely analogy from beekeeping may be helpful here. In pre­
modern times the gathering of honey was a difficult affair. Even if bees 
were housed in straw hives, harvesting the honey usually meant driv­
ing off the bees and often destroying the colony. The arrangement of 
brood chambers and honey cells followed complex patterns that varied 
from hive to hive—patterns that did not allow for neat extractions. The 
modern beehive, in contrast, is designed to solve the beekeeper’s prob­
lem. With a device called a “queen excluder,” it separates the brood 
chambers below from the honey supplies above, preventing the queen 
from laying eggs above a certain level. Furthermore, the wax cells are 
arranged neatly in vertical frames, nine or ten to a box, which enable 
the easy extraction of honey, wax, and propolis. Extraction is made

Introduction 3
possible by observing “bee space”—the precise distance between the 
frames that the bees will leave open as passages rather than bridging 
the frames by building intervening honeycomb. From the beekeeper’s 
point of view, the modern hive is an orderly, “legible” hive allowing the 
beekeeper to inspect the condition of the colony and the queen, judge 
its honey production (by weight), enlarge or contract the size of the 
hive by standard units, move it to a new location, and, above all, ex­
tract just enough honey (in temperate climates) to ensure that the 
colony will overwinter successfully.
I do not wish to push the analogy further than it will go, but much 
of early modern European statecraft seemed similarly devoted to ra- '; 
tionalizing and standardizing what was a social hieroglyph into a leg­
ible and administratively more convenient format. The social sim­
plifications thus introduced not only permitted a more finely tuned 
system of taxation and conscription but also greatly enhanced state ca­
pacity. They made possible quite discriminating interventions of every 
kind, such as public-health measures, political surveillance, and relief 
for the poor.
These state simplifications, the basic givens of modern statecraft, 
were, I began to realize, rather like abridged maps. They did not suc­
cessfully represent the actual activity of the society they depicted, nor 
were they intended to; they represented only that slice of it that inter­
ested the official observer. They were, moreover, not just maps. Rather, 
they were maps that, when allied with state power, would enable much 
of the reality they depicted to be remade. Thus a state cadastral map 
created to designate taxable property-holders does not merely describe 
a system of land tenure; it creates such a system through its ability to 
give its categories the force of law. Much of the first chapter is in­
tended to convey how thoroughly society and the environment have 
been refashioned by state maps of legibility.
This view of early modern statecraft is not particularly original. 
Suitably modified, however, it can provide a distinctive optic through 
which a number of huge development fiascoes in poorer Third World 
nations and Eastern Europe can be usefully viewed.
But “fiasco” is too lighthearted a word for the disasters I have in 
mind. The Great Leap Forward in China, collectivization in Russia, 
and compulsory villagization in Tanzania, Mozambique, and Ethiopia 
are among the great human tragedies of the twentieth century, in 
terms of both lives lost and lives irretrievably disrupted. At a less dra­
matic but far more common level, the history of Third World develop­
ment is littered with the debris of huge agricultural schemes and new 
cities (think of Brasilia or Chandigarh) that have failed their residents.

4 Introduction
It is not so difficult, alas, to understand why so many human lives have 
been destroyed by mobilized violence between ethnic groups, religious 
sects, or linguistic communities. But it is harder to grasp why so many 
well-intended schemes to improve the human condition have gone so 
tragically awry. I aim, in what follows, to provide a convincing account 
of the logic behind the failure of some of the great utopian social engi­
neering schemes of the twentieth century.
I shall argue that the most tragic episodes of state-initiated social 
engineering originate in a pernicious combination of four elements. 
All four are necessary for a full-fledged disaster. The first element is the 
administrative ordering of nature and society—the transformative 
state simplifications described above. By themselves, they are the un­
remarkable tools of modern statecraft; they are as vital to the mainte­
nance of our welfare and freedom as they are to the designs of a 
would-be modern despot. They undergird the concept of citizenship 
and the provision of social welfare just as they might undergird a pol­
icy of rounding up undesirable minorities.
The second element is what I call a high-modernist ideology. It is 
best conceived as a strong, one might even say muscle-bound, version 
of the self-confidence about scientific and technical progress, the expan­
sion of production, the growing satisfaction of human needs, the mas­
tery of nature (including human nature), and, above all, the rational 
design of social order commensurate with the scientific understanding 
of natural laws. It originated, of course, in the West, as a by-product of 
unprecedented progress in science and industry.
High modernism must not be confused with scientific practice. It 
was fundamentally, as the term "ideology" implies, a faith that bor­
rowed, as it were, the legitimacy of science and technology. It was, ac­
cordingly, uncritical, unskeptical, and thus unscientifically optimistic 
about the possibilities for the comprehensive planning of human set­
tlement and production. The carriers of high modernism tended to see 
rational order in remarkably visual aesthetic terms. For them, an ef­
ficient, rationally organized city, village, or farm was a city that looked 
regimented and orderly in a geometrical sense. The carriers of high 
modernism, once their plans miscarried or were thwarted, tended to 
retreat to what I call miniaturization; the creation of a more easily 
controlled micro-order in model cities, model villages, and model 
farms.
High modernism was about "interests” as well as faith. Its carriers, 
even when they were capitalist entrepreneurs, required state action to 
realize their plans. In most cases, they were powerful officials and 
heads of state. They tended to prefer certain forms of planning and so­

Introduction 5
cial organization (such as huge dams, centralized communication and 
transportation hubs, large factories and farms, and grid cities), be­
cause these forms fit snugly into a high-modernist view and also an­
swered their political interests as state officials. There was, to put it 
mildly, an elective affinity between high modernism and the interests 
of many state officials.
Like any ideology, high modernism had a particular temporal and 
social context. The feats of national economic mobilization of the belli­
gerents (especially Germany) in World War I seem to mark its high tide. 
Not surprisingly, its most fertile social soil was to be found among plan­
ners, engineers, architects, scientists, and technicians whose skills and 
status it celebrated as the designers of the new order. High-modernist 
faith was no respecter of traditional political boundaries; it could be 
found across the political spectrum from left to right but particularly 
among those who wanted to use state power to bring about huge, 
utopian changes in people's work habits, living patterns, moral con­
duct, and worldview. Nor was this utopian vision dangerous in and of 
itself. Where it animated plans in liberal parliamentary societies and 
where the planners therefore had to negotiate with organized citizens, 
it could spur reform.
Only when these first two elements are joined to a third does the 
combination become potentially lethal. The third element is an au­
thoritarian state that is willing and able to use the full weight of its co­
ercive power to bring these high-modernist designs into being. The 
most fertile soil for this element has typically been times of war, revo­
lution, depression, and struggle for national liberation. In such situa­
tions, emergency conditions foster the seizure of emergency powers 
and frequently delegitimize the previous regime. They also tend to give 
rise to elites who repudiate the past and who have revolutionary de­
signs for their people.
A fourth element is closely linked to the third: a prostrate civil so­
ciety that lacks the capacity to resist these plans. War, revolution, and 
economic collapse often radically weaken civil society as well as make 
the populace more receptive to a new dispensation. Late colonial rule, 
with its social engineering aspirations and ability to run roughshod 
over popular opposition, occasionally met this last condition.
In sum, the legibility of a society provides the capacity for large- 
scale social engineering, high-modernist ideology provides the desire, 
the authoritarian state provides the determination to act on that de­
sire, and an incapacitated civil society provides the leveled social ter­
rain on which to build.
I have not yet explained, the reader will have noted, why such high-

6 Introduction
modernist plans, backed by authoritarian power, actually failed. Ac­
counting for theif failure is my second purpose here.
Designed or planned social order is necessarily schematic; it al­
ways ignores essential features of any real, functioning social order. 
This truth is best illustrated in a work-to-rule strike, which turns on the 
fact that any production process depends on a host of informal prac­
tices and improvisations that could never be codified. By merely fol­
lowing the rules meticulously, the workforce can virtually halt produc­
tion. In the same fashion, the simplified rules animating plans for, say, 
a city, a village, or a collective farm were inadequate as a set of in­
structions for creating a functioning social order. The formal scheme 
was parasitic on informal processes that, alone, it could not create or 
maintain. To the degree that the formal scheme made no allowance for 
these processes or actually suppressed them, it failed both its intended 
beneficiaries and ultimately its designers as well.
Much of this book can be read as a case against the imperialism of 
high-modernist, planned social order. I stress the word "imperialism” 
here because I am emphatically not making a blanket case against ei­
ther bureaucratic planning or high-modernist ideology. I am, however, 
making a case against an imperial or hegemonic planning mentality 
that excludes the necessary role of local knowledge and know-how.
Throughout the book I make the case for the indispensable role of 
practical knowledge, informal processes, and improvisation in the face 
of unpredictability. In chapters 4 and 5, I contrast the high-modernist 
views and practices of city planners and revolutionaries with critical 
views emphasizing process, complexity, and open-endedness. Le Cor­
busier and Lenin are the protagonists, with Jane Jacobs and Rosa Lux­
emburg cast as their formidable critics. Chapters 6 and 7 contain ac­
counts of Soviet collectivization and Tanzanian forced villagization, 
which illustrate how schematic, authoritarian solutions to production 
and social order inevitably fail when they exclude the fund of valuable 
knowledge embodied in local practices. (An early draft contained a 
case study of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the United States’ high- 
modernist experiment and the granddaddy of all regional development 
projects. It was reluctantly swept aside to shorten what is still a long 
book.)
Finally, in chapter 9 I attempt to conceptualize the nature of prac­
tical knowledge and to contrast it with more formal, deductive, epis- 
temic knowledge. The term metis, which descends from classical Greek 
and denotes the knowledge that can come only from practical experi­
ence, serves as a useful portmanteau word for what I have in mind.

Introduction 7
Here I should also acknowledge my debt to anarchist writers (Kro­
potkin, Bakunin, Malatesta, Proudhon) who consistently emphasize 
the role of mutuality as opposed to imperative, hierarchical coordina­
tion in the creation of social order. Their understanding of the term 
"mutuality” covers some, but not all, of the same ground that I mean to 
cover with "metis.”
Radically simplified designs for social organization seem to court 
the same risks of failure courted by radically simplified designs for 
natural environments. The failures and vulnerability of monocrop 
commercial forests and genetically .engineered, mechanized mono­
cropping mimic the failures of collective farms and planned cities. At 
this level, I am making a case for the resilience of both social and nat­
ural diversity and a strong case about the limits, in principle, of what 
we are likely to know about complex, functioning order. One could, I 
think, successfully turn this argument against a certain kind of reduc­
tive social science. Having already taken on more than I could chew, I 
leave this additional detour to others, with my blessing.
In trying to make a strong, paradigmatic case, I realize that I have 
risked displaying the hubris of which high modernists are justly ac­
cused. Once you have crafted lenses that change your perspective, it is 
a great temptation to look at everything through the same spectacles. I 
do, however, want to plead innocent to two charges that I do not think 
a careful reading would sustain. The first charge is that my argument 
is uncritically admiring of the local, the traditional, and the customary. 
I understand that the practical knowledge I describe is often insepara­
ble from the practices of domination, monopoly, and exclusion that 
offend the modern liberal sensibility. My point is not that practical 
knowledge is the product of some mythical, egalitarian state of nature. 
Rather, my point is that formal schemes of order are untenable without 
some elements of the practical knowledge that they tend to dismiss. 
The second charge is that my argument is an anarchist case against the 
state itself. The state, as I make abundantly clear, is the vexed institu­
tion that is the ground of both our freedoms and our unfreedoms. My 
case is that certain kinds of states, driven by utopian plans and an au­
thoritarian disregard for the values, desires, and objections of their 
subjects, are indeed a mortal threat to human well-being. Short of that 
draconian but all too common situation, we are left to weigh judi­
ciously the benefits of certain state interventions against their costs.
As I finished this book, I realized that its critique of certain forms of 
state action might seem, from the post-1989 perspective of capitalist 
triumphalism, like a kind of quaint archaeology. States with the pre­
tensions and power that I criticize have for the most part vanished or

8 Introduction
have drastically curbed their ambitions. And yet, as I make clear in ex­
amining scientific farming, industrial agriculture, and capitalist mar­
kets in general, large-scale capitalism is just as much an agency of ho­
mogenization, uniformity, grids, and heroic simplification as the state 
is, with the difference being that, for capitalists, simplification must 
pay. A market necessarily reduces quality to quantity via the price 
mechanism and promotes standardization; in markets, money talks, 
not people. Today, global capitalism is perhaps the most powerful force 
for homogenization, whereas the state may in some instances be the 
defender of local difference and variety. (In Enlightenment’s Wake, 
John Gray makes a similar case for liberalism, which he regards as 
self-limiting because it rests on cultural and institutional capital that 
it is bound to undermine.) The “interruption,” forced by widespread 
strikes, of Frances structural adjustments to accommodate a common 
European currency is perhaps a straw in the wind. Put bluntly, my bill 
of particulars against a certain kind of state is by no means a case for 
politically unfettered market coordination as urged by Friedrich Hayek 
and Milton Friedman. As we shall see, the conclusions that can be 
drawn from the failures of modern projects of social engineering are 
as applicable to market-driven standardization as they are to bureau­
cratic homogeneity.

Part 1
State Projects of 
Legibility and Simplification


1 Nature and Space
Would it not be a great satisfaction to the king to know at a designated mo­
ment every year the number of his subjects, in total and by region, with all the 
resources, wealth & poverty of each place; [the number] of his nobility and ec­
clesiastics of all kinds, of men of the robe, of Catholics and of those of the 
other religion, all separated according to the place of their residence? . . . 
[Would it not be] a useful and necessary pleasure for him to be able, in his 
own office, to review in an hour’s time the present and past condition of a 
great realm of which he is the head, and be able himself to know with certi­
tude in what consists his grandeur, his wealth, and his strengths?
— Marquis de Vauban, proposing an annual census to Louis XIV in 1686
Certain forms of knowledge and control require a narrowing of vision. 
The great advantage of such tunnel vision is that it brings into sharp 
focus certain limited aspects of an otherwise far more complex and un­
wieldy reality. This very simplification, in turn, makes the phenome­
non at the center of the field of vision more legible and hence more 
susceptible to careful measurement and calculation. Combined with 
similar observations, an overall, aggregate, synoptic view of a selective 
reality is achieved, making possible a high degree of schematic knowl­
edge, control, and manipulation.
The invention of scientific forestry in late eighteenth-century Prus­
sia and Saxony serves as something of a model of this process.1 Al­
though the history of scientific forestry is important in its own right, it 
is used here as a metaphor for the forms of knowledge and manipula­
tion characteristic of powerful institutions with sharply defined inter­
ests, of which state bureaucracies and large commercial firms are per­
haps the outstanding examples. Once we have seen how simplification, 
legibility, and manipulation operate in forest management, we can 
then explore how the modern state applies a similar lens to urban plan­
ning, rural settlement, land administration, and agriculture.
The State and Scientific Forestry: A Parable
I [Gilgamesh] would conquer in the Cedar Forest. . ..  I will set my hand to it
and will chop down the Cedar.
—Epic of Gilgamesh
The early modern European state, even before the development of sci­
entific forestry, viewed its forests primarily through the fiscal lens of
11

12 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
revenue needs. To be sure, other concerns—such as timber for ship­
building, state construction, and fuel for the economic security of its 
subjects—were not entirely absent from official management. These 
concerns also had heavy implications for state revenue and security.2 
Exaggerating only slightly, one might say that the crown’s interest in 
forests was resolved through its fiscal lens into a single number: the 
revenue yield of the timber that might be extracted annually.
The best way to appreciate how heroic was this constriction of vi­
sion is to notice what fell outside its field of vision. Lurking behind the 
number indicating revenue yield were not so much forests as commer­
cial wood, representing so many thousands of board feet of saleable 
timber and so many cords of firewood fetching a certain price. Missing, 
of course, were all those trees, bushes, and plants holding little or no 
potential for state revenue. Missing as well were all those parts of trees, 
even revenue-bearing trees, which might have been useful to the popu­
lation but whose value could not be converted into fiscal receipts. Here 
I have in mind foliage and its uses as fodder and thatch; fruits, as food 
for people and domestic animals; twigs and branches, as bedding, fenc­
ing, hop poles, and kindling; bark and roots, for making medicines and 
for tanning; sap, for making resins; and so forth. Each species of tree— 
indeed, each part or growth stage of each species—had its unique 
properties and uses. A fragment of the entry under “elm” in a popular 
seventeenth-century encyclopedia on aboriculture conveys something 
of the vast range of practical uses to which the tree could be put.
Elm is a timber of most singular use, especially whereby it may be con­
tinually dry, or wet, in extremes; therefore proper for water works, 
mills, the ladles and soles of the wheel, pumps, aqueducts, ship planks 
below the water line, . . . also for wheelwrights, handles for the single 
handsaw, rails and gates. Elm is not so apt to rive [split]... and is used 
for chopping blocks, blocks for the hat maker, trunks and boxes to be 
covered with leather, coffins and dressers and shovelboard tables of 
great length; also for the carver and those curious workers of fruitage, 
foliage, shields, statues and most of the ornaments appertaining to the 
orders of architecture. . . . And finally . . . the use of the very leaves of 
this tree, especially the female, is not to be despised, . . . for they will 
prove of great relief to cattle in the winter and scorching summers 
when hay and fodder is dear. . . . The green leaf of the elms contused 
heals a green wound or cut, and boiled with the bark, consolidates 
bone fractures.3
In state “fiscal forestry,” however, the actual tree with its vast num­
ber of possible uses was replaced by an abstract tree representing a 
volume of lumber or firewood. If the princely conception of the forest 
was still utilitarian, it was surely a utilitarianism confined to the direct 
needs of the state.
From a naturalist’s perspective, nearly everything was missing from

N ature and Space 13
the state’s narrow frame of reference. Gone was the vast majority of 
flora: grasses, flowers, lichens, ferns, mosses, shrubs, and vines. Gone, 
too, were reptiles, birds, amphibians, and innumerable species of in­
sects. Gone were most species of fauna, except those that interested 
the crowns gamekeepers.
From an anthropologist’s perspective, nearly everything touching 
on human interaction with the forest was also missing from the 
state’s tunnel vision. The state did pay attention to poaching, which 
impinged on its claim to revenue in wood or its claim to royal game, 
but otherwise it typically ignored the vast, complex, and negotiated 
social uses of the forest for hunting and gathering, pasturage, fishing, 
charcoal making, trapping, and collecting food and valuable miner­
als as well as the forest’s significance for magic, worship, refuge, and 
so on.4
If the utilitarian state could not see the real, existing forest for the 
(commercial) trees, if its view of its forests was abstract and partial, it 
was hardly unique in this respect. Some level of abstraction is neces­
sary for virtually all forms of analysis, and it is not at all surprising that 
the abstractions of state officials should have reflected the paramount 
fiscal interests of their employer. The entry under “forest” in Diderot’s 
Encyclopedic is almost exclusively concerned with the utilite publique 
of forest products and the taxes, revenues, and profits that they can be 
made to yield. The forest as a habitat disappears and is replaced by the 
forest as an economic resource to be managed efficiently and prof­
itably.5 Here, fiscal and commercial logics coincide; they are both res­
olutely fixed on the bottom line.
The vocabulary used to organize nature typically betrays the over­
riding interests of its human users. In fact, utilitarian discourse re­
places the term “nature” with the term “natural resources," focusing 
on those aspects of nature that can be appropriated for human use. A 
comparable logic extracts from a more generalized natural world 
those flora or fauna that are of utilitarian value (usually marketable 
commodities) and, in turn, reclassifies those species that compete with, 
prey on, or otherwise diminish the yields of the valued species. Thus, 
plants that are valued become “crops,” the species that compete with 
them are stigmatized as “weeds,” and the insects that ingest them are 
stigmatized as "pests.” Thus, trees that are valued become “timber,” 
while species that compete with them become “trash” trees or "under­
brush.” The same logic applies to fauna. Highly valued animals become 
“game” or “livestock,” while those animals that compete with or prey 
upon them become “predators" or “varmints.”
The kind of abstracting, utilitarian logic that the state, through its 
officials, applied to the forest is thus not entirely distinctive. What is 
distinctive about this logic, however, is the narrowness of its field of vi­
sion, the degree of elaboration to which it can be subjected, and above

14 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
all, as we shall see, the degree to which it allowed the state to impose 
that logic on the very reality that was observed.6
Scientific forestry was originally developed from about 1765 to 1800, 
largely in Prussia and Saxony. Eventually, it would become the basis of 
forest management techniques in France, England, and the United 
States and throughout the Third World. Its emergence cannot be under­
stood outside the larger context of the centralized state-making initia­
tives of the period. In fact, the new forestry science was a subdiscipline 
of what was called cameral science, an effort to reduce the fiscal man­
agement of a kingdom to scientific principles that would allow sys­
tematic planning.7 Traditional domainal forestry had hitherto simply 
divided the forest into roughly equal plots, with the number of plots co­
inciding with the number of years in the assumed growth cycle.8 One 
plot was cut each year on the assumption of equal yields (and value) 
from plots of equal size. Because of poor maps, the uneven distribution 
of the most valuable large trees (Hochwald), and very approximate 
cordwood (Bruststaerke) measures, the results were unsatisfactory for 
fiscal planning.
Careful exploitation of domainal forests was all the more impera­
tive in the late eighteenth century, when fiscal officials became aware 
of a growing shortage of wood. Many of the old-growth forests of oak, 
beech, hornbeam, and linden had been severely degraded by planned 
and unplanned felling, while the regrowth was not as robust as hoped. 
The prospect of declining yields was alarming, not merely because it 
threatened revenue flows but also because it might provoke massive 
poaching by a peasantry in search of firewood. One sign of this con­
cern were the numerous state-sponsored competitions for designs of 
more efficient woodstoves.
The first attempt at more precise measurements of forests was 
made by Johann Gottlieb Beckmann on a carefully surveyed sample 
plot. Walking abreast, several assistants carried compartmentalized 
boxes with color-coded nails corresponding to five categories of tree 
sizes, which they had been trained to identify. Each tree was tagged 
with the appropriate nail until the sample plot had been covered. Be­
cause each assistant had begun with a certain number of nails, it was a 
simple matter to subtract the remaining nails from the initial total and 
arrive at an inventory of trees by class for the entire plot. The sample 
plot had been carefully chosen for its representativeness, allowing the 
foresters to then calculate the timber and, given certain price assump­
tions, the revenue yield of the whole forest. For the forest scientists 
(Forstwissenschaftler) the goal was always to "deliver the greatest pos­
sible constant volume of wood.”9
The effort at precision was pushed further as mathematicians 
worked from the cone-volume principle to specify the volume of sale­
able wood contained by a standardized tree (Normalbaum) of a given

N ature and Space 15
size-class. Their calculations were checked empirically against the ac­
tual volume of wood in sample trees.10 The final result of such calcula­
tions was the development of elaborate tables with data organized by 
tree size and age under specified conditions of normal growth and 
maturation. By radically narrowing his vision to commercial wood, 
the state forester had, with his tables, paradoxically achieved a synop­
tic view of the entire forest.11 This restriction of focus reflected in the 
tables was in fact the only way in which the whole forest could be 
taken in by a single optic. Reference to these tables coupled with field 
tests allowed the forester to estimate closely the inventory, growth, and 
yield of a given forest. In the regulated, abstract forest of the forst- 
wissenschaftler, calculation and measurement prevailed, and the 
three watchwords, in modern parlance, were “minimum diversity,” the 
“balance sheet,” and “sustained yield.” The logic of the state-managed 
forest science was virtually identical with the logic of commercial 
exploitation.12
The achievement of German forestry science in standardizing tech­
niques for calculating the sustainable yield of commercial timber and 
hence revenue was impressive enough. What is decisive for our pur­
poses, however, was the next logical step in forest management. That 
step was to attempt to create, through careful seeding, planting, and 
cutting, a forest that was easier for state foresters to count, manipu­
late, measure, and assess. The fact is that forest science and geometry, 
backed by state power, had the capacity to transform the real, diverse, 
and chaotic old-growth forest into a new, more uniform forest that 
closely resembled the administrative grid of its techniques. To this end, 
the underbrush was cleared, the number of species was reduced (often 
to monoculture), and plantings were done simultaneously and in 
straight rows on large tracts. These management practices, as Henry 
Lowood observes, “produced the monocultural, even-age forests that 
eventually transformed the Normalbaum from abstraction to reality. 
The German forest became the archetype for imposing on disorderly 
nature the neatly arranged constructs of science. Practical goals had 
encouraged mathematical utilitarianism, which seemed, in turn, to pro­
mote geometric perfection as the outward sign of the well-managed 
forest; in turn the rationally ordered arrangements of trees offered 
new possibilities for controlling nature."13
The tendency was toward regimentation, in the strict sense of the 
word. The forest trees were drawn up into serried, uniform ranks, as 
it were, to be measured, counted off, felled, and replaced by a new 
rank and file of lookalike conscripts. As an army, it was also designed 
hierarchically from above to fulfill a unique purpose and to be at the 
disposition of a single commander. At the limit, the forest itself would 
not even have to be seen; it could be “read” accurately from the tables 
and maps in the forester’s office.

1. Mixed temperate forest, part managed, part natural regeneration

2. One aisle of a managed poplar forest in Tuscany

18 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
How much easier it was to manage the new, stripped-down forest. 
With stands of same-age trees arranged in linear alleys, clearing the 
underbrush, felling, extraction, and new planting became a far more 
routine process. Increasing order in the forest made it possible for for­
est workers to use written training protocols that could be widely ap­
plied. A relatively unskilled and inexperienced labor crew could ade­
quately carry out its tasks by following a few standard rules in the new 
forest environment. Harvesting logs of relatively uniform width and 
length not only made it possible to forecast yields successfully but also 
to market homogeneous product units to logging contractors and tim­
ber merchants.14 Commercial logic and bureaucratic logic were, in 
this instance, synonymous; it was a system that promised to maximize 
the return of a single commodity over the long haul and at the same 
time lent itself to a centralized scheme of management.
The new legible forest was also easier to manipulate experimen­
tally. Now that the more complex old-growth forest had been replaced 
by a forest in which many variables were held constant, it was a far 
simpler matter to examine the effects of such variables as fertilizer ap­
plications, rainfall, and weeding, on same-age, single-species stands. It 
was the closest thing to a forest laboratory one could imagine at the 
time.15 The very simplicity of the forest made it possible, for the first 
time, to assess novel regimens of forest management under nearly ex­
perimental conditions.
Although the geometric, uniform forest was intended to facilitate 
management and extraction, it quickly became a powerful aesthetic as 
well. The visual sign of the well-managed forest, in Germany and in the 
many settings where German scientific forestry took hold, came to be 
the regularity and neatness of its appearance. Forests might be in­
spected in much the same way as a commanding officer might review 
his troops on parade, and woe to the forest guard whose “beat” was 
not sufficiently trim or “dressed.” This aboveground order required 
that underbrush be removed and that fallen trees and branches be 
gathered and hauled off. Unauthorized disturbances—whether by fire 
or by local populations—were seen as implicit threats to management 
routines. The more uniform the forest, the greater the possibilities for 
centralized management; the routines that could be applied mini­
mized the need for the discretion necessary in the management of di­
verse old-growth forests.
The controlled environment of the redesigned, scientific forest prom­
ised many striking advantages.16 It could be synoptically surveyed by 
the chief forester; it could be more easily supervised and harvested ac­
cording to centralized, long-range plans; it provided a steady, uniform 
commodity, thereby eliminating one major source of revenue fluctua­
tion; and it created a legible natural terrain that facilitated manipula­
tion and experimentation.

Nature and Space 19
This utopian dream of scientific forestry was, of course, only the 
immanent logic of its techniques. It was not and could not ever be re­
alized in practice. Both nature and the human factor intervened. The 
existing topography of the landscape and the vagaries of fire, storms, 
blights, climatic changes, insect populations, and disease conspired to 
thwart foresters and to shape the actual forest. Also, given the insur­
mountable difficulties of policing large forests, people living nearby 
typically continued to graze animals, poach firewood and kindling, 
make charcoal, and use the forest in other ways that prevented the 
foresters’ management plan from being fully realized.17 Although, like 
all utopian schemes, it fell well short of attaining its goal, the critical 
fact is that it did partly succeed in stamping the actual forest with the 
imprint of its designs.
The principles of scientific forestry were applied as rigorously as 
was practicable to most large German forests throughout much of the 
nineteenth century. The Norway spruce, known for its hardiness, rapid 
growth, and valuable wood, became the bread-and-butter tree of com­
mercial forestry. Originally, the Norway spruce was seen as a restora­
tion crop that might revive overexploited mixed forests, but the com­
mercial profits from the first rotation were so stunning that there was 
little effort to return to mixed forests. The monocropped forest was a 
disaster for peasants who were now deprived of all the grazing, food, 
raw materials, and medicines that the earlier forest ecology had af­
forded. Diverse old-growth forests, about three-fourths of which were 
broadleaf (deciduous) species, were replaced by largely coniferous 
forests in which Norway spruce or Scotch pine were the dominant or 
often only species.
In the short run, this experiment in the radical simplification of the 
forest to a single commodity was a resounding success. It was a rather 
long short run, in the sense that a single crop rotation of trees might 
take eighty years to mature. The productivity of the new forests re­
versed the decline in the domestic wood supply/provided more uni­
form stands and more usable wood fiber, raised the economic return of 
forest land, and appreciably shortened rotation times (the time it took 
to harvest a stand and plant another).18 Like row crops in a field, the 
new softwood forests were prodigious producers of a single commod­
ity. Little wonder that the German model of intensive commercial for­
estry became standard throughout the world.19 Gifford Pinchot, the 
second chief forester of the United States, was trained at the French 
forestry school at Nancy, which followed a German-style curriculum, 
as did most U.S. and European forestry schools.20 The first forester 
hired by the British to assess and manage the great forest resources of 
India and Burma was Dietrich Brandes, a German.21 By the end of the 
nineteenth century, German forestry science was hegemonic.
The great simplification of the forest into a "one-commodity ma­

20 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
chine" was precisely the step that allowed German forestry science to 
become a rigorous technical and commercial discipline that could be 
codified and taught. A condition of its rigor was that it severely brack­
eted, or assumed to be constant, all variables except those bearing di­
rectly on the yield of the selected species and on the cost of growing 
and extracting them. As we shall see with urban planning, revolution­
ary theory, collectivization, and rural resettlement, a whole world ly­
ing “outside the brackets" returned to haunt this technical vision.
In the German case, the negative biological and ultimately com­
mercial consequences of the stripped-down forest became painfully 
obvious only after the second rotation of conifers had been planted. “It 
took about one century for them [the negative consequences] to show 
up clearly. Many of the pure stands grew excellently in the first gener­
ation but already showed an amazing retrogression in the second gen­
eration. The reason for this is a very complex one and only a simplified 
explanation can be given. . . . Then the whole nutrient cycle got out of 
order and eventually was nearly stopped. . . . Anyway, the drop of one 
or two site classes [used for grading the quality of timber] during two 
or three generations of pure spruce is a well known and frequently ob­
served fact. This represents a production loss of 20 to 30 percent.”22
A new term, Waldsterben (forest death), entered the German vocab­
ulary to describe the worst cases. An exceptionally complex process in­
volving soil building, nutrient uptake, and symbiotic relations among 
fungi, insects, mammals, and flora—which were, and still are, not en­
tirely understood—was apparently disrupted, with serious conse­
quences. Most of these consequences can be traced to the radical sim­
plicity of the scientific forest.
Only an elaborate treatise in ecology could do justice to the subject 
of what went wrong, but mentioning a few of the major effects of sim­
plification will illustrate how vital many of the factors bracketed by 
scientific forestry turned out to be. German forestry’s attention to for­
mal order and ease of access for management and extraction led to the 
clearing of underbrush, deadfalls, and snags (standing dead trees), 
greatly reducing the diversity of insect, mammal, and bird populations 
so essential to soil-building processes.23 The absence of litter and woody 
biomass on the new forest floor is now seen as a major factor leading to 
thinner and less nutritious soils.24 Same-age, same-species forests not 
only created a far less diverse habitat but were also more vulnerable to 
massive storm-felling. The very uniformity of species and age among, 
say, Norway spruce also provided a favorable habitat to all the “pests” 
which were specialized to that species. Populations of these pests built 
up to epidemic proportions, inflicting losses in yields and large outlays 
for fertilizers, insecticides, fungicides, or rodenticides.25 Apparently 
the first rotation of Norway spruce had grown exceptionally well in 
large part because it was living off (or mining) the long-accumulated

N ature and Space 21
soil capital of the diverse old-growth forest that it had replaced. Once 
that capital was depleted, the steep decline in growth rates began.
As pioneers in scientific forestry, the Germans also became pio­
neers in recognizing and attempting to remedy many of its undesir­
able consequences. To this end, they invented the science of what they 
called "forest hygiene.” In place of hollow trees that had been home to 
woodpeckers, owls, and other tree-nesting birds, the foresters pro­
vided specially designed boxes. Ant colonies were artificially raised 
and implanted in the forest, their nests tended by local schoolchildren. 
Several species of spiders, which had disappeared from the mono­
cropped forest, were reintroduced.26 What is striking about these en­
deavors is that they are attempts to work around an impoverished 
habitat still planted with a single species of conifers for production pur­
poses.27 In this case, “restoration forestry” attempted with mixed re­
sults to create a virtual ecology, while denying its chief sustaining con­
dition: diversity.
The metaphorical value of this brief account of scientific production 
forestry is that it illustrates the dangers of dismembering an exception­
ally complex and poorly understood set of relations and processes in 
order to isolate a single element of instrumental value. The instrument, 
the knife, that carved out the new, rudimentary forest was the razor- 
sharp interest in the production of a single commodity. Everything that 
interfered with the efficient production of the key commodity was im­
placably eliminated. Everything that seemed unrelated to efficient pro­
duction was ignored. Having come to see the forest as a commodity, sci­
entific forestry set about refashioning it as a commodity machine.28 
Utilitarian simplification in the forest was an effective way of maximiz­
ing wood production in the short and intermediate term. Ultimately, 
however, its emphasis on yield and paper profits, its relatively short 
time horizon, and, above all, the vast array of consequences it had res­
olutely bracketed came back to haunt it.29
Even in the realm of greatest interest—namely, the production of 
wood fiber—the consequences of not seeing the forest for the trees 
sooner or later became glaring. Many were directly traceable to the 
basic simplification imposed in the interest of ease of management and 
economic return: monoculture. Monocultures are, as a rule, more 
fragile and hence more vulnerable to the stress of disease and weather 
than polycultures are. As Richard Plochmann expresses it, “One further 
drawback, which is typical of all pure plantations, is that the ecology of 
the natural plant associations became unbalanced. Outside of the nat­
ural habitat, and when planted in pure stands, the physical condition of 
the single tree weakens and resistance against enemies decreases."30 
Any unmanaged forest may experience stress from storms, disease, 
drought, fragile soil, or severe cold. A diverse, complex forest, however, 
with its many species of trees, its full complement of birds, insects, and

22 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
mammals, is far more resilient—far more able to withstand and re­
cover from such injuries—than pure stands. Its very diversity and 
complexity help to inoculate it against devastation: a windstorm that 
fells large, old trees of one species will typically spare large trees of 
other species as well as small trees of the same species; a blight or in­
sect attack that threatens, say, oaks may leave lindens and hornbeams 
unscathed. Just as a merchant who, not knowing what conditions her 
ships will face at sea, sends out scores of vessels with different designs, 
weights, sails, and navigational aids stands a better chance of having 
much of her fleet make it to port, while a merchant who stakes every­
thing on a single ship design and size runs a higher risk of losing 
everything, forest biodiversity acts like an insurance policy. Like the en­
terprise run by the second merchant, the simplified forest is a more vul­
nerable system, especially over the long haul, as its effects on soil, 
water, and "pest” populations become manifest. Such dangers can only 
partly be checked by the use of artificial fertilizers, insecticides, and 
fungicides. Given the fragility of the simplified production forest, the 
massive outside intervention that was required to establish it—we 
might call it the administrators' forest—is increasingly necessary in 
order to sustain it as well.31
Social Facts, Raw and Cooked
Society must be remade before it can be the object of quantification. Cate­
gories of people and things must be defined, measures must be interchange­
able; land and commodities must be conceived as represented by an equiva­
lent in money. There is much of what Weber called rationalization in this, and 
also a good deal of centralization.
—Theodore M. Porter, “Objectivity as Standardization”
The administrators' forest cannot be the naturalists’ forest. Even if the 
ecological interactions at play in the forest were known, they would 
constitute a reality so complex and variegated as to defy easy short­
hand description. The intellectual filter necessary to reduce the com­
plexity to manageable dimensions was provided by the state’s interest 
in commercial timber and revenue.
If the natural world, however shaped by human use, is too un­
wieldy in its "raw” form for administrative manipulation, so too are 
the actual social patterns of human interaction with nature bureau­
cratically indigestible in their raw form. No administrative system is 
capable of representing any existing social community except through 
a heroic and greatly schematized process of abstraction and sim­
plification. It is not simply a question of capacity, although, like a for­
est, a human community is surely far too complicated and variable to 
easily yield its secrets to bureaucratic formulae. It is also a question of 
purpose. State agents have no interest—nor should they—in describ­

Nature and Space 23
ing an entire social reality, any more than the scientific forester has 
an interest in describing the ecology of a forest in detail. Their ab­
stractions and simplifications are disciplined by a small number of 
objectives, and until the nineteenth century the most prominent of 
these were typically taxation, political control, and conscription. They 
needed only the techniques and understanding that were adequate to 
these tasks. As we shall see, here are some instructive parallels be­
tween the development of modern “fiscal forestry” and modern forms 
of taxable property in land. Premodern states were no less concerned 
with tax receipts than are modern states. But, as with premodern state 
forestry, the taxation techniques and reach of the premodern state left 
much to be desired.
Absolutist France in the seventeenth century is a case in point.32 In­
direct taxes—excise levies on salt and tobacco, tolls, license fees, and 
the sale of offices and titles—were favored forms of taxation; they 
were easy to administer and required little or nothing in the way of in­
formation about landholding and income. The tax-exempt status of the 
nobility and clergy meant that a good deal of the landed property was 
not taxed at all, transferring much of the burden to wealthy commoner 
farmers and the peasantry. Common land, although it was a vitally im­
portant subsistence resource for the rural poor, yielded no revenue ei­
ther. In the eighteenth century, the physiocrats would condemn all 
common property on two presumptive grounds: it was inefficiently ex­
ploited, and it was fiscally barren.33
What must strike any observer of absolutist taxation is how wildly 
variable and unsystematic it was. James Collins has found that the 
main direct land tax, the taille, was frequently not paid at all and that 
no community paid more than one-third of what they were assessed.34 
The result was that the state routinely relied on exceptional measures 
to overcome shortfalls in revenue or to pay for new expenses, particu­
larly military campaigns. The crown exacted "forced loans” (rentes, 
droits alienes) in return for annuities that it might or might not honor; 
it sold offices and titles (venalites d ‘offices); it levied exceptional hearth 
taxes (fouages extraordinaires); and, worst of all, it billeted troops di­
rectly in communities, often ruining the towns in the process.35
The billeting of troops, a common form of fiscal punishment, is to 
modern forms of systematic taxation as the drawing and quartering of 
would-be regicides (so strikingly described by Michel Foucault at the 
beginning of Discipline and Punish) is to modern forms of systematic 
incarceration of criminals. Not that there was a great deal of choice in­
volved. The state simply lacked both the information and the adminis­
trative grid that would have allowed it to exact from its subjects a reli­
able revenue that was more closely tied to their actual capacity to pay. 
As with forest revenue, there was no alternative to rough-and-ready 
calculations and their corresponding fluctuations in yields. Fiscally,

24 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
the premodern state was, to use Charles Lindblom's felicitous phrase, 
“all thumbs and no fingers”; it was incapable of fine tuning.
Here is where the rough analogy between forest management and 
taxation begins to break down. In the absence of reliable information 
about sustainable timber yield, the state might either inadvertently 
overexploit its resources and threaten future supply or else fail to real­
ize the level of proceeds the forest might sustain.36 The trees them­
selves, however, were not political actors, whereas the taxable subjects 
of the crown most certainly were. They signaled their dissatisfaction 
by flight, by various forms of quiet resistance and evasion, and, in ex­
tremis, by outright revolt. A reliable format for taxation of subjects 
thus depended not just on discovering what their economic conditions 
were but also on trying to judge what exactions they would vigorously 
resist.
How were the agents of the state to begin measuring and codifying, 
throughout each region of an entire kingdom, its population, their land­
holdings, their harvests, their wealth, the volume of commerce, and so 
on? The obstacles in the path of even the most rudimentary knowledge 
of these matters were enormous. The struggle to establish uniform 
weights and measures and to carry out a cadastral mapping of land­
holdings can serve as diagnostic examples. Each required a large, costly, 
long-term campaign against determined resistance. Resistance came 
not only from the general population but also from local power-holders; 
they were frequently able to take advantage of the administrative inco­
herence produced by differing interests and missions within the ranks 
of officialdom. But in spite of the ebbs and flows of the various cam­
paigns and their national peculiarities, a pattern of adopting uniform 
measurements and charting cadastral maps ultimately prevailed.
Each undertaking also exemplified a pattern of relations between 
local knowledge and practices on one hand and state administrative 
routines on the other, a pattern that will find echoes throughout this 
book. In each case, local practices of measurement and landholding 
were "illegible" to the state in their raw form. They exhibited a diver­
sity and intricacy that reflected a great variety of purely local, not 
state, interests. That is to say, they could not be assimilated into an ad­
ministrative grid without being either transformed or reduced to a con­
venient, if partly fictional, shorthand. The logic behind the required 
shorthand was provided, as in scientific forestry, by the pressing mate­
rial interests of rulers: fiscal receipts, military manpower, and state se­
curity. In turn, this shorthand functioned, as did Beckmann’s Normal- 
baume, as not just a description, however inadequate. Backed by state 
power through records, courts, and ultimately coercion, these state 
fictions transformed the reality they presumed to observe, although 
never so thoroughly as to precisely fit the grid.

Nature and Space 25
Forging the Tools of Legibility: Popular Measures, 
State Measures
Nonstate forms of measurement grew from the logic of local practice. 
As such, they shared some generic features despite their bewildering 
variety—features that made them an impediment to administrative 
uniformity. Thanks to the synthesis of the medievalist Witold Kula, the 
reasoning that animated local practices of measurement may be set 
out fairly succinctly.37
Most early measures were human in scale. One sees this logic at 
work in such surviving expressions as a “stone's throw” or “within ear­
shot" for distances and a “cartload,” a "basketful,” or a "handful” for 
volume. Given that the size of a cart or basket might vary from place to 
place and that a stone’s throw might not be precisely uniform from 
person to person, these units of measurement varied geographically 
and temporally. Even measures that were apparently fixed might be 
deceptive. The pinte in eighteenth-century Paris, for example, was equiv­
alent to .93 liters, whereas in Seine-en-Montagne it was 1.99 liters and 
in Precy-sous-Thil, an astounding 3.33 liters. The aune, a measure of 
length used for cloth, varied depending on the material (the unit for 
silk, for instance, was smaller than that for linen), and across France 
there were at least seventeen different aunes.38
Local measures were also relational or "commensurable.”39 Virtu­
ally any request for a judgment of measure allows a range of responses 
depending on the context of the request. In the part of Malaysia with 
which I am most familiar, if one were to ask "How far is it to the next 
village?" a likely response would be “Three rice-cookings.” The answer 
assumes that the questioner is interested in how much time it will take 
to get there, not how many miles away it is. In varied terrain, of course, 
distance in miles is an utterly unreliable guide to travel time, especially 
when the traveler is on foot or riding a bicycle. The answer also ex­
presses time not in minutes—until recently, wristwatches were rare— 
but in units that are locally meaningful. Everyone knows how long it 
takes to cook the local rice. Thus an Ethiopian response to a query 
about how much salt is required for a dish might be “Half as much as to 
cook a chicken.” The reply refers back to a standard that everyone is ex­
pected to know. Such measurement practices are irreducibly local, 
inasmuch as regional differences in, say, the type of rice eaten or the 
preferred way of cooking chicken will give different results.
Many local units of measurement are tied practically to particular 
activities. Marathi peasants, as Arjun Appadurai notes, express the de­
sired distance between the onion sets they plant in terms of hand- 
breadths. When one is moving along a field row, the hand is, well, the 
most handy gauge. In similar fashion, a common measure for twine or 
rope is the distance between the thumb and elbow because this corre­
sponds with how it is wrapped and stored. As with setting onions, the

26 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
process of measuring is embedded in the activity itself and requires no 
separate operation. Such measurements, moreover, are often approx­
imate; they are only as exact as the task at hand requires.40 Rainfall 
may be said to be abundant or inadequate if the context of the query 
implies an interest in a particular crop. And a reply in terms of inches 
of rainfall, however accurate, would also fail to convey the desired in­
formation; it ignores such vital matters as the timing of the rain. For 
many purposes, an apparently vague measurement may communicate 
more valuable information than a statistically exact figure. The culti­
vator who reports that his rice yield from a plot is anywhere between 
four and seven baskets is conveying more accurate information, when 
the focus of attention is on the variability of the yield, than if he re­
ported a ten-year statistical average of 5.6 baskets.
There is, then, no single, all-purpose, correct answer to a question 
implying measurement unless we specify the relevant local concerns 
that give rise to the question. Particular customs of measurement are 
thus situationally, temporally, and geographically bound.
Nowhere is the particularity of customary measurement more evi­
dent than with cultivated land. Modern abstract measures of land by 
surface area—so many hectares or acres—are singularly uninforma­
tive figures to a family that proposes to make its living from these 
acres. Telling a farmer only that he is leasing twenty acres of land is 
about as helpful as telling a scholar that he has bought six kilograms of 
books. Customary measures of land have therefore taken a variety of 
forms corresponding to those aspects of the land that are of greatest 
practical interest. Where land was abundant and manpower or draft- 
power scarce, the most meaningful gauge of land was often the num­
ber of days required to plow or to weed it. A plot of land in nineteenth- 
century France, for example, would be described as representing so 
many morgen or journals (days of work) and as requiring a specific 
kind of work (homee, bechee, fauchee). How many morgen were repre­
sented by a field of, say, ten acres could vary greatly; if the land were 
rocky and steeply pitched, it might require twice as much labor to 
work than if it were rich bottomland. The morgen would also differ 
from place to place depending on the strength of local draftpower and 
the crops sown, and it would differ from time to time as technology 
(plow tips, yokes, harnesses) affected the work a man could accom­
plish in a day.
Land might also be evaluated according to the amount of seed re­
quired to sow it. If the soil were very good, a field would be densely 
sown, whereas poor land would be more lightly seeded. The amount of 
seed sown to a field is in fact a relatively good proxy for average yield, 
as the sowing is done in anticipation of average growing conditions, 
while the actual seasonal yield would be more variable. Given a par­
ticular crop regimen, the amount of seed sown would indicate roughly

N ature and Space 27
how productive a field had been, although it would reveal little about 
how arduous the land was to cultivate or how variable the harvests 
were. But the average yield from a plot of land is itself a rather ab­
stract figure. What most farmers near the subsistence margin want to 
know above all is whether a particular farm will meet their basic needs 
reliably. Thus small farms in Ireland were described as a “farm of one 
cow” or a “farm of two cows” to indicate their grazing capacity to 
those who lived largely by milk products and potatoes. The physical 
area a farm might comprise was of little interest compared to whether 
it would feed a particular family.41
To grasp the prodigious variety of customary ways of measuring 
land, we would have to imagine literally scores of “maps” constructed 
along very different lines than mere surface area. I have in mind the 
sorts of maps devised to capture our attention with a kind of fun-house 
effect in which, say, the size of a country is made proportional to its 
population rather than its geographical size, with China and India 
looming menacingly over Russia, Brazil, and the United States, while 
Libya, Australia, and Greenland virtually disappear. These types of 
customary maps (for there would be a great many) would construct 
the landscape according to units of work and yield, type of soil, acces­
sibility, and ability to provide subsistence, none of which would neces­
sarily accord with surface area. The measurements are decidedly lo­
cal, interested, contextual, and historically specific. What meets the 
subsistence needs of one family may not meet the subsistence needs of 
another. Factors such as local crop regimens, labor supply, agricultural 
technology, and weather ensure that the standards of evaluation vary 
from place to place and over time. Directly apprehended by the state, 
so many maps would represent a hopelessly bewildering welter of 
local standards. They definitely would not lend themselves to aggrega­
tion into a single statistical series that would allow state officials to 
make meaningful comparisons.
The Politics of Measurement
Thus far, this account of local measurement practices risks giving 
the impression that, although local conceptions of distance, area, vol­
ume, and so on were different from and more varied than the unitary 
abstract standards a state might favor, they were nevertheless aiming 
at objective accuracy. That impression would be false. Every act of mea­
surement was an act marked by the play of power relations. To under­
stand measurement practices in early modern Europe, as Kula demon­
strates, one must relate them to the contending interests of the major 
estates: aristocrats, clergy, merchants, artisans, and serfs.
A good part of the politics of measurement sprang from what a con­
temporary economist might call the "stickiness” of feudal rents. Noble

28 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
and clerical claimants often found it difficult to increase feudal dues di­
rectly; the levels set for various charges were the result of long struggle, 
and even a small increase above the customary level was viewed as a 
threatening breach of tradition.42 Adjusting the measure, however, rep­
resented a roundabout way of achieving the same end. The local lord 
might, for example, lend grain to peasants in smaller baskets and insist 
on repayment in larger baskets. He might surreptitiously or even boldly 
enlarge the size of the grain sacks accepted for milling (a monopoly of 
the domain lord) and reduce the size of the sacks used for measuring 
out flour; he might also collect feudal dues in larger baskets and pay 
wages in kind in smaller baskets. While the formal custom governing 
feudal dues and wages would thus remain intact (requiring, for exam­
ple, the same number of sacks of wheat from the harvest of a given 
holding), the actual transaction might increasingly favor the lord.43 The 
results of such fiddling were far from trivial. Kula estimates that the 
size of the bushel (boisseau) used to collect the main feudal rent (taille) 
increased by one-third between 1674 and 1716 as part of what was 
called the reaction feodale.44
Even when the unit of measurement—say, the bushel—was appar­
ently agreed upon by all, the fun had just begun. Virtually everywhere 
in early modern Europe were endless micropolitics about how baskets 
might be adjusted through wear, bulging, tricks of weaving, moisture, 
the thickness of the rim, and so on. In some areas the local standards 
for the bushel and other units of measurement were kept in metallic 
form and placed in the care of a trusted official or else literally carved 
into the stone of a church or the town hall.45 Nor did it end there. How 
the grain was to be poured (from shoulder height, which packed it 
somewhat, or from waist height?), how damp it could be, whether the 
container could be shaken down, and, finally, if and how it was to be 
leveled off when full were subjects of long and bitter controversy. 
Some arrangements called for the grain to be heaped, some for a "half­
heap," and still others for it to be leveled or “striked" (ras). These were 
not trivial matters. A feudal lord could increase his rents by 25 percent 
by insisting on receiving wheat and rye in heaped bushels.46 If, by cus­
tom, the bushel of grain was to be striked, then a further micropolitics 
erupted over the strickle. Was it to be round, thereby packing in grain 
as it was rolled across the rim, or was it to be sharp-edged? Who would 
apply the strickle? Who could be trusted to keep it?
A comparable micropolitics, as one might expect, swirled around 
the unit of land measurement. A common measure of length, the ell, 
was used to mark off the area to be plowed or weeded as a part of feu­
dal labor dues. Once again, the lengths and widths in ells were “sticky" 
having been established through long struggle. It was tempting for a 
lord or overseer to try raising labor dues indirectly by increasing the 
length of the ell. If the attempt were successful, the formal rules of

N ature and Space 29
corvee labor would not be violated, but the amount of work extracted 
would increase. Perhaps the stickiest of all measures before the nine­
teenth century was the price of bread. As the most vital subsistence 
good of premodern times, it served as a kind of cost-of-living index, 
and its cost was the subject of deeply held popular customs about its 
relationship to the typical urban wage. Kula shows in remarkable de­
tail how bakers, afraid to provoke a riot by directly violating the “just 
price,” managed nevertheless to manipulate the size and weight of the 
loaf to compensate to some degree for changes in the price of wheat 
and rye flour.47
Statecraft and the Hieroglyphics of Measurement
Because local standards of measurement were tied to practical 
needs, because they reflected particular cropping patterns and agri­
cultural technology, because they varied with climate and ecology, 
because they were "an attribute of power and an instrument of as­
serting class privilege,” and because they were “at the center of bitter 
class struggle," they represented a mind-boggling problem for state­
craft.48 Efforts to simplify or standardize measures recur like a leit­
motif throughout French history—their reappearance a sure sign of 
previous failure. More modest attempts to simply codify local practices 
and create conversion tables were quickly overtaken and rendered ob­
solete by changes on the ground. The king’s ministers were confronted, 
in effect, with a patchwork of local measurement codes, each of which 
had to be cracked. It was as if each district spoke its own dialect, one 
that was unintelligible to outsiders and at the same time liable to 
change without notice. Either the state risked making large and po­
tentially damaging miscalculations about local conditions, or it relied 
heavily on the advice of local trackers—the nobles and clergy in the 
Crown’s confidence—who, in turn, were not slow to take full advan­
tage of their power.
The illegibility of local measurement practices was more than an ad­
ministrative headache for the monarchy. It compromised the most vital 
and sensitive aspects of state security. Food supply was the Achilles heel 
of the early modern state; short of religious war, nothing so menaced 
the state as food shortages and the resulting social upheavals. Without 
comparable units of measurement, it was difficult if not impossible to 
monitor markets, to compare regional prices for basic commodities, or 
to regulate food supplies effectively.49 Obliged to grope its way on the 
basis of sketchy information, rumor, and self-interested local reports, 
the state often responded belatedly and inappropriately. Equity in tax­
ation, another sensitive political issue, was beyond the reach of a state 
that found it difficult to know the basic comparative facts about har­
vests and prices. A vigorous effort to collect taxes, to requisition for mil­

30 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
itary garrisons, to relieve urban shortages, or any number of other mea­
sures might, given the crudeness of state intelligence, actually provoke 
a political crisis. Even when it did not jeopardize state security, the 
Babel of measurement produced gross inefficiencies and a pattern of 
either undershooting or overshooting fiscal targets.50 No effective cen­
tral monitoring or controlled comparisons were possible without stan­
dard, fixed units of measurement.
Simplification and Standardization of Measurement
The conquerors of our days, peoples or princes, want their empire to possess a 
unified surface over which the superb eye of power can wander without en­
countering any inequality which hurts or limits its view. The same code of law, 
the same measures, the same rules, and if we could gradually get there, the 
same language; that is what is proclaimed as the perfection of the social orga­
nization. . . . The great slogan of the day is uniformity.
— Benjamin Constant, De Vesprit de conquete
If scientific forestry’s project of creating a simplified and legible 
forest encountered opposition from villagers whose usage rights were 
being challenged, the political opposition to standard and legible units 
of measurement was even more refractory. The power to establish and 
impose local measures was an important feudal prerogative with ma­
terial consequences which the aristocracy and clergy would not will­
ingly surrender. Testimony to their capacity to thwart standardization 
is evident in the long series of abortive initiatives by absolutist rulers 
who tried to insist on some degree of uniformity. The very particularity 
of local feudal practices and their impenetrability to would-be central- 
izers helped to underwrite the autonomy of local spheres of power.
Three factors, in the end, conspired to make what Kula calls the 
“metrical revolution” possible. First, the growth of market exchange 
encouraged uniformity in measures. Second, both popular sentiment 
and Enlightenment philosophy favored a single standard throughout 
France. Finally, the Revolution and especially Napoleonic state build­
ing actually enforced the metric system in France and the empire.
Large-scale commercial exchange and long-distance trade tend to 
promote common standards of measurement. For relatively small- 
scale trade, grain dealers could transact with several suppliers as long 
as they knew the measure each was using. They might actually profit 
from their superior grasp of the profusion of units, much as smugglers 
take advantage of small differences in taxes and tariffs. Beyond a cer­
tain point, however, much of commerce is composed of long chains of 
transactions, often over great distances, between anonymous buyers 
and sellers. Such trade is greatly simplified and made legible by stan­
dard weights and measures. Whereas artisanal products were typically 
made by a single producer according to the desires of a particular cus­

Nature and Space 31
tomer and carried a price specific to that object, the mass-produced 
commodity is made by no one in particular and is intended for any 
purchaser at all. In a sense, the virtue of the mass commodity is its re­
liable uniformity. In proportion, then, as the volume of commerce grew 
and the goods exchanged became increasingly standardized (a ton of 
wheat, a dozen plow tips, twenty cart wheels), there was a growing ten­
dency to accept widely agreed upon units of measurement. Officials 
and physiocrats alike were convinced that uniform measures were the 
precondition for creating a national market and promoting rational 
economic action.51
The perennial state project of unifying measures throughout the 
kingdom received a large degree of popular support in the eighteenth 
century, thanks to the reaction feodale. Aiming to maximize the return 
on their estates, owners of feudal domains, many of them arrivistes, 
achieved their goal in part by manipulating units of measurement. This 
sense of victimization was evident in the cahiers of grievances pre­
pared for the meeting of the Estates General just before the Revolu­
tion. The cahiers of the members of the Third Estate consistently called 
for equal measures (although this was hardly their main grievance), 
whereas the cahiers of the clergy and nobility were silent, presumably 
indicating their satisfaction with the status quo on this issue. The fol­
lowing petition from Brittany is typical of the way in which an appeal 
for unitary measures could be assimilated to devotion to the Crown: 
"We beg them [the king, his family, and his chief minister] to join with 
us in checking the abuses being perpetrated by tyrants against that 
class of citizens which is kind and considerate and which, until this 
day has been unable to present its very grievances to the very foot of 
the throne, and now we call on the King to mete out justice, and we ex­
press our most sincere desire for but one king, one law, one weight, and 
one measure."52
For centralizing elites, the universal meter was to older, particular­
istic measurement practices as a national language was to the existing 
welter of dialects. Such quaint idioms would be replaced by a new uni­
versal gold standard, just as the central banking of absolutism had 
swept away the local currencies of feudalism. The metric system was 
at once a means of administrative centralization, commercial reform, 
and cultural progress. The academicians of the revolutionary republic, 
like the royal academicians before them, saw the meter as one of the 
intellectual instruments that would make France "revenue-rich, mili­
tarily potent, and easily administered."53 Common measures, it was 
supposed, would spur the grain trade, make land more productive (by 
permitting easier comparisons of price and productivity), and, not in­
cidentally, lay the groundwork for a national tax code.54 But the re­
formers also had in mind a genuine cultural revolution. “As mathe­
matics was the language of science, so would the metric system be the

32 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
language of commerce and industry,” serving to unify and transform 
French society.55 A rational unit of measurement would promote a ra­
tional citizenry.
The simplification of measures, however, depended on that other 
revolutionary political simplification of the modern era: the concept of 
a uniform, homogeneous citizenship. As long as each estate operated 
within a separate legal sphere, as long as different categories of people 
were unequal in law, it followed that they might also have unequal 
rights with respect to measures.56 The idea of equal citizenship, the 
abstraction of the “unmarked” citizen, can be traced to the Enlighten­
ment and is evident in the writings of the Encyclopedists.57 For the En­
cyclopedists, the cacophony among measurements, institutions, inher­
itance laws, taxation, and market regulations was the great obstacle to 
the French becoming a single people. They envisioned a series of cen­
tralizing and rationalizing reforms that would transform France into a 
national community where the same codified laws, measures, customs, 
and beliefs would everywhere prevail. It is worth noting that this pro­
ject promotes the concept of national citizenship—a national French 
citizen perambulating the kingdom and encountering exactly the same 
fair, equal conditions as the rest of his compatriots. In place of a welter 
of incommensurable small communities, familiar to their inhabitants 
but mystifying to outsiders, there would rise a single national society 
perfectly legible from the center. The proponents of this vision well un­
derstood that what was at stake was not merely administrative conve­
nience but also the transformation of a people: “The uniformity of cus­
toms, viewpoints, and principles of action will, inevitably, lead to a 
greater community of habits and predispositions."58 The abstract grid 
of equal citizenship would create a new reality: the French citizen.
The homogenization of measures, then, was part of a larger, eman­
cipatory simplification. At one stroke the equality of all French people 
before the law was guaranteed by the state; they were no longer mere 
subjects of their lords and sovereign but bearers of inalienable rights 
as citizens.59 All the previous "natural” distinctions were now “denat­
uralized” and nullified, at least in law.60 In an unprecedented revolu­
tionary context where an entirely new political system was being cre­
ated from first principles, it was surely no great matter to legislate 
uniform weights and measures. As the revolutionary decree read: 
“The centuries old dream of the masses of only one just measure has 
come true! The Revolution has given the people the meter.”61
Proclaiming the universal meter was far simpler than ensuring that 
it became the daily practice of French citizens. The state could insist 
on the exclusive use of its units in the courts, in the state school system, 
and in such documents as property deeds, legal contracts, and tax 
codes. Outside these official spheres, the metric system made its way 
only very slowly. In spite of a decree for confiscating toise sticks in

N ature and Space 33
shops and replacing them with meter sticks, the populace continued to 
use the older system, often marking their meter sticks with the old 
measures. Even as late as 1828 the new measures were more a part of 
lepays legal than of le pays reel. As Chateaubriand remarked, “When­
ever you meet a fellow who, instead of talking arpents, toises, and 
pieds, refers to hectares, meters, and centimeters, rest assured, the 
man is a prefect."62
Land Tenure: Local Practice and Fiscal Shorthand
The revenue of the early modern state came mainly from levies on 
commerce and land, the major sources of wealth. For commerce, this 
implied an array of excise taxes, tolls and market duties, licensing 
fees, and tariffs. For landed wealth, this meant somehow attaching 
every parcel of taxable property to an individual or an institution re­
sponsible for paying the tax on it. As straightforward as this proce­
dure seems in the context of the modern state, its achievement was 
enormously difficult for at least two reasons. First, the actual prac­
tices of customary land tenure were frequently so varied and intricate 
as to defy any one-to-one equation of taxpayer and taxable property. 
And second, as was the case with standardizing measurement, there 
were social forces whose interests could only be damaged by the 
unified and transparent set of property relations desired by the state's 
fiscal agents. In the end, the centralizing state succeeded in imposing 
a novel and (from the center) legible property system, which, as had 
the work of the scientific foresters, not only radically abridged the 
practices that the system described but at the same time transformed 
those practices to align more closely with their shorthand, schematic 
reading.
An Illustration
Negara mawi tata, desa mawi cara (The capital has its order, the village its
customs).
—Javanese proverb
A hypothetical case of customary land tenure practices may help 
demonstrate how difficult it is to assimilate such practices to the bare- 
bones schema of a modern cadastral map. The patterns I will describe 
are an amalgam of practices I have encountered in the literature of or 
in the course of fieldwork in Southeast Asia, and although the case is 
hypothetical, it is not unrealistic.
Let us imagine a community in which families have usufruct rights 
to parcels of cropland during the main growing season. Only certain 
crops, however, may be planted, and every seven years the usufruct

34 l e g ib il it y  a n d s im p l if ic a t io n
land is redistributed among resident families according to each family’s 
size and its number of able-bodied adults. After the harvest of the main- 
season crop, all cropland reverts to common land where any family 
may glean, graze their fowl and livestock, and even plant quickly ma­
turing, diy-season crops. Rights to graze fowl and livestock on pasture- 
land held in common by the village is extended to all local families, but 
the number of animals that can be grazed is restricted according to 
family size, especially in dry years when forage is scarce. Families not 
using their grazing rights can give them to other villagers but not to 
outsiders. Everyone has the right to gather firewood for normal family 
needs, and the village blacksmith and baker are given larger allot­
ments. No commercial sale from village woodlands is permitted.
Trees that have been planted and any fruit they may bear are the 
property of the family who planted them, no matter where they are 
now growing. Fruit fallen from such trees, however, is the property of 
anyone who gathers it. When a family fells one of its trees or a tree is 
felled by a storm, the trunk belongs to the family, the branches to the 
immediate neighbors, and the “tops” (leaves and twigs) to any poorer 
villager who carries them off. Land is set aside for use or leasing out by 
widows with children and dependents of conscripted males. Usufruct 
rights to land and trees may be let to anyone in the village; the only 
time they may be let to someone outside the village is if no one in the 
community wishes to claim them.
After a crop failure leading to a food shortage, many of these 
arrangements are readjusted. Better-off villagers are expected to as­
sume some responsibility for poorer relatives—by sharing their land, 
by hiring them, or by simply feeding them. Should the shortage per­
sist, a council composed of heads of families may inventory food 
supplies and begin daily rationing. In cases of severe shortages or 
famine, the women who have married into the village but have not 
yet borne children will not be fed and are expected to return to their 
native village. This last practice alerts us to the inequalities that often 
prevail in local customary tenure; single women, junior males, and 
anyone defined as falling outside the core of the community are 
clearly disadvantaged.
This description could be further elaborated. It is itself a simpli­
fication, but it does convey some of the actual complexity of property 
relations in contexts where local customs have tended to prevail. To 
describe the usual practices in this fashion, as if they were laws, is it­
self a distortion. Customs are better understood as a living, negotiated 
tissue of practices which are continually being adapted to new ecolog­
ical and social circumstances — including, of course, power relations. 
Customary systems of tenure should not be romanticized; they are usu­
ally riven with inequalities based on gender, status, and lineage. But 
because they are strongly local, particular, and adaptable, their plas­

N ature and Space 35
ticity can be the source of microadjustments that lead to shifts in pre­
vailing practice.
Imagine a lawgiver whose only concern was to respect land prac­
tices. Imagine, in other words, a written system of positive law that at­
tempted to represent this complex skein of property relations and land 
tenure. The mind fairly boggles at the clauses, sub-clauses, and sub- 
sub-clauses that would be required to reduce these practices to a set of 
regulations that an administrator might understand, never mind en­
force. And even if the practices could be codified, the resulting code 
would necessarily sacrifice much of their plasticity and subtle adapt­
ability. The circumstances that might provoke a new adaptation are 
too numerous to foresee, let alone specify, in a regulatory code. That 
code would in effect freeze a living process. Changes in the positive 
code designed to reflect evolving practice would represent at best a 
jerky and mechanical adaptation.
And what of the next village, and the village after that? Our hypo­
thetical code-giver, however devilishly clever and conscientious, would 
find that the code devised to fit one set of local practices would not 
travel well. Each village, with its own particular history, ecology, crop­
ping patterns, kinship alignments, and economic activity, would re­
quire a substantially new set of regulations. At the limit, there would be 
at least as many legal codes as there were communities.
Administratively, of course, such a cacophony of local property reg­
ulations would be a nightmare. The nightmare is experienced not by 
those whose particular practices are being represented but by those 
state officials who aspire to a uniform, homogeneous, national admin­
istrative code. Like the "exotic” units of weights and measures, local 
land tenure practice is perfectly legible to all who live within it from 
day to day. Its details may often be contested and far from satisfactory 
to all its practitioners, but it is completely familiar; local residents 
have no difficulty in grasping its subtleties and using its flexible provi­
sions for their own purposes. State officials, on the other hand, cannot 
be expected to decipher and then apply a new set of property hiero­
glyphs for each jurisdiction. Indeed, the very concept of the modern 
state presupposes a vastly simplified and uniform property regime that 
is legible and hence manipulable from the center.
My use of the term “simple" to describe modern property law, 
whose intricacies provide employment to armies of legal profession­
als, will seem grossly misplaced. It is surely the case that property law 
has in many respects become an impenetrable thicket for ordinary 
citizens. The use of the term “simple” in this context is thus both rela­
tive and perspectival. Modern freehold tenure is tenure that is medi­
ated through the state and therefore readily decipherable only to 
those who have sufficient training and a grasp of the state statutes.63 
Its relative simplicity is lost on those who cannot break the code, just

36 LEGIBILITY AMD SIMPLIFICATION
as the relative clarity of customary tenure is lost on those who live 
outside the village.
The fiscal or administrative goal toward which all modern states 
aspire is to measure, codify, and simplify land tenure in much the same 
way as scientific forestry reconceived the forest. Accommodating the 
luxuriant variety of customary land tenure was simply inconceivable. 
The historical solution, at least for the liberal state, has typically been 
the heroic simplification of individual freehold tenure. Land is owned 
by a legal individual who possesses wide powers of use, inheritance, or 
sale and whose ownership is represented by a uniform deed of title en­
forced through the judicial and police institutions of the state. Just as 
the flora of the forest were reduced to Normalbaume, so the complex 
tenure arrangements of customary practice are reduced to freehold, 
transferrable title. In an agrarian setting, the administrative landscape 
is blanketed with a uniform grid of homogeneous land, each parcel of 
which has a legal person as owner and hence taxpayer. How much 
easier it then becomes to assess such property and its owner on the 
basis of its acreage, its soil class, the crops it normally bears, and its 
assumed yield than to untangle the thicket of common property and 
mixed forms of tenure.
The crowning artifact of this mighty simplification is the cadastral 
map. Created by trained surveyors and mapped to a given scale, the 
cadastral map is a more or less complete and accurate survey of all 
landholdings. Since the driving logic behind the map is to create a man­
ageable and reliable format for taxation, the map is associated with a 
property register in which each specified (usually numbered) lot on 
the map is linked to an owner who is responsible for paying its taxes. 
The cadastral map and property register are to the taxation of land as 
the maps and tables of the scientific forester were to the fiscal ex­
ploitation of the forest.
The Code Rural That Almost Was
The rulers of postrevolutionary France confronted a rural society 
that was a nearly impenetrable web of feudal and revolutionary prac­
tices. It was inconceivable that they could catalogue its complexities, 
let alone effectively eliminate them, in the short run. Ideologically, for 
example, their commitment to equality and liberty was contradicted by 
customary rural contracts like those used by craft guilds, which still 
employed the terms "master” (maitre) and “servant” (serviteur). As rul­
ers of a new nation—not a kingdom—they were likewise offended by 
the absence of an overall legal framework for social relations. For 
some, a new civil code covering all Frenchmen seemed as if it would 
be sufficient.64 But for bourgeois owners of rural property who, along 
with their noble neighbors, had been threatened by the local uprisings

Nature and Space 37
of the Revolution and La Grand Peur and, more generally, by the ag­
gressiveness of an emboldened and autonomous peasantry, an explicit 
code rural seemed necessary to underwrite their security.
In the end, no postrevolutionary rural code attracted a winning 
coalition, even amid a flurry of Napoleonic codes in nearly all other 
realms. For our purposes, the history of the stalemate is instructive. 
The first proposal for a code, which was drafted between 1803 and 
1807, would have swept away most traditional rights (such as common 
pasturage and free passage through others’ property) and essentially 
recast rural property relations in the light of bourgeois property rights 
and freedom of contract.65 Although the proposed code prefigured cer­
tain modern French practices, many revolutionaries blocked it be­
cause they feared that its hands-off liberalism would allow large land­
holders to recreate the subordination of feudalism in a new guise.66
A reexamination of the issue was then ordered by Napoleon and 
presided over by Joseph Verneilh Puyrasseau. Concurrently, Depute 
Lalouette proposed to do precisely what I supposed, in the hypothetical 
example, was impossible. That is, he undertook to systematically gather 
information about all local practices, to classify and codify them, and 
then to sanction them by decree. The decree in question would become 
the code rural. Two problems undid this charming scheme to present 
the rural populace with a rural code that simply reflected its own prac­
tices. The first difficulty was in deciding which aspects of the literally 
"infinite diversity” of rural production relations were to be represented 
and codified.67 Even in a particular locality, practices varied greatly 
from farm to farm and over time; any codification would be partly arbi­
trary and artificially static. To codify local practices was thus a pro­
foundly political act. Local notables would be able to sanction their 
preferences with the mantle of law, whereas others would lose custom­
ary rights that they depended on. The second difficulty was that Lalou- 
ette’s plan was a mortal threat to all the state centralizers and eco­
nomic modernizers for whom a legible, national property regime was 
the precondition of progress. As Serge Aberdam notes, “The Lalouette 
project would have brought about exactly what Merlin de Douai and 
the bourgeois, revolutionary jurists always sought to avoid.”68 Neither 
Lalouette’s nor Verneilh’s proposed code was ever passed, because they, 
like their predecessor in 1807, seemed to be designed to strengthen the 
hand of the landowners.
The Illegibility of Communal Tenure
The premodern and early modern state, as we have noted, dealt 
more with communities than with individuals when it came to taxes. 
Some apparently individual taxes, such as the notorious Russian “soul 
tax,” which was collected from all subjects, were actually paid directly

38 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
by the communities or indirectly through the nobles whose subjects 
they were. Failure to deliver the required sum usually led to collective 
punishment.69 The only agents of taxation who regularly reached to the 
level of the household and its cultivated fields were the local nobility 
and clergy in the course of collecting feudal dues and the religious 
tithe. For its part, the state had neither the administrative tools nor the 
information to penetrate to this level.
The limitations on state knowledge were partly due to the complex­
ity and variability of local production. This was not the most important 
reason, however. The collective form of taxation meant that it was gen­
erally in the interest of local officials to misrepresent their situation in 
order to minimize the local tax and conscription burden. To this end, 
they might minimize the local population, systematically understate 
the acreage under cultivation, hide new commercial profits, exagger­
ate crop losses after storms and droughts, and so on.70 The point of the 
cadastral map and land register was precisely to eliminate this fiscal 
feudalism and rationalize the fiscal take of the state. Just as the sci­
entific forester needed an inventory of trees to realize the commercial 
potential of the forest, so the fiscal reformer needed a detailed inven­
tory of landownership to realize the maximum, sustainable revenue 
yield.71
Assuming that the state had the will to challenge the resistance of 
the local nobles and elites and the financial resources to undertake a 
full cadastral survey (which was both time-consuming and expensive), 
it faced other obstacles as well. In particular, some communal forms of 
tenure simply could not be adequately represented in cadastral form. 
Rural living in seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century Denmark, 
for example, was organized by ejerlav, whose members had certain 
rights for using local arable, waste, and forest land. It would have been 
impossible in such a community to associate a household or individual 
with a particular holding on a cadastral map. The Norwegian large 
farm (gard) posed similar problems. Each household held rights to a 
given proportion of the value (skyId) of the farm, not to the plot of 
land; none of the joint owners could call a specific part of the farm his 
own.72 Although it was possible to estimate the arable land of each 
community and, making some assumptions about crop yields and sub­
sistence needs, arrive at a plausible tax burden, these villagers derived 
a substantial part of their livelihood from the commons by fishing, 
forestry, collecting resin, hunting, and making charcoal. Monitoring 
this kind of income was almost impossible. Nor would crude estimates 
of the value of the commons solve the problem, for the inhabitants of 
nearby villages often shared one another's commons (even though the 
practice was outlawed). The mode of production in such communities 
was simply incompatible with the assumption of individual freehold 
tenure implicit in a cadastral map. It was claimed, although the evi­

N ature and Space 39
dence is not convincing, that common property was less productive 
than freehold property.73 The state’s case against communal forms of 
land tenure, however, was based on the correct observation that it was 
fiscally illegible and hence fiscally less productive. Rather than trying, 
like the hapless Lalouette, to bring the map into line with reality, the 
historical resolution has generally been for the state to impose a prop­
erty system in line with its fiscal grid.
As long as common property was abundant and had essentially no 
fiscal value, the illegibility of its tenure was no problem. But the mo­
ment it became scarce (when "nature” became "natural resources”), it 
became the subject of property rights in law, whether of the state or of 
the citizens. The history of property in this sense has meant the inex­
orable incorporation of what were once thought of as free gifts of na­
ture: forests, game, wasteland, prairie, subsurface minerals, water and 
watercourses, air rights (rights to the air above buildings or surface 
area), breathable air, and even genetic sequences, into a property re­
gime. In the case of common-property farmland, the imposition of free­
hold property was clarifying not so much for the local inhabitants— 
the customary structure of rights had always been clear enough to them 
—as it was for the tax official and the land speculator. The cadastral 
map added documentary intelligence to state power and thus provided 
the basis for the synoptic view of the state and a supralocal market in 
land.74
An example may help to clarify the process of installing a new, 
more legible property regime. The case of two prerevolutionary Rus­
sian villages provides a nearly textbook example of state attempts to 
create individual tenure in keeping with its convictions about agricul­
tural growth and administrative order. Most of rural Russia, even after 
the emancipation of 1861, was a model of fiscal illegibility. Communal 
forms of tenure prevailed, and the state had little or no knowledge of 
who cultivated which strips of land or what their yields and income 
were.
Novoselok village had a varied economy of cultivation, grazing, 
and forestry, whereas Khotynitsa village was limited to cultivation and 
some grazing (figures 3 and 4). The complex welter of strips was de­
signed to ensure that each village household received a strip of land in 
every ecological zone. An individual household might have as many as 
ten to fifteen different plots constituting something of a representative 
sample of the village’s ecological zones and microclimates. The distri­
bution spread a family’s risks prudently, and from time to time the land 
was reshuffled as families grew or shrunk.75
It was enough to make the head of a cadastral surveyor swim. At 
first glance it seems as if the village itself would need a staff of profes­
sional surveyors to get things right. But in practice the system, called 
interstripping, was quite simple to those who lived it. The strips of land

40 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
3. Novoselok village before the Stolypin Reform
were generally straight and parallel so that a readjustment could be 
made by moving small stakes along just one side of a field, without 
having to think of areal dimensions. Where the other end of the field 
was not parallel, the stakes could be shifted to compensate for the fact 
that the strip lay toward the narrower or wider end of the field. Irreg­
ular fields were divided, not according to area, but according to yield. 
To the eye—and certainly to those involved in cadastral mapping—the 
pattern seemed convoluted and irrational. But to those familiar with it, 
it was simple enough and worked admirably for their purposes.

N ature and Space 41
4. Khotynitsa village before the Stolypin Reform
The dream of state officials and agrarian reformers, at least since 
emancipation, was to transform the open-field system into a series of 
consolidated, independent farmsteads on what they took to be the 
western European model. They were driven by the desire to break the 
hold of the community over the individual household and to move 
from collective taxation of the whole community to a tax on individual 
landholders. As in France, fiscal goals were very much connected to 
reigning ideas of agricultural progress. Under Count Sergei Witte and 
Petr Stolypin, as George Yaney notes, plans for reform shared a com­
mon vision of how things were and how they needed to be: “First 
tableau: poor peasants, crowded together in villages, suffering from 
hunger, running into each other with their plows on their tiny strips. 
Second tableau: agriculture specialist agent leads a few progressive

42 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
5. Novoselok village after the Stolypin Reform
peasants off to new lands, leaving those remaining more room. Third 
tableau: departing peasants, freed from restraints of strips, set up 
khutor [integral farmsteads with dwellings] on new fields and adapt lat­
est methods. Those who remain, freed of village and family restraints, 
plunge into a demand economy—all are richer, more productive, the 
cities get fed, and the peasants are not proletarianized.”76 It was abun­
dantly clear that the prejudicial attitude toward interstripping was 
based as much on the autonomy of the Russian village, its illegibility to 
outsiders, and prevailing dogma about scientific agriculture as it was

Nature and Space 43
6. Khotynitsa village after the Stolypin Reform
on hard evidence.77 The state officials and agrarian reformers reasoned 
that, once given a consolidated, private plot, the peasant would sud­
denly want to get rich and would organize his household into an 
efficient workforce and take up scientific agriculture. The Stolypin Re­
form therefore went forward, and cadastral order was brought to both 
villages in the wake of the reform (figures 5 and 6).
In Novoselok village, seventeen independent farmsteads (khutor) 
were created in a way that aimed to give each household a share of 
meadow, arable, and forest. In Khotynitsa village, ten khutor were cre­
ated as well as seventy-eight farms (otrub), whose owners continued to 
dwell in the village center. As a cadastral matter, the new farms were 
mappable, easily legible from above and outside, and, since each was 
owned by an identifiable person, assessable.
Taken alone, the maps shown in figures 5 and 6 are misleading. Such 
model villages suggest efficient cadastral teams working their way dili­
gently through the countryside and turning open-field chaos into tidy lit-

44 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
tie farms. Reality was something else. In fact, the dream of orderly, rec­
tangular fields was approximated only on newly settled land, where 
the surveyor faced little geographical or social resistance.78 Elsewhere, 
the reformers were generally thwarted, despite tremendous pressure 
to produce integral farms. There were unauthorized consolidations, al­
though they were forbidden; there were also “paper consolidations," in 
which the new farmers continued to farm their strips as before.79 The 
best evidence that the agricultural property system had in fact not be­
come legible to central tax officials was the immensely damaging pro­
curement policies pursued by the czarist government during World 
War I. No one knew what a reasonable levy on grain or draft animals 
might be; as a result, some farmers were ruined, while others managed 
to hoard grain and livestock.80 The same experience of forced procure­
ment without adequate knowledge of landholdings and wealth was re­
peated again after the October Revolution during the period of War 
Communism.81
The Cadastral Map as Objective Information for Outsiders
The value of the cadastral map to the state lies in its abstraction and 
universality. In principle, at least, the same objective standard can be 
applied throughout the nation, regardless of local context, to produce 
a complete and unambiguous map of all landed property. The com­
pleteness of the cadastral map depends, in a curious way, on its abstract 
sketchiness, its lack of detail—its thinness. Taken alone, it is essentially 
a geometric representation of the borders or frontiers between parcels 
of land. What lies inside the parcel is left blank—unspecified—since it 
is not germane to the map plotting itself.
Surely many things about a parcel of land are far more important 
than its surface area and the location of its boundaries. What kind of 
soil it has, what crops can be grown on it, how hard it is to work, and 
how close it is to a market are the first questions a potential buyer 
might ask. These are questions a tax assessor would also want to ask. 
From a capitalist perspective, the physical dimensions of land are be­
side the point. But these other qualities can become relevant (espe­
cially to the state) only after the terrain to which they apply has been 
located and measured. And unlike identifying location and dimension, 
identifying these qualities involves judgments that are complex, sus­
ceptible to fraud, and easily overtaken by events. Crop rotations and 
yields may change, new tools or machines may transform cultivation, 
and markets may shift. The cadastral survey, by contrast, is precise, 
schematic, general, and uniform. Whatever its other defects, it is the 
precondition of a tax regimen that comprehensively links every patch 
of land with its owner—the taxpayer.82 In this spirit, the survey for a 
1807 Dutch land tax (inspired by Napoleonic France) stressed that all

Nature and Space 45
surveyors were to use the same measurements, surveyors’ instruments 
were to be periodically inspected to ensure conformity, and all maps 
were to be drawn up on a uniform scale of 1:2,880.83
Land maps in general and cadastral maps in particular are de­
signed to make the local situation legible to an outsider. For purely 
local purposes, a cadastral map was redundant. Everyone knew who 
held, say, the meadow by the river, the value of the fodder it yielded, 
and the feudal dues it carried; there was no need to know its precise 
dimensions. A substantial domain might have the kind of prose map, 
or terrier, that one finds in old deeds ("from the large oak tree, north 
120 feet to the river bank, thence . . ."), with a notation about the 
holder’s obligations to the domain. One imagines such a document 
proving valuable to a young heir, new to the management of a domain. 
But a proper map seems to have come into use especially when a brisk 
market in land developed. The Netherlands was thus a leader in land 
mapping because of its early commercialization and because each 
speculator who invested in the draining of land by windmill wanted to 
know in advance precisely what plot of the newly opened land he 
would be entitled to. The map was especially crucial to the new bour­
geois owners of landed estates, for it allowed them to survey a large 
territory at a glance. Its miniaturization helped it to serve as an aide- 
memoire when the property consisted of many small parcels or the 
owner was not intimately familiar with the terrain.
As early as 1607, an English surveyor, John Norden, sold his ser­
vices to the aristocracy on the premise that the map was a substitute for 
the tour of inspection; "A plot rightly drawne by true information, dis- 
cribeth so the lively image of a manor, and every branch and member of 
the same, as the lord sitting in his chayre, may see what he hath, and 
where and how he lyeth, and in whole use and occupation of every par­
ticular is upon suddaine view.’’84 A national tax administration requires 
the same logic: a legible, bureaucratic formula which a new official can 
quickly grasp and administer from the documents in his office.
What Is Missing in This Picture?
Administrative man recognizes that the world he perceives is a drastically 
simplified model of the buzzing, blooming confusion that constitutes the real 
world. He is content with the gross simplification because he believes that the 
real world is mostly empty—that most of the facts of the real world have no 
great relevance to any particular situation he is facing and that most signifi­
cant chains of causes and consequences are short and simple.
— Herbert Simon
Isaiah Berlin, in his study of Tolstoy, compared the hedgehog, who 
knew "one big thing,” to the fox, who knew many things. The scientific

46 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
forester and the cadastral official are like the hedgehog. The sharply 
focused interest of the scientific foresters in commercial lumber and 
that of the cadastral officials in land revenue constrain them to finding 
clear-cut answers to one question. The naturalist and the farmer, on 
the other hand, are like the fox. They know a great many things about 
forests and cultivable land. Although the forester's and cadastral of­
ficial’s range of knowledge is far narrower, we should not forget that 
their knowledge is systematic and synoptic, allowing them to see and 
understand things a fox would not grasp.85 What I want to emphasize 
here, however, is how this knowledge is gained at the expense of a 
rather static and myopic view of land tenure.
The cadastral map is very much like a still photograph of the cur­
rent in a river. It represents the parcels of land as they were arranged 
and owned at the moment the survey was conducted. But the current 
is always moving, and in periods of major social upheaval and growth, 
a cadastral survey may freeze a scene of great turbulence.86 Changes 
are taking place on field boundaries; land is being subdivided or con­
solidated by inheritance or purchase; new canals, roads, and railways 
are being cut; land use is changing; and so forth. Inasmuch as these 
particular changes directly affect tax assessments, there are provisions 
for recording them on the map or in a title register. The accumulation 
of annotations and marginalia at some point render the map illegible, 
whereupon a more up-to-date but still static map must be drawn and 
the process repeated.
No operating land-revenue system can stop at the mere identifi­
cation of parcel and ownership. Other schematic facts, themselves sta­
tic, must be created to arrive at some judgment of a sustainable tax 
burden. Land may be graded by soil class, how well it is watered, what 
crops are grown on it, and its presumed average yield, which is often 
checked by sample crop-cuttings. These facts are themselves changing, 
or they are averages that may mask great variation. Like the still photo 
of the cadastral map, they grow more unrealistic with time and must 
be reexamined.
These state simplifications, like all state simplifications, are always 
far more static and schematic than the actual social phenomena they 
presume to typify. The farmer rarely experiences an average crop, an 
average rainfall, or an average price for his crops. Much of the long his­
tory of rural tax revolts in early modern Europe and elsewhere can be 
illuminated by the lack of fit between an unyielding fiscal claim, on one 
hand, and an often wildly fluctuating capacity of the rural population to 
meet that claim, on the other.87 And yet, even the most equitable, well- 
intentioned cadastral system cannot be uniformly administered except 
on the basis of stable units of measurement and calculation. It can no 
more reflect the actual complexity of a farmer’s experience than the

Nature and Space 47
scientific forester’s schemes can reflect the complexity of the natural­
ist's forest.88
Governed by a practical, concrete objective, the cadastral lens also 
ignored anything lying outside its sharply defined field of vision. This 
was reflected in a loss of detail in the survey itself. Surveyors, one re­
cent Swedish study found, made the fields more geometrically regular 
than they in fact were. Ignoring small jogs and squiggles made their 
job easier and did not materially affect the outcome.89 Just as the com­
mercial forester found it convenient to overlook minor forest prod­
ucts, so the cadastral official tended to ignore all but the main com­
mercial use of a field. The fact that a field designated as growing wheat 
or hay might also be a significant source of bedding straw, gleanings, 
rabbits, birds, frogs, and mushrooms was not so much unknown as ig­
nored lest it needlessly complicate a straightforward administrative 
formula.90 The most significant instance of myopia, of course, was that 
the cadastral map and assessment system considered only the dimen­
sions of the land and its value as a productive asset or as a commodity 
for sale. Any value that the land might have for subsistence purposes 
or for the local ecology was bracketed as aesthetic, ritual, or senti­
mental values.
Transformation and Resistance
The cadastral map is an instrument of control which both reflects and consol­
idates the power of those who commission it. . . . The cadastral map is parti­
san: where knowledge is power, it provides comprehensive information to be 
used to the advantage of some and the detriment of others, as rulers and ruled 
were well aware in the tax struggles of the 18th and 19th centuries. Finally, 
the cadastral map is active: in portraying one reality, as in the settlement of 
the new world or in India, it helps obliterate the old.
— Roger J. P. Kain and Elizabeth Baigent, The Cadastral Map
The shorthand formulas through which tax officials must appre­
hend reality are not mere tools of observation. By a kind of fiscal Hei­
senberg principle, they frequently have the power to transform the 
facts they take note of.
The door-and-window tax established in France under the Direc­
tory and abolished only in 1917 is a striking case in point.91 Its origi­
nator must have reasoned that the number of windows and doors in a 
dwelling was proportional to the dwelling’s size. Thus a tax assessor 
need not enter the house or measure it but merely count the doors and 
windows. As a simple, workable formula, it was a brilliant stroke, but 
it was not without consequences. Peasant dwellings were subsequently 
designed or renovated with the formula in mind so as to have as few 
openings as possible. While the fiscal losses could be recouped by rais­

48 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
ing the tax per opening, the long-term effects on the health of the rural 
population lasted for more than a century.
The novel state-imposed form of land tenure was far more revolu­
tionary than a door-and-window tax. It established a whole new insti­
tutional nexus. However simple and uniform the new tenure system 
was to an administrator, it flung villagers willy-nilly into a world of 
title deeds, land offices, fees, assessments, and applications. They faced 
powerful new specialists in the form of land clerks, surveyors, judges, 
and lawyers whose rules of procedure and decisions were unfamiliar.
Where the new tenure system was a colonial imposition—that is, 
where it was totally unfamiliar, where it was imposed by alien con­
querors using an unintelligible language and institutional context, and 
where local practices bore no resemblance to freehold tenure—the 
consequences were far-reaching. The permanent settlement in India, 
for example, created a new class who, because they paid the taxes on 
the land, became full owners with rights of inheritance and sale where 
none had existed earlier.92 At the same time, literally millions of culti­
vators, tenants, and laborers lost their customary rights of access to 
the land and its products. Those in the colonies who first plumbed the 
mysteries of the new tenure administration enjoyed unique opportuni­
ties. Thus the Vietnamese secretaires and interpretes who served as in­
termediaries between the French officials in the Mekong Delta and 
their Vietnamese subjects were in a position to make great fortunes. By 
concentrating on the legal paperwork, such as title deeds, and the ap­
propriate fees, they occasionally became landlords to whole villages of 
cultivators who had imagined they had opened common land free for 
the taking. The new intermediaries, of course, might occasionally use 
their knowledge to see their compatriots safely through the new legal 
thicket. Whatever their conduct, their fluency in a language of tenure 
specifically designed to be legible and transparent to administrators, 
coupled with the illiteracy of the rural population to whom the new 
tenure was indecipherable, brought about a momentous shift in power 
relations.93 What was simplifying to an official was mystifying to most 
cultivators.
Freehold title and standard land measurement were to central tax­
ation and the real-estate market what central bank currency was to the 
marketplace.94 By the same token, they threatened to destroy a great 
deal of local power and autonomy. It is no wonder, then, that they 
should have been so vigorously resisted. In the eighteenth-century Eu­
ropean context, any general cadastral survey was by definition a gam­
bit of centralization; the local clergy and nobility were bound to see 
both their own taxing powers and the exemptions they enjoyed men­
aced. Commoners were likely to see it as a pretext for an additional 
local tax. Jean-Baptiste Colbert, the great "centralizer” of absolutism, 
proposed to conduct a national cadastral survey of France, but he was

Nature and Space 49
thwarted in 1679 by the combined opposition of the aristocracy and 
clergy. After the Revolution more than a century later, the radical 
Frangois-Noel Babeuf, in his "Projet de cadastre perpetuel,” dreamed 
of a perfectly egalitarian land reform in which everyone would get an 
equal parcel.95 He too was thwarted.
We must keep in mind not only the capacity of state simplifications 
to transform the world but also the capacity of the society to modify, 
subvert, block, and even overturn the categories imposed upon it. Here 
it is useful to distinguish what might be called facts on paper from 
facts on the ground. As Sally Falk Moore and many others have em­
phasized, the land-office records may serve as the basis for taxation, 
but they may have little to do with the actual rights to the land. Paper 
owners may not be the effective owners.96 Russian peasants, as we saw, 
might register a “paper” consolidation while continuing to interstrip. 
Land invasions, squatting, and poaching, if successful, represent the 
exercise of de facto property rights which are not represented on 
paper. Certain land taxes and tithes have been evaded or defied to the 
point where they have become dead letters.97 The gulf between land 
tenure facts on paper and facts on the ground is probably greatest at 
moments of social turmoil and revolt. But even in more tranquil times, 
there will always be a shadow land-tenure system lurking beside and 
beneath the official account in the land-records office. We must never 
assume that local practice conforms with state theory.
All centralizing states recognized the value of a uniform, compre­
hensive cadastral map. Carrying out the mapmaking, however, was 
another matter. As a rule of thumb, cadastral mapping was earlier and 
more comprehensive where a powerful central state could impose it­
self on a relatively weak civil society. Where, by contrast, civil society 
was well organized and the state relatively weak, cadastral mapping 
was late, often voluntary, and fragmentary. Thus Napoleonic France 
was mapped much earlier than England, where the legal profession 
managed for a long time to stymie this threat to its local, income- 
earning function. It followed from the same logic that conquered 
colonies ruled by fiat would often be cadastrally mapped before the 
metropolitan nation that ordered it. Ireland may have been the first. 
After Cromwell's conquest, as Ian Hacking notes, “Ireland was com­
pletely surveyed for land, buildings, people, and cattle under the direct­
orship of William Petty, in order to facilitate the rape of that nation by 
the English in 1679.”98
Where the colony was a thinly populated settler-colony, as in North 
America or Australia, the obstacles to a thorough, uniform cadastral 
grid were minimal. There it was a question less of mapping preexisting 
patterns of land use than of surveying parcels of land that would be 
given or sold to new arrivals from Europe and of ignoring indigenous 
peoples and their common-property regimes.99 Thomas Jefferson, with

50 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
7. The survey landscape, Castleton, North Dakota
an eye trained by Enlightenment rationalism, imagined dividing the 
United States west of the Ohio River into “hundreds"—squares mea­
suring ten miles by ten miles—and requiring settlers to take the 
parcels of land as so designated.
The geometrical clarity of Jefferson's proposal was not merely an aes­
thetic choice; he claimed that irregular lots facilitated fraud. To rein­
force his case, he cited the experience of Massachusetts, where actual 
landholdings were 10 percent to 100 percent greater than what had

Nature and Space 51
been granted by deed.100 Not only did the regularity of the grid create 
legibility for the taxing authority, but it was a convenient and cheap 
way to package land and market it in homogeneous units. The grid facil­
itated the commoditization of land as much as the calculation of taxes 
and boundaries. Administratively, it was also disarmingly simple. Land 
could be registered and titled from a distance by someone who pos­
sessed virtually no local knowledge.101 Once it was in place, the scheme 
had some of the impersonal, mechanical logic of the foresters’ tables. 
But in practice, land titling in Jefferson's plan (which was modified by 
Congress to provide for rectangular lots and townships that were thirty- 
six square miles) did not always follow the prescribed pattern.
The Torrens system of land titling, developed in Australia and New 
Zealand in the 1860s, provided a lithographed, presurveyed grid rep­
resenting allotments that were registered to settlers on a first-come, 
first-served basis. It was the quickest and most economical means yet 
devised to sell land, and it was later adopted in many British colonies. 
The more homogeneous and rigid the geometric grid, however, the 
more likely it was to run afoul of the natural features of the noncon­
forming landscape. The possibilities for surprises was nicely captured 
in this satirical verse from New Zealand.
Now the road through Michael’s section 
though it looked well on the map 
For the use it was intended 
wasn’t really worth a rap 
And at night was not unlikely 
to occasion some mishap.
It was nicely planned on paper 
and was ruled without remorse 
Over cliffs, and spurs and gullies 
with a straight and even course 
Which precluded locomotion 
on part of man or horse.102
The cadastral survey was but one technique in the growing armory of 
the utilitarian modern state.103 Where the premodern state was content 
with a level of intelligence sufficient to allow it to keep order, extract 
taxes, and raise armies, the modem state increasingly aspired to “take in 
charge” the physical and human resources of the nation and make them 
more productive. These more positive ends of statecraft required a 
much greater knowledge of the society. And an inventory of land, peo­
ple, incomes, occupations, resources, and deviance was the logical 
place to begin. “The need for the increasingly bureaucratic state to or­
ganize itself and control its resources gave an impulse to the collection

52 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
of vital and other statistics; to forestry and rational agriculture; to sur­
veying and exact cartography; and to public hygiene and climatology.”104 
Although the purposes of the state were broadening, what the 
state wanted to know was still directly related to those purposes. The 
nineteenth-century Prussian state, for example, was very much inter­
ested in the ages and sexes of immigrants and emigrants but not in 
their religions or races; what mattered to the state was keeping track 
of possible draft dodgers and maintaining a supply of men of military 
age.105 The state’s increasing concern with productivity, health, sani­
tation, education, transportation, mineral resources, grain produc­
tion, and investment was less an abandonment of the older objectives 
of statecraft than a broadening and deepening of what those objec­
tives entailed in the modern world.

2 Cities, People, and 
Language
And the Colleges of the Cartographers set up a Map of the Empire which had 
the size of the Empire itself and coincided with it point by point. . . . Succeed­
ing generations understood that this Widespread Map was Useless, and not 
without Impiety they abandoned it to the Inclemencies of the Sun and the 
Winters.
— Suarez Miranda, Viajes de varones prudentes (1658)
An aerial view of a town built during the Middle Ages or the oldest 
quarters (medina) of a Middle Eastern city that has not been greatly 
tampered with has a particular look. It is the look of disorder. Or, to 
put it more precisely, the town conforms to no overall abstract form. 
Streets, lanes, and passages intersect at varying angles with a density 
that resembles the intricate complexity of some organic processes. In 
the case of a medieval town, where defense needs required walls and 
perhaps moats, there may be traces of inner walls superseded by 
outer walls, much like the growth rings of a tree. A representation of 
Bruges in about 1500 illustrates the pattern (figure 8). What definition 
there is to the city is provided by the castle green, the marketplace, 
and the river and canals that were (until they silted up) the lifeblood 
of this textile-trading city.
The fact that the layout of the city, having developed without any 
overall design, lacks a consistent geometric logic does not mean that it 
was at all confusing to its inhabitants. One imagines that many of its 
cobbled streets were nothing more than surfaced footpaths traced by 
repeated use. For those who grew up in its various quarters, Bruges 
would have been perfectly familiar, perfectly legible. Its very alleys and 
lanes would have closely approximated the most common daily move­
ments. For a stranger or trader arriving for the first time, however, the 
town was almost certainly confusing, simply because it lacked a repet­
itive, abstract logic that would allow a newcomer to orient herself. The 
cityscape of Bruges in 1500 could be said to privilege local knowledge 
over outside knowledge, including that of external political authori-
53

54 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
8. Bruges circa 1500, from a painting in the Town Hall, Bruges
ties.1 It functioned spatially in much the same way a difficult or unin­
telligible dialect would function linguistically. As a semipermeable 
membrane, it facilitated communication within the city while remaining 
stubbornly unfamiliar to those who had not grown up speaking this 
special geographic dialect.
Historically, the relative illegibility to outsiders of some urban neigh­
borhoods (or of their rural analogues, such as hills, marshes, and 
forests) has provided a vital margin of political safety from control by 
outside elites. A simple way of determining whether this margin exists is 
to ask if an outsider would have needed a local guide (a native tracker) 
in order to find her way successfully. If the answer is yes, then the com­
munity or terrain in question enjoys at least a small measure of insula­
tion from outside intrusion. Coupled with patterns of local solidarity, 
this insulation has proven politically valuable in such disparate con­
texts as eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century urban riots over bread 
prices in Europe, the Front de Liberation Nationale’s tenacious resis­
tance to the French in the Casbah of Algiers,2 and the politics of the 
bazaar that helped to bring down the Shah of Iran. Illegibility, then, has 
been and remains a reliable resource for political autonomy.3
Stopping short of redesigning cities in order to make them more 
legible (a subject that we shall soon explore), state authorities endeav­

Cities, People, and Language 55
ored to map complex, old cities in a way that would facilitate policing 
and control. Most of the major cities of France were thus the subject 
of careful military mapping (reconnaissances militaires), particularly 
after the Revolution. When urban revolts occurred, the authorities 
wanted to be able to move quickly to the precise locations that would 
enable them to contain or suppress the rebellions effectively.4
States and city planners have striven, as one might expect, to over­
come this spatial unintelligibility and to make urban geography trans­
parently legible from without. Their attitude toward what they regarded 
as the higgledy-piggledy profusion of unplanned cities was not unlike 
the attitude of foresters to the natural profusion of the unplanned forest. 
The origin of grids or geometrically regular settlements may lie in a 
straightforward military logic. A square, ordered, formulaic military 
camp on the order of the Roman castra has many advantages. Sol­
diers can easily learn the techniques of building it; the commander of 
the troops knows exactly in which disposition his subalterns and vari­
ous troops lie; and any Roman messenger or officer who arrives at the 
camp will know where to find the officer he seeks. On a more specu­
lative note, a far-flung, polyglot empire may find it symbolically useful 
to have its camps and towns laid out according to formula as a stamp 
of its order and authority. Other things being equal, the city laid out ac­
cording to a simple, repetitive logic will be easiest to administer and to 
police.
Whatever the political and administrative conveniences of a geo­
metric cityscape, the Enlightenment fostered a strong aesthetic that 
looked with enthusiasm on straight lines and visible order. No one ex­
pressed the prejudice more clearly than Descartes: “These ancient 
cities that were once mere straggling villages and have become in the 
course of time great cities are commonly quite poorly laid out com­
pared to those well-ordered towns that an engineer lays out on a vacant 
plane as it suits his fancy. And although, upon considering one-by-one 
the buildings in the former class of towns, one finds as much art or 
more than one finds in the latter class of towns, still, upon seeing how 
the buildings are arranged—here a large one, there a small one—and 
how they make the streets crooked and uneven, one will say that it is 
chance more than the will of some men using their reason that has 
arranged them thus.”5
Descartes’s vision conjures up the urban equivalent of the scientific 
forest: streets laid out in straight lines intersecting at right angles, 
buildings of uniform design and size, the whole built according to a 
single, overarching plan.
The elective affinity between a strong state and a uniformly laid out

56 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
city is obvious. Lewis Mumford, the historian of urban form, locates the 
modern European origin of this symbiosis in the open, legible baroque 
style of the Italian city-state. He claims, in terms that Descartes would 
have found congenial, "It was one of the triumphs of the baroque mind 
to organize space, to make it continuous, reduce it to measure and 
order."6 More to the point, the baroque redesigning of medieval cities— 
with its grand edifices, vistas, squares, and attention to uniformity, 
proportion, and perspective—was intended to reflect the grandeur 
and awesome power of the prince. Aesthetic considerations frequently, 
won out over the existing social structure and the mundane functioning 
of the city. “Long before the invention of bulldozers,” Mumford adds, 
“the Italian military engineer developed, through his professional spe­
cialization in destruction, a bulldozing habit of mind: one that sought 
to clear the ground of encumbrances, so as to make a clear beginning 
on its own inflexible mathematical lines.”7
The visual power of the baroque city was underwritten by scrupu­
lous attention to the military security of the prince from internal as 
well as external enemies. Thus both Alberti and Palladio thought of 
main thoroughfares as military roads (viae militaires). Such roads had 
to be straight, and, in Palladio's view, "the ways will be more conve­
nient if they are made everywhere equal: that is to say that there will 
be no part in them where armies may not easily march ”8
There are, of course, many cities approximating Descartes's model. 
For obvious reasons, most have been planned from the ground up as 
new, often utopian cities.9 Where they have not been built by imperial 
decrees, they have been designed by their founding fathers to accom­
modate more repetitive and uniform squares for future settlement.10 A 
bird's-eye view of central Chicago in the late nineteenth century (Wil­
liam Penn’s Philadelphia or New Haven would do equally well) serves 
as an example of the grid city (figure 9).
From an administrator’s vantage point, the ground plan of Chicago 
is nearly utopian. It offers a quick appreciation of the ensemble, since 
the entirety is made up of straight lines, right angles, and repetitions.11 
Even the rivers seem scarcely to interrupt the city’s relentless symme­
try. For an outsider—or a policeman—finding an address is a com­
paratively simple matter; no local guides are required. The knowledge 
of local citizens is not especially privileged vis-a-vis that of outsiders. 
If, as is the case in upper Manhattan, the cross streets are consecu­
tively numbered and are intersected by longer avenues, also consecu­
tively numbered, the plan acquires even greater transparency.12 The 
aboveground order of a grid city facilitates its underground order in 
the layout of water pipes, storm drains, sewers, electric cables, natural

Cities, People, and Language 57
9. Map of downtown Chicago, circa 1893
gas lines, and subways — an order no less important to the administra­
tors of a city. Delivering mail, collecting taxes, conducting a census, 
moving supplies and people in and out of the city, putting down a riot 
or insurrection, digging for pipes and sewer lines, finding a felon or 
conscript (providing he is at the address given), and planning public 
transportation, water supply, and trash removal are all made vastly 
simpler by the logic of the grid.
Three aspects of this geometric order in human settlement bear em­
phasis. The first is that the order in question is most evident, not at 
street level, but rather from above and from outside. Like a marcher in 
a parade or like a single riveter in a long assembly line, a pedestrian in 
the middle of this grid cannot instantly perceive the larger design of 
the city. The symmetry is either grasped from a representation—it is 
in fact what one would expect if one gave a schoolchild a ruler and a 
blank piece of paper—or from the vantage point of a helicopter hov­
ering far above the ground: in short, a God s-eye view, or the view of an 
absolute ruler. This spatial fact is perhaps inherent in the process of 
urban or architectural planning itself, a process that involves minia­
turization and scale models upon which patron and planner gaze 
down, exactly as if they were in a helicopter.13 There is, after all, no 
other way of visually imagining what a large-scale construction project 
will look like when it is completed except by a miniaturization of this

58 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
kind. It follows, I believe, that such plans, which have the scale of toys, 
are judged for their sculptural properties and visual order, often from 
a perspective that no or very few human observers will ever replicate.
The miniaturization imaginatively achieved by scale models of cities 
or landscapes was practically achieved with the airplane. The mapping 
tradition of the bird’s-eye view, evident in the map of Chicago, was no 
longer a mere convention. By virtue of its great distance, an aerial 
view resolved what might have seemed ground-level confusion into an 
apparently vaster order and symmetry. It would be hard to exaggerate 
the importance of the airplane for modernist thought and planning. By 
offering a perspective that flattened the topography as if it were a can­
vas, flight encouraged new aspirations to “synoptic vision, rational 
control, planning, and spatial order."14
A second point about an urban order easily legible from outside is 
that the grand plan of the ensemble has no necessary relationship to 
the order of life as it is experienced by its residents. Although certain 
state services may be more easily provided and distant addresses more 
easily located, these apparent advantages may be negated by such per­
ceived disadvantages as the absence of a dense street life, the intrusion 
of hostile authorities, the loss of the spatial irregularities that foster co­
ziness, gathering places for informal recreation, and neighborhood 
feeling. The formal order of a geometrically regular urban space is just 
that: formal order. Its visual regimentation has a ceremonial or ideo­
logical quality, much like the order of a parade or a barracks. The fact 
that such order works for municipal and state authorities in adminis­
tering the city is no guarantee that it works for citizens. Provisionally, 
then, we must remain agnostic about the relation between formal spa­
tial order and social experience.
The third notable aspect of homogeneous, geometrical, uniform 
property is its convenience as a standardized commodity for the mar­
ket. Like Jefferson’s scheme for surveying or the Torrens system for ti­
tling open land, the grid creates regular lots and blocks that are ideal 
for buying and selling. Precisely because they are abstract units de­
tached from any ecological or topographical reality, they resemble a 
kind of currency which is endlessly amenable to aggregation and frag­
mentation. This feature of the grid plan suits equally the surveyor, the 
planner, and the real-estate speculator. Bureaucratic and commercial 
logic, in this instance, go hand in hand. As Mumford notes, “The beauty 
of this mechanical pattern, from the commercial standpoint, should be 
plain. This plan offers the engineer none of those special problems that 
irregular parcels and curved boundary lines present. An office boy could 
figure out the number of square feet involved in a street opening or in

Cities, People, and Language 59
a sale of land: even a lawyer’s clerk could write a description of the 
necessary deed of sale, merely by filling in with the proper dimensions 
the standard document. With a T-square and a triangle, finally, the mu­
nicipal engineer could, without the slightest training as either an archi­
tect or a sociologist, ‘plan’ a metropolis, with its standard lots, its stan­
dard blocks, its standard width streets. . . . The very absence of more 
specific adaptation to landscape or to human purpose only increased, 
by its very indefiniteness, its general usefulness for exchange."15
The vast majority of Old World cities are, in fact, some historical 
amalgam of a Bruges and a Chicago. Although more than one politi­
cian, dictator, and city planner have devised plans for the total recast­
ing of an existing city, these dreams came at such cost, both financial 
and political, that they have rarely left the drawing boards. Piecemeal 
planning, by contrast, is far more common. The central, older core of 
many cities remains somewhat like Bruges, whereas the newer out­
skirts are more likely to exhibit the marks of one or more plans. Some­
times, as in the sharp contrast between old Delhi and the imperial cap­
ital of New Delhi, the divergence is formalized.
Occasionally, authorities have taken draconian steps to retrofit an 
existing city. The redevelopment of Paris by the prefect of the Seine, 
Baron Haussmann, under Louis Napoleon was a grandiose public works 
program stretching from 1853 to 1869. Haussmann's vast scheme ab­
sorbed unprecedented amounts of public debt, uprooted tens of thou­
sands of people, and could have been accomplished only by a single ex­
ecutive authority not directly accountable to the electorate.
The logic behind the reconstruction of Paris bears a resemblance 
to the logic behind the transformation of old-growth forests into sci­
entific forests designed for unitary fiscal management. There was the 
same emphasis on simplification, legibility, straight lines, central man­
agement, and a synoptic grasp of the ensemble. As in the case of the 
forest, much of the plan was achieved. One chief difference, however, 
was that Haussmann’s plan was devised less for fiscal reasons than for 
its impact on the conduct and sensibilities of Parisians. While the plan 
did create a far more legible fiscal space in the capital, this was a by­
product of the desire to make the city more governable, prosperous, 
healthy, and architecturally imposing.16 The second difference was, of 
course, that those uprooted by the urban planning of the Second Em­
pire could, and did, strike back. As we shall see, the retrofitting of Paris 
foreshadows many of the paradoxes of authoritarian high-modernist 
planning that we will soon examine in greater detail.
The plan reproduced in figure 10 shows the new boulevards con­
structed to Haussmann’s measure as well as the prerevolutionary inner

60 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
10. Map of Paris, 1870, showing the principal new streets built between 1850 
and 1870
boulevards, which were widened and straightened.17 But the retrofit, 
seen merely as a new street map, greatly underestimates the transfor­
mation. For all the demolition and construction required, for all the 
new legibility added to the street plan, the new pattern bore strong 
traces of an accommodation with “old-growth” Paris. The outer boule­
vards, for example, follow the line of the older customs (octroi) wall of 
1787. But Haussmann’s scheme was far more than a traffic reform. 
The new legibility of the boulevards was accompanied by changes that 
revolutionized daily life: new aqueducts, a much more effective sewage 
system, new rail lines and terminals, centralized markets (Les Hailes), 
gas lines and lighting, and new parks and public squares.18 The new 
Paris created by Louis Napoleon became, by the turn of the century, a 
widely admired public works miracle and shrine for would-be plan­
ners from abroad.
At the center of Louis Napoleons and Haussmann s plans for Paris 
lay the military security of the state. The redesigned city was, above

Cities, People, and Language 61
all, to be made safe against popular insurrections. As Haussmann 
wrote, “The order of this Queen-city is one of the main pre-conditions 
of general [public] security."19 Barricades had gone up nine times in 
the twenty-five years before 1851. Louis Napoleon and Haussmann had 
seen the revolutions of 1830 and 1848; more recently, the June Days 
and resistance to Louis Napoleon's coup represented the largest in­
surrection of the century. Louis Napoleon, as a returned exile, was 
well aware of how tenuous his hold on power might prove.
The geography of insurrection, however, was not evenly distributed 
across Paris. Resistance was concentrated in densely packed, working- 
class quartiers, which, like Bruges, had complex, illegible street plans.20 
The 1860 annexation of the “inner suburbs” (located between the cus­
toms wall and the outer fortifications and containing 240,000 resi­
dents) was explicitly designed to gain mastery over a ceinture sauvage 
that had thus far escaped police control. Haussmann described this 
area as a “dense belt of suburbs, given over to twenty different admin­
istrations, built at random, covered by an inextricable network of nar­
row and tortuous public ways, alleys, and dead-ends, where a nomadic 
population without any real ties to the land [property] and without any 
effective surveillance, grows at a prodigious speed.”21 Within Paris it­
self, there were such revolutionary foyers as the Marais and especially 
the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, both of which had been determined cen­
ters of resistance to Louis Napoleon’s coup d’etat.
The military control of these insurrectionary spaces—spaces that 
had not yet been well mapped—was integral to Haussmann’s plan.22 A 
series of new avenues between the inner boulevards and the customs 
wall was designed to facilitate movement between the barracks on 
the outskirts of the city and the subversive districts. As Haussmann 
saw it, his new roads would ensure multiple, direct rail and road links 
between each district of the city and the military units responsible for 
order there.23 Thus, for example, new boulevards in northeastern Paris 
allowed troops to rush from the Courbevoie barracks to the Bastille 
and then to subdue the turbulent Faubourg Saint-Antoine.24 Many of 
the new rail lines and stations were located with similar strategic goals 
in mind. Where possible, insurrectionary quartiers were demolished 
or broken up by new roads, public spaces, and commercial develop­
ment. Explaining the need for a loan of 50 million francs to begin the 
work, Leon Faucher emphasized state security needs: “The interests of 
public order, no less than those of salubrity, demand that a wide swath 
be cut as soon as possible across this district of barricades.”25
The reconstruction of Paris was also a necessary public-health mea­

62 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
sure. And here the steps that the hygienists said would make Paris 
more healthful would at the same time make it more efficient econom­
ically and more secure militarily. Antiquated sewers and cesspools, the 
droppings of an estimated thirty-seven thousand horses (in 1850), and 
the unreliable water supply made Paris literally pestilential. The city 
had the highest death rate in France and was most susceptible to viru­
lent epidemics of cholera; in 1831, the disease killed 18,400 people, in­
cluding the prime minister. And it was in those districts of revolution­
ary resistance where, because of crowding and lack of sanitation, the 
rates of mortality were highest.26 Haussmann's Paris was, for those who 
were not expelled, a far healthier city; the greater circulation of air 
and water and the exposure to sunlight reduced the risk of epidemics 
just as the improved circulation of goods and labor (healthier labor, at 
that) contributed to the city’s economic well-being. A utilitarian logic 
of labor productivity and commercial success went hand in hand with 
strategic and public-health concerns.
The politico-aesthetic tastes of the driving force behind the trans­
formation of Paris, Louis Napoleon himself, were also decisive. When 
Haussmann was appointed prefect of the Seine, Louis Napoleon handed 
him a map that provided for the central market, the Bois de Bologne, 
and many of the streets eventually built. There is no doubt that Louis 
Napoleon’s plans drew heavily from the ideas of the Saint Simonists in 
their visionary journal Le globe and from the model urban communi­
ties sketched by Fourier and Cabet.27 Their grandiose designs appealed 
to his own determination to have the new grandeur of the capital city 
serve as testimony to the grandeur of the regime.
As happens in many authoritarian modernizing schemes, the politi­
cal tastes of the ruler occasionally trumped purely military and func­
tional concerns. Rectilinear streets may have admirably assisted the mo­
bilization of troops against insurgents, but they were also to be flanked 
by elegant facades and to terminate in imposing buildings that would 
impress visitors.28 Uniform modern buildings along the new boulevards 
may have represented healthier dwellings, but they were often no more 
than facades. The zoning regulations were almost exclusively concerned 
with the visible surfaces of buildings, but behind the facades, builders 
could build crowded, airless tenements, and many of them did.29
The new Paris, as T. J. Clark has observed, was intensely visualized: 
“Part of Haussmann’s purpose was to give modernity a shape, and he 
seemed at the time to have a measure of success in doing so; he built a 
set of forms in which the city appeared to be visible, even intelligible: 
Paris, to repeat the formula, was becoming a spectacle.”30
Legibility, in this case, was achieved by a much more pronounced

Cities, People, and Language 63
segregation of the population by class and function. Each fragment of 
Paris increasingly took on a distinctive character of dress, activity, and 
wealth—bourgeois shopping district, prosperous residential quarter, 
industrial suburb, artisan quarter, bohemian quarter. It was a more 
easily managed and administered city and a more "readable” city be­
cause of Haussmann’s heroic simplifications.
As in most ambitious schemes of modern order, there was a kind of 
evil twin to Haussmann's spacious and imposing new capital. The hi­
erarchy of urban space in which the rebuilt center of Paris occupied 
pride of place presupposed the displacement of the urban poor to­
ward the periphery.31 Nowhere was this more true than in Belleville, a 
popular working-class quarter to the northeast which grew into a 
town of sixty thousand people by 1856. Many of its residents had been 
disinherited by Haussmann’s demolitions; some called it a community 
of outcasts. By the 1860s, it had become a suburban equivalent of 
what the Faubourg Saint-Antoine had been earlier—an illegible, in­
surrectionary foyer. “The problem was not that Belleville was not a 
community, but that it became the sort of community which the bour­
geoisie feared, which the police could not penetrate, which the gov­
ernment could not regulate, where the popular classes, with all their 
unruly passions and political resentments, held the upper hand.”32 If, 
as many claim, the Commune of Paris in 1871 was partly an attempt 
to reconquer the city ("la reconquete de la Ville par la Ville”)33 by those 
exiled to the periphery by Haussmann, then Belleville was the geo­
graphical locus of that sentiment. The Communards, militarily on the 
defensive in late May 1871, retreated toward the northeast and Belle­
ville, where, at the Belleville town hall, they made their last stand. 
Treated as a den of revolutionaries, Belleville was subjected to a bru­
tal military occupation.
Two diagnostic ironies marked the suppression of the Commune. 
The first was that the strategic design of Haussmann was triumphant. 
The boulevards and rail lines that the Second Empire had hoped 
would foil a popular insurrection had proved their value. "Thanks to 
Haussmann, the Versailles army could move in one fell swoop from the 
Place du Chateau d’eau to Belleville.”34 The second irony was that, just 
as the Faubourg Saint-Antoine had been effaced by Haussmann's dem­
olitions, so too was much of the newly offending quarter obliterated by 
the building of the Eglise Sacre Coeur, built “in the guilty town ... as 
restitution made on the site of the crime.”35

64 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
The Creation of Surnames
Some of the categories that we most take for granted and with which 
we now routinely apprehend the social world had their origin in state 
projects of standardization and legibility. Consider, for example, some­
thing as fundamental as permanent surnames.
A vignette from the popular film Witness illustrates how, when 
among strangers, we do rely on surnames as key navigational aids.36 
The detective in the film is attempting to locate a young Amish boy who 
may have witnessed a murder. Although the detective has a surname to 
go on, he is thwarted by several aspects of Amish traditionalism, in­
cluding the antique German dialect spoken by the Amish. His first in­
stinct is, of course, to reach for the telephone book— a list of proper 
names and addresses—but the Amish don't have telephones. Further­
more, he learns, the Amish have a very small number of last names. 
His quandary reminds us that the great variety of surnames and given 
names in the United States allows us to identify unambiguously a large 
number of individuals whom we may never have met. A world without 
such names is bewildering; indeed, the detective finds Amish society so 
opaque that he needs a native tracker to find his way.
Customary naming practices throughout much of the world are 
enormously rich. Among some peoples, it is not uncommon for individ­
uals to have different names during different stages of life (infancy, 
childhood, adulthood) and in some cases after death; added to these are 
names used for joking, rituals, and mourning and names used for in­
teractions with same-sex friends or with in-laws. Each name is specific 
to a certain phase of life, social setting, or interlocutor. A single indi­
vidual will frequently be called by several different names, depending 
on the stage of life and the person addressing him or her. To the ques­
tion "What is your name?” which has a more unambiguous answer in 
the contemporary West, the only plausible answer is "It depends.”37
For the insider who grows up using these naming practices, they 
are both legible and clarifying. Each name and the contexts of its use 
convey important social knowledge. Like the network of alleys in 
Bruges, the assortment of local weights and measures, and the intri­
cacies of customary land tenure, the complexity of naming has some 
direct and often quite practical relations to local purposes. For an out­
sider, however, this byzantine complexity of names is a formidable ob­
stacle to understanding local society. Finding someone, let alone situ­
ating him or her in a kinship network or tracing the inheritance of 
property, becomes a major undertaking. If, in addition, the population 
in question has reason to conceal its identity and its activities from ex­

Cities, People, and Language 65
ternal authority, the camouflage value of such naming practices is 
considerable.
The invention of permanent, inherited patronyms was, after the ad­
ministrative simplification of nature (for example, the forest) and space 
(for example, land tenure), the last step in establishing the necessary 
preconditions of modern statecraft. In almost every case it was a state 
project, designed to allow officials to identify, unambiguously, the ma­
jority of its citizens. When successful, it went far to create a legible peo­
ple.38 Tax and tithe rolls, property rolls, conscription lists, censuses, and 
property deeds recognized in law were inconceivable without some 
means of fixing an individual’s identity and linking him or her to a kin 
group. Campaigns to assign permanent patronyms have typically taken 
place, as one might expect, in the context of a state’s exertions to put its 
fiscal system on a sounder and more lucrative footing. Fearing, with 
good reason, that an effort to enumerate and register them could be a 
prelude to some new tax burden or conscription, local officials and the 
population at large often resisted such campaigns.
If permanent surnames were largely a project of official legibility, 
then they should have appeared earliest in those societies with pre­
cocious states. China provides a striking example.39 By roughly the 
fourth century B.C. (although the exact timing and comprehensiveness 
are in dispute), the Qin dynasty had apparently begun imposing sur­
names on much of its population and enumerating them for the pur­
poses of taxes, forced labor, and conscription.40 This initiative may well 
have been the origin of the term "laobaixing," meaning, literally, “the 
old one hundred surnames," which in modern China has come to mean 
“the common people.” Before this, the fabled Chinese patrilineage, 
while established among ruling houses and related lines, was absent 
among commoners. They did not have surnames, nor did they even im­
itate elite practices in this respect. The assigning of patronyms by fam­
ily was integral to state policy promoting the status of (male) family 
heads, giving them legal jurisdiction over their wives, children, and ju­
niors and, not incidentally, holding them accountable for the fiscal 
obligations of the entire family.41 This (Qin) policy required registering 
the entire population, after which the "hodgepodge of terms by which 
people were called were all classified as hsing [surname], to be passed 
down to their patrilineal descendants indefinitely.”42 On this account, 
both the establishment of permanent patronyms and the creation of the 
patrilineal family itself can be attributed to early state simplification.
Until at least the fourteenth century, the great majority of Euro­
peans did not have permanent patronymics.43 An individual's name 
was typically his given name, which might well suffice for local identi­

66 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
fication. If something more were required, a second designation could 
be added, indicating his occupation (in the English case, smith, baker), 
his geographical location (hill, edgewood), his father s given name, or 
a personal characteristic (short, strong). These secondary designations 
were not permanent surnames; they did not survive their bearers, un­
less by chance, say, a baker’s son went into the same trade and was 
called by the same second designation.
We can learn something about the creation of permanent pat­
ronyms in Europe by the documentation left behind from the failed 
census (catasto) of the Florentine state in 1427.44 The catasto was an au­
dacious attempt to rationalize the state’s revenues and military strength 
by specifying its subjects and their wealth, residences, landholdings, 
and ages.45 Close study of these records demonstrates, first, that, as in 
the Chinese case, state initiative created new surnames rather than 
simply recording existing surnames. It is thus often impossible to know 
whether a state-recorded surname has any social existence outside the 
role of the text in which it is inscribed. Second, the variable imposition 
of permanent surnames within a territory—in this case Tuscany— 
serves as a rough-and-ready gauge of state capacity.
Family names in early fifteenth-century Tuscany were confined to a 
very few powerful, property-owning lineages (such as the Strozzi). For 
such lineages, a surname was a way of achieving social recognition as 
a "corporate group,” and kin and affines adopted the name as a way of 
claiming the backing of an influential lineage. Beyond this narrow seg­
ment of society and a small urban patriciate that copied its practices, 
there were no permanent family names.
How, in this case, was the catasto office to pinpoint and register an 
individual, let alone his location, his property, and his age? When mak­
ing his declaration, a typical Tuscan provided not only his own given 
name but those of his father and perhaps his grandfather as well, in 
quasi-biblical fashion (Luigi, son of Giovanni, son of Paolo). Given the 
limited number of baptismal names and the tendency of many families 
to repeat names in alternate generations, even this sequence might not 
suffice for unambiguous identification. The subject might then add his 
profession, his nickname, or a personal characteristic. There is no ev­
idence that any of these designations was a permanent patronym, al­
though this exercise and others like it might have eventually served to 
crystallize surnames, at least for documentary purposes. In the final 
analysis, the Florentine state was inadequate to the administrative feat 
intended by the catasto. Popular resistance, the noncompliance of 
many local elites, and the arduousness and cost of the census exercise 
doomed the project, and officials returned to the earlier fiscal system.

Cities, People, and Language 67
What evidence we have suggests that second names of any kind be­
came rarer as distance from the state’s fiscal reach increased. Whereas 
one-third of the households in Florence declared a second name, the 
proportion dropped to one-fifth for secondary towns and to one-tenth 
in the countryside. It was not until the seventeenth century that family 
names crystallized in the most remote and poorest areas of Tuscany— 
the areas that would have had the least contact with officialdom.
A comparable connection between state building and the invention 
of permanent patronyms exists for fourteenth- and fifteenth-century 
England. As in Tuscany, in England only wealthy aristocratic families 
tended to have fixed surnames. In the English case such names referred 
typically to families' places of origin in Normandy (for example, Bau- 
mont, Percy, Disney) or to the places in England that they held in fief 
from William the Conqueror (for example, Gerard de Sussex). For the 
rest of the male population, the standard practice of linking only father 
and son by way of identification prevailed.46 Thus, William Robertson’s 
male son might be called Thomas Williamson (son of William), while 
Thomas’s son, in turn, might be called Henry Thompson (Thomas’s son). 
Note that the grandson's name, by itself, bore no evidence of his grand­
father’s identity, complicating the tracing of descent through names 
alone. A great many northern European surnames, though now perma­
nent, still bear, like a fly caught in amber, particles that echo their an­
tique purpose of designating who a man’s father was ( Fitz-, O’-, -sen, 
-son, -s, Mac-, -vich).47 At the time of their establishment, last names 
often had a kind of local logic to them: John who owned a mill became 
John Miller; John who made cart wheels became John Wheelwright; 
John who was physically small became John Short. As their male de­
scendants, whatever their occupations or stature, retained the patro­
nyms, the names later assumed an arbitrary cast.
The development of the personal surname (literally, a name added 
to another name, and not to be confused with a permanent patronym) 
went hand in hand with the development of written, official documents 
such as tithe records, manorial dues rolls, marriage registers, cen­
suses, tax records, and land records.48 They were necessary to the suc­
cessful conduct of any administrative exercise involving large numbers 
of people who had to be individually identified and who were not 
known personally by the authorities. Imagine the dilemma of a tithe or 
capitation-tax collector faced with a male population, 90 percent of 
whom bore just six Christian names (John, William, Thomas, Robert, 
Richard, and Henry). Some second designation was absolutely essen­
tial for the records, and, if the subject suggested none, it was invented 
for him by the recording clerk. These second designations and the rolls

68 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
of names that they generated were to the legibility of the population 
what uniform measurement and the cadastral map were to the legibil­
ity of real property. While the subject might normally prefer the safety 
of anonymity, once he was forced to pay the tax, it was then in his in­
terest to be accurately identified in order to avoid paying the same tax 
twice. Many of these fourteenth-century surnames were clearly noth­
ing more than administrative fictions designed to make a population 
fiscally legible. Many of the subjects whose “surnames” appear in the 
documents were probably unaware of what had been written down, 
and, for the great majority, the surnames had no social existence what­
ever outside the document.49 Only on very rare occasions does one en­
counter an entry, such as "William Carter, tailor," that implies that we 
may be dealing with a permanent patronym.
The increasing intensity of interaction with the state and statelike 
structures (large manors, the church) exactly parallels the devel­
opment of permanent, heritable patronyms. Thus, when Edward I 
clarified the system of landholding, establishing primogeniture and 
hereditary copyhold tenure for manorial land, he provided a powerful 
incentive for the adoption of permanent patronyms. Taking one’s fa­
ther's surname became, for the eldest son at least, part of a claim to the 
property on the father’s death.50 Now that property claims were sub­
ject to state validation, surnames that had once been mere bureau­
cratic fantasies took on a social reality of their own. One imagines that 
for a long time English subjects had in effect two names—their local 
name and an “official,” fixed patronym. As the frequency of interaction 
with impersonal administrative structures increased, the official name 
came to prevail in all but a man’s intimate circle. Those subjects living 
at a greater distance, both socially and geographically, from the organs 
of state power, as did the Tuscans, acquired permanent patronyms 
much later. The upper classes and those living in the south of England 
thus acquired permanent surnames before the lower classes and those 
living in the north did. The Scottish and Welsh acquired them even 
later.51
State naming practices, like state mapping practices, were inevi­
tably associated with taxes (labor, military service, grain, revenue,) 
and hence aroused popular resistance. The great English peasant ris­
ing of 13 81 (often called the Wat Tyler Rebellion) is attributed to an un­
precedented decade of registrations and assessments of poll taxes.52 
For English as well as for Tuscan peasants, a census of all adult males 
could not but appear ominous, if not ruinous.
The imposition of permanent surnames on colonial populations of­
fers us a chance to observe a process, telescoped into a decade or less,

Cities, People, and Language 69
that in the West might have taken several generations. Many of the 
same state objectives animate both the European and the colonial ex­
ercises, but in the colonial case, the state is at once more bureaucra­
tized and less tolerant of popular resistance. The very brusqueness of 
colonial naming casts the purposes and paradoxes of the process in 
sharp relief.
Nowhere is this better illustrated than in the Philippines under the 
Spanish.53 Filipinos were instructed by the decree of November 21, 
1849, to take on permanent Hispanic surnames. The author of the de­
cree was Governor (and Lieutenant General) Narciso Claveria y Zal- 
dua, a meticulous administrator as determined to rationalize names as 
he had been determined to rationalize existing law, provincial bound­
aries, and the calendar.54 He had observed, as his decree states, that 
Filipinos generally lacked individual surnames, which might “distin­
guish them by families," and that their practice of adopting baptismal 
names drawn from a small group of saints' names resulted in great 
“confusion.” The remedy was the catalogo, a compendium not only of 
personal names but also of nouns and adjectives drawn from flora, 
fauna, minerals, geography, and the arts and intended to be used by the 
authorities in assigning permanent, inherited surnames. Each local 
official was to be given a supply of surnames sufficient for his jurisdic­
tion, "taking care that the distribution be made by letters [of the al­
phabet]."55 In practice, each town was given a number of pages from 
the alphabetized catalogo, producing whole towns with surnames be­
ginning with the same letter. In situations where there has been little 
in-migration in the past 150 years, the traces of this administrative ex­
ercise are still perfectly visible across the landscape: “For example, in 
the Bikol region, the entire alphabet is laid out like a garland over the 
provinces of Albay, Sorsogon, and Catanduanes which in 1849 be­
longed to the single jurisdiction of Albay. Beginning with A at the 
provincial capital, the letters B and C mark the towns along the coast 
beyond Tabaco to Tiwi. We return and trace along the coast of Sorso­
gon the letters E to L; then starting down the Iraya Valley at Daraga 
with M, we stop with S to Polangui and Libon, and finish the alphabet 
with a quick tour around the island of Catanduanes.”56
The confusion for which the decree is the antidote is largely that of 
the administrator and the tax collector. Universal last names, they be­
lieve, will facilitate the administration of justice, finance, and public 
order as well as make it simpler for prospective marriage partners to 
calculate their degree of consanguinity.57 For a utilitarian state builder 
of Claveria’s temper, however, the ultimate goal was a complete and 
legible list of subjects and taxpayers. This is abundantly clear from the

70 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
short preamble to the decree: “In view of the extreme usefulness and 
practicality of this measure, the time has come to issue a directive for 
the formation of a civil register [formerly a clerical function], which 
may not only fulfill and ensure the said objectives, but may also serve 
as a basis for the statistics of the country, guarantee the collection of 
taxes, the regular performance of personal services, and the receipt of 
payment for exemptions. It likewise provides exact information of the 
movement of the population, thus avoiding unauthorized migrations, 
hiding taxpayers, and other abuses."58
Drawing on the accurate lists of citizens throughout the colony, 
Claveria envisioned each local official constructing a table of eight 
columns specifying tribute obligations, communal labor obligations, 
first name, surname, age, marital status, occupation, and exemptions. 
A ninth column, for updating the register, would record alterations in 
status and would be submitted for inspection every month. Because of 
their accuracy and uniformity, these registers would allow the state to 
compile the precise statistics in Manila that would make for fiscal ef­
ficiency. The daunting cost of assigning surnames to the entire popula­
tion and building a complete and discriminating list of taxpayers was 
justified by forecasting that the list, while it might cost as much as 
twenty thousand pesos to create, would yield one hundred thousand or 
two hundred thousand pesos in continuing annual revenue.
What if the Filipinos chose to ignore their new last names? This 
possibility had already crossed Claveria’s mind, and he took steps to 
make sure that the names would stick. Schoolteachers were ordered to 
forbid their students to address or even know one another by any name 
except the officially inscribed family name. Those teachers who did not 
apply the rule with enthusiasm were to be punished. More efficacious 
perhaps, given the minuscule school enrollment, was the proviso that 
forbade priests and military and civil officials from accepting any doc­
ument, application, petition, or deed that did not use the official sur­
names. All documents using other names would be null and void.
Actual practice, as one might expect, fell considerably short of 
Claveria’s administrative utopia of legible and regimented taxpayers. 
The continued existence of such non-Spanish surnames as Magsay- 
say or Macapagal suggests that part of the population was never mus­
tered for this exercise. Local officials submitted incomplete returns or 
none at all. And there was another serious problem, one that Claveria 
had foreseen but inadequately provided for. The new registers rarely 
recorded, as they were supposed to, the previous names used by the 
registrants. This meant that it became exceptionally difficult for offi­
cials to trace back property and taxpaying to the period before the

Cities, People, and Language 71
transformation of names. The state had in effect blinded its own hind­
sight by the very success of its new scheme.
With surnames, as with forests, land tenure, and legible cities, ac­
tual practice never achieved anything like the simplified and uniform 
perfection to which its designers had aspired. As late as 1872, an at­
tempt at taking a census proved a complete fiasco, and it was not tried 
again until just before the revolution of 1896. Nevertheless, by the 
twentieth century, the vast majority of Filipinos bore the surnames that 
Claveria had dreamed up for them. The increasing weight of the state 
in people’s lives and the state’s capacity to insist on its rules and its 
terms ensured that.
Universal last names are a fairly recent historical phenomenon. 
Tracking property ownership and inheritance, collecting taxes, main­
taining court records, performing police work, conscripting soldiers, 
and controlling epidemics were all made immeasurably easier by the 
clarity of full names and, increasingly, fixed addresses. While the utili­
tarian state was committed to a complete inventory of its population, 
liberal ideas of citizenship, which implied voting rights and conscrip­
tion, also contributed greatly to the standardization of naming prac­
tices. The legislative imposition of permanent surnames is particularly 
clear in the case of Western European Jews who had no tradition of last 
names. A Napoleonic decree “concernant les Juifs qui n’ont pas de nom 
de famille et de prenoms fixes,” in 1808, mandated last names.59 Aus­
trian legislation of 1787, as part of the emancipation process, required 
Jews to choose last names or, if they refused, to have fixed last names 
chosen for them. In Prussia the emancipation of the Jews was contin­
gent upon the adoption of surnames.60 Many of the immigrants to the 
United States, Jews and non-Jews alike, had no permanent surnames 
when they set sail. Very few, however, made it through the initial pa­
perwork without an official last name that their descendants carry still.
The process of creating fixed last names continues in much of the 
Third World and on the “tribal frontiers” of more developed coun­
tries.61 Today, of course, there are now many other state-impelled stan­
dard designations that have vastly improved the capacity of the state to 
identify an individual. The creation of birth and death certificates, 
more specific addresses (that is, more specific than something like 
"John-on-the-hill"), identity cards, passports, social security numbers, 
photographs, fingerprints, and, most recently, d na profiles have super­
seded the rather crude instrument of the permanent surname. But the 
surname was a first and crucial step toward making individual citizens 
officially legible, and along with the photograph, it is still the first fact 
on documents of identity.

72 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
The Directive for a Standard, Official Language
The great cultural barrier imposed by a separate language is perhaps 
the most effective guarantee that a social world, easily accessible to in­
siders, will remain opaque to outsiders.62 Just as the stranger or state 
official might need a local guide to find his way around sixteenth- 
century Bruges, he would need a local interpreter in order to under­
stand and be understood in an unfamiliar linguistic environment. A 
distinct language, however, is a far more powerful basis for autonomy 
than a complex residential pattern. It is also the bearer of a distinctive 
history, a cultural sensibility, a literature, a mythology, a musical past.63 
In this respect, a unique language represents a formidable obstacle to 
state knowledge, let alone colonization, control, manipulation, instruc­
tion, or propaganda.
Of all state simplifications, then, the imposition of a single, official 
language may be the most powerful, and it is the precondition of many 
other simplifications. This process should probably be viewed, as 
Eugen Weber suggests in the case of France, as one of domestic colo­
nization in which various foreign provinces (such as Brittany and Oc- 
citanie) are linguistically subdued and culturally incorporated.64 In the 
first efforts made to insist on the use of French, it is clear that the 
state’s objective was the legibility of local practice. Officials insisted 
that every legal document—whether a will, document of sale, loan in­
strument, contract, annuity, or property deed—be drawn up in French. 
As long as these documents remained in local vernaculars, they were 
daunting to an official sent from Paris and virtually impossible to 
bring into conformity with central schemes of legal and administra­
tive standardization. The campaign of linguistic centralization was as­
sured of some success since it went hand in hand with an expansion of 
state power. By the late nineteenth century, dealing with the state was 
unavoidable for all but a small minority of the population. Petitions, 
court cases, school documents, applications, and correspondence with 
officials were all of necessity written in French. One can hardly imag­
ine a more effective formula for immediately devaluing local knowl­
edge and privileging all those who had mastered the official linguistic 
code. It was a gigantic shift in power. Those at the periphery who 
lacked competence in French were rendered mute and marginal. 
They were now in need of a local guide to the new state culture, which 
appeared in the form of lawyers, notaires, schoolteachers, clerks, and 
soldiers.65
A cultural project, as one might suspect, lurked behind the linguis­
tic centralization. French was seen as the bearer of a national civiliza­

Cities, People, and Language 73
tion; the purpose of imposing it was not merely to have provincials 
digest the Code Napoleon but also to bring them Voltaire, Racine, 
Parisian newspapers, and a national education. As Weber provoca­
tively puts it, “There can be no clearer expression of imperialist senti­
ment, a white man’s burden of Francophony, whose first conquests 
were to be right at home.”66 Where the command of Latin had once 
defined participation in a wider culture for a small elite, the command 
of standard French now defined full participation in French culture. 
The implicit logic of the move was to define a hierarchy of cultures, 
relegating local languages and their regional cultures to, at best, a 
quaint provincialism. At the apex of this implicit pyramid was Paris and 
its institutions: ministries, schools, academies (including the guard­
ian of the language, l'Academie Frangaise). The relative success of this 
cultural project hinged on both coercion and inducements. “It was cen­
tralization,” says Alexandre Sanguinetti, “which permitted the making 
of France despite the French, or in the midst of their indifference. . . . 
France is a deliberate political construction for whose creation the 
central power has never ceased to fight."67 Standard (Parisian) French 
and Paris were not only focal points of power; they were also magnets. 
The growth of markets, physical mobility, new careers, political pa­
tronage, public service, and a national educational system all meant 
that facility in French and connections to Paris were the paths of social 
advancement and material success. It was a state simplification that 
promised to reward those who complied with its logic and to penalize 
those who ignored it.
The Centralization of Traffic Patterns
The linguistic centralization impelled by the imposition of Parisian 
French as the official standard was replicated in a centralization of 
traffic. Just as the new dispensation in language made Paris the hub of 
communication, so the new road and rail systems increasingly favored 
movement to and from Paris over interregional or local traffic. State 
policy resembled, in computer parlance, a “hardwiring” pattern that 
made the provinces far more accessible, far more legible, to central 
authorities than even the absolutist kings had imagined.
Let us contrast, in an overly schematic way, a relatively uncentral­
ized network of communication, on one hand, with a relatively cen­
tralized network, on the other. If mapped, the uncentralized pattern 
would be the physical image of the actual movements of goods and 
people along routes not created by administrative fiat. Such move­
ments would not be random; they would reflect both the ease of travel

74 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
along valleys, by watercourses, and around defiles and also the loca­
tion of important resources and ritual sites. Weber captures the wealth 
of human activities that animate these movements across the land­
scape: “They served professional pursuits, like the special trails fol­
lowed by glassmakers, carriers or sellers of salt, potters, or those that 
led to forges, mines, quarries, and hemp fields, or those along which 
flax, hemp, linen, and yarn were taken to market. There were pilgrim­
age routes and procession trails."68
If we can imagine, for the sake of argument, a place where physical 
resources are evenly distributed and there are no great physical barri­
ers to movement (such as mountains or swamps), then a map of paths 
in use might form a network resembling a dense concentration of cap­
illaries (figure 11). The tracings would, of course, never be entirely 
random. Market towns based on location and resources would consti­
tute small hubs, as would religious shrines, quarries, mines, and other 
important sites.69 In the French case as well, the network of roads 
would have long reflected the centralizing ambitions of local lords and 
the nation's monarchs. The point of this illustrative idealization, how­
ever, is to depict a landscape of communication routes that is only

Cities, People, and Language 75
lightly marked by state centralization. It would resemble in many ways 
the cityscape of late fourteenth-century Bruges, shown earlier.
Beginning with Colbert, the state-building modernizers of France 
were bent on superimposing on this pattern a carefully planned grid of 
administrative centralization.70 Their scheme, never entirely realized, 
was to align highways, canals, and ultimately rail lines to radiate out 
from Paris like the spokes of a wheel (figure 12). The similarity be­
tween this grid and the tire-aire of the well-managed state forest as 
conceived by Colbert was not accidental. They were both devised to 
maximize access and to facilitate central control. And the kind of sim­
plification involved was, again, entirely relative to location. For an 
official at the hub, it was now much easier to go to A or to B along the 
new routes. The layout was designed “to serve the government and the 
cities and lacking a network of supporting thoroughfares had little to 
do with popular habit or need. Administrative highways, a historian of 
the center called them, [were] made for troops to march on and for tax 
revenues to reach the treasury.”71 For anyone wanting to travel or move 
goods between A and B, however, things were not so simple. Just as all 
documents had to "pass through" the official legal language, so too did 
much of the commercial traffic have to pass through the capital.
The driving intellectual force behind this esprit geometrique was, 
and has remained, the renowned engineers of the Corps des Ponts et

76 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
Chaussees.72 Victor Legrand, the director of Ponts et des Chaussees, 
was the originator of the belle idee of seven grand lines of junction link­
ing Paris to points from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. His plan be­
came known as the Legrand Star and was proposed first for canals and 
then, with greater effect, for railroads (among them the Gare du Nord 
and Gare de l’Est).73
As a centralizing aesthetic, the plan defied the canons of commer­
cial logic or cost-effectiveness. The first phase of the grid, the line from 
Paris east to Strasbourg and the frontier, ran straight through the pla­
teau of Brie rather than following the centers of population along the 
Marne. By refusing to conform to the topography in its quest of geo­
metric perfection, the railway line was ruinously expensive compared 
to English or German railroads. The army had also adopted the Ponts 
et Chaussees logic, believing that direct rail lines to the borders would 
be militarily advantageous. They were proven tragically wrong in the 
Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71.74
This retrofitting of traffic patterns had enormous consequences, 
most of which were intended: linking provincial France and provincial 
French citizens to Paris and to the state and facilitating the deployment 
of troops from the capital to put down civil unrest in any department in 
the nation. It was aimed at achieving, for the military control of the na­
tion, what Haussmann had achieved in the capital itself. It thus em­
powered Paris and the state at the expense of the provinces, greatly af­
fected the economics of location, expedited central fiscal and military 
control, and severed or weakened lateral cultural and economic ties by 
favoring hierarchical links. At a stroke, it marginalized outlying areas 
in the way that official French had marginalized local dialects.
Conclusion
Officials of the modern state are, of necessity, at least one step—and 
often several steps—removed from the society they are charged with 
governing. They assess the life of their society by a series of typifi- 
cations that are always some distance from the full reality these ab­
stractions are meant to capture. Thus the foresters’ charts and tables, 
despite their synoptic power to distill many individual facts into a 
larger pattern, do not quite capture (nor are they meant to) the real 
forest in its full diversity. Thus the cadastral survey and the title deed 
are a rough, often misleading representation of actual, existing rights to 
land use and disposal. The functionary of any large organization “sees" 
the human activity that is of interest to him largely through the sim­
plified approximations of documents and statistics: tax proceeds, lists

Cities, People, and Language 77
of taxpayers, land records, average incomes, unemployment numbers, 
mortality rates, trade and productivity figures, the total number of 
cases of cholera in a certain district.
These typifications are indispensable to statecraft. State simplifi­
cations such as maps, censuses, cadastral lists, and standard units of 
measurement represent techniques for grasping a large and complex 
reality; in order for officials to be able to comprehend aspects of the 
ensemble, that complex reality must be reduced to schematic categor­
ies. The only way to accomplish this is to reduce an infinite array of 
detail to a set of categories that will facilitate summary descriptions, 
comparisons, and aggregation. The invention, elaboration, and deploy­
ment of these abstractions represent, as Charles Tilly has shown, an 
enormous leap in state capacity—a move from tribute and indirect 
rule to taxation and direct rule. Indirect rule required only a minimal 
state apparatus but rested on local elites and communities who had 
an interest in withholding resources and knowledge from the center. 
Direct rule sparked widespread resistance and necessitated negotia­
tions that often limited the center's power, but for the first time, it al­
lowed state officials direct knowledge of and access to a previously 
opaque society.
Such is the power of the most advanced techniques of direct rule, 
that it discovers new social truths as well as merely summarizing known 
facts. The Center for Disease Control in Atlanta is a striking case in 
point. Its network of sample hospitals allowed it to first “discover”—in 
the epidemiological sense—such hitherto unknown diseases as toxic 
shock syndrome, Legionnaires’ disease, and AIDS. Stylized facts of 
this kind are a powerful form of state knowledge, making it possible 
for officials to intervene early in epidemics, to understand economic 
trends that greatly affect public welfare, to gauge whether their poli­
cies are having the desired effect, and to make policy with many of the 
crucial facts at hand.75 These facts permit discriminating interven­
tions, some of which are literally lifesaving.
The techniques devised to enhance the legibility of a society to its 
rulers have become vastly more sophisticated, but the political motives 
driving them have changed little. Appropriation, control, and manip­
ulation (in the nonpejorative sense) remain the most prominent. If we 
imagine a state that has no reliable means of enumerating and locating 
its population, gauging its wealth, and mapping its land, resources, 
and settlements, we are imagining a state whose interventions in that 
society are necessarily crude. A society that is relatively opaque to the 
state is thereby insulated from some forms of finely tuned state inter­
ventions, both welcomed (universal vaccinations) and resented (per­

78 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
sonal income taxes). The interventions it does experience will typically 
be mediated by local trackers who know the society from inside and 
who are likely to interpose their own particular interests. Without this 
mediation—and often with it—state action is likely to be inept, greatly 
overshooting or undershooting its objective.
An illegible society, then, is a hindrance to any effective interven­
tion by the state, whether the purpose of that intervention is plunder or 
public welfare. As long as the state’s interest is largely confined to grab­
bing a few tons of grain and rounding up a few conscripts, the state’s 
ignorance may not be fatal. When, however, the state’s objective re­
quires changing the daily habits (hygiene or health practices) or work 
performance (quality labor or machine maintenance) of its citizens, 
such ignorance can well be disabling. A thoroughly legible society elim­
inates local monopolies of information and creates a kind of national 
transparency through the uniformity of codes, identities, statistics, reg­
ulations, and measures. At the same time it is likely to create new po­
sitional advantages for those at the apex who have the knowledge and 
access to easily decipher the new state-created format.
The discriminating interventions that a legible society makes pos­
sible can, of course, be deadly as well. A sobering instance is word­
lessly recalled by a map produced by the City Office of Statistics of Am­
sterdam, then under Nazi occupation, in May 1941 (figure 13).76 Along 
with lists of residents, the map was the synoptic representation that 
guided the rounding up of the city’s Jewish population, sixty-five thou­
sand of whom were eventually deported.
The map is titled "The Distribution of Jews in the Municipality.” Each 
dot represents ten Jews, a scheme that makes the heavily Jewish dis­
tricts readily apparent. The map was compiled from information ob­
tained not only through the order for people of Jewish extraction to 
register themselves but also through the population registry ("excep­
tionally comprehensive in the Netherlands”)77 and the business reg­
istry. If one reflects briefly on the kind of detailed information on names, 
addresses, and ethnic backgrounds (determined perhaps by names in 
the population registry or by declaration) and the cartographic exacti­
tude required to produce this statistical representation, the contribu­
tion of legibility to state capacity is evident. The Nazi authorities, of 
course, supplied the murderous purpose behind the exercise, but the 
legibility provided by the Dutch authorities supplied the means to its 
efficient implementation.78 That legibility, I should emphasize, merely 
amplifies the capacity of the state for discriminating interventions—a 
capacity that in principle could as easily have been deployed to feed 
the Jews as to deport them.

Cities, People, and Language 79
K - VERSPREIDIMG VAH DE JODEr 
^ERDEGEMEEMTE ( memsmi
13. Map produced by the City Office of Statistics of Amsterdam and entitled 
"The Distribution of Jews in the Municipality (May 1941)"
Legibility implies a viewer whose place is central and whose vi­
sion is synoptic. State simplifications of the kind we have examined are 
designed to provide authorities with a schematic view of their society, a 
view not afforded to those without authority. Rather like U.S. highway 
patrolmen wearing mirrored sunglasses, the authorities enjoy a quasi- 
monopolistic picture of selected aspects of the whole society. This 
privileged vantage point is typical of all institutional settings where 
command and control of complex human activities is paramount. The 
monastery, the barracks, the factory floor, and the administrative bu­
reaucracy (private or public) exercise many statelike functions and 
often mimic its information structure as well.

80 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
State simplifications can be considered part of an ongoing "project 
of legibility," a project that is never fully realized. The data from which 
such simplifications arise are, to varying degrees, riddled with inac­
curacies, omissions, faulty aggregations, fraud, negligence, political 
distortion, and so on. A project of legibility is immanent in any state­
craft that aims at manipulating society, but it is undermined by intra­
state rivalries, technical obstacles, and, above all, the resistance of its 
subjects.
State simplifications have at least five characteristics that deserve 
emphasis. Most obviously, state simplifications are observations of only 
those aspects of social life that are of official interest. They are inter­
ested, utilitarian facts. Second, they are also nearly always written (ver­
bal or numerical) documentary facts. Third, they are typically static 
facts.79 Fourth, most stylized state facts are also aggregate facts. Aggre­
gate facts may be impersonal (the density of transportation networks) 
or simply a collection of facts about individuals (employment rates, lit­
eracy rates, residence patterns). Finally, for most purposes, state offi­
cials need to group citizens in ways that permit them to make a collec­
tive assessment. Facts that can be aggregated and presented as averages 
or distributions must therefore be standardized facts. However unique 
the actual circumstances of the various individuals who make up the ag­
gregate, it is their sameness or, more precisely, their differences along a 
standardized scale or continuum that are of interest.
The process by which standardized facts susceptible to aggregation 
are manufactured seems to require at least three steps. The first, indis­
pensable step is the creation of common units of measurement or cod­
ing. Size classes of trees, freehold tenure, the metric system for measur­
ing landed property or the volume of grain, uniform naming practices, 
sections of prairie land, and urban lots of standard sizes are among the 
units created for this purpose. In the next step, each item or instance 
falling within a category is counted and classified according to the new 
unit of assessment. A particular tree reappears as an instance of a cer­
tain size class of tree; a particular plot of agricultural land reappears as 
coordinates in a cadastral map; a particular job reappears as an in­
stance of a category of employment; a particular person reappears bear­
ing a name according to the new formula. Each fact must be recuper­
ated and brought back on stage, as it were, dressed in a new uniform of 
official weave—as part of “a series in a total classificatory grid.”80 Only 
in such garb can these facts play a role in the culmination of the 
process: the creation of wholly new facts by aggregation, following the 
logic of the new units. One arrives, finally, at synoptic facts that are use­
ful to officials: so many thousands of trees in a given size class, so many

Cities, People, and Language 81
thousands of men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five, so many 
farms in a given size class, so many students whose surnames begin 
with the letter A, so many people with tuberculosis. Combining several 
metrics of aggregation, one arrives at quite subtle, complex, heretofore 
unknown truths, including, for example, the distribution of tubercular 
patients by income and urban location.
To call such elaborate artifacts of knowledge "state simplifications" 
risks being misleading. They are anything but simple-minded, and they 
are often wielded with great sophistication by officials. Rather, the 
term "simplification” is meant in two quite specific senses. First, the 
knowledge that an official needs must give him or her a synoptic view 
of the ensemble; it must be cast in terms that are replicable across 
many cases. In this respect, such facts must lose their particularity and 
reappear in schematic or simplified form as a member of a class of 
facts.81 Second, in a meaning closely related to the first, the grouping 
of synoptic facts necessarily entails collapsing or ignoring distinctions 
that might otherwise be relevant.
Take, for example, simplifications about employment. The working 
lives of many people are exceptionally complex and may change from 
day to day. For the purposes of official statistics, however, being “gain­
fully employed” is a stylized fact; one is or is not gainfully employed. 
Also, available characterizations of many rather exotic working lives 
are sharply restricted by the categories used in the aggregate statis­
tics.82 Those who gather and interpret such aggregate data understand 
that there is a certain fictional and arbitrary quality to their categories 
and that they hide a wealth of problematic variation. Once set, how­
ever, these thin categories operate unavoidably as if all similarly 
classified cases were in fact homogeneous and uniform. All Normal- 
baume in a given size range are the same; all soil in a defined soil class 
is statistically identical; all autoworkers (if we are classifying by in­
dustry) are alike; all Catholics (if we are classifying by religious faith) 
are alike. There is, as Theodore Porter notes in his study of mechanical 
objectivity, a "strong incentive to prefer precise and standardizable 
measures to highly accurate ones,” since accuracy is meaningless if the 
identical procedure cannot reliably be performed elsewhere.83
To this point, I have been making a rather straightforward, even 
banal point about the simplification, abstraction, and standardization 
that are necessary for state officials’ observations of the circumstances 
of some or all of the population. But I want to make a further claim, 
one analogous to that made for scientific forestry: the modern state, 
through its officials, attempts with varying success to create a terrain 
and a population with precisely those standardized characteristics that

82 LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION
will be easiest to monitor, count, assess, and manage. The utopian, im­
manent, and continually frustrated goal of the modern state is to re­
duce the chaotic, disorderly, constantly changing social reality beneath 
it to something more closely resembling the administrative grid of its 
observations. Much of the statecraft of the late eighteenth and nine­
teenth centuries was devoted to this project. “In the period of move­
ment from tribute to tax, from indirect rule to direct rule, from subor­
dination to assimilation,” Tilly remarks, "states generally worked to 
homogenize their populations and break down their segmentation by 
imposing common languages, religions, currencies, and legal systems, 
as well as promoting the construction of connected systems of trade, 
transportation, and communication.”84
As the scientific forester may dream of a perfectly legible forest 
planted with same-aged, single-species, uniform trees growing in 
straight lines in a rectangular flat space cleared of all underbrush and 
poachers,85 so the exacting state official may aspire to a perfectly legi­
ble population with registered, unique names and addresses keyed to 
grid settlements; who pursue single, identifiable occupations; and all 
of whose transactions are documented according to the designated 
formula and in the official language. This caricature of society as a mil­
itary parade ground is overdrawn, but the grain of truth that it em­
bodies may help us understand the grandiose plans we will examine 
later.86 The aspiration to such uniformity and order alerts us to the fact 
that modern statecraft is largely a project of internal colonization, 
often glossed, as it is in imperial rhetoric, as a “civilizing mission." The 
builders of the modern nation-state do not merely describe, observe, 
and map; they strive to shape a people and landscape that will fit their 
techniques of observation.87
This tendency is perhaps one shared by many large hierarchical or­
ganizations. As Donald Chisholm, in reviewing the literature on ad­
ministrative coordination, concludes, “central coordinating schemes do 
work effectively under conditions where the task environment is known 
and unchanging, where it can be treated as a closed system.”88 The more 
static, standardized, and uniform a population or social space is, the 
more legible it is, and the more amenable it is to the techniques of state 
officials. I am suggesting that many state activities aim at transforming 
the population, space, and nature under their jurisdiction into the 
closed systems that offer no surprises and that can best be observed 
and controlled.
State officials can often make their categories stick and impose their 
simplifications, because the state, of all institutions, is best equipped to 
insist on treating people according to its schemata. Thus categories

Cities, People, and Language 83
that may have begun as the artificial inventions of cadastral surveyors, 
census takers, judges, or police officers can end by becoming cate­
gories that organize people’s daily experience precisely because they 
are embedded in state-created institutions that structure that exper­
ience.89 The economic plan, survey map, record of ownership, forest 
management plan, classification of ethnicity, passbook, arrest record, 
and map of political boundaries acquire their force from the fact that 
these synoptic data are the points of departure for reality as state 
officials apprehend and shape it. In dictatorial settings where there is 
no effective way to assert another reality, fictitious facts-on-paper can 
often be made eventually to prevail on the ground, because it is on be­
half of such pieces of paper that police and army are deployed.
These paper records are the operative facts in a court of law, in an 
administrative dossier, and before most functionaries. In this sense, 
there are virtually no other facts for the state than those that are con­
tained in documents standardized for that purpose. An error in such a 
document can have far more power—and for far longer—than can an 
unreported truth. If, for example, you want to defend your claim to 
real property, you are normally obliged to defend it with a document 
called a property deed, and to do so in the courts and tribunals created 
for that purpose. If you wish to have any standing in law, you must 
have a document that officials accept as evidence of citizenship, be 
that document a birth certificate, passport, or identity card. The cate­
gories used by state agents are not merely means to make their envi­
ronment legible; they are an authoritative tune to which most of the 
population must dance.


Part 2
Transforming Visions


3 Authoritarian High Modernism
Then, as this morning on the dock, again I saw, as if for the first time in my 
life, the impeccably straight streets, the glistening glass of the pavement, the 
divine parallelepipeds of the transparent dwellings, the square harmony of the 
grayish blue rows of Numbers. And it seemed to me that not past generations, 
but I myself, had won a victory over the old god and the old life.
— Eugene Zamiatin, We
Modern science, which displaced and replaced God, removed that obstacle [lim­
its on freedom]. It also created a vacancy: the office of the supreme legislator- 
cum-manager, of the designer and administrator of the world order, was now 
horrifyingly empty. It had to be filled or else. . . . The emptiness of the throne 
was throughout the modern era a standing and tempting invitation to vision­
aries and adventurers. The dream of an all-embracing order and harmony re­
mained as vivid as ever, and it seemed now closer than ever, more than ever 
within human reach. It was now up to mortal earthlings to bring it about and 
to secure its ascendancy.
— Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust
t»
All the state simplifications that we have examined have the character 
of maps. That is, they are designed to summarize precisely those as­
pects of a complex world that are of immediate interest to the map- 
maker and to ignore the rest. To complain that a map lacks nuance and 
detail makes no sense unless it omits information necessary to its func­
tion. A city map that aspired to represent every traffic light, every pot­
hole, every building, and every bush and tree in every park would 
threaten to become as large and as complex as the city that it depicted.1 
And it certainly would defeat the purpose of mapping, which is to ab­
stract and summarize. A map is an instrument designed for a purpose. 
We may judge that purpose noble or morally offensive, but the map it­
self either serves or fails to serve its intended use.
In case after case, however, we have remarked on the apparent 
power of maps to transform as well as merely to summarize the facts 
that they portray. This transformative power resides not in the map, of 
course, but rather in the power possessed by those who deploy the 
perspective of that particular map.2 A private corporation aiming to 
maximize sustainable timber yields, profit, or production will map its 
world according to this logic and will use what power it has to ensure 
that the logic of its map prevails. The state has no monopoly on utili­
tarian simplifications. What the state does at least aspire to, though, is
87

88 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
a monopoly on the legitimate use of force. That is surely why, from the 
seventeenth century until now, the most transformative maps have been 
those invented and applied by the most powerful institution in society: 
the state.
Until recently, the ability of the state to impose its schemes on soci­
ety was limited by the state’s modest ambitions and its limited capacity. 
Although utopian aspirations to a finely tuned social control can be 
traced back to Enlightenment thought and to monastic and military 
practices, the eighteenth-century European state was still largely a 
machine for extraction. It is true that state officials, particularly under 
absolutism, had mapped much more of their kingdoms’ populations, 
land tenures, production, and trade than their predecessors had and 
that they had become increasingly efficient in pumping revenue, grain, 
and conscripts from the countryside. But there was more than a little 
irony in their claim to absolute rule. They lacked the consistent coer­
cive power, the fine-grained administrative grid, or the detailed knowl­
edge that would have permitted them to undertake more intrusive ex­
periments in social engineering. To give their growing ambitions full 
rein, they required a far greater hubris, a state machinery that was equal 
to the task, and a society they could master. By the mid-nineteenth 
century in the West and by the early twentieth century elsewhere, these 
conditions were being met.
I believe that many of the most tragic episodes of state development 
in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries originate in a particu­
larly pernicious combination of three elements. The first is the aspira­
tion to the administrative ordering of nature and society, an aspiration 
that we have already seen at work in scientific forestry, but one raised 
to a far more comprehensive and ambitious level. “High modernism” 
seems an appropriate term for this aspiration.3 As a faith, it was shared 
by many across a wide spectrum of political ideologies. Its main car­
riers and exponents were the avant-garde among engineers, planners, 
technocrats, high-level administrators, architects, scientists, and vi­
sionaries. If one were to imagine a pantheon or Hall of Fame of high- 
modernist figures, it would almost certainly include such names as 
Henri Comte de Saint-Simon, Le Corbusier, Walther Rathenau, Robert 
McNamara, Robert Moses, Jean Monnet, the Shah of Iran, David Lilien- 
thal, Vladimir I. Lenin, Leon Trotsky, and Julius Nyerere.4 They envi­
sioned a sweeping, rational engineering of all aspects of social life in 
order to improve the human condition. As a conviction, high mod­
ernism was not the exclusive property of any political tendency; it had 
both right- and left-wing variants, as we shall see. The second element 
is the unrestrained use of the power of the modern state as an instru­

Authoritarian High Modernism 89
ment for achieving these designs. The third element is a weakened or 
prostrate civil society that lacks the capacity to resist these plans. The 
ideology of high modernism provides, as it were, the desire; the mod­
ern state provides the means of acting on that desire; and the inca­
pacitated civil society provides the leveled terrain on which to build 
(dis)utopias.
We shall return shortly to the premises of high modernism. But 
here it is important to note that many of the great state-sponsored 
calamities of the twentieth century have been the work of rulers with 
grandiose and utopian plans for their society. One can identify a high- 
modernist utopianism of the right, of which Nazism is surely the diag­
nostic example.5 The massive social engineering under apartheid in 
South Africa, the modernization plans of the Shah of Iran, villagiza- 
tion in Vietnam, and huge late-colonial development schemes (for ex­
ample, the Gezira scheme in the Sudan) could be considered under this 
rubric.6 And yet there is no denying that much of the massive, state- 
enforced social engineering of the twentieth century has been the work 
of progressive, often revolutionary elites. Why?
The answer, I believe, lies in the fact that it is typically progressives 
who have come to power with a comprehensive critique of existing so­
ciety and a popular mandate (at least initially) to transform it. These 
progressives have wanted to use that power to bring about enormous 
changes in people’s habits, work, living patterns, moral conduct, and 
worldview.7 They have deployed what Vaclav Havel has called “the ar­
mory of holistic social engineering.”8 Utopian aspirations per se are 
not dangerous. As Oscar Wilde remarked, "A map of the world which 
does not include Utopia is not worth even glancing at, for it leaves out 
the one country at which Humanity is always landing.’’9 Where the uto­
pian vision goes wrong is when it is held by ruling elites with no com­
mitment to democracy or civil rights and who are therefore likely to 
use unbridled state power for its achievement. Where it goes brutally 
wrong is when the society subjected to such utopian experiments lacks 
the capacity to mount a determined resistance.
What is high modernism, then? It is best conceived as a strong (one 
might even say muscle-bound) version of the beliefs in scientific and 
technical progress that were associated with industrialization in West­
ern Europe and in North America from roughly 1830 until World War 
I. At its center was a supreme self-confidence about continued linear 
progress, the development of scientific and technical knowledge, the 
expansion of production, the rational design of social order, the grow­
ing satisfaction of human needs, and, not least, an increasing control 
over nature (including human nature) commensurate with scientific

90 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
understanding of natural laws ,w High modernism is thus a particularly 
sweeping vision of how the benefits of technical and scientific progress 
might be applied—usually through the state—in every field of human 
activity.11 If, as we have seen, the simplified, utilitarian descriptions of 
state officials had a tendency, through the exercise of state power, to 
bring the facts into line with their representations, then one might say 
that the high-modern state began with extensive prescriptions for a 
new society, and it intended to impose them.
It would have been hard not to have been a modernist of some 
stripe at the end of the nineteenth century in the West. How could one 
fail to be impressed—even awed—by the vast transformation wrought 
by science and industry?12 Anyone who was, say, sixty years old in 
Manchester, England, would have witnessed in his or her lifetime a 
revolution in the manufacturing of cotton and wool textiles, the 
growth of the factory system, the application of steam power and other 
astounding new mechanical devices to production, remarkable break­
throughs in metallurgy and transportation (especially railroads), and 
the appearance of cheap mass-produced commodities. Given the stun­
ning advances in chemistry, physics, medicine, math, and engineering, 
anyone even slightly attentive to the world of science would have al­
most come to expect a continuing stream of new marvels (such as the 
internal combustion engine and electricity). The unprecedented trans­
formations of the nineteenth century may have impoverished and mar­
ginalized many, but even the victims recognized that something revo­
lutionary was afoot. All this sounds rather naive today, when we are 
far more sober about the limits and costs of technological progress 
and have acquired a postmodern skepticism about any totalizing dis­
course. Still, this new sensibility ignores both the degree to which 
modernist assumptions prevail in our lives and, especially, the great 
enthusiasm and revolutionary hubris that were part and parcel of 
high modernism.
The Discovery of Society
The path from description to prescription was not so much an inadver­
tent result of a deep psychological tendency as a deliberate move. The 
point of the Enlightenment view of legal codes was less to mirror the 
distinctive customs and practices of a people than to create a cultural 
community by codifying and generalizing the most rational of those 
customs and suppressing the more obscure and barbaric ones.13 Estab­
lishing uniform standards of weight and measurement across a king­
dom had a greater purpose than just making trade easier; the new

Authoritarian High Modernism 91
standards were intended both to express and to promote a new cul­
tural unity. Well before the tools existed to make good on this cultural 
revolution, Enlightenment thinkers such as Condorcet were looking 
ahead to the day when the tools would be in place. He wrote in 1782: 
“Those sciences, created almost in our own days, the object of which is 
man himself, the direct goal of which is the happiness of man, will en­
joy a progress no less sure than that of the physical sciences, and this 
idea so sweet, that our descendants will surpass us in wisdom as in en­
lightenment, is no longer an illusion. In meditating on the nature of 
the moral sciences, one cannot help seeing that, as they are based like 
physical sciences on the observation of fact, they must follow the same 
method, acquire a language equally exact and precise, attaining the 
same degree of certainty."14 The gleam in Condorcet s eye became, by 
the mid-nineteenth century, an active utopian project. Simplification 
and rationalization previously applied to forests, weights and mea­
sures, taxation, and factories were now applied to the design of society 
as a whole.15 Industrial-strength social engineering was born. While 
factories and forests might be planned by private entrepreneurs, the 
ambition of engineering whole societies was almost exclusively a pro­
ject of the nation-state.
This pew conception of the state’s role represented a fundamental 
transformation. Before then, the state’s activities had been largely con­
fined to those that contributed to the wealth and power of the sover­
eign, as the example of scientific forestry and cameral science illus­
trated. The (idea that one of the central purposes of the state was the 
improvement of all the members of society—their health, skills and 
education, longevity, productivity, morals, and family life—was quite 
novel.16 There was, of course, a direct connection between the old con­
ception of the state and this new one. A state that improved its popula­
tion’s skills, vigor, civic morals, and work habits would increase its tax 
base and field better armies; it was a policy that any enlightened sov­
ereign might pursue. And yet, in the nineteenth century, the welfare of 
the population came increasingly to be seen, not merely as a means to 
national strength, but as an end in itself.
One essential precondition of this transformation was the discov­
ery of society as a reified object that was separate from the state and 
that could be scientifically described. In this respect, the production 
of statistical knowledge about the population—its age profiles, occu­
pations, fertility, literacy, property ownership, law-abidingness (as 
demonstrated by crime statistics)—allowed state officials to char­
acterize the population in elaborate new ways, much as scientific 
forestry permitted the forester to carefully describe the forest. Ian Hack­

92 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
ing explains how a suicide or homicide rate, for example, came to be 
seen as a characteristic of a people, so that one could speak of a "bud­
get" of homicides that would be “spent" each year, like routine debits 
from an account, although the particular murderers and their victims 
were unknown.17 Statistical facts were elaborated into social laws. It 
was but a small step from a simplified description of society to a de­
sign and manipulation of society, with its improvement in mind. If one 
could reshape nature to design a more suitable forest, why not re­
shape society to create a more suitable population?
The scope of intervention was potentially endless. Society became 
an object that the state might manage and transform with a view to­
ward perfecting it. A progressive nation-state would set about engi­
neering its society according to the most advanced technical standards 
of the new moral sciences. The existing social order, which had been 
more or less taken by earlier states as a given, reproducing itself under 
the watchful eye of the state, was for the first time the subject of active 
management. It was possible to conceive of an artificial, engineered 
society designed, not by custom and historical accident, but according 
to conscious, rational, scientific criteria. Every nook and cranny of the 
social order might be improved upon: personal hygiene, diet, child 
rearing, housing, posture, recreation, family structure, and, most infa­
mously, the genetic inheritance of the population.18 The working poor 
were often the first subjects of scientific social planning.19 Schemes for 
improving their daily lives were promulgated by progressive urban 
and public-health policies and instituted in model factory towns and 
newly founded welfare agencies. Subpopulations found wanting in ways 
that were potentially threatening—such as indigents, vagabonds, the 
mentally ill, and criminals—might be made the objects of the most in­
tensive social engineering.20
The metaphor of gardening, Zygmunt Bauman suggests, captures 
much of this new spirit. The gardener—perhaps a landscape architect 
specializing in formal gardens is the most appropriate parallel—takes 
a natural site and creates an entirely designed space of botanical order. 
Although the organic character of the flora limits what can be achieved, 
the gardener has enormous discretion in the overall arrangement and 
in training, pruning, planting, and weeding out selected plants. As an 
untended forest is to a long-managed scientific forest, so untended na­
ture is to the garden. The garden is one of man’s attempts to impose his 
own principles of order, utility, and beauty on nature.21 What grows in 
the garden is always a small, consciously selected sample of what might 
be grown there. Similarly, social engineers consciously set out to design 
and maintain a more perfect social order. An Enlightenment belief in

Authoritarian High Modernism 93
the self-improvement of man became, by degrees, a belief in the per­
fectibility of social order.
One of the great paradoxes of social engineering is that it seems at 
odds with the experience of modernity generally. Trying to jell a social 
world, the most striking characteristic of which appears to be flux, 
seems rather like trying to manage a whirlwind. Marx was hardly 
alone in claiming that the "constant revolutionizing of production, un­
interrupted disturbance of all social relations, everlasting uncertainty 
and agitation, distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier times.”22 
The experience of modernity (in literature, art, industry, transporta­
tion, and popular culture) was, above all, the experience of disorient­
ing speed, movement, and change, which self-proclaimed modernists 
found exhilarating and liberating.23 Perhaps the most charitable way of 
resolving this paradox is to imagine that what these designers of so­
ciety had in mind was roughly what designers of locomotives had in 
mind with “streamlining.” Rather than arresting social change, they 
hoped to design a shape to social life that would minimize the friction 
of progress. The difficulty with this resolution is that state social engi­
neering was inherently authoritarian. In place of multiple sources of 
invention and change, there was a single planning authority; in place 
of the plasticity and autonomy of existing social life, there was a fixed 
social order in which positions were designated. The tendency toward 
various forms of “social taxidermy" was unavoidable.
The Radical Authority of High Modernism
The real thing is that this time we’re going to get science applied to social 
problems and backed by the whole force of the state, just as war has been 
backed by the whole force of the state in the past.
— C. S. Lewis, That Hideous Strength
The troubling features of high modernism derive, for the most part, 
from its claim to speak about the improvement of the human condition 
with the authority of scientific knowledge and its tendency to disallow 
other competing sources of judgment.
First and foremost, high modernism implies a truly radical break 
with history and tradition. Insofar as rational thought and scientific 
laws could provide a single answer to every empirical question, noth­
ing ought to be taken for granted. All human habits and practices that 
were inherited and hence not based on scientific reasoning—from the 
structure of the family and patterns of residence to moral values and 
forms of production—would have to be reexamined and redesigned. 
The structures of the past were typically the products of myth, super­

94 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
stition, and religious prejudice. It followed that scientifically designed 
schemes for production and social life would be superior to received 
tradition.
The sources of this view are deeply authoritarian. If a planned so­
cial order is better than the accidental, irrational deposit of historical 
practice, two conclusions follow. Only those who have the scientific 
knowledge to discern and create this superior social order are fit to 
rule in the new age. Further, those who through retrograde ignorance 
refuse to yield to the scientific plan need to be educated to its benefits 
or else swept aside. Strong versions of high modernism, such as those 
held by Lenin and Le Corbusier, cultivated an Olympian ruthlessness 
toward the subjects of their interventions. At its most radical, high 
modernism imagined wiping the slate utterly clean and beginning 
from zero.24
High-modernist ideology thus tends to devalue or banish politics. 
Political interests can only frustrate the social solutions devised by spe­
cialists with scientific tools adequate to their analysis. As individuals, 
high modernists might well hold democratic views about popular sov­
ereignty or classical liberal views about the inviolability of a private 
sphere that restrained them, but such convictions are external to, and 
often at war with, their high-modernist convictions.
Although high modernists came to imagine the refashioning of so­
cial habits and of human nature itself, they began with a nearly limit­
less ambition to transform nature to suit man’s purposes—an ambition 
that remained central to their faith. How completely the utopian pos­
sibilities gripped intellectuals of almost every political persuasion is 
captured in the paean to technical progress of the Communist Mani­
festo, where Marx and Engels write of the “subjection of nature’s 
forces to man, machinery, and the application of chemistry to agri­
culture and industry, steam navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, 
clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalization of rivers, 
whole populations conjured out of the ground.”25 In fact, this promise, 
made plausible by capitalist development, was for Marx the point of 
departure for socialism, which would place the fruits of capitalism at 
the service of the working class for the first time. The intellectual air in 
the late nineteenth century was filled with proposals for such vast engi­
neering projects as the Suez Canal, which was completed in 1869 with 
enormous consequences for trade between Asia and Europe. The pages 
of Le globe, the organ of utopian socialists of Saint-Simon’s persuasion, 
featured an endless stream of discussions about massive projects: the 
construction of Panama Canal, the development of the United States, 
far-reaching schemes for energy and transportation. This belief that it

Authoritarian High Modernism 95
was man’s destiny to tame nature to suit his interests and preserve his 
safety is perhaps the keystone of high modernism, partly because the 
success of so many grand ventures was already manifest.26
Once again the authoritarian and statist implications of this vision 
are clear. The very scale of such projects meant that, with few excep­
tions (such as the early canals), they demanded large infusions of 
monies raised through taxes or credit. Even if one could imagine them 
being financed privately in a capitalist economy, they typically re­
quired a vast public authority empowered to condemn private property, 
relocate people against their will, guarantee the loans or bonds re­
quired, and coordinate the work of the many state agencies involved. In 
a statist society, be it Louis Napoleon’s France or Lenin's Soviet Union, 
such power was already built into the political system. In a nonstatist 
society, such tasks have required new public authorities or “super­
agencies” having quasi-governmental powers for sending men to the 
moon or for constructing dams, irrigation works, highways, and public 
transportation systems.
The temporal emphasis of high modernism is almost exclusively on 
the future. Although any ideology with a large altar dedicated to pro­
gress is bound to privilege the future, high modernism carries this to 
great lengths. The past is an impediment, a history that must be tran­
scended; the present is the platform for launching plans for a better fu­
ture. A key characteristic of discourses of high modernism and of the 
public pronouncements of those states that have embraced it is a heavy 
reliance on visual images of heroic progress toward a totally trans­
formed future.27 The strategic choice of the future is freighted with 
consequences. To the degree that the future is known and achievable — 
a belief that the faith in progress encourages—the less future benefits 
are discounted for uncertainty. The practical effect is to convince most 
high modernists that the certainty of a better future justifies the many 
short-term sacrifices required to get there.28 The ubiquity of five-year 
plans in socialist states is an example of that conviction. Progress is 
objectified by a series of preconceived goals—largely material and 
quantifiable—which are to be achieved through savings, labor, and in­
vestments in the interim. There may, of course, be no alternative to 
planning, especially when the urgency of a single goal, such as winning 
a war, seems to require the subordination of every other goal. The im­
manent logic of such an exercise, however, implies a degree of cer­
tainty about the future, about means-ends calculations, and about the 
meaning of human welfare that is truly heroic. That such plans have 
often had to be adjusted or abandoned is an indication of just how 
heroic are the assumptions behind them.

96 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
In this reading, high modernism ought to appeal greatly to the 
classes and strata who have most to gain—in status, power, and 
wealth—from its worldview. And indeed it is the ideology par excel­
lence of the bureaucratic intelligentsia, technicians, planners, and en­
gineers.29 The position accorded to them is not just one of rule and 
privilege but also one of responsibility for the great works of nation 
building and social transformation. Where this intelligentsia conceives 
of its mission as the dragging of a technically backward, unschooled, 
subsistence-oriented population into the twentieth century, its self­
assigned cultural role as educator of its people becomes doubly gran­
diose. Having a historic mission of such breadth may provide a ruling 
intelligentsia with high morale, solidarity, and the willingness to make 
(and impose) sacrifices. This vision of a great future is often in sharp 
contrast to the disorder, misery, and unseemly scramble for petty ad­
vantage that the elites very likely see in their daily foreground. One 
might in fact speculate that the more intractable and resistant the real 
world faced by the planner, the greater the need for utopian plans to 
fill, as it were, the void that would otherwise invite despair. The elites 
who elaborate such plans implicitly represent themselves as exemplars 
of the learning and progressive views to which their compatriots might 
aspire. Given the ideological advantages of high modernism as a dis­
course, it is hardly surprising that so many postcolonial elites have 
marched under its banner.30
Aided by hindsight as it is, this unsympathetic account of high- 
modernist audacity is, in one important respect, grossly unfair. If we 
put the development of high-modernist beliefs in their historical con­
text, if we ask who the enemies of high modernism actually were, a far 
more sympathetic picture emerges. Doctors and public-health engi­
neers who did possess new knowledge that could save millions of lives 
were often thwarted by popular prejudices and entrenched political in­
terests. Urban planners who could in fact redesign urban housing to be 
cheaper, more healthful, and more convenient were blocked by real- 
estate interests and existing tastes. Inventors and engineers who had 
devised revolutionary new modes of power and transportation faced 
opposition from industrialists and laborers whose profits and jobs the 
new technology would almost certainly displace.
For nineteenth-century high modernists, the scientific domination 
of nature (including human nature) was emancipatory. It “promised 
freedom from scarcity, want and the arbitrariness of natural calamity," 
David Harvey observes. “The development of rational forms of social 
organization and rational modes of thought promised liberation from 
the irrationalities of myth, religion, superstition, release from the arbi-

Authoritarian High Modernism 97
trary use of power as well as from the dark side of our human na­
tures."31 Before we turn to later versions of high modernism, we should 
recall two important facts about their nineteenth-century forebears: 
first, that virtually every high-modernist intervention was undertaken 
in the name of and with the support of citizens seeking help and pro­
tection, and, second, that we are all beneficiaries, in countless ways, of 
these various high-modernist schemes.
Twentieth-Century High Modernism
The idea of a root-and-branch, rational engineering of entire social 
orders in creating realizable utopias is a largely twentieth-century 
phenomenon. And a range of historical soils have seemed particularly 
favorable for the flourishing of high-modernist ideology. Those soils in­
clude crises of state power, such as wars and economic depressions, . 
and circumstances in which a state’s capacity for relatively unimpeded 
planning is greatly enhanced, such as the revolutionary conquest of 
power and colonial rule.
The industrial warfare of the twentieth century has required un­
precedented steps toward the total mobilization of the society and the 
economy.32 Even quite liberal societies like the United States and Britain 
became, in the context of war mobilization, directly administered soci­
eties. The worldwide depression of the 1930s similarly propelled lib­
eral states into extensive experiments in social and economic planning 
in an effort to relieve economic distress and to retain popular legiti­
macy. In the cases of war and depression, the rush toward an admin­
istered society has an aspect of force majeure to it. The postwar re­
building of a war-torn nation may well fall in the same category.
Revolution and colonialism, however, are hospitable to high mod­
ernism for different reasons. A revolutionary regime and a colonial 
regime each disposes of an unusual degree of power. The revolution­
ary state has defeated the ancien regime, often has its partisans’ man­
date to remake the society after its image, and faces a prostrate civil 
society whose capacity for active resistance is limited.33 The millen­
nial expectations commonly associated with revolutionary movements 
give further impetus to high-modernist ambitions. Colonial regimes, 
particularly late colonial regimes, have often been sites of extensive 
experiments in social engineering.34 An ideology of "welfare colonial­
ism” combined with the authoritarian power inherent in colonial rule 
have encouraged ambitious schemes to remake native societies.
If one were required to pinpoint the “birth" of twentieth-century 
high modernism, specifying a particular time, place, and individual—

98 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
in what is admittedly a rather arbitrary exercise, given high modern­
ism’s many intellectual wellsprings — a strong case can be made for 
German mobilization during World War I and the figure most closely 
associated with it, Walther Rathenau. German economic mobilization 
was the technocratic wonder of the war. That Germany kept its armies 
in the field and adequately supplied long after most observers had 
predicted its collapse was largely due to Rathenau's planning.35 An 
industrial engineer and head of the great electrical firm A.E.G (All- 
gemeine Elektricitats-Gesellschaft), which had been founded by his 
father, Rathenau was placed in charge of the Office of War Raw Mate­
rials (Kriegsrohstoffabteilung).36 He realized that the planned ration­
ing of raw materials and transport was the key to sustaining the war 
effort. Inventing a planned economy step by step, as it were, Germany 
achieved feats—in industrial production, munitions and armament 
supply, transportation and traffic control, price controls, and civilian 
rationing—that had never before been attempted. The scope of plan­
ning and coordination necessitated an unprecedented mobilization of 
conscripts, soldiers, and war-related industrial labor. Such mobiliza­
tion fostered the idea of creating "administered mass organizations" 
that would encompass the entire society.37
Rathenau’s faith in pervasive planning and in rationalizing produc­
tion had deep roots in the intellectual connection being forged be­
tween the physical laws of thermodynamics on one hand and the new 
applied sciences of work on the other. For many specialists, a narrow 
and materialist "productivism” treated human labor as a mechanical 
system which could be decomposed into energy transfers, motion, and 
the physics of work. The simplification of labor into isolated problems 
of mechanical efficiencies led directly to the aspiration for a scientific 
control of the entire labor process. Late nineteenth-century material­
ism, as Anson Rabinbach emphasizes, had an equivalence between 
technology and physiology at its metaphysical core.38
This productivism had at least two distinct lineages, one of them 
North American and the other European. An American contribution 
came from the influential work of Frederick Taylor, whose minute de­
composition of factory labor into isolable, precise, repetitive motions 
had begun to revolutionize the organization of factory work.39 For the 
factory manager or engineer, the newly invented assembly lines per­
mitted the use of unskilled labor and control over not only the pace of 
production but the whole labor process. The European tradition of 
“energetics,” which focused on questions of motion, fatigue, measured 
rest, rational hygiene, and nutrition, also treated the worker notionally 
as a machine, albeit a machine that must be well fed and kept in good

Authoritarian High Modernism 99
working order. In place of workers, there was an abstract, standard­
ized worker with uniform physical capacities and needs. Seen initially 
as a way of increasing wartime efficiency at the front and in industry, 
the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut fur Arbeitsphysiologie, like Taylorism, was 
based on a scheme to rationalize the body.40
What is most remarkable about both traditions is, once again, how 
widely they were believed by educated elites who were otherwise poles 
apart politically. "Taylorism and technocracy were the watchwords of 
a three-pronged idealism; the elimination of economic and social cri­
sis, the expansion of productivity through science, and the reenchant­
ment of technology. The vision of society in which social conflict was 
eliminated in favor of technological and scientific imperatives could 
embrace liberal, socialist, authoritarian, and even communist and fas­
cist solutions. Productivism, in short, was politically promiscuous.”41
The appeal of one or another form of productivism across much of 
the right and center of the political spectrum was largely due to its 
promise as a technological “fix” for class struggle. If, as its advocates 
claimed, it could vastly increase worker output, then the politics of re­
distribution could be replaced by class collaboration, in which both 
profits and wages could grow at once. For much of the left, produc­
tivism promised the replacement of the capitalist by the engineer or by 
the state expert or official. It also proposed a single optimum solution, 
or “best practice,” for any problem in the organization of work. The 
logical outcome was some form of slide-rule authoritarianism in the 
interest, presumably, of all.42
A combination of Rathenau’s broad training in philosophy and eco­
nomics, his wartime experience with planning, and the social conclu­
sions that he thought were inherent in the precision, reach, and trans­
forming potential of electric power allowed him to draw the broadest 
lessons for social organization. In the war, private industry had given 
way to a kind of state socialism; “gigantic industrial enterprises had 
transcended their ostensibly private owners and all the laws of prop­
erty.”43 The decisions required had nothing to do with ideology; they 
were driven by purely technical and economic necessities. The rule of 
specialists and the new technological possibilities, particularly huge 
electric power grids, made possible a new social-industrial order that 
was both centralized and locally autonomous. During the time when 
war made necessary a coalition among industrial firms, technocrats, 
and the state, Rathenau discerned the shape of a progressive peace­
time society. Inasmuch as the technical and economic requirements 
for reconstruction were obvious and required the same sort of collab­
oration in all countries, Rathenau’s rationalist faith in planning had an

100 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
internationalist flavor. He characterized the modem era as a “new ma­
chine order . . . [and] a consolidation of the world into an unconscious 
association of constraint, into an uninterrupted community of produc­
tion and harmony."44
The world war was the high-water mark for the political influence 
of engineers and planners. Having seen what could be accomplished 
in extremis, they imagined what they could achieve if the identical en­
ergy and planning were devoted to popular welfare rather than mass 
destruction. Together with many political leaders, industrialists, labor 
leaders, and prominent intellectuals (such as Philip Gibbs in England, 
Ernst Jiinger in Germany, and Gustave Le Bon in France), they con­
cluded that only a renewed and comprehensive dedication to technical 
innovation and the planning it made possible could rebuild the Euro­
pean economies and bring social peace.45
Lenin himself was deeply impressed by the achievements of Ger­
man industrial mobilization and believed that it had shown how pro­
duction might be socialized. Just as Lenin believed that Marx had dis­
covered immutable social laws akin to Darwin’s laws of evolution, so 
he believed that the new technologies of mass production were scien­
tific laws and not social constructions. Barely a month before the Oc­
tober 1917 revolution, he wrote that the war had "accelerated the de­
velopment of capitalism to such a tremendous degree, converting 
monopoly capitalism into state-monopoly capitalism, that neither the 
proletariat nor the revolutionary petty-bourgeois democrats can keep 
within the limits of capitalism.”46 He and his economic advisers drew 
directly on the work of Rathenau and Mollendorf in their plans for the 
Soviet economy. The German war economy was for Lenin “the ulti­
mate in modern, large-scale capitalist techniques, planning and orga­
nization”; he took it to be the prototype of a socialized economy.47 Pre­
sumably, if the state in question were in the hands of representatives of 
the working class, the basis of a socialist system would exist. Lenin’s vi­
sion of the future looked much like Rathenau’s, providing, of course, 
we ignore the not so small matter of a revolutionary seizure of power.
Lenin was not slow to appreciate how Taylorism on the factory 
floor offered advantages for the socialist control of production. Al­
though he had earlier denounced such techniques, calling them the 
"scientific extortion of sweat," by the time of the revolution he had be­
come an enthusiastic advocate of systematic control as practiced in 
Germany. He extolled "the principle of discipline, organization, and 
harmonious cooperation based upon the most modern, mechanized in­
dustry, the most rigid system of accountability and control."48

Authoritarian High Modernism 101
The Taylor system, the last word of capitalism in this respect, like all 
capitalist progress, is a combination of the subtle brutality of bour­
geois exploitation and a number of its great scientific achievements in 
the fields of analysing mechanical motions during work, the elimina­
tion of superfluous and awkward motions, the working out of correct 
methods of work, the introduction of the best system of accounting and 
control, etc. The Soviet Republic must at all costs adopt all that is valu­
able in the achievements of science and technology in this field. . .. We 
must organize in Russia the study and teaching of the Taylor system 
and systematically try it out and adapt it to our purposes.49
By 1918, with production falling, he was calling for rigid work 
norms and, if necessary, the reintroduction of hated piecework. The 
first All-Russian Congress for Initiatives in Scientific Management was 
convened in 1921 and featured disputes between advocates of Tay­
lorism and those of energetics (also called ergonomics). At least twenty 
institutes and as many journals were by then devoted to scientific man­
agement in the Soviet Union. A command economy at the macrolevel 
and Taylorist principles of central coordination at the microlevel of the 
factory floor provided an attractive and symbiotic package for an au­
thoritarian, high-modernist revolutionary like Lenin.
Despite the authoritarian temptations of twentieth-century high 
modernism, they have often been resisted. The reasons are not only 
complex; they are different from case to case. While it is not my inten­
tion to examine in detail all the potential obstacles to high-modernist 
planning, the particular barrier posed by liberal democratic ideas and 
institutions deserves emphasis. Three factors seem decisive. The first is 
the existence and belief in a private sphere of activity in which the 
state and its agencies may not legitimately interfere. To be sure, this 
zone of autonomy has had a beleaguered existence as, following 
Mannheim, more heretofore private spheres have been made the ob­
ject of official intervention. Much of the work of Michel Foucault was 
an attempt to map these incursions into health, sexuality, mental ill­
ness, vagrancy, or sanitation and the strategies behind them. Never­
theless, the idea of a private realm has served to limit the ambitions of 
many high modernists, through either their own political values or 
their healthy respect for the political storm that such incursions would 
provoke.
The second, closely related factor is the private sector in liberal po­
litical economy. As Foucault put it: unlike absolutism and mercantil­
ism, "political economy announces the unknowability for the sover­
eign of the totality of economic processes and, as a consequence, the 
impossibility of an economic sovereignty”50 The point of liberal political 
economy was not only that a free market protected property and ere-

102 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
ated wealth but also that the economy was far too complex for it ever 
to be managed in detail by a hierarchical administration.51
The third and by far most important barrier to thoroughgoing high- 
modernist schemes has been the existence of working, representative 
institutions through which a resistant society could make its influence 
felt. Such institutions have thwarted the most draconian features of 
high-modernist schemes in roughly the same way that publicity and mo­
bilized opposition in open societies, as Amartya Sen has argued, have 
prevented famines. Rulers, he notes, do not go hungry, and they are 
unlikely to learn about and respond readily to curb famine unless their 
institutional position provides strong incentives. The freedoms of 
speech, of assembly, and of the press ensure that widespread hunger 
will be publicized, while the freedoms of assembly and elections in 
representative institutions ensure that it is in the interest of elected 
officials’ self-preservation to prevent famine when they can. In the same 
fashion, high-modernist schemes in liberal democratic settings must 
accommodate themselves sufficiently to local opinion in order to avoid 
being undone at the polls.
But high modernism, unimpeded by liberal political economy, is 
best grasped through the working out of its high ambitions and its con­
sequences. It is to this practical terrain in urban planning and revolu­
tionary discourse that we now turn.

4 The High-Modernist City: 
An Experiment and a Critique
No one, wise Kuublai, knows better than you that the city must never be con­
fused with the words that describe it.
— Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities
Time is a fatal handicap to the baroque conception of the world: its mechani­
cal order makes no allowances for growth, change, adaptation, and creative 
renewal. In short, a baroque plan was a block achievement. It must be laid out 
at a stroke, fixed and frozen forever, as if done overnight by Arabian nights 
genii. Such a plan demands an architectural despot, working for an absolute 
ruler, who will live long enough to complete their own conceptions. To alter 
this type of plan, to introduce fresh elements of another style, is to break its es­
thetic backbone.
— Lewis Mumford, The City in History
In Mumford’s epigraph to this chapter, his criticism is directed at 
Pierre-Charles L’Enfant's Washington in particular and at baroque 
urban planning in general.1 Greatly amplified, Mumford’s criticism 
could be applied to the work and thought of the Swiss-born French es­
sayist, painter, architect, and planner Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, 
who is better known by his professional name, Le Corbusier. Jeanneret 
was the embodiment of high-modernist urban design. Active roughly 
between 1920 and 1960, he was less an architect than a visionary plan­
ner of planetary ambitions. The great majority of his gargantuan 
schemes were never built; they typically required a political resolve 
and financial wherewithal that few political authorities could muster. 
Some monuments to his expansive genius do exist, the most notable of 
which are perhaps Chandigarh, the austere capital of India’s Punjab, 
and L'Unite d'Habitation, a large apartment complex in Marseilles, but 
his legacy is most apparent in the logic of his unbuilt megaprojects. 
At one time or another he proposed city-planning schemes for Paris, 
Algiers, Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, Stockholm, Geneva, 
and Barcelona.2 His early politics was a bizarre combination of Sorel’s 
revolutionary syndicalism and Saint-Simon’s utopian modernism, and 
he designed both in Soviet Russia (1928-36)3 and in Vichy for Mar­
shal Philippe Petain. The key manifesto of modern urban planning, 
the Athens charter of the Congres Internationaux d’Architecture Mod- 
erne (cia m ), faithfully reflected his doctrines.
103

104 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
Le Corbusier embraced the huge, machine-age, hierarchical, cen­
tralized city with a vengeance. If one were looking for a caricature — 
a Colonel Blimp, as it were, of modernist urbanism—one could hardly 
do better than to invent Le Corbusier. His views were extreme but in­
fluential, and they were representative in the sense that they cele­
brated the logic implicit in high modernism. In his daring, his bril­
liance, and his consistency, Le Corbusier casts the high-modernist 
faith in sharp relief.4
Total City Planning
In The Radiant City (La ville radieuse), published in 1933 and repub­
lished with few changes in 1964, Le Corbusier offers the most complete 
exposition of his views.5 Here as elsewhere, Le Corbusier’s plans were 
self-consciously immodest. If E. F. Schumacher made the case for the 
virtue of smallness, Le Corbusier asserted, in effect, "Big is beautiful.” 
The best way to appreciate the sheer extravagance of his reach is to 
look briefly at three of his designs. The first is the core idea behind his 
Plan Voisin for central Paris (figure 14); the second, a new “business 
city” for Buenos Aires (figure 15); and the last, a vast housing scheme 
for about ninety thousand residents in Rio de Janeiro (figure 16).
In their magnitude, these plans speak for themselves. No compro­
mise is made with the preexisting city; the new cityscape completely 
supplants its predecessor. In each case, the new city has striking sculp­
tural properties; it is designed to make a powerful visual impact as a 
form. That impact, it is worth noting, can be had only from a great dis­
tance. Buenos Aires is pictured as if seen from many miles out to sea: a 
view of the New World “after a two-week crossing,” writes Le Corbu­
sier, adopting the perspective of a modern-day Christopher Columbus.6 
Rio is seen at several miles remove, as if from an airplane. What we be­
hold is a six-kilometer-long highway elevated one hundred meters and 
enclosing a continuous ribbon of fifteen-story apartments. The new city 
literally towers over the old. The plan for a city of 3 million in Paris is 
seen from far above and outside, the distance emphasized by dots rep­
resenting vehicles on the major avenue as well as by a small airplane 
and what appears to be a helicopter. None of the plans makes any ref­
erence to the urban history, traditions, or aesthetic tastes of the place 
in which it is to be located. The cities depicted, however striking, be­
tray no context; in their neutrality, they could be anywhere at all. 
While astoundingly high construction costs may explain why none of 
these projects was ever adopted, Le Corbusier's refusal to make any 
appeal to local pride in an existing city cannot have helped his case.

14. Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin for Paris, a city of 3 million people
15. Le Corbusier’s plan for the “business city” of Buenos Aires, as if seen from 
an approaching ship

106 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
16. Le Corbusier’s plan for roads and housing in Rio de Janeiro
Le Corbusier had no patience for the physical environment that 
centuries of urban living had created. He heaped scorn on the tangle, 
darkness, and disorder, the crowded and pestilential conditions, of 
Paris and other European cities at the turn of the century. Part of his 
scorn was, as we shall see, on functional and scientific grounds; a city 
that was to become efficient and healthful would indeed have had to 
demolish much of what it had inherited. But another source of his 
scorn was aesthetic. He was visually offended by disarray and confu­
sion. And the disorder he wished to correct was not so much a disorder 
at ground level but a disorder that was a function of distance, a bird’s- 
eye view.7 His mixed motives are nicely captured in his judgment on 
small rural properties as seen from the air (figure 17). “From air­
planes, a look down on infinitely subdivided, incongruously shaped 
plots of land. The more modern machinery develops, the more land is 
chopped up into tiny holdings that render the miraculous promise of 
machinery useless. The result is waste: inefficient, individual scrab­
bling.”8 The purely formal order was at least as important as the accom­
modation with the machine age. "Architecture,” he insisted, “is the art 
above all others which achieves a state of platonic grandeur, mathe­
matical order, speculation, the perception of harmony that lies in 
emotional relationships.”9
Formal, geometric simplicity and functional efficiency were not two 
distinct goals to be balanced; on the contrary, formal order was a pre­
condition of efficiency. Le Corbusier set himself the task of inventing 
the ideal industrial city, in which the "general truths” behind the ma­
chine age would be expressed with graphic simplicity. The rigor and 
unity of this ideal city required that it make as few concessions as pos­
sible to the history of existing cities. “We must refuse to afford even the 
slightest concession to what is: to the mess we are in now,” he wrote. 
"There is no solution to be found there.” Instead, his new city would 
preferably rise on a cleared site as a single, integrated urban composi-

The High-M odem ist City 107
17. Aerial view of Alsace, circa 1930, from Le Corbusier’s La ville radieuse
tion. Le Corbusier's new urban order was to be a lyrical marriage be­
tween Cartesian pure forms and the implacable requirements of the ma­
chine. In characteristically bombastic terms, he declared, "We claim, 
in the name of the steamship, the airplane, and the automobile, the 
right to health, logic, daring, harmony, perfection.”10 Unlike the exist­
ing city of Paris, which to him resembled a "porcupine” and a "vision 
of Dante's Inferno,” his city would be an “organized, serene, forceful, 
aiiy, ordered entity.”11
Geometry and Standardization
It is impossible to read much of Le Corbusier or to see many of his 
architectural drawings without noticing his love (mania?) for simple, 
repetitive lines and his horror of complexity. He makes a personal 
commitment to austere lines and represents that commitment as an es­
sential characteristic of human nature. In his own words, “an infinity 
of combinations is possible when innumerable and diverse elements 
are brought together. But the human mind loses itself and becomes fa­
tigued by such a labyrinth of possibilities. Control becomes impossible. 
The spiritual failure that must result is disheartening. . . . Reason ... is 
an unbroken straight line. Thus, in order to save himself from this

108 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
chaos, in order to provide himself with a bearable, acceptable frame­
work for his existence, one productive of human well-being and con­
trol, man has projected the laws of nature into a system that is a man­
ifestation of the human spirit itself: geometry.”12
When Le Corbusier visited New York City, he was utterly taken by 
the geometric logic of midtown Manhattan. The clarity of what he 
called the "skyscraper machines” and the street plan pleased him: “The 
streets are at right angles to each other and the mind is liberated.”13 
Elsewhere Le Corbusier answered what he saw as the criticism of those 
who were nostalgic for the variety of the existing city—in this case, 
Paris. People may complain, he noted, that in reality streets intersect at 
all sorts of angles and that the variations are infinite. "But," he replied, 
“that’s precisely the point. I eliminate all those things. That’s my start­
ing point. . .. I insist on right-angled intersections ”14
Le Corbusier would have liked to endow his love of straight lines 
and right angles with the authority of the machine, of science, and of 
nature. Neither the brilliance of his designs nor the heat of his po­
lemic, however, could succeed in justifying this move. The machines to 
which he most adoringly referred—the locomotive, the airplane, and 
the automobile—embody rounder or more elliptical shapes than right 
angles (the teardrop being the most streamlined of shapes). As for sci­
ence, any shape is geometrical: the trapezoid, the triangle, the circle. 
If sheer simplicity or efficiency was the criterion, why not prefer the 
circle or sphere—as the minimum surface enclosing the maximum 
space—to the square or the rectangle? Nature, as Le Corbusier 
claimed, might be mathematical, but the complex, intricate, “chaotic” 
logic of living forms has only recently been understood with the aid of 
computers.15 No, the great architect was expressing no more, and no 
less, than an aesthetic ideology—a strong taste for classic lines, which 
he also considered to be "Gallic" lines: “sublime straight lines, and oh, 
sublime French rigor.’’16 It was one powerful way of mastering space. 
What's more, it provided a legible grid that could be easily grasped at a 
glance and that could be repeated in every direction, ad infinitum. As a 
practical matter, of course, a straight line was often impractical and 
ruinously expensive. Where the topography was irregular, building a 
straight, flat avenue without daunting climbs and descents would re­
quire great feats of digging and leveling. Le Corbusier’s kind of geom­
etry was rarely cost effective.
He took his utopian scheme for an abstract, linear city to impres­
sive lengths. He foresaw that the industrialization of the construction 
trades would lead to a welcome standardization. He foresaw, too, the 
prefabrication of houses and office blocks, whose parts were built at

The High-M odem ist City 109
factories and then assembled at the building sites. The sizes of all ele­
ments would be standardized, with multiples of standard sizes allow­
ing for unique combinations determined by the architect. Door frames, 
windows, bricks, roof tiles, and even screws would all conform to a uni­
form code. The first manifesto of CIAM in 1928 called for the new stan­
dards to be legislated by the League of Nations, which would develop 
a universal technical language to be compulsorily taught throughout 
the world. An international convention would “normalize" the various 
standard measurements for domestic equipment and appliances.17 Le 
Corbusier made efforts to practice what he preached. His design for 
the mammoth Palace of Soviets (never built) was intended to appeal to 
Soviet high modernism. The building, he claimed, would establish pre­
cise and universal new standards for all buildings—standards that 
would cover lighting, heating, ventilation, structure, and aesthetics 
and that would be valid in all latitudes for all needs.18
The straight line, the right angle, and the imposition of interna­
tional building standards were all determined steps in the direction of 
simplification. Perhaps the most decisive step, however, was Le Cor­
busier’s lifelong insistence on strict functional separation. Indicative of 
this doctrine was the second of fourteen principles he enunciated at 
the beginning of La ville radieuse, namely, "the death of the street.’’ What 
he meant by this was simply the complete separation of pedestrian 
traffic from vehicle traffic and, beyond that, the segregation of slow- 
from fast-moving vehicles. He abhorred the mingling of pedestrians 
and vehicles, which made walking unpleasant and impeded the circu­
lation of traffic.
The principle of functional segregation was applied across the 
board. Written by Le Corbusier and his brother Pierre, the final report 
for the second meeting of CIAM, in 1929, began with an assault on tra­
ditional housing construction: "The poverty, the inadequacy of tradi­
tional techniques have brought in their wake a confusion of powers, an 
artificial mingling of functions, only indifferently related to one an­
other. . . . We must find and apply new methods . . . lending themselves 
naturally to standardization, industrialization, Taylorization. ... If we 
persist in the present methods by which the two functions [arrange­
ment and furnishing versus construction; circulation versus structure] 
are mingled and interdependent, then we will remain petrified in the 
same immobility.’’19
Outside the apartment block, the city itself was an exercise in 
planned functional segregation—an exercise that became standard 
urban-planning doctrine until the late 1960s. There would be separate 
zones for workplaces, residences, shopping and entertainment centers,

110 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
and monuments and government buildings. Where possible, work 
zones were to be further subdivided into office buildings and facto­
ries. Le Corbusier's insistence on an urban plan in which each district 
had one and only one function was evident in his first act after taking 
over the planning of Chandigarh, his only built city. He replaced the 
housing that had been planned for the city center with an “acropolis 
of monuments” on a 220-acre site at a great distance from the nearest 
residences.20 In his Plan Voisin for Paris, he separated what he called 
la ville, which was for dwelling, and the business center, which was 
for working. “These are two distinct functions, consecutive and not si­
multaneous, representative of two distinct and categorically separate 
areas.”21
The logic of this rigid segregation of functions is perfectly clear. It is 
far easier to plan an urban zone if it has just one purpose. It is far eas­
ier to plan the circulation of pedestrians if they do not have to compete 
with automobiles and trains. It is far easier to plan a forest if its sole 
purpose is to maximize the yield of furniture-grade timber. When two 
purposes must be served by a single facility or plan, the trade-offs be­
come nettlesome. When several or many purposes must be considered, 
the variables that the planner must juggle begin to boggle the mind. 
Faced with such a labyrinth of possibilities, as Le Corbusier noted, “the 
human mind loses itself and becomes fatigued.”
The segregation of functions thus allowed the planner to think with 
greater clarity about efficiency. If the only function of roads is to get 
automobiles from A to B quickly and economically, then one can com­
pare two road plans in terms of relative efficiency. This logic is emi­
nently reasonable inasmuch as this is precisely what we have in mind 
when we build a road from A to B. Notice, however, that the clarity is 
achieved by bracketing the many other purposes that we may want 
roads to serve, such as affording the leisure of a touristic drive, pro­
viding aesthetic beauty or visual interest, or enabling the transfer of 
heavy goods. Even in the case of roads, narrow criteria of efficiency 
ignore other ends that are not trivial. In the case of the places that peo­
ple call home, narrow criteria of efficiency do considerably greater vio­
lence to human practice. Le Corbusier calculates the air (la respiration 
exacte), heat, light, and space people need as a matter of public health. 
Starting with a figure of fourteen square meters per person, he reckons 
that this could be reduced to ten square meters if such activities as 
food preparation and laundering were communal. But here the crite­
ria of efficiency that may apply to a road can hardly do justice to a 
home, which is variously used as a place for work, recreation, privacy, 
sociability, education, cooking, gossip, politics, and so on. Each of

The High-M odem ist City 111
these activities, moreover, resists being reduced to criteria of effi­
ciency; what is going on in the kitchen when someone is cooking for 
friends who have gathered there is not merely "food preparation." But 
the logic of efficient planning from above for large populations re­
quires that each of the values being maximized be sharply specified 
and that the number of values being maximized simultaneously be 
sharply restricted—preferably to a single value.22 The logic of Le Cor­
busier’s doctrine was to carefully delineate urban space by use and 
function so that single-purpose planning and standardization were 
possible.23
Rule by the Plan, the Planner, and the State
The first of Le Corbusier’s "principles of urbanism,” before even 
“the death of the street,” was the dictum “The Plan: Dictator.”24 It would 
be difficult to exaggerate the emphasis that, like Descartes, Le Cor­
busier placed on making the city the reflection of a single, rational 
plan. He greatly admired Roman camps and imperial cities for the 
overall logic of their layouts. He returned repeatedly to the contrast 
between the existing city, which is the product of historical chance, 
and the city of the future, which would be consciously designed from 
start to finish following scientific principles.
The centralization required by Le Corbusier's doctrine of the Plan 
(always capitalized in his usage) is replicated by the centralization of 
the city itself. Functional segregation was joined to hierarchy. His city 
was a "monocephalic” city, its centrally located core performing the 
"higher” functions of the metropolitan area. This is how he described 
the business center of his Plan Voisin for Paris: "From its offices come 
the commands that put the world in order. In fact, the skyscrapers are 
the brain of the city, the brain of the whole country. They embody the 
work of elaboration and command on which all activities depend. 
Everything is concentrated there: the tools that conquer time and 
space—telephones, telegraphs, radios, the banks, trading houses, the 
organs of decision for the factories: finance, technology, commerce.”25
The business center issues commands; it does not suggest, much less 
consult. The program of high-modernist authoritarianism at work here 
stems in part from Le Corbusier’s love of the order of the factory. In 
condemning the "rot” (la pourriture) of the contemporary city, its 
houses, and its streets, he singles out the factory as the sole exception. 
There, a single rational purpose structures both the physical layout and 
the coordinated movements of hundreds. The Van Nelle tobacco factory 
in Rotterdam is praised in particular. Le Corbusier admires its auster­

112 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
ity, its floor-to-ceiling windows on each floor, the order in the work, and 
the apparent contentment of the workers. He finishes with a hymn to 
the authoritarian order of the production line. “There is a hierarchical 
scale, famously established and respected,” he admiringly observes of 
the workers. “They accept it so as to manage themselves like a colony of 
worker-bees: order, regularity, punctuality, justice and paternalism.”26 
The scientific urban planner is to the design and construction of the 
city as the entrepreneur-engineer is to the design and construction of 
the factory. Just as a single brain plans the city and the factory, so a sin­
gle brain directs its activity—from the factory’s office and from the 
city’s business center. The hierarchy doesn’t stop there. The city is the 
brain of the whole society. “The great city commands everything: peace, 
war, work.’’27 Whether it is a matter of clothing, philosophy, technol­
ogy, or taste, the great city dominates and colonizes the provinces: the 
lines of influence and command are exclusively from the center to the 
periphery.28
There is no ambiguity to Le Corbusier's view of how authority rela­
tions should be ordered: hierarchy prevails in every direction. At the 
apex of the pyramid, however, is not a capricious autocrat but rather a 
modern philosopher-king who applies the truths of scientific under­
standing for the well-being of all.29 It is true, naturally, that the master 
planner, in his not infrequent bouts of megalomania, imagines that he 
alone has a monopoly on the truth. In a moment of personal reflection 
in The Radiant City, for example, Le Corbusier declares: "I drew up 
plans [for Algiers], after analyses, after calculations, with imagination, 
with poetry. The plans were prodigiously true. They were incontro­
vertible. They were breathtaking. They expressed all the splendor of 
modern times.’’30 It is not, however, the excess of pride that concerns us 
here but the sort of implacable authority Le Corbusier feels entitled to 
claim on behalf of universal scientific truths. His high-modernist faith 
is nowhere so starkly—or so ominously—expressed as in the follow­
ing, which I quote at length:
The despot is not a man. It is the Plan. The correct, realistic, exact plan, 
the one that will provide your solution once the problem has been 
posited clearly, in its entirety, in its indispensable harmony. This plan 
has been drawn up well away from the frenzy in the mayor’s office or the 
town hall, from the cries of the electorate or the laments of society's vic­
tims. It has been drawn up by serene and lucid minds. It has taken ac­
count of nothing but human truths. It has ignored all current regula­
tions, all existing usages, and channels. It has not considered whether 
or not it could be carried out with the constitution now in force. It is a 
biological creation destined for human beings and capable of realiza­
tion by modern techniques.31

The High-M odem ist City 113
The wisdom of the plan sweeps away all social obstacles: the elected au­
thorities, the voting public, the constitution, and the legal structure. At 
the very least, we are in the presence of a dictatorship of the planner; at 
most, we approach a cult of power and remorselessness that is reminis­
cent of fascist imagery.32 Despite the imagery, Le Corbusier sees himself 
as a technical genius and demands power in the name of his truths. 
Technocracy, in this instance, is the belief that the human problem of 
urban design has a unique solution, which an expert can discover and 
execute. Deciding such technical matters by politics and bargaining 
would lead to the wrong solution. As there is a single, true answer to the 
problem of planning the modern city, no compromises are possible.33
Throughout his career, Le Corbusier is clearly aware that his kind 
of root-and-branch urban planning requires authoritarian measures. 
"A Colbert is required,” he declares to his French reading public in an 
early article entitled “Toward a Machine Age Paris.”34 On the title page 
of his major work, one finds the words, "This work is Dedicated to Au­
thority." Much of Le Corbusier’s career as a would-be public architect 
can be read as a quest for a “Prince” (preferably an authoritarian one) 
who would anoint him as the court’s Colbert. He exhibited designs for 
the League of Nations, lobbied the Soviet elite to accept his new plan 
for Moscow, and did what he could to get himself appointed as regula­
tor of planning and zoning for the whole of France and to win the 
adoption of his plan for the new Algiers. Finally, under the patronage 
of Jawaharlal Nehru, he built a provincial capital at Chandigarh in 
India. Although Le Corbusier’s own political affiliations in France 
were firmly anchored on the right,35 he would clearly have settled for 
any state authority that would give him a free hand. He was appealing 
to logic rather than politics when he wrote, “Once his [the scientific 
planner’s] calculations are finished, he is in a position to say—and he 
does say: It shall be thus!”36
What captivated Le Corbusier about the Soviet Union was not so 
much its ideology as the prospect that a revolutionary, high-modernist 
state might prove hospitable to a visionary planner. After building the 
headquarters of the Central Union of Consumer Cooperatives (Cen- 
trosoyuz),37 he proposed, in plans prepared in only six weeks, a vast 
design for the rebuilding of Moscow in line with what he thought were 
Soviet aspirations to create an entirely new mode of living in a class­
less society. Having seen Sergey Eisenstein’s film about the peasantry 
and technology, The General Line, Le Corbusier was utterly taken with 
its celebration of tractors, centrifuge creamers, and huge farms. He re­
ferred to it often in his plan to work a comparable transformation of 
Russia’s urban landscape.

114 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
Stalin's commissars found his plans for Moscow as well as his proj­
ect for the Palace of Soviets too radical.38 The Soviet modernist El Lis- 
sitzky attacked Le Corbusier’s Moscow as a “city of nowhere,... [a city] 
that is neither capitalist, nor proletarian, nor socialist, . . .  a city on 
paper, extraneous to living nature, located in a desert through which 
not even a river must be allowed to pass (since a curve would contra­
dict the style).”39 As if to confirm El Lissitzky’s charge that he had de­
signed a "city of nowhere," Le Corbusier recycled his design virtually 
intact—aside from removing all references to Moscow—and presented 
it as La ville radieuse, suitable for central Paris.
The City as a Utopian Project
Believing that his revolutionary urban planning expressed univer­
sal scientific truths, Le Corbusier naturally assumed that the public, 
once they understood this logic, would embrace his plan. The original 
manifesto of cia m  called for primary school students to be taught the 
elementary principles of scientific housing: the importance of sunlight 
and fresh air to health; the rudiments of electricity, heat, lighting, and 
sound; the right principles of furniture design; and so on. These were 
matters of science, not of taste; instruction would create, in time, a cli­
entele worthy of the scientific architect. Whereas the scientific forester 
could, as it were, go right to work on the forest and shape it to his plan, 
the scientific architect was obliged to first train a new clientele that 
would "freely” choose the urban life that Le Corbusier had planned for 
them.
Any architect, I imagine, supposes that the dwellings she designs 
will contribute to her clients’ happiness rather than to their misery. 
The difference lies in how the architect understands happiness. For Le 
Corbusier, “human happiness already exists expressed in terms of num­
bers, of mathematics, of properly calculated designs, plans in which 
the cities can already be seen.’’40 He was certain, at least rhetorically, 
that since his city was the rational expression of a machine-age con­
sciousness, modern man would embrace it wholeheartedly.41
The kinds of satisfactions that the citizen-subject of Le Corbusier’s 
city would experience, however, were not the pleasures of personal 
freedom and autonomy. They were the pleasures of fitting logically into 
a rational plan: "Authority must now step in, patriarchal authority, the 
authority of a father concerned for his children. . . . We must build 
places where mankind will be reborn. When the collective functions of 
the urban community have been organized, then there will be individ­
ual liberty for all. Each man will live in an ordered relation to the

The High-M odem ist City 115
whole."42 In the Plan Voisin for Paris, the place of each individual in 
the great urban hierarchy is spatially coded. The business elite (indus­
trials) will live in high-rise apartments at the core, while the subaltern 
classes will have small garden apartments at the periphery. One’s sta­
tus can be directly read from one's distance from the center. But, like 
everyone in a well-run factory, everyone in the city will have the "col­
lective pride” of a team of workers producing a perfect product. “The 
worker who does only a part of the job understands the role of his 
labor; the machines that cover the floor of the factory are examples to 
him of power and clarity, and make him part of a work of perfection to 
which his simple spirit never dared to aspire.”43 Just as Le Corbusier 
was perhaps most famous for asserting that "the home is a machine for 
living," so he thought of the planned city as a large, efficient machine 
with many closely calibrated parts. He assumed, therefore, that the cit­
izens of his city would accept, with pride, their own modest role in a 
noble, scientifically planned urban machine.
By his own lights Le Corbusier was planning for the basic needs of 
his fellow men—needs that were ignored or traduced in the existing 
city. Essentially, he established them by stipulating an abstract, simpli­
fied human subject with certain material and physical requirements. 
This schematic subject needed so many square meters of living space, 
so much fresh air, so much sunlight, so much open space, so many es­
sential services. At this level, he designed a city that was indeed far 
more healthful and functional than the crowded, dark slums against 
which he railed. Thus he spoke of “punctual and exact respiration," of 
various formulas for determining optimal sizes for apartments; he in­
sisted on apartment skyscrapers to allow for park space and, above all, 
for efficient traffic circulation.
The Le Corbusian city was designed, first and foremost, as a work­
shop for production. Human needs, in this context, were scientifically 
stipulated by the planner. Nowhere did he admit that the subjects for 
whom he was planning might have something valuable to say on this 
matter or that their needs might be plural rather than singular. Such 
was his concern with efficiency that he treated shopping and meal 
preparation as nuisances that would be discharged by central services 
like those offered by well-run hotels.44 Although floor space was pro­
vided for social activities, he said almost nothing about the actual so­
cial and cultural needs of the citizenry.
High modernism implies, as we have seen, a rejection of the past as 
a model to improve upon and a desire to make a completely fresh start. 
The more utopian the high modernism, the more thoroughgoing its 
implied critique of the existing society. Some of the most vituperative

116 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
prose of The Radiant City was directed at the misery, confusion, “rot," 
“decay,” “scum,” and "refuse" of the cities that Le Corbusier wanted to 
transcend. The slums he showed in pictures were labeled “shabby” or, in 
the case of the French capital, "history, historic and tubercular Paris." 
He deplored both the conditions of the slums and the people they had 
created. “How many of those five million [those who came from the 
countryside to make their fortune] are simply a dead weight on the city, 
an obstacle, a black clot of misery, of failure, of human garbage?”45
His objection to the slums was twofold. First, they failed aestheti­
cally to meet his standards of discipline, purpose, and order. "Is there 
anything,” he asked rhetorically, “more pitiful than an undisciplined 
crowd?" Nature, he added, is "all discipline” and will "sweep them 
away” even if nature operates by a logic “contrary to the interests of 
mankind.”46 Here he signals that the founders of the modern city must 
be prepared to act ruthlessly. The second danger of the slums was that, 
besides being noisy, dangerous, dusty, dark, and disease-ridden, they 
harbored a potential revolutionary menace to the authorities. He un­
derstood, as Haussmann had, that crowded slums were and had always 
been an obstacle to efficient police work. Switching back and forth be­
tween Louis XIV s Paris and imperial Rome, Le Corbusier wrote: “From 
the huddle of hovels, from the depths of grimy lairs (in Rome—the 
Rome of the Caesars—the plebes lived in an inextricable chaos of 
abutting and warren-like skyscrapers), there sometimes came the hot 
gust of rebellion; the plot would be hatched in the dark recesses of an 
accumulated chaos in which any kind of police activity was extremely 
difficult. ... St. Paul of Tarsus was impossible to arrest while he stayed 
in the slums, and the words of his Sermons were passed like wildfire 
from mouth to mouth.”47
In case they were wondering, Le Corbusier’s potential bourgeois 
backers and their representatives could rest assured that his legible, 
geometric city would facilitate police work. Where Haussmann man­
aged to retrofit the baroque city of absolutism, Le Corbusier proposed 
to clear the decks completely and replace the center of Haussmann’s 
city with one built with control and hierarchy in mind.48
A Textbook Case of High-Modemist Architecture
Le Corbusier’s intellectual influence on architecture was out of all 
proportion to the actual structures he built. Not even the Soviet Union 
was quite up to his sweeping ambition. It is as an exemplar, a textbook 
case, of the key elements of high-modernist planning—often exagger­
ated—that he belongs in this analysis. His commitment to what he

The High-M odem ist City 117
called the “total efficiency and total rationalization” of a new machine- 
age civilization was uncompromising.49 Although he was obliged to 
deal with nation-states, his vision was universal. As he put it, “city plan­
ning everywhere, universal city planning, total city planning.”50 His ac­
tual plans for Algiers, Paris, and Rio were, as we have seen, on a scale 
that was virtually without precedent. Le Corbusier was influenced, as 
were others of his generation, by the spectacle of total military mobi­
lization in World War I. "Let’s make our plans,” he urged, “plans on a 
scale with twentieth century events, plans equally as big as Satan's 
[war], . . . Big! Big!”51
The visual, aesthetic component of his bold plans was central. Clean, 
smooth lines were something he associated with the “all-business” 
leanness of the machine. He was positively lyrical about the beauty of 
the machine and its products. And houses, cities, and agrovilles could 
also "emerge properly equipped, glitteringly new, from the factory, from 
the workshop, faultless products of smoothly humming machines."52
Integral, finally, to Le Corbusier’s ultramodernism was his repudi­
ation of tradition, history, and received taste. After explaining the ori­
gin of the traffic congestion in contemporary Paris, he warned against 
temptations to reform. “We must refuse even the slightest considera­
tion to what is: to the mess we are in now.” He emphasized, “There is 
no solution to be found here.”53 Instead, he insisted, we must take a 
“blank piece of paper," a “clean tablecloth,” and start new calculations 
from zero. It was in this context that he was drawn to the u s s r  and to 
the ambitious rulers of developing countries. There, he hoped, he 
would not be cramped by the “grotesquely inadequate sites” available 
in the West, where it was possible to practice only what he called an 
“orthopedic architecture.”54 The long-established cities of the West, their 
traditions, their interest groups, their slow-moving institutions, and 
their complex legal and regulatory structures could only shackle the 
dreams of a high-modernist Gulliver.
Brasilia: The High-Modernist City Built—Almost
Cities also believe they are the work of the mind or of chance, but neither the
one nor the other suffices to hold up their walls.
— Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities
No utopian city gets built precisely as designed by its prophet-architect. 
Just as the scientific forester is foiled by the vagaries of unpredictable 
nature and by the divergent purposes of both his employers and those 
who have access to the forest, so the urban planner must contend with

118 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
the tastes and financial means of his patrons as well as the resistance 
of builders, workers, and residents. Even so, Brasilia is about the clos­
est thing we have to a high-modernist city, having been built more or 
less along the lines set out by Le Corbusier and CIAM. Thanks to an ex­
cellent book by James Holston, The Modernist City: An Anthropologi­
cal Critique of Brasilia,55 it is possible to analyze both the logic of the 
plan for Brasilia and the extent of its realization. An appreciation of 
the slippage between what Brasilia meant for its originators on one 
hand and for its residents on the other will in turn pave the way (no 
pun intended) for Jane Jacob’s thoroughgoing critique of modern ur­
ban planning.
The idea of a new capital in the interior predates even the indepen­
dence of Brazil.56 Its realization, however, was the pet project of Jus- 
celino Kubitschek, the populist president from 1956 to 1961, who 
promised Brazilians "fifty years of progress in five” and a future of self- 
sustaining economic growth. In 1957 Oscar Niemeyer, who had al­
ready been named the chief architect for public buildings and housing 
prototypes, organized a design competition that was won, on the basis 
of very rough sketches, by Lucio Costa. Costa’s idea—for it was no 
more than that—was of a “monumental axis” to define the center of the 
city, which consisted of terraced embankments describing an arc inter­
sected in its center by a straight avenue, and of a triangle to define the 
city’s limits (figure 18).
Both architects were working within the doctrines of cia m  and Le 
Corbusier. Niemeyer, a longtime member of the Brazilian Communist 
Party, was also influenced by the Soviet version of architectural mod­
ernism. After the design competition, construction began almost im­
mediately on an empty site on the Central Plateau in the state of Goias, 
nearly 1000 kilometers from Rio de Janeiro and the coast and 1620 
kilometers from the Pacific Ocean in the northeast. It was indeed a new 
city in the wilderness. No "orthopedic” compromises were necessary 
now that the planners had, thanks to Kubitschek, who made Brasilia 
his top priority, a "clean tablecloth.” The state planning agency con­
trolled all the land at the site, so there were no private-property own­
ers with whom to negotiate. The city was then designed from the 
ground up, according to an elaborate and unified plan. Housing, work, 
recreation, traffic, and public administration were each spatially seg­
regated as Le Corbusier would have insisted. Inasmuch as Brasilia 
was itself a single-function, strictly administrative capital, the plan­
ning itself was greatly simplified.

The High-M odernist City 119
v :
D
18. The Costa plan of 1957, showing A, the Plaza of the Three Powers; B, the 
ministries; C, superquadra residential zones; D, the president's residence; and E, 
single-family housing
Brasilia as the Negation (or Transcendence) of Brazil
Brasilia was conceived of by Kubitschek and by Costa and Niemeyer 
as a city of the future, a city of development, a realizable utopia. It made 
no reference to the habits, traditions, and practices of Brazil’s past or of 
its great cities, Sao Paulo, Sao Salvador, and Rio de Janeiro. As if to em­
phasize the point, Kubitschek called his own residence in Brasilia the 
Dawn Palace. “What else will Brasilia be,” he asked, “if not the dawn of 
a new day for Brazil?”57 Like the Saint Petersburg of Peter the Great, 
Brasilia was to be an exemplary city, a center that would transform the 
lives of the Brazilians who lived there—from their personal habits and 
household organization to their social lives, leisure, and work. The goal 
of making over Brazil and Brazilians necessarily implied a disdain for 
what Brazil had been. In this sense, the whole point of the new capital 
was to be a manifest contrast to the corruption, backwardness, and ig­
norance of the old Brazil.

120 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
The great crossroads that was the plan's point of departure has 
been variously interpreted as a symbol of Christ’s cross or an Amazon­
ian bow. Costa, however, referred to it as a "monumental axis,” the 
same term that Le Corbusier used to describe the center of many of 
his urban plans. Even if the axis represented a small attempt to assim­
ilate Brasilia in some way to its national tradition, it remained a city 
that could have been anywhere, that provided no clue to its own his­
tory, unless that history was the modernist doctrine of c ia m . It was a 
state-imposed city invented to project a new Brazil to Brazilians and to 
the world at large. And it was a state-imposed city in at least one other 
sense: inasmuch as it was created to be a city for civil servants, many 
aspects of life that might otherwise have been left to the private sphere 
were minutely organized, from domestic and residential matters to 
health services, education, child care, recreation, commercial outlets, 
and so forth.
If Brasilia was to be Brazil’s urban future, what was Brazil’s urban 
past and present? What, precisely, was the new capital intended to 
negate? A large part of the answer can be inferred from Le Corbusier’s 
second principle of the new urbanism: "the death of the street.” Brasilia 
was designed to eliminate the street and the square as places for public 
life. Although the elimination of local barrio loyalties and rivalries may 
not have been planned, they were also a casualty of the new city.
The public square and the crowded "corridor” street had been 
venues of civic life in urban Brazil since colonial days. As Holston ex­
plains, this civic life took two forms. In the first, which had been spon­
sored by the church or state, ceremonial or patriotic processions and 
rituals were typically held in the principal square of the town.58 The sec­
ond form encompassed a nearly inexhaustible range of popular uses of 
all the town squares. Children might play there; adults might simply 
shop, stroll and run into acquaintances, meet friends for a meal or cof­
fee, play cards or chess, enjoy the social diversions of seeing and being 
seen. The point is that the square, as a confluence of streets and a 
sharply enclosed, framed space, become what Holston aptly calls a 
“public visiting room.’’59 As a public room, the square is distinguished 
by its accessibility to all social classes and the great variety of activities 
it accommodates. Barring state proscriptions, it is a flexible space that 
enables those who use it to use it for their mutual purposes. The square 
or the busy street attracts a crowd precisely because it provides an an­
imated scene—a scene in which thousands of unplanned, informal, 
improvised encounters can take place simultaneously. The street was 
the spatial focus for public life outside the usually cramped family 
dwelling.60 The colloquialism for “I’m going downtown" was “I’m going

The High-M odem ist City 121
to the street.” As the focus for sociability, these spaces were also crucial 
sites for the development of public opinion as well as for “barrio na­
tionalism," which could take institutional form in sports teams, bands, 
patron-saint celebrations, festival groups, and so on. It goes without 
saying that the street or the public square, under the right circum­
stances, could also become the site of public demonstrations and riots 
directed against the state.
A mere glance at the scenes of Brasilia, juxtaposed to the urban 
Brazil that we have been describing, shows at once how radical is the 
transformation. There are no streets in the sense of public gathering 
places; there are only roads and highways to be used exclusively by 
motorized traffic (compare figures 19 and 20).
There is a square. But what a square! The vast, monumental Plaza 
of the Three Powers, flanked by the Esplanade of the Ministries, is of 
such a scale as to dwarf even a military parade (compare figures 21 
and 22, and figures 23 and 24). In comparison, Tiananmen Square and 
the Red Square are positively cozy and intimate. The plaza is best seen, 
as are many of Le Corbusier’s plans, from the air (as in figure 24). If 
one were to arrange to meet a friend there, it would be rather like try­
ing to meet someone in the middle of the Gobi desert. And if one did 
meet up with one’s friend, there would be nothing to do. Functional 
simplification demands that the rationale for the square as a public vis­
iting room be designed out of Brasilia. This plaza is a symbolic center 
for the state; the only activity that goes on around it is the work of the 
ministries. Whereas the vitality of the older square depended on the 
mix of residence, commerce, and administration in its catchment area, 
those who work in the ministries must drive to their residences and 
then again to the separate commercial centers of each residential area.
One striking result of Brasilia’s cityscape is that virtually all the pub­
lic spaces in the city are officially designated public spaces: the sta­
dium, the theater, the concert hall, the planned restaurants. The smaller, 
unstructured, informal public spaces—sidewalk cafes, street corners, 
small parks, neighborhood squares—do not exist. Paradoxically, a 
great deal of nominally open space characterizes this city, as it does Le 
Corbusier's city plans. But that space tends to be "dead” space, as in 
the Plaza of the Three Powers. Holston explains this by showing how 
cia m  doctrines create sculptural masses widely separated by large 
voids, an inversion of the “figure-ground” relations in older cities. 
Given our perceptual habits, these voids in the modernist city seem to 
be not inviting public spaces but boundless, empty spaces that are 
avoided.61 One could fairly say that the effect of the plan was to design 
out all those unauthorized locations where casual encounters could

Residential street in the neighborhood Barra Funda, Sao Paulo, 1988
20. Residential access way LI in Brasilia, 1980

21. Largo do Pelourinho, with the museum of the city and the former slave 
market, Sao Salvador, 1980
22. The Plaza of the Three Powers, with the museum of the city and 
Planalto Palace, Brasilia, 1980

23. The Praga de Se, Sao Paulo, 1984
24. The Plaza of the Three Powers and the Esplanade of the Ministries, Brasilia, 
1981

The High-M odernist City 125
occur and crowds could gather spontaneously. The dispersal and func­
tional segregation meant that meeting someone virtually required a 
plan.
Costa and Niemeyer were not only banishing the street and the 
square from their utopian city. They believed that they were also ban­
ishing crowded slums, with their darkness, disease, crime, pollution, 
traffic jams and noise, and lack of public services. There were definite 
advantages to beginning with an empty, bulldozed site belonging to 
the state. At least the problems of land speculation, rent gouging, and 
property-based inequalities that beset most planners could be circum­
vented. As with Le Corbusier and Haussmann, there was an emanci­
pating vision here. The best and most current architectural knowledge 
about sanitation, education, health, and recreation could be made part 
of the design. Twenty-five square meters of green space per resident 
reached the UNESCO-designed ideal. And as with any utopian plan, the 
design of Brasilia reflected the social and political commitments of the 
builders and their patron, Kubitschek. All residents would have similar 
housing; the sole difference would be the number of units they were al­
lotted. Following the plans of progressive European and Soviet archi­
tects, the planners of Brasilia grouped the apartment buildings into 
what were called superquadra in order to facilitate the development of 
a collective life. Each superquadra (roughly 360 apartments housing 
1,500-2,500 residents) had its own nursery and elementary school; 
each grouping of four superquadra had a secondary school, a cinema, 
a social club, sports facilities, and a retail sector.
Virtually all the needs of Brasilia's future residents were reflected in 
the plan. It is just that these needs were the same abstract, schematic 
needs that produced the formulas for Le Corbusier's plans. Although it 
was surely a rational, healthy, rather egalitarian, state-created city, its 
plans made not the slightest concession to the desires, history, and 
practices of its residents. In some important respects, Brasilia is to Sao 
Paulo or Rio as scientific forestry is to the unplanned forest. Both 
plans are highly legible, planned simplifications devised to create an 
efficient order that can be monitored and directed from above. Both 
plans, as we shall see, miscarry in comparable respects. Finally, both 
plans change the city and the woods to conform to the simple grid of 
the planner.
Living in Brasilia
Most of those who have moved to Brasilia from other cities are 
amazed to discover “that it is a city without crowds." People complain

126 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
that Brasilia lacks the bustle of street life, that it has none of the busy 
street corners and long stretches of storefront facades that animate a 
sidewalk for pedestrians. For them, it is almost as if the founders of 
Brasilia, rather than having planned a city, have actually planned to 
prevent a city. The most common way they put it is to say that Brasilia 
“lacks street corners," by which they mean that it lacks the complex in­
tersections of dense neighborhoods comprising residences and public 
cafes and restaurants with places for leisure, work, and shopping. 
While Brasilia provides well for some human needs, the functional 
separation of work from residence and of both from commerce and en­
tertainment, the great voids between superquadra, and a road system 
devoted exclusively to motorized traffic make the disappearance of the 
street corner a foregone conclusion. The plan did eliminate traffic 
jams; it also eliminated the welcome and familiar pedestrian jams that 
one of Holston's informants called "the point of social conviviality.”62
The term brasilite, meaning roughly Brasil(ia)-itis, which was coined 
by the first-generation residents, nicely captures the trauma they expe­
rienced.63 As a mock clinical condition, it connotes a rejection of the 
standardization and anonymity of life in Brasilia. "They use the term 
brasilite to refer to their feelings about a daily life without the plea­
sures—the distractions, conversations, flirtations, and little rituals— 
of outdoor life in other Brazilian cities.”64 Meeting someone normally 
requires seeing them either at their apartment or at work. Even if we 
allow for the initial simplifying premise of Brasilia’s being an adminis­
trative city, there is nonetheless a bland anonymity built into the very 
structure of the capital. The population simply lacks the small accessi­
ble spaces that they could colonize and stamp with the character of 
their activity, as they have done historically in Rio and Sao Paulo. To 
be sure, the inhabitants of Brasilia haven't had much time to modify 
the city through their practices, but the city is designed to be fairly re­
calcitrant to their efforts.65
"Brasilite,” as a term, also underscores how the built environment 
affects those who dwell in it. Compared to life in Rio and Sao Paulo, 
with their color and variety, the daily round in bland, repetitive, aus­
tere Brasilia must have resembled life in a sensory deprivation tank. 
The recipe for high-modernist urban planning, while it may have cre­
ated formal order and functional segregation, did so at the cost of a 
sensorily impoverished and monotonous environment—an environ­
ment that inevitably took its toll on the spirits of its residents.
The anonymity induced by Brasilia is evident from the scale and ex­
terior of the apartments that typically make up each residential su­
perquadra (compare figures 25 and 26). For superquadra residents,

The High-M odernist City 127
the two most frequent complaints are the sameness of the apartment 
blocks and the isolation of the residences ("In Brasilia, there is only 
house and work”).66 The facade of each block is strictly geometric and 
egalitarian. Nothing distinguishes the exterior of one apartment from 
another; there are not even balconies that would allow residents to 
add distinctive touches and create semipublic spaces. Part of the dis­
orientation arises from the fact that apartment dwelling—especially, 
perhaps, this form of apartment dwelling—fails to accord with deeply 
embedded conceptions of home. Holston asked a class of nine-year- 
old children, most of whom lived in superquadra, to draw a picture of 
“home.” Not one drew an apartment building of any kind. All drew, in­
stead, a traditional freestanding house with windows, a central door, 
and a pitched roof.67 The superquadra blocks, by contrast, resist the 
stamp of individuality, while the glass walls on their exteriors infringe 
on the sense of private space in the home.68 Concerned with the over­
all aesthetic of the plan, the architects erased not only the external 
display of status distinctions but also much of the visual play of differ­
ence. Just as the general design of the city militates against an au­
tonomous public life, so the design of the residential city militates 
against individuality.
The disorienting quality of Brasilia is exacerbated by architectural 
repetition and uniformity. Here is a case where what seems like ration­
ality and legibility to those working in administration and urban ser­
vices seems like mystifying disorder for the ordinary residents who 
must navigate the city. Brasilia has few landmarks. Each commercial 
quarter or superquadra cluster looks roughly like any other. The sec­
tors of the city are designated by an elaborate set of acronyms and ab­
breviations that are nearly impossible to master, except from the global 
logic of the center. Holston notes the irony between macro-order and 
micro-confusion: “Thus, while the topologies of total order produce an 
unusual, abstract awareness of the plan, practical knowledge of the 
city actually decreases with the imposition of systematic rationality.”69 
From the perspective of the planners of a utopian city, whose goal is 
more to change the world than to accommodate it, however, the shock 
and disorientation occasioned by life in Brasilia may be part of its di­
dactic purpose. A city that merely pandered to existing tastes and 
habits would not be doing its utopian job.
Unplanned Brasilia
From the beginning, Brasilia failed to go precisely as planned. Its 
master builders were designing for a new Brazil and for new Brazil-

Residential area along Rua Tiradentes in Ouro Preto, 1980
26. A superquadra apartment block in Brasilia, 1980

The High-M odem ist City 129
ians—orderly, modern, efficient, and under their discipline. They were 
thwarted by contemporary Brazilians with different interests and the 
determination to have them heard. Somehow, it was assumed that the 
huge workforce (more than sixty thousand strong) would respond to 
the call to build the city and then quietly leave it to the administrators 
for whom it was intended. The construction workers, moreover, had 
not been adequately planned for. Kubitschek accorded top priority to 
finishing Brasilia as quickly as possible. Although most construction 
laborers routinely worked overtime, the population at the building site 
quickly outstripped the temporary housing allotted to them in what 
was called the Free City. They soon squatted on additional land on 
which they built makeshift houses; in cases where whole families mi­
grated to Brasilia (or farmed there), the houses they erected were 
sometimes quite substantial.
The “pioneers" of Brasilia were collectively called “bandeirantes of 
the twentieth century,” after the adventurers who had first penetrated 
the interior. The label was intended as a compliment, inasmuch as Ku­
bitschek's Brasilia was also a symbolic conquest of the interior in a na­
tion that had historically clung to the shoreline. At the outset, however, 
the manual laborers attracted to Brasilia were derogatorily called can- 
dangos. A candango was “a man without qualities, without culture, a 
vagabond, lower-class, lowbrow."70 Kubitschek changed that. He used 
the building of Brasilia, which was, after all, devised to transform 
Brazil, in order to transform the candangos into the proletarian heroes 
of the new nation. "Future interpreters of Brazilian Civilization," he 
declared, “must dwell with astonishment before the bronzed rigors of 
this anonymous titan, who is the candango, the obscure and formida­
ble hero of the construction of Brasilia. . . . While the skeptics laughed 
at the intended utopia of the new city that I prepared to build, the can­
dangos shouldered the responsibility.”71 Taking full advantage of the 
rhetorical space thus provided them, the candangos insisted on having 
their own patch of the utopian city. They organized to defend their 
land, to demand urban services, and to be given secure title. In the 
end, by 1980, 75 percent of the population of Brasilia lived in settle­
ments that had never been anticipated, while the planned city had 
reached less than half of its projected population of 557,000. The foot­
hold the poor gained in Brasilia was not just a result of the beneficence 
of Kubitschek and his wife, Dona Sara. Political structure played a key 
role as well. Squatters were able to mobilize, protest, and be heard by 
virtue of a reasonably competitive political system. Neither Kubitschek 
nor other politicians could possibly ignore the opportunity to cultivate 
a political clientele who might vote as a bloc.

130 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
The unplanned Brasilia—that is, the real, existing Brasilia—was 
quite different from the original vision. Instead of a classless adminis­
trative city, it was a city marked by stark spatial segregation according 
to social class. The poor lived on the periphery and commuted long dis­
tances to the center, where much of the elite lived and worked. Many 
of the rich also created their own settlements with individual houses 
and private clubs, thereby replicating the affluent lifestyles found else­
where in Brazil. The unplanned Brasilias—that of the rich and that of 
the poor—were not merely a footnote or an accident; one could say 
that the cost of this kind of order and legibility at the center of the plan 
virtually required that it be sustained by an unplanned Brasilia at the 
margins. The two Brasilias were not just different; they were symbiotic.
Radically transforming an entire nation of Brazil’s size and diver­
sity— let alone in only five years—was all but inconceivable. One 
senses that Kubitschek, like many rulers with great ambitions for their 
countries, despaired of a direct assault on all Brazil and all Brazilians 
and turned to the more plausible task of creating from zero a utopian 
model. Raised on a new site, in a new place, the city would provide a 
transforming physical environment for its new residents—an envi­
ronment minutely tailored to the latest dictates regarding health, effi­
ciency, and rational order. As the progressive city would evolve from a 
unitary, integrated plan on land owned entirely by the state, with all 
contracts, commercial licenses, and zoning in the hands of the plan­
ning agency (Novacap), the conditions seemed favorable for a success­
ful "utopian miniaturization.”
How successful was Brasilia as a high-modernist, utopian space? If 
we judge it by the degree to which it departs from cities in older, urban 
Brazil, then its success was considerable. If we judge it by its capacity 
either to transform the rest of Brazil or to inspire a love of the new way 
of life, then its success was minimal. The real Brasilia, as opposed to the 
hypothetical Brasilia in the planning documents, was greatly marked by 
resistance, subversion, and political calculation.
Le Corbusier at Chandigarh
Since Le Corbusier did not design Brasilia, it may seem like guilt by 
association to blame him for its manifest failings. Two considerations, 
however, justify the connection. The first is that Brasilia was faithfully 
built according to c ia m  doctrines elaborated mostly by Le Corbusier. 
Second, Le Corbusier did in fact play a major role in designing an­
other capital city that reflected precisely the human problems encoun­
tered in Brasilia.

The High-M odem ist City 131
27. The chowk, or piazza, that Le Corbusier designed for Chandigarh's city center
Chandigarh, the new capital of the Punjab, was half planned when 
the architect in charge, Matthew Nowicki, suddenly died.72 Nehru, in 
search of a successor, invited Le Corbusier to finish the design and su­
pervise the construction. The choice was in keeping with Nehru’s own 
high-modernist purpose: namely, the promotion of modern technology 
in a new capital that would dramatize the values that the new Indian 
elite wished to convey.73 Le Corbusier's modifications of Nowicki’s and 
Albert Mayer’s original plan were all in the direction of monumental- 
ism and linearity. In place of large curves, Le Corbusier substituted 
rectilinear axes. At the center of the capital, he inserted a huge monu­
mental axis not unlike those in Brasilia and in his plan for Paris.74 In 
place of crowded bazaars cramming as many goods and people as pos­
sible into small spaces, he substituted huge squares that today stand 
largely empty (figure 27).
Whereas road crossings in India had typically served as public 
gathering places, Le Corbusier shifted the scale and arranged the zon­
ing in order to prevent animated street scenes from developing. Notes 
one recent observer: “On the ground, the scale is so large and the 
width between meeting streets so great that one sees nothing but vast 
stretches of concrete paving with a few lone figures here and there. 
The small-scale street trader, the hawker or the rehris (barrows) have

132 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
been banned from the city center, so that even where sources of inter­
est and activity could be included, if only to reduce the concreted bar­
renness and authority of the chowk, these are not utilized."75
As in Brasilia, the effort was to transcend India as it existed and to 
present Chandigarh's citizens—largely administrators—with an image 
of their own future. As in Brasilia, the upshot was another unplanned 
city at the periphery and the margins, one that contradicted the aus­
tere order at the center.
The Case Against High-Modernist Urbanism: Jane Jacobs
Jane Jacobs’s book The Death and Life of Great American Cities was 
written in 1961 against a high tide of modernist, functional urban 
planning. Hers was by no means the first criticism of high-modernist 
urbanism, but it was, I believe, the most carefully observed and intel­
lectually grounded critique.76 As the most comprehensive challenge to 
contemporaiy doctrines of urban planning, it sparked a debate, the 
reverberations of which are still being felt. The result, some three 
decades later, has been that many of Jacobs's views have been incorpo­
rated into the working assumptions of today's urban planners. Al­
though what she called her "attack on current city planning and re­
building” was concerned primarily with American cities, she located 
Le Corbusier’s doctrines, as applied abroad and at home, at the center 
of her field of fire.
What is remarkable and telling about Jacobs’s critique is its unique 
perspective. She begins at street level, with an ethnography of micro­
order in neighborhoods, sidewalks, and intersections. Where Le Cor­
busier “sees" his city initially from the air, Jacobs sees her city as a 
pedestrian on her daily rounds would. Jacobs was also a political acti­
vist involved in many campaigns against proposals for zoning changes, 
road building, and housing development that she thought ill-advised.77 
It was all but inconceivable that a radical critique, grounded in this 
fashion, could ever have originated from within the intellectual circle 
of urban planners.78 Her novel brand of everyday urban sociology ap­
plied to the design of cities was simply too far removed from the or­
thodox educational routines of urban planning schools at the time.79 
An examination of her critique from the margins serves to underline 
many of the failings of high modernism.

The High-M odem ist City 133
Visual Order Versus Experienced Order
A formative insight in Jacobs’s argument is that there is no neces­
sary correspondence between the tidy look of geometric order on one 
hand and systems that effectively meet daily needs on the other. Why 
should we expect, she asks, that well-functioning built environments 
or social arrangements will satisfy purely visual notions of order and 
regularity? To illustrate the conundrum, she refers to a new housing 
project in East Harlem that sported, conspicuously, a rectangular lawn. 
The lawn was the object of general contempt by the residents. It was 
even taken as an insult by those who had been forcibly relocated and 
now lived in a project among strangers where it was impossible to get 
a newspaper or a cup of coffee or to borrow fifty cents.80 The apparent 
order of the lawn seemed cruelly emblematic of a more keenly felt dis­
order.
A fundamental mistake that urban planners made, Jacobs claims, 
was to infer functional order from the duplication and regimentation 
of building forms: that is, from purely visual order. Most complex sys­
tems, on the contrary, do not display a surface regularity; their order 
must be sought at a deeper level. "To see complex systems of functional 
order as order, and not as chaos, takes understanding. The leaves drop­
ping from the trees in the autumn, the interior of an airplane engine, 
the entrails of a rabbit, the city desk of a newspaper, all appear to be 
chaos if they are seen without comprehension. Once they are seen as 
systems of order, they actually look different." At this level one could 
say that Jacobs was a “functionalist,” a word whose use was banned in 
Le Corbusier's studio. She asked, What function does this structure 
serve, and how well does it serve it? The "order” of a thing is deter­
mined by the purpose it serves, not by a purely aesthetic view of its sur­
face order.81 Le Corbusier, by contrast, seemed to have firmly believed 
that the most efficient forms would always have a classical clarity and 
order. The physical environments Le Corbusier designed and built had, 
as did Brasilia, an overall harmony and simplicity of form. For the 
most part, however, they failed in important ways as places where peo­
ple would want to live and work.
It was this failure of the general urban planning models that so 
preoccupied Jacobs. The planners’ conception of a city accorded nei­
ther with the actual economic and social functions of an urban area 
nor with the (not unrelated) individual needs of its inhabitants. Their 
most fundamental error was their entirely aesthetic view of order. 
This error drove them to the further error of rigidly segregating func­

134 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
tions. In their eyes, mixed uses of real estate—say, stores intermingled 
with apartments, small workshops, restaurants, and public build­
ings—created a kind of visual disorder and confusion. The great ad­
vantage of single uses—one shopping area, one residential area— 
was that it made possible the monofunctional uniformity and visual 
regimentation that they sought. As a planning exercise, it was of 
course vastly easier to plan an area zoned for a single use than one 
zoned for several. Minimizing the number of uses and hence the num­
ber of variables to be juggled thus combined with an aesthetic of vi­
sual order to argue for a single-use doctrine.82 The metaphor that 
comes to mind in this connection is that of an army drawn up on the 
parade ground as opposed to an army engaged in combat with the 
enemy. In the first case is a tidy visual order created by units and 
ranks drawn up in straight lines. But it is an army doing nothing, an 
army on display. An army at war will not display the same orderly 
arrangement, but it will be, in Jacobs’s terms, an army doing what it 
was trained to do. Jacobs thinks she knows the roots of this penchant 
for abstract, geometric order from above: “Indirectly through the 
utopian tradition, and directly through the more realistic doctrine of 
art by imposition, modern city planning has been burdened from its 
beginnings with the unsuitable aim of converting cities into disci­
plined works of art.’’83
Recently, Jacobs notes, the statistical techniques and input-output 
models available to planners had become far more sophisticated. They 
were encouraged to attempt such ambitious feats of planning as mas­
sive slum clearance now that they could closely calculate the budget, 
materials, space, energy, and transportation needs of a rebuilt area. 
These plans continued to ignore the social costs of moving families 
“like grains of sand, or electrons, or billiard balls.’’84 The plans were 
also based on notoriously shaky assumptions, and they treated systems 
of complex order as if they could be simplified by numerical tech­
niques, regarding shopping, for example, as a purely mathematical 
issue involving square footage for shopping space and traffic manage­
ment as an issue of moving a certain number of vehicles in a given 
time along a certain number of streets of a given width. These were in­
deed formidable technical problems, but, as we shall see, the real is­
sues involved much more besides.
The Functional Superiority of Cross-Use and Complexity
The establishment and maintenance of social order in large cities 
are, as we have increasingly learned, fragile achievements. Jacobs's

The High-M odernist City 135
view of social order is both subtle and instructive. Social order is not 
the result of the architectural order created by T squares and slide 
rules. Nor is social order brought about by such professionals as po­
licemen, nightwatchmen, and public officials. Instead, says Jacobs, 
“the public peace—the sidewalk and street peace—of cities . . .  is 
kept by an intricate, almost unconscious network of voluntary controls 
and standards among the people themselves, and enforced by the peo­
ple themselves." The necessary conditions for a safe street are a clear 
demarcation between public space and private space, a substantial 
number of people who are watching the street on and off (“eyes on the 
street”), and fairly continual, heavy use, which adds to the quantity of 
eyes on the street.85 Her example of an area where these conditions 
were met is Boston’s North End. Its streets were thronged with pedes­
trians throughout the day owing to the density of convenience and gro­
cery stores, bars, restaurants, bakeries, and other shops. It was a place 
where people came to shop and stroll and to watch others shop and 
stroll. The shopkeepers had the most direct interest in watching the 
sidewalk: they knew many people by name, they were there all day, 
and their businesses depended on the neighborhood traffic. Those who 
came and went on errands or to eat or drink also provided eyes on the 
street, as did the elderly who watched the passing scene from their 
apartment windows. Few of these people were friends, but a good 
many were acquaintances who did recognize one another. The process 
is powerfully cumulative. The more animated and busier the street, the 
more interesting it is to watch and observe; all these unpaid observers 
who have some familiarity with the neighborhood provide willing, in­
formed surveillance.
Jacobs recounts a revealing incident that occurred on her mixed- 
use street in Manhattan when an older man seemed to be trying to ca­
jole an eight- or nine-year-old girl to go with him. As Jacobs watched 
this from her second-floor window, wondering if she should intervene, 
the butcher’s wife appeared on the sidewalk, as did the owner of the 
deli, two patrons of a bar, a fruit vendor, and a laundryman, and sev­
eral other people watched openly from their tenement windows, ready 
to frustrate a possible abduction. No “peace officer” appeared or was 
necessary.86
Another instance of informal urban order and services is instruc­
tive. Jacobs explains that when a friend used their apartment while she 
and her husband were away or when they didn’t want to wait up for a 
late-arriving visitor, they would leave the key to their apartment with 
the deli owner, who had a special drawer for such keys and who held 
them for the friends.87 She noted that every nearby mixed-use street had

136 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
someone who played the same role: a grocer, candy-store owner, bar­
ber, butcher, dry cleaner, or bookshop owner. This is one of the many 
public functions of private business.88 These services, Jacobs notes, are 
not the outgrowth of any deep friendship; they are the result of people 
being on what she calls “sidewalk terms" with others. And these are 
services that could not plausibly be provided by a public institution. 
Having no recourse to the face-to-face politics of personal reputation 
that underwrites social order in small rural communities, the city re­
lies on the density of people who are on sidewalk terms with one an­
other to maintain a modicum of public order. The web of familiarity 
and acquaintanceship enabled a host of crucial but often invisible pub­
lic amenities. A person didn’t think twice about asking someone to 
hold one's seat at the theater, to watch a child while one goes to the rest­
room, or to keep an eye on a bike while one ducks into a deli to buy a 
sandwich.
Jacobs’s analysis is notable for its attention to the microsociology of 
public order. The agents of this order are all nonspecialists whose main 
business is something else. There are no formal public or voluntary or­
ganizations of urban order here—no police, no private guards or 
neighborhood watch, no formal meetings or officeholders. Instead, the 
order is embedded in the logic of daily practice. What’s more, Jacobs 
argues, the formal public institutions of order function successfully 
only when they are undergirded by this rich, informal public life. An 
urban space where the police are the sole agents of order is a very 
dangerous place. Jacobs admits that each of the small exchanges of 
informal public life—nodding hello, admiring a newborn baby, asking 
where someone’s nice pears come from—can be seen as trivial. “But 
the sum is not trivial at all,” she insists. “The sum of each casual, pub­
lic contact at a local level—most of it fortuitous, most of it associated 
with errands, all of it metered by the person concerned and not thrust 
upon him by anyone—is a feeling for the public identity of people, a 
web of public respect and trust, and a resource in time of personal or 
neighborhood need. The absence of this trust is a disaster to a city 
street. Its cultivation cannot be institutionalized. And above all, it im­
plies no private commitments.”89 Where Le Corbusier began with for­
mal, architectural order from above, Jacobs begins with informal, so­
cial order from below.
Diversity, cross-use, and complexity (both social and architectural) 
are Jacobs's watchwords. The mingling of residences with shopping 
areas and workplaces makes a neighborhood more interesting, more 
convenient, and more desirable—qualities that draw the foot traffic

The High-M odernist City 137
that in turn makes the streets relatively safe. The whole logic of her case 
depends on the creation of the crowds, diversity, and conveniences that 
define a setting where people will want to be. In addition, a high vol­
ume of foot traffic stimulated by an animated and colorful neighbor­
hood has economic effects on commerce and property values, which 
are hardly trivial. The popularity of a district and its economic success 
go hand in hand. Once created, such places will attract activities that 
most planners would have specially sequestered elsewhere. Rather 
than play in the large parks created for that purpose, many children 
prefer the sidewalks, which are safer, more eventful, and more conve­
nient to the comforts available in stores and at home.90 Understanding 
the magnetic effect of the busy street over more specialized settings is 
no more difficult than understanding why the kitchen is typically the 
busiest room in a house. It is the most versatile setting—a place of 
food and drink, of cooking and eating, and hence of socialization and 
exchange.91
What are the conditions of this diversity? That a district have mixed 
primary uses, Jacobs suggests, is the most vital factor. Streets and 
blocks should be short in order to avoid creating long barriers to pedes­
trians and commerce.92 Buildings should ideally be of greatly varying 
age and condition, thereby making possible different rental terms and 
the varied uses that accompany them. Each of these conditions, not sur­
prisingly, violates one or more of the working assumptions of orthodox 
urban planners of the day: single-use districts, long streets, and archi­
tectural uniformity. Mixed primary uses, Jacobs explains, are synergis­
tic with diversity and density.
Take, for example, a small restaurant in a single-use district—say, 
the financial district of Wall Street. Such a restaurant must make vir­
tually all its profit between 10 a.m . and 3 p.m ., the hours when office 
workers take their midmorning coffee breaks and lunch breaks before 
commuting home at the end of the day, leaving the street silent. The 
restaurant in a mixed-use district, on the other hand, has potential 
clients passing by throughout the day and into the night. It may there­
fore stay open for more hours, benefiting not only its own business but 
also that of nearby specialized shops, which might be economically 
marginal in a single-use district but which become going concerns in 
a lively mixed-use area. The very jumble of activities, buildings, and 
people—the apparent disorder that offended the aesthetic eye of the 
planner—was for Jacobs the sign of dynamic vitality: “Intricate min- 
glings of different uses are not a form of chaos. On the contrary they 
represent a complex and highly developed form of order."93

138 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
While Jacobs makes a convincing case for mixed use and complex­
ity by examining the micro-origins of public safety, civic trust, visual 
interest, and convenience, there is a larger argument to be made for 
cross-use and diversity. Like the diverse old-growth forest, a richly dif­
ferentiated neighborhood with many kinds of shops, entertainment 
centers, services, housing options, and public spaces is, virtually by 
definition, a more resilient and durable neighborhood. Economically, 
the diversity of its commercial “bets” (everything from funeral parlors 
and public services to grocery stores and bars) makes it less vulnerable 
to economic downturns. At the same time its diversity provides many 
opportunities for economic growth in upturns. Like monocropped 
forests, single-purpose districts, although they may initially catch a 
boom, are especially susceptible to stress. The diverse neighborhood is 
more sustainable.
I think that a “woman’s eye,” for lack of a better term, was essential 
to Jacobs’s frame of reference. A good many men, to be sure, were in­
sightful critics of high-modernist urban planning, and Jacobs refers to 
many of their writings. Nevertheless, it is difficult to imagine her ar­
gument being made in quite the same way by a man. Several elements 
of her critique reinforce this impression. First, she experiences the city 
as far more than a setting for the daily trek to and from work and the 
acquisition of goods and services. The eyes with which she sees the 
street are, by turns, those of shoppers running errands, mothers push­
ing baby carriages, children playing, friends having coffee or a bite to 
eat, lovers strolling, people looking from their windows, shopkeepers 
dealing with customers, old people sitting on park benches.94 Work is 
not absent from her account, but her attention is riveted on the quo­
tidian in the street as it appears around work and outside of work. A 
concern with public space puts both the interior of the home and the 
office as factory outside her purview. The activities that she observes so 
carefully, from taking a walk to window-shopping, are largely activi­
ties that do not have a single purpose or that have no conscious pur­
pose in the narrow sense.
Compare this perspective with most of the key elements in high- 
modernist urban planning. Such plans all but require forms of sim­
plification that strip human activity to a sharply defined single pur­
pose. In orthodox planning, such simplifications underlie the strict 
functional segregation of work from domicile and both from com­
merce. The matter of transportation becomes, for Le Corbusier and 
others, the single problem of how to transport people (usually in auto­
mobiles) as quickly and economically as possible. The activity of shop­
ping becomes a question of providing adequate floor space and access

The High-M odem ist City 139
for a certain quantity of shoppers and goods. Even the category of en­
tertainment was split up into specified activities and segregated into 
playgrounds, athletic fields, theaters, and so on.
Thus, the second result of Jacobs's having a woman’s eye is her re­
alization that a great deal of human activity (including, by all means, 
work) is pursued for a wide range of goals and satisfactions. An ami­
able lunch with co-workers may be the most significant part of the day 
for a jobholder. Mothers pushing baby carriages may also be talking to 
friends, doing errands, getting a bite to eat, and looking for a book at 
the local bookstore or library. In the course of these activities, still an­
other "purpose" might arise, unbidden. The man or woman driving to 
work may not just be driving to work. He or she may care about the 
scenery or companionship along the way and the availability of coffee 
near the parking lot. Jacobs herself was an enormously gifted "eye on 
the street," and she wrote in full recognition of the great variety of 
human purposes embedded in any activity. The purpose of the city is to 
accommodate and abet this rich diversity and not to thwart it. And the 
persistent failure of urban-planning doctrines to do so, she suggested, 
had something to do with gender.95
Authoritarian Planning as Urban Taxidermy
For Jacobs, the city as a social organism is a living structure that is 
constantly changing and springing surprises. Its interconnections are 
so complex and dimly understood that planning always risks unknow­
ingly cutting into its living tissue, thereby damaging or killing vital so­
cial processes. She contrasts the “art” of the planner to the practical 
conduct of daily life: “A city cannot be a work of art. ... In relation to 
the inclusiveness and literally endless intricacy of life, art is arbitrary, 
symbolic, and abstracted. That is its value and the source of its own 
kind of order and coherence. . . . The results of such profound confu­
sion between art and life are neither life nor art. They are taxidermy. In 
its place, taxidermy can be a useful and decent craft. However, it goes 
too far when the specimens put on display are exhibitions of dead, 
stuffed cities.”96 The core of Jacobs’s case against modern city planning 
was that it placed a static grid over this profusion of unknowable pos­
sibilities. She condemned Ebenezer Howard’s vision of the garden 
city because its planned segregation presumed that farmers, factory 
workers, and businessmen would remain fixed and distinct castes. 
Such a presumption failed to respect or provide for the “spontaneous 
self-diversification” and fluidity that were the main features of the 
nineteenth-century city.97

140 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
Urban planners’ great penchant for massive schemes of slum clear­
ance was attacked on the same grounds. Slums were the first foothold 
of poor migrants to the city. As long as these areas were reasonably sta­
ble, the economy relatively strong, and people and businesses not 
starved for credit, the slums could, given time, manage to "unslum’’ 
themselves. Many already had. Planners frequently destroyed "unslum- 
ming slums’’ because these areas violated their doctrines of “layout, 
use, ground coverage, mixture and activities”98—not to mention the 
land speculation and security concerns behind much “urban renewal.”
From time to time Jacobs stands back from the infinite and chang­
ing variety of American cities to express a certain awe and humility: 
“Their intricate order—a manifestation of the freedom of countless 
numbers of people to make and carry out countless plans—is in many 
ways a great wonder. We ought not to be reluctant to make this living 
collection of interdependent uses, this freedom, this life, more un­
derstandable for what it is, nor so unaware that we do not know what 
it is.”99 The magisterial assumption behind the doctrines of many 
urban planners—that they know what people want and how people 
should spend their time—seems to Jacobs shortsighted and arrogant. 
They assumed, or at least their plans assumed, that people preferred 
open spaces, visual (zoned) order, and quiet. They assumed that people 
wanted to live in one place and work in another. Jacobs believes they 
were mistaken, and most important, she is prepared to argue from 
close daily observation at street level rather than stipulating human 
wishes from above.
The logic behind the spatial segregation and single-use zoning of the 
urban planners that Jacobs criticized was at once aesthetic, scientific, 
and practical. As an aesthetic matter, it led to the visual regularity— 
even regimentation—that a sculptural view of the ensemble required. 
As a scientific matter it reduced the number of unknowns for which the 
planner had to find a solution. Like simultaneous equations in algebra, 
too many unknowns in urban planning rendered any solution problem­
atic or else required heroic assumptions. The problem the planner 
faced was analogous to that of the forester. One modern solution to the 
forester’s dilemma was to borrow a management technique called op­
timum control theory, whereby the sustained timber yield could be 
successfully predicted by few observations and a parsimonious for­
mula. It goes without saying that optimum control theory was simplest 
where more variables could be turned into constants. Thus a single­
species, same-age forest planted in straight lines on a flat plain with 
consistent soil and moisture profiles yielded simpler and more accu­

The High-M odernist City 141
rate optimum control formulas. Compared to uniformity, diversity is 
always more difficult to design, build, and control. When Ebenezer 
Howard approached town planning as a simple, two-variable problem 
of relating housing needs to the quantity of jobs in a closed system, he 
was both temporally and functionally operating “scientifically” within 
those self-imposed limits. Formulas for green space, light, schools, and 
square meters per capita did the rest.
In urban planning as in forestry, it is a short step from parsimo­
nious assumptions to the practice of shaping the environment so that it 
satisfies the simplifications required by the formula. The logic of plan­
ning for the shopping needs of a given population serves as an exam­
ple. Once planners applied the formula for a certain number of square 
feet of commercial space, parceled out among such categories as food 
and clothing, they realized that they would then have to make these 
shopping centers monopolistic within their areas, lest nearby competi­
tors draw away their clientele. The whole point was to legislate the for­
mula, thereby guaranteeing the shopping center a monopoly of its 
catchment area.100 Rigid, single-use zoning is, then, not just an aes­
thetic measure. It is an indispensable aid to scientific planning, and it 
can also be used to transform formulas posing as observations into 
self-fulfilling prophesies.
The radically simplified city, provided it is viewed from above, is 
also practical and efficient. The organization of services—electricity, 
water, sewage, mail—is simplified both below and above ground. Sin­
gle-use districts, by virtue of the repetition of functionally similar 
apartments or offices, are simpler to produce and build. Le Corbusier 
looked forward to a future when all the components of such buildings 
would be industrially prefabricated.101 Zoning along these lines also 
produces a city that is, district by district, both more uniform aesthet­
ically and more "orderly” functionally. A single activity or narrow band 
of activities is appropriate to each district: work in the business dis­
trict, family life in the residential quarter, shopping and entertainment 
in the commercial district. As a police matter, this functional segrega­
tion minimizes unruly crowds and introduces as much regimentation 
into the movement and conduct of the population as physical planning 
alone can encourage.
Once the desire for comprehensive urban planning is established, 
the logic of uniformity and regimentation is well-nigh inexorable. Cost 
effectiveness contributes to this tendency. Just as it saves a prison trou­
ble and money if all prisoners wear uniforms of the same material, 
color, and size, every concession to diversity is likely to entail a corre­

142 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
sponding increase in administrative time and budgetary cost. If the 
planning authority does not need to make concessions to popular de­
sires, the one-size-fits-all solution is likely to prevail.102
Against the planners’ eye and formulas, Jacobs juxtaposes her own. 
Her aesthetic, she would claim, is pragmatic and street level, an aes­
thetic that has as its reference the experienced working order of the 
city for the people who live there. She asks, What physical environ­
ments draw people, facilitate circulation, promote social exchange and 
contact, and satisfy both utilitarian and nonutilitarian needs? This per­
spective leads her to many judgments. Short blocks are preferable to 
long blocks because they knit together more activities. Large truck de­
pots or filling stations that break the continuity of pedestrian interest 
are to be avoided. To be kept to a minimum are huge roads and vast, 
forbidding open spaces that operate as visual and physical barriers. 
There is a logic here, but it is not an a priori visual logic, nor is it a 
purely utilitarian logic narrowly conceived. Rather, it is a standard of 
evaluation that springs from how satisfactorily a given arrangement 
meets the social and practical desires of urban dwellers as those needs 
are revealed in their actual activity.
Planning for the Unplanned
The historic diversity of the city—the source of its value and mag­
netism—is an unplanned creation of many hands and long historical 
practice. Most cities are the outcome, the vector sum, of innumerable 
small acts bearing no discernible overall intention. Despite the best ef­
forts of monarchs, planning bodies, and capitalist speculators, “most 
city diversity is the creation of incredible numbers of different people 
and different private organizations, with vastly different ideas and pur­
poses, planning and contriving outside the formal framework of public 
action.”103 Le Corbusier would have agreed with this description of the 
existing city, and it was precisely what appalled him. It was just this 
cacophony of intentions that was responsible for the clutter, ugliness, 
disorder, and inefficiencies of the unplanned city. Looking at the same 
social and historical facts, Jacobs sees reason to praise them: “Cities 
have the capability of providing something for everybody, only be­
cause, and only when, they are created by everybody.”104 She is no free- 
market libertarian, however; she understands clearly that capitalists 
and speculators are, willy-nilly, transforming the city with their com­
mercial muscle and political influence. But when it comes to urban 
public policy, she thinks planning ought not to usurp this unplanned 
city: “The main responsibility of city planning and design should be to

The High-M odernist City 143
develop, insofar as public policy and action can do so, cities that are 
congenial places for this great range of unofficial plans, ideas, and 
opportunities to flourish.”105 Whereas Le Corbusier's planner is con­
cerned with the overall form of the cityscape and its efficiency in mov­
ing people from point to point, Jacobs’s planner consciously makes 
room for the unexpected, small, informal, and even nonproductive 
human activities that constitute the vitality of the “lived city.”
Jacobs is more aware than most urban planners of the ecological 
and market forces continually transforming the city. The succession of 
harbors, railroads, and highways as means of moving people and goods 
had already marked the rise and decline of sections of the city. Even the 
successful, animated neighborhoods that Jacobs so prizes were, she 
recognizes, becoming victims of their own success. Areas were "colo­
nized" by urban migrants because land values, and hence rents, were 
cheap. As an area became more desirable to live in, its rents rose and its 
local commerce changed, the new businesses often driving out the orig­
inal pioneers who had helped transform it. The nature of the city was 
flux and change; a successful neighborhood could not be frozen and 
preserved by the planners. A city that was extensively planned would 
inevitably diminish much of the diversity that is the hallmark of great 
towns. The best a planner can hope for is to modestly enhance rather 
than impede the development of urban complexity.
For Jacobs, how a city develops is something like how a language 
evolves. A language is the joint historical creation of millions of speak­
ers. Although all speakers have some effect on the trajectory of a lan­
guage, the process is not particularly egalitarian. Linguists, grammar­
ians, and educators, some of them backed by the power of the state, 
weigh in heavily. But the process is not particularly amenable to a dicta­
torship, either. Despite the efforts toward “central planning,” language 
(especially its everyday spoken form) stubbornly tends to go on its own 
rich, multivalent, colorful way. Similarly, despite the attempts by urban 
planners toward designing and stablizing the city, it escapes their grasp; 
it is always being reinvented and inflected by its inhabitants.106 For both 
a large city and a rich language, this openness, plasticity, and diversity 
allow them to serve an endless variety of purposes—many of which 
have yet to be conceived.
The analogy can be pressed further. Like planned cities, planned 
languages are indeed possible. Esperanto is one example; technical 
and scientific languages are another, and they are quite precise and 
powerful means of expression within the limited purposes for which 
they were designed. But language per se is not for only one or two pur­
poses. It is a general tool that can be bent to countless ends by virtue of

144 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
its adaptability and flexibility. The very history of an inherited lan­
guage helps to provide the range of associations and meanings that 
sustain its plasticity. In much the same way, one could plan a city from 
zero. But since no individual or committee could ever completely en­
compass the purposes and lifeways, both present and future, that ani­
mate its residents, it would necessarily be a thin and pale version of a 
complex city with its own history. It will be a Brasilia, Saint Petersburg, 
or Chandigarh rather than a Rio de Janeiro, Moscow, or Calcutta. Only 
time and the work of millions of its residents can turn these thin cities 
into thick cities. The grave shortcoming of a planned city is that it not 
only fails to respect the autonomous purposes and subjectivity of those 
who live in it but also fails to allow sufficiently for the contingency of 
the interaction between its inhabitants and what that produces.
Jacobs has a kind of informed respect for the novel forms of social 
order that emerge in many city neighborhoods. This respect is re­
flected in her attention to the mundane but meaningful human con­
nections in a functioning neighborhood. While recognizing that no 
urban neighborhood can ever be, or should be, static, she stresses the 
minimal degree of continuity, social networks, and “street-terms" ac­
quaintanceship required to knit together an urban locality. “If self- 
government in the place is to work,” she muses, “underlying any float 
of population must be a continuity of people who have forged neigh­
borhood networks. These networks are a city’s irreplaceable social 
capital. Whenever the capital is lost, from whatever cause, the [social] 
income from it disappears, never to return until and unless new capi­
tal is slowly and chancily accumulated.”107 It follows from this vantage 
point that even in the case of slums, Jacobs was implacably opposed to 
the wholesale slum-clearance projects that were so much in vogue 
when she was writing. The slum might not have much social capital, 
but what it did have was something to build on, not destroy.108 What 
keeps Jacobs from becoming a Burkean conservative, celebrating what­
ever history has thrown up, is her emphasis on change, renewal, and 
invention. To try to arrest this change (although one might try to mod­
estly influence it) would be not only unwise but futile.
Strong neighborhoods, like strong cities, are the product of com­
plex processes that cannot be replicated from above. Jacobs quotes 
with approval Stanley Tankel, a planner who made the rarely heard 
case against large-scale slum clearance in these terms: “The next step 
will require great humility, since we are now so prone to confuse great 
building projects with great social achievements. We will have to admit 
that it is beyond the scope of anyone’s imagination to create a commu­
nity. We must learn to cherish the communities we have, they are hard

The High-M odem ist City 145
to come by. 'Fix the buildings, but leave the people.’ ‘No relocation out­
side the neighborhood.’ These must be the slogans if public housing is 
to be popular."109 In fact, the political logic of Jacobs’s case is that while 
the planner cannot create a functioning community, a functioning 
community can, within limits, improve its own condition. Standing the 
planning logic on its head, she explains how a reasonably strong neigh­
borhood can, in a democratic setting, fight to create and maintain good 
schools, useful parks, vital urban services, and decent housing.
Jane Jacobs was writing against the major figures still dominating 
the urban planning landscape of her day: Ebenezer Howard and Le 
Corbusier. To some of her critics she has seemed a rather conservative 
figure, extolling the virtues of community in poor neighborhoods that 
many were anxious to leave and ignoring the degree to which the city 
was already being “planned," not by popular initiative or by the state 
but by developers and financiers with political connections. There is 
some justice to these points of view. For our purposes, however, there 
is little doubt that she has put her finger on the central flaws of hubris 
in high-modernist urban planning. The first flaw is the presumption 
that planners can safely make most of the predictions about the future 
that their schemes require. We know enough by now to be exception­
ally skeptical about forecasting from current trends in fertility rates, 
urban migration, or the structure of employment and income. Such 
predictions have often been wildly wrong. As for wars, oil embargoes, 
weather, consumer tastes, and political eruptions, our capacity for pre­
diction is practically nil. Second, thanks in part to Jacobs, we now 
know more about what constitutes a satisfactory neighborhood for the 
people who live in it, but we still know precious little about how such 
communities can be fostered and maintained. Working from formulas 
about density, green space, and transportation may produce narrowly 
efficient outcomes, but it is unlikely to result in a desirable place to 
live. Brasilia and Chandigarh, at a minimum, demonstrate this.
It is not a coincidence that many of the high-modernist cities actu­
ally built—Brasilia, Canberra, Saint Petersburg, Islamabad, Chandi­
garh, Abuja, Dodoma, Ciudad Guayana110—have been administrative 
capitals. Here at the center of state power, in a completely new setting, 
with a population consisting largely of state employees who have to re­
side there, the state can virtually stipulate the success of its planning 
grid. The fact that the business of the city is state administration al­
ready vastly simplifies the task of planning. Authorities do not have to 
contend, as did Haussmann, with preexisting commercial and cultural 
centers. And because the authorities control the instruments of zoning, 
employment, housing, wage levels, and physical layout, they can bend

146 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
the environment to the city. These urban planners backed by state 
power are rather like tailors who are not only free to invent whatever 
suit of clothes they wish but also free to trim the customer so that he 
fits the measure.
Urban planners who reject “taxidermy,” Jacobs claims, must never­
theless invent a kind of planning that encourages novel initiatives and 
contingencies, foreclosing as few options as possible, and that fosters 
the circulation and contact out of which such initiatives arise. To illus­
trate the diversity of urban life, Jacobs lists more than a dozen uses 
which have been served over the years by the center for the arts in 
Louisville: stable, school, theater, bar, athletic club, blacksmith’s forge, 
factory, warehouse, artists’ studio. She then asks, rhetorically, “Who 
could anticipate or provide for such a succession of hopes and ser­
vices?” Her answer is simple: “Only an unimaginative man would think 
he could; only an arrogant man would want to.”111

5 The Revolutionary Party: 
A Plan and a Diagnosis
Feeling, Comrade C, is a mass element, but thought is organization. Comrade 
Lenin said that organization is the highest of all of us.
—Andrei Platonov, Chevengur
Communism was modernity’s most devout, vigorous and gallant champion. . . . 
It was under communist . . . auspices that the audacious dream of modernity, 
freed from obstacles by the merciless and omnipotent state, was pushed to its 
radical limits: grand designs, unlimited social engineering, huge and bulky 
technology, total transformation of nature.
— Zygmunt Bauman, "Living Without an Alternative”
Lenin’s design for the construction of the revolution was in many 
ways comparable to Le Corbusier’s design for the construction of the 
modern city. Both were complex endeavors that had to be entrusted to 
the professionalism and scientific insight of a trained cadre with full 
power to see the plan through. And just as Le Corbusier and Lenin 
shared a broadly comparable high modernism, so Jane Jacobs’s per­
spective was shared by Rosa Luxemburg and Aleksandra Kollontay, 
who opposed Lenin’s politics. Jacobs doubted both the possibility and 
the desirability of the centrally planned city, and Luxemburg and Kol­
lontay doubted the possibility and desirability of a revolution planned 
from above by the vanguard party.
Lenin: Architect and Engineer of Revolution
Lenin, if we judge him from his major writings, was a convinced high 
modernist. The broad lines of his thought were quite consistent; 
whether he was writing about revolution, industrial planning, agricul­
tural organization, or administration, he focused on a unitary scien­
tific answer that was known to a trained intelligentsia and that ought 
to be followed. The Lenin of practice was, of course, something else 
again. His capacity for sensing the popular mood in fashioning Bol­
shevik propaganda, for beating a tactical retreat when it seemed pru­
dent, and for striking boldly to seize the advantage was more relevant 
than his high modernism to his success as a revolutionary. It is Lenin 
as a high modernist, however, with whom we are primarily concerned.
147

148 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
The major text for the elaboration of Lenin’s high-modernist views 
of revolution is What Is to Be Done?1 High modernism was integral to 
the central purpose of Lenin’s argument: to convince the Russian left 
that only a small, selected, centralized, professional cadre of revolu­
tionaries could bring about a revolution in Russia. Written in 1903, well 
before the "dress rehearsal” revolution of 1905, this view was never en­
tirely abandoned, even under totally different circumstances in 1917 
between the February overthrow of the czar and the Bolshevik seizure 
of power in October, when he wrote State and Revolution. I shall com­
pare Lenin’s view in these two works and in his writings on agriculture 
with Rosa Luxemburg’s "Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions," writ­
ten in reply to What Is to Be Done? and with the writings of Aleksandra 
Kollontay, an important figure in what was called the Workers’ Oppo­
sition, a group within the Bolshevik party who criticized many of 
Lenin's policies after the revolution.
The Lenin of What Is to Be Done?
Lenin’s choice of the title What Is to Be Done? has great significance. 
It was also the title of an exceptionally popular novel by Nicholas 
Chernyshevsky, in which a "new man” of the intelligentsia set about 
destroying the old order and then ruling autocratically to establish a 
social utopia. It had been the favorite book of Lenin’s adored older 
brother, Alexander, who had been executed in 1887 for a plot against 
the czar’s life. Even after Lenin became a Marxist, it was still his favor­
ite book: "I became acquainted with the works of Marx, Engels, and 
Plekhanov, but it was only Chernyshevsky who had an overwhelming 
influence on me.”2 The idea that superior knowledge, authoritarian in­
struction, and social design could transform society pervades both 
works.
Certain metaphors suffuse Lenin’s analysis of the link between the 
vanguard party and the workers in What Is to Be Done? They set the 
tone of the work and limit what can be said within its confines. These 
metaphors center on the classroom and the barracks.3 The party and 
its local agitators and propagandists function as schoolteachers capa­
ble of raising merely economic complaints to the level of revolutionary 
political demands, or they function as officers in a revolutionary army 
who deploy their troops to best advantage. In their roles as teachers, 
the vanguard party and its newspaper develop a pedagogical style that 
is decidedly authoritarian. The party analyzes the many and varied 
popular grievances and, at the right time, “dictate[s] a positive pro­
gramme of action" that will contribute to a “universal political strug­

The Revolutionary Patty 149
gle.”4 In fact, Lenin complained, the party’s activists have been woefully 
inadequate. It is not enough to call the movement a "vanguard,” he in­
sisted. "We must act in such a way that all other units of the army shall 
see us, and be obliged to admit that we are the vanguard.” The goal of 
the vanguard party is to train willing but "backward” proletarians in 
revolutionary politics so that they may be inducted into an army that 
will "collect and utilize every grain of even rudimentary protest,” there­
by creating a disciplined revolutionary army.5
In keeping with these metaphors, the “masses” in general and the 
working class in particular become "the body,” while the vanguard 
party is “the brain.” The party is to the working class as intelligence is to 
brute force, deliberation to confusion, a manager to a worker, a teacher 
to a student, an administrator to a subordinate, a professional to an am­
ateur, an army to a mob, or a scientist to a layman. A brief explanation 
of how these metaphors work will help situate Lenin’s own version of 
high-modern, albeit revolutionary, politics.
Lenin realized, of course, that the revolutionary project depended 
on popular militancy and spontaneous protest. The problem of relying 
solely on popular action from below, however, was that such action 
was scattered and sporadic, making easy pickings for the czarist po­
lice. If we think of popular action as incendiary political material, the 
role of the vanguard party was to concentrate and aim this explosive 
charge so that its detonation could bring down the regime. The van­
guard party “merged the elemental destructive force of a crowd with 
the conscious destructive force of the organization of revolutionists.”6 
It was the thinking organ of the revolution, ensuring that the otherwise 
diffuse brute force of the masses was effectively used.
The logic of this perspective led Lenin to think of the vanguard 
party as a would-be general staff to a vast but undisciplined army of 
raw recruits already in combat. The more unruly the army, the greater 
the need for a small, cohesive general staff. To his competitors on the 
left (the Economists), who argued that ten wise men could easily be 
grabbed by the police, whereas one hundred fools (the revolutionary 
crowd) could not be stopped, Lenin replied, "Without the ‘dozen’ of 
tried and talented leaders (and talented men are not born by hun­
dreds), professionally trained, schooled by long experience and work­
ing in perfect harmony, no class in modern society is capable of con­
ducting a determined struggle.”7
Lenin’s analogies to military organization were not just colorful 
figures of speech; they were how he thought about most aspects of 
party organization. He wrote of "tactics” and “strategy” in a straight­
forwardly military style. Only a general staff is capable of deploying its

150 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
revolutionary forces in accord with an overall battle plan. Only a gen­
eral staff can see the entire battlefield and anticipate enemy move­
ments. Only a general staff would have the “flexibility ... to adapt itself 
immediately to the most diverse and rapidly changing conditions of 
struggle,” the “ability to renounce an open fight against overwhelming 
and concentrated forces, and yet capable of taking advantage of the 
awkwardness and immobility of the enemy and of attacking at a time 
and a place where he least expects attack.”8 The earlier failures of social 
democrat revolutionaries could, he insisted, be attributed precisely to 
the absence of organization, planning, and coordination that a general 
staff could provide. These "young warriors,” who had “marched to bat­
tle with astonishingly primitive equipment and training,” were “like 
peasants from the plough, snatching up a club.” Their "immediate and 
complete defeat” was a foregone conclusion “because these open con­
flicts were not the result of a systematic and carefully thought-out and 
gradually prepared plan for a prolonged and stubborn struggle.”9
Part of the necessity for strict discipline arose from the fact that 
the enemies of revolution were better armed and more sophisticated. 
This explains why “freedom of criticism” among the revolutionary 
forces could only favor opportunists and the ascendancy of bourgeois 
values. Once again Lenin seized on a military analogy to drive the 
point home: “We are marching in a compact group along a precipi­
tous and difficult path, firmly holding each other by the hand. We are 
surrounded on all sides by enemies, and are under their almost con­
stant fire. We have combined voluntarily, especially for the purpose of 
fighting the enemy and not to retreat into the adjacent marsh,” that is, 
freedom of criticism.10
The relationship envisioned by Lenin between the vanguard party 
and its rank and file is perhaps best exemplified by the terms "mass” or 
“masses." Although the terms became standard in socialist parlance, 
they are heavy with implications. Nothing better conveys the im­
pression of mere quantity and number without order than the word 
“masses." Once the rank and file are so labeled, it is clear that what 
they chiefly add to the revolutionary process are their weight in num­
bers and the kind of brute force they can represent if firmly directed. 
The impression conveyed is of a huge, formless, milling crowd without 
any cohesion—without a history, without ideas, without a plan of ac­
tion. Lenin was all too aware, of course, that the working class does 
have its own history and values, but this history and these values will 
lead the working class in the wrong direction unless they are replaced 
by the historical analysis and advanced revolutionary theory of sci­
entific socialism.

The Revolutionary Party 151
Thus the vanguard party not only is essential to the tactical cohe­
sion of the masses but also must literally do their thinking for them. 
The party functions as an executive elite whose grasp of history and di­
alectical materialism allows it to devise the correct “war aims” of the 
class struggle. Its authority is based on its scientific intelligence. Lenin 
quoted the “profoundly true and important utterances by Karl Kaut- 
sky," who said that the proletariat cannot aspire to "modern socialist 
consciousness” on its own because it lacks the "profound scientific 
knowledge” required to do so: “The vehicles of science are not the pro­
letariat, but the bourgeois intelligentsia."11
This is the core of Lenin’s case against spontaneity. There are only 
two ideologies: bourgeois and socialist. Given the pervasiveness and 
historical power of bourgeois ideology, the spontaneous development 
of the working class will always lead to the triumph of bourgeois ide­
ology. In Lenin’s memorable formulation, “the working class, exclu­
sively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade-union conscious­
ness."12 Social democratic consciousness, in contrast, must come from 
outside, that is, from the socialist intelligentsia. The vanguard party is 
depicted as conscious, scientific, and socialist in the full sense and is 
contrasted with the masses who are, by extension, unconscious, pre- 
scientific, and in constant danger of absorbing bourgeois values. 
Lenin’s stern admonitions about indiscipline—“to deviate from it [so­
cialist ideology] in the slightest degree means strengthening bourgeois 
ideology”13—leave the impression of a general staff whose tight con­
trol is the only counterweight to a force of conscripts who might at any 
moment disband and wander off.
Another metaphor occasionally replaces those of the army and class­
room in Lenin’s discourse. It is the image of a bureaucratic or indus­
trial enterprise in which only the executives and engineers can see the 
larger purposes of the organization. Lenin appeals to something like a 
division of labor in revolutionary work, where the executive has a mo­
nopoly on the advanced theory without which revolution is impossible. 
Resembling factory owners and engineers who design rational plans 
for production, the vanguard party possesses a scientific grasp of rev­
olutionary theory that makes it uniquely able to guide the entire prole­
tarian struggle for emancipation. It was a bit too early, in 1903, for 
Lenin to refer to the assembly lines of mass production to make his 
point, but he appropriated the next best analogy from the building in­
dustry. “Pray tell me," he proposed. "When a brick layer lays bricks in 
various parts of an enormous structure, the like of which has never 
been seen before, is it a ‘paper’ line that he uses to help him find the 
correct place to place each brick, to indicate to him the ultimate goal

152 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
of the work as a whole, to enable him to use not only every brick but 
even every piece of brick, which, joining with the bricks placed before 
and after it, forms a complete and all embracing line? And are we not 
now passing through a period in our party life, when we have bricks 
and bricklayers, but we lack the guiding line, visible to all, by which to 
guide our movements?"14 What the party has is the blueprint of the en­
tire new structure, which its scientific insight has made possible. The 
role of the workers is to follow that part of the blueprint allotted to 
them in the confidence that the architects of revolution know what 
they are doing.
The analogy to the division of labor in modern capitalist production 
has implications roughly parallel to those of the military metaphor. 
Both, for example, require authoritarian methods and central control. 
Thus Lenin wrote of the party’s need “to distribute the thousand-and- 
one minute functions of their organizational work,” complained of 
"technical defects,” and called for the unification of “all these tiny frac­
tions into one whole." As he concluded, "specialization necessarily pre­
supposes centralization, and in its turn imperatively calls for it.”15
It is surely a great paradox of What Is to Be Done? that Lenin takes 
a subject—promoting revolution—that is inseparable from popular 
anger, violence, and the determination of new political ends and trans­
forms it into a discourse on technical specialization, hierarchy, and the 
efficient and predictable organization of means. Politics miraculously 
disappears from within the revolutionary ranks and is left to the elite 
of the vanguard party, much as industrial engineers might discuss, 
among themselves, how to lay out a factory floor. The vanguard party 
is a machine to produce a revolution. There is no need for politics 
within the party inasmuch as the science and rationality of the social­
ist intelligentsia require instead a technically necessary subordination; 
the party’s judgments are not subjective and value laden but objective 
and logically inevitable.
Lenin extends this line of reasoning to his characterization of the 
revolutionary elite. They are not mere revolutionaries; they are “pro­
fessional revolutionists.” He insists on the full meaning of the term 
“professional”: someone who is an experienced, full-time, trained rev­
olutionist. This small, secret, disciplined, professional cadre is specifi­
cally contrasted to workers' organizations, which are large, public, 
and established according to trades. The two are never to be confused. 
Thus, to the analogy of the factory manager vis-a-vis the worker, Lenin 
adds that of the professional vis-a-vis the apprentice or amateur. It is 
assumed that those in the second category will defer to those in the 
first on the basis of their greater technical knowledge and experience.

The Revolutionary Party 153
Just as Le Corbusier imagines that the public will acquiesce to the 
knowledge and calculations of the master architect, so Lenin is 
confident that a sensible worker will want to place himself under the 
authority of professional revolutionists.
Let us return, finally, to the metaphor of the schoolroom where the 
vanguard party is the teacher and the masses are the pupils. Lenin is 
hardly unique in his use of this analogy. His was a pedagogical age in 
general, and reading circles for workers and schools for socialist mili­
tants were common, especially in Germany, where Rosa Luxemburg 
taught at the Socialist Party's school in Berlin. Although the imagery of 
the schoolroom may have been commonplace, Lenin's particular use 
of it to characterize socialist training bears emphasis. A tremendous 
amount of Lenin’s thought and prose was devoted to “socialist instruc­
tion” broadly understood. He was preoccupied with how militants 
might be trained, the role of the party newspaper, Iskra, and the con­
tent of speeches, manifestos, and slogans. But Lenin’s socialist school­
room is fraught with danger. His constant fear is that the teachers will 
lose control of the students and be swamped by the pervasive influence 
of narrow economic demands, legislative reforms, and purely local 
concerns. The classroom metaphor is inherently hierarchical, but 
Lenin’s main worry is that his socialist teachers will succumb and "go 
native.” Lurking near the surface of Lenin’s writings is a powerful cul­
tural judgment, which is evident here in a representative passage.
Our very first and most imperative duty is to help to train working-class 
revolutionists who will be on the same level in regard to party activity as 
intellectual revolutionists (we emphasize the words “in regard to party 
activity" because although it is necessary, it is not so easy and not so 
imperative to bring workers up to the level of intellectuals in other re­
spects). Therefore attention must be devoted principally to the task of 
raising the workers to the level of revolutionists, but without, in doing 
so, necessarily degrading ourselves to the level of the "labor masses" as 
the Economists wish to do, or necessarily to the level of the average 
worker, as [the newspaper] Svoboda desires to do.16
The dilemma for the party is how to train revolutionists who will be 
close to the workers (and perhaps of worker backgrounds themselves) 
but who will not be absorbed, contaminated, and weakened by the po­
litical and cultural backwardness of the workers. Some of Lenin's wor­
ries have to do with his Conviction at the time that the Russian working 
class and most of its socialist intelligentsia were woefully backward 
compared to their German counterparts. In What Is to Be Done? Ger­
man social democracy and the German trade-union movement func­
tion repeatedly as the model, in terms of which Russia is found want­

154 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
ing. But the principle behind Lenin’s concerns transcends national dif­
ferences; it stems from the sharply delineated, functional roles that the 
party and the working class each played. Class consciousness, in the 
final analysis, is an objective truth carried solely by the ideologically 
enlightened who direct the vanguard party.17
However contrary to Newton’s first law of motion, the central idea 
informing Lenin’s logic is that the party will be an "unmoved mover.” 
An intimate association with the working class is absolutely necessary 
to the task of propaganda and agitation, but it must be a closeness that 
will never threaten the hierarchy of knowledge, influence, and power. 
If professional revolutionists are to be effective leaders, they require 
the kind of detailed understanding and knowledge of the workers that 
successful teachers need of their students, military officers need of 
their troops, or production managers need of their workforce. It is 
knowledge for the purpose of achieving goals set by an elite. The rela­
tionship depicted is so asymmetrical that one is even tempted to com­
pare it to the relation that a craftsman has to his raw material. A wood­
worker or a mason must know his inert materials well in order to 
realize his designs. In Lenin’s case, the relative inertness of the mate­
rial being shaped is implied by the global imagery of “the masses” or 
“the proletariat.” Once these flattened terms are used, it becomes diffi­
cult to examine the enormous differences in history, political experi­
ence, organizational skills, and ideology (not to mention religion, eth­
nicity, and language) that exist within the working class.
There is still another contingent and Russia-centered reason why 
Lenin might have insisted on a small, disciplined, and secret cadre of 
revolutionists. They were, after all, operating in an autocracy, under 
the noses of the czarist secret police. After commenting favorably on 
the openness of competition for office within the German Social Demo­
cratic Party, where, owing to certain political and press freedoms, all 
candidates’ public records were known, he exclaimed, "Try to put this 
picture in the frame of our autocracy!”18 Where a revolutionary must 
conceal his identity, under pain of arrest, such openly democratic 
methods were impossible. The revolutionaries in Russia must, Lenin 
argued, adapt their tactics to those of their enemy—the political po­
lice. If this were the only argument Lenin made for secrecy and iron 
discipline, then it could be treated as an incidental tactical conces­
sion to local conditions. But it was not. The secrecy of the party was 
designed to prevent contamination from below as much as arrest and 
exile. There is no other way to interpret passages like the following: "If 
such an organization [a secret body of ‘tried’ revolutionists] existed on 
a firm theoretical basis, and possessed a Social-Democratic journal.

The Revolutionary Party 155
we would have no reason to fear that the movement will be diverted from 
its path by the numerous ‘outside’ elements that will be attracted to it!’19
How would the movement be diverted? Lenin had chiefly two po­
tential dangers in mind. The first was the danger of spontaneity, which 
makes the tactical coordination of revolutionary pressure impossible. 
The second was, of course, the virtually inevitable ideological diversion 
of the working class toward trade unionism and legislative reform. 
Since authentic, revolutionary class consciousness could never de­
velop autonomously within the working class, it followed that the ac­
tual political outlook of workers was always a threat to the vanguard 
party.
It is perhaps for these reasons that when Lenin wrote of propa­
ganda and agitation, it was a one-way transmission of information and 
ideas that he had in mind. His unrelenting emphasis on a party news­
paper fit nicely into this context. A newspaper, even more than "agita­
tion” before heckling or sullen crowds, creates a decidedly one-sided 
relationship.20 The organ is a splendid way to diffuse instructions, ex­
plain the party line, and rally the troops. Like its successor, the radio, 
the newspaper is a medium better suited to sending messages than to 
receiving them.
On many occasions, Lenin and his colleagues took the threat of 
contamination more literally and spoke in metaphors drawn from the 
science of hygiene and the germ theory of disease. Thus it became pos­
sible to talk of "petit-bourgeois bacilli” and “infection.”21 The shift in 
imagery was not far-fetched, for Lenin did want to keep the party in an 
environment that was as sterile and germ-free as possible lest the party 
contract one of the many diseases lurking outside.22
Lenin’s general treatment of the working class in What Is to Be Done? 
is strongly reminiscent of Marx’s famous depiction of the smallholding 
French peasantry as a “sack of potatoes”—just so many “homologous” 
units lacking any overall structure or cohesion. This premise shapes in 
turn the role of the vanguard party. The trick is to change a formless, 
sporadic, fragmented, and localized anger among the masses into an 
organized force with purpose and direction. Just as the force of a pow­
erful magnet aligns a chaos of thousands of iron filings, so the party's 
leadership is expected to turn a crowd into a political army. At times it 
is hard to know what the masses actually bring to the revolutionary 
project beyond the raw material they represent. Lenin’s catalogue of 
the functional roles that the party assumes is quite comprehensive: 
“We must go among all classes of people as theoreticians, as propagan­
dists, as agitators, and as organizers!’22. The inference to be drawn from 
this list is that the revolutionists are to provide knowledge, opinion, the

156 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
urge and direction to action, and organizational structure. Given this 
unidirectional flow of intellectual, social, and cultural services from 
above, it is hard to imagine what role the masses could have had be­
yond being mustered up.
Lenin conceived of a division of revolutionary labor that resembled 
what came to be the expectation (if rarely the practice) of Communist 
parties both in and out of power. The central committee made all the 
crucial decisions about tactics and strategy, while the mass organiza­
tions and trade unions affiliated with the party served as “transmission 
belts" for instructions. If we consider the vanguard party, as Lenin did, 
to be a machine for bringing about the revolution, then we see that the 
vanguard party’s relation to the working class is not much different 
from a capitalist entrepreneur’s relation to the working class. The 
working class is necessary to production; its members must be trained 
and instructed, and the efficient organization of their work must be 
left to professional specialists. The ends of the revolutionist and the 
capitalist are, of course, utterly different, but the problem of means 
that confronts each is similar and is similarly resolved. The problem 
of the factory manager is how to deploy so many factory “hands” (in­
terchangeable units all) for the purpose of efficient production. The 
problem of the scientific socialist party is how to efficiently deploy the 
masses in order to hasten the revolution. Such organizational logic 
seems more appropriate to factory production, which involves steady 
routines, known technologies, and daily wages, than to the decidedly 
nonroutine, high-stakes endeavor of revolution. Nevertheless, it was 
the model of organization that structured much of Lenin's argument.
To grasp the picture of Lenin’s utopian hopes for the vanguard 
party, one might relate it to the “mass exercises” that were enormously 
popular among both reactionary (mobilizing) and left-wing move­
ments of the turn of the century. Set in huge stadiums or on parade 
grounds, they involved thousands of young men and women trained to 
move in unison. The more complicated their maneuvers, which were 
often set to rhythmic music, the more impressive the spectacle. In 
1891, at the Second National Congress of Sokol, a Czech gymnastic 
and physical fitness organization promoting nationalism, no fewer 
than seventeen thousand Czechs gave an elaborate display of coordi­
nated movement.24 The whole idea of mass exercises was to create a 
striking exhibition of order, training, and discipline from above, one 
that would awe participants and spectators alike with its display of dis­
ciplined power. Such spectacles assumed and required a single cen­
tralized authority, which planned and executed the display.25 It is little 
wonder that the new mass-mobilization parties of all stripes should

The Revolutionary Party 157
have found public exhibitions of this kind compatible with their orga­
nizational ideology. Lenin was far too realistic to imagine that the 
Russian social democrats would ever resemble anything this coherent 
and disciplined. Nevertheless, it was clearly the model of centralized 
coordination to which he aspired and thus the yardstick by which he 
measured his achievements.
Lenin and Le Corbusier, notwithstanding the great disparity in 
their training and purpose, shared some basic elements of the high- 
modernist outlook. While the scientific pretensions of each may seem 
implausible to us, they both believed in the existence of a master sci­
ence that served as the claim to authority of a small planning elite. Le 
Corbusier believed that the scientific truths of modern construction 
and efficient design entitled him to replace the discordant, chaotic his­
torical deposit of urbanism with a utopian city. Lenin believed that the 
science of dialectical materialism gave the party unique insight into 
the revolutionary process and entitled it to claim the leadership of an 
otherwise disorganized and ideologically misled working class. Both 
were convinced that their scientific knowledge provided correct, uni­
tary answers to how cities should be designed and how revolutions 
might be brought to fruition. Their confidence in their method meant 
that neither the science of designing cities nor that of designing revo­
lutions had much to learn from the existing practices and values of 
their intended beneficiaries. On the contrary, each looked forward to 
refashioning the human material that came under their purview. Both, 
of course, had the improvement of the human condition as their ulti­
mate goal, and both attempted to attain it with methods that were pro­
foundly hierarchical and authoritarian. In the writings of both men, 
metaphors of the military and the machine pervaded; for Le Corbusier, 
the house and city were machines for living, and for Lenin, the van­
guard party was a machine for revolution. Appeals to centralized 
forms of bureaucratic coordination—especially the factory and the pa­
rade ground—creep naturally into their prose.26 They were, to be sure, 
among the most far-reaching and grandiose figures of high mod­
ernism, but they were at the same time representative.
Theory and Practice: The Revolutions of 1917
A detailed account of the two Russian Revolutions of 1917 (Feb­
ruary and, above all, October) would take us too far afield. What is 
possible, however, is to sketch briefly some of the principal ways in 
which the actual revolutionary process resembled little the organiza­
tional doctrines advocated in What Is to Be Done? The high-modernist

158 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
scheme for revolution was no more borne out in practice than were 
high-modernist plans for Brasilia and Chandigarh borne out in practice.
The most discordant fact about the Russian Revolution was that it 
was not to any significant degree brought about by the vanguard party, 
the Bolsheviks. What Lenin did succeed brilliantly in doing was in cap­
turing the revolution once it was an accomplished fact. As Hannah 
Arendt succinctly put it, “The Bolsheviks found power lying in the 
street, and picked it up.”27 E. H. Carr, who wrote one of the earliest and 
most complete studies of the revolutionary period, concluded that "the 
contribution of Lenin and the Bolsheviks to the overthrow of czarism 
was negligible” and that indeed "Bolshevism succeeded to an empty 
throne." Nor was Lenin the prescient commander in chief who could 
see the strategic situation clearly. In January 1917, a month before the 
February Revolution, he wrote disconsolately, “We of the older gener­
ation may not see the decisive battles of the coming revolution.”28
The Bolsheviks, on the eve of the revolution, did have a modest 
working-class base, especially among the unskilled in Moscow and 
Saint Petersburg, but Social Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, anarchists, 
and unaffiliated workers predominated. What is more, the workers 
who were affiliated with the Bolsheviks were rarely amenable to any­
thing like the hierarchical control envisioned in What Is to Be Done?
Lenin’s aspiration for revolutionary practice was that the Bolshe­
viks would come to form a tight, disciplined, command-and-control 
structure. Nothing could have been further from actual experience. In 
all but one crucial respect, the revolution of 1917 was very much like 
the miscarried revolution of 1905. Workers in revolt took over the fac­
tories and seized municipal power, while in the countryside, the peas­
antry began seizing land and attacking the gentry and tax officials. 
Neither of these activities, either in 1905 or in 1917, was brought about 
by the Bolsheviks or any other revolutionary vanguard. The workers, 
who spontaneously formed soviets to run each factory in 1917, disre­
garded at will the instructions of their own Executive Committee of 
Soviets, not to mention the Bolsheviks. For their part, the peasantry 
took the opportunity created by a political vacuum at the center to re­
store communal control over land and enact their local concept of jus­
tice. Most of the peasants had not even heard of the Bolsheviks, let 
alone presumed to act on their orders.
What must forcefully strike any reader of accounts of the detailed 
events of late October 1917 is the utter confusion and localized spon­
taneity that prevailed.29 The very idea of centralized coordination in 
this political environment was implausible. In the course of battle, as 
military historians and astute observers have always understood, the

The Revolutionary Party 159
command structure typically falters. Generals lose contact with their 
troops and are unable to follow the rapidly changing tides of battle; the 
commands the generals do issue are likely to be irrelevant by the time 
they reach the battlefield.30 In Lenin's case, the command-and-control 
structure could hardly falter, as it had never existed in the first place. 
Ironically, Lenin himself was out of step with the party’s leadership 
(many of whom were behind bars) and was criticized on the eve of the 
Revolution as a reckless putschist.
The new element in 1917 that made a revolutionary outcome far 
more likely than it had been in 1905 was World War I—specifically, 
the military collapse of the Russian offensive in Austria. Soldiers by 
the thousands threw down their weapons to return to the cities or to 
seize land in the countryside. The provisional government of Alek­
sandr Kerensky had little or nothing in the way of coercive resources 
to deploy in its defense. It is in this sense that the Bolsheviks "suc­
ceeded to an empty throne,” although Lenin's small military uprising 
of October 24 proved a crucial stroke. What followed in the years until 
1921 is best described as the reconquest, now by the fledgling Bolshe­
vik state, of Russia. The reconquest was not simply a civil war against 
the “Whites”; it was also a war against the autonomous forces that had 
seized local power in the revolution.31 It involved, first and foremost, 
a long struggle to destroy the independent power of the soviets and to 
impose piecework, labor control, and the abrogation of the right to 
strike on the workers. In the countryside, the Bolshevik state gradually 
imposed political control (in place of communal power), grain deliver­
ies, and, eventually, collectivization on the peasantry.32 The process of 
Bolshevik state making entailed a great deal of violence against its 
erstwhile beneficiaries, as the uprisings of Kronstadt, Tambov, and the 
Maknovchina in the Ukraine attested.
The model for the vanguard party depicted so sharply in What Is to 
Be Done? is an impressive example of executive command and control. 
Applied to the actual revolutionary process, however, it is a pipe 
dream, bearing hardly any relation to the facts. Where the model is de­
scriptively accurate, alas, is in the exercise of state authority after the 
revolutionary seizure of power. As it turned out, the structure of power 
that Lenin hoped would characterize the making of the revolution was 
more closely approximated by the long-lived "dictatorship of the pro­
letariat.” And in this case, of course, the workers and peasants did not 
consent to the structure of power; the state imposed it as a matter of 
imperative coordination.
Since the revolutionary victors get to write the official history of 
how they achieved power, it matters little, in one sense, how snugly

160 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
their account fits the historical facts. Because most citizens come to 
believe the neatly packaged account, whether or not it is accurate, it 
further enhances their confidence in the clairvoyance, determination, 
and power of their revolutionary leaders. The standard “just so” story 
of the revolutionary process is perhaps the ultimate state simpli­
fication. It serves a variety of political and aesthetic purposes, which in 
turn help to account for the form it assumes. Surely, in the first in­
stance, the inheritors of the revolutionary state have a vested interest 
in representing themselves as the prime animators of the historical out­
come. Such an account emphasizes their indispensable role as leaders 
and missionaries, and in the case of Lenin, it accorded best with the 
stated organizational ideology of the Bolsheviks. The authorized histo­
ries of revolutions, as Milovan Djilas points out, “describe the revolu­
tion as if it were the fruit of the previously planned action of its lead­
ers.”33 No cynicism or mendacity need be involved. It is perfectly 
natural for leaders and generals to exaggerate their influence on 
events; that is the way the world looks from where they sit, and it is 
rarely in the interest of their subordinates to contradict their picture.
After seizing state power, the victors have a powerful interest in 
moving the revolution out of the streets and into the museums and 
schoolbooks as quickly as possible, lest the people decide to repeat the 
experience.34 A schematic account highlighting the decisiveness of a 
handful of leaders reinforces their legitimacy; its emphasis on cohe­
sion, uniformity, and central purpose makes it seem inevitable and 
therefore, it is to be hoped, permanent. The slighting of autonomous 
popular action serves the additional purpose of implying that the 
working class is incapable of acting on its own without outside leader­
ship.35 The account is likely to take the opportunity to identify enemies 
outside and inside the revolution, singling out appropriate targets of 
hatred and suppression.
The standard account promoted by revolutionary elites is but­
tressed by the way in which the historical process itself “naturalizes” 
the world, erasing evidence of its contingency. Those who fought in 
“The Russian Revolution” discovered this fact about themselves only 
later, when the revolution was an accomplished fact. In the same way, 
none of the historical participants in, say, World War I or the Battle of 
the Bulge, not to mention the Reformation or the Renaissance, knew at 
the time that they were participating in anything that could be so sum­
marily described. And because things do turn out in a certain way after 
all, with certain patterns or causes that are clear in retrospect, it is not 
surprising that the outcome should sometimes seem inevitable. Every­
one forgets that it might all have turned out quite differently.36 In that

The Revolutionary Party 161
forgetting, another step in naturalizing the revolutionary triumph has 
been taken.37
When victors such as Lenin get to impose their theories of revolu­
tion, not so much on the revolutionary events themselves, but on the 
postrevolutionary official story, the narrative typically stresses the 
agency, purpose, and genius of the revolutionary leadership and mini­
mizes contingency.38 The final irony, then, was that the official story of 
the Bolshevik Revolution was made, for more than sixty years, to con­
form closely to the utopian directions outlined in What Is to Be Done?
The Lenin of State and Revolution
The later Lenin of State and Revolution is often juxtaposed to the 
Lenin of What Is to Be Done? to demonstrate a substantial shift in his 
view of the relationship between the vanguard party and the masses. 
Without a doubt, much of Lenin’s tone in the pamphlet, written at 
breakneck speed in August and September of 1917—after the Febru­
ary Revolution and just before the October Revolution—is difficult to 
square with the text of 1903. There were important tactical reasons 
why, in 1917, Lenin might have wanted to encourage as much auton­
omous popular revolutionary action as possible. He and other Bolshe­
viks were concerned that many workers, now masters of their facto­
ries, and many Russian urbanites would lose their revolutionary ardor, 
allowing Kerensky’s provisional government to gain control and block 
the Bolsheviks. For Lenin’s revolutionaries, everything depended on 
destabilizing the Kerensky regime, even if the crowds were not at all 
under Bolshevik discipline. No wonder that, even in early November, 
before the Bolsheviks had consolidated power, Lenin sounded very 
much like the anarchists: “Socialism is not created by orders from 
above. State bureaucratic automatism is alien to its spirit; socialism is 
alive, creative-—the creation of the popular masses themselves.’’39
While State and Revolution has an egalitarian and utopian tone that 
echoes Marx's picture of Communism, what is striking for our purpose 
is the degree to which Lenin’s high-modernist convictions still pervade 
the text. First, Lenin leaves no doubt that the application of state coer­
cive power is the only way to build socialism. He openly avows the 
need for violence after the seizure of power: “The proletariat needs 
state power, the centralized organization of force, the organization of 
violence, . . . for the purpose of guiding the great mass of the popula­
tion—the peasantry, the petite bourgeoisie, the semi-proletarians—in 
the work of organizing Socialist economy.”40 Once again Marxism pro­
vides the ideas and training that alone create a brain for the working

162 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
masses: "By educating a workers’ party, Marxism educates the van­
guard of the proletariat, capable of assuming power and leading the 
whole people to Socialism, of directing and organizing the new order, 
of being teacher, guide and leader of all the toiling and exploited in the 
task of building up their social life without the bourgeoisie and against 
the bourgeoisie.”41 The assumption is that the social life of the working 
class will be organized either by the bourgeoisie or by the vanguard 
party, but never by members of the working class themselves.
At the same time, Lenin waxes eloquent about a new society in 
which politics will have disappeared and in which virtually anyone 
could be entrusted with the administration of things. The models for 
Lenin’s optimism were precisely the great human machines of his 
time: industrial organizations and large bureaucracies. In his picture, 
the growth of capitalism has built a nonpolitical technostructure that 
rolls along of its accord: “Capitalist culture has created large-scale pro­
duction, factories, railways, the postal service, telephones, etc., and on 
this basis the great majority of functions of the old 'state power’ have 
become so simplified and can be reduced to such simple operations of 
registration, filing, and checking that they would be quite within the 
reach of every literate person, and it will be possible to perform them 
for working men’s wages, which circumstance can (and must) strip 
those functions of every shadow of privilege and every appearance of 
official grandeur.’’42 Lenin conjures up a vision of the perfect technical 
rationality of modern production. Once the “simple operations” ap­
propriate to each niche in the established division of labor are mas­
tered, there is quite literally nothing more to discuss. The revolution 
ousts the bourgeoisie from the bridge of this "ocean liner,” installs the 
vanguard party, and sets a new course, but the jobs of the vast crew are 
unchanged. Lenin’s picture of the technical structure, it should be 
noted, is entirely static. The forms of production are either set or, if 
they do change, the changes cannot require skills of a different order.
The utopian promise of this capitalist-created state of affairs is that 
anyone could take part in the administration of the state. The develop­
ment of capitalism had produced massive, socialized, bureaucratic ap­
paratuses as well as the “training and disciplining of millions of work­
ers.”43 Taken together, these huge, centralized bureaucracies were the 
key to the new world. Lenin had seen them at work in the wartime mo­
bilization of Germany under Rathenau's guiding hand. Science and the 
division of labor had spawned an institutional order of technical ex­
pertise in which politics and quarrels were beside the point. Modern 
production provided the basis of a technically necessary dictatorship. 
"In regard to . . . the importance of individual dictatorial powers,"

The Revolutionary Party 163
Lenin observed, “it must be said that large-scale machine industry— 
which is precisely . . . the foundation of socialism[—] . . . calls for ab­
solute and strict unity of will, which directs the joint labours of hun­
dreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people. . . . But how can 
strict unity of will be ensured? By thousands subordinating their will 
to the will of one. . . . We must learn to combine the public-meeting 
democracy of the working people—turbulent, surging, overflowing its 
banks like a spring flood—with iron discipline while at work, with un­
questioning obedience to the will of a single person, the Soviet leader, 
while at work.”44
In this respect, Lenin joins many of his capitalist contemporaries in 
his enthusiasm for Fordist and Taylorist production technology. What 
was rejected by Western trade unions of the time as a “de-skilling” of 
an artisanal workforce was embraced by Lenin as the key to rational 
state planning.45 There is, for Lenin, a single, objectively correct, effi­
cient answer to all questions of how to rationally design production or 
administration.46
Lenin goes on to imagine, in a Fourierist vein, a vast national syn­
dicate that will virtually run itself. He sees it as a technical net whose 
mesh will confine workers to the appropriate routines by its rationality 
and the discipline of habit. In a chillingly Orwellian passage—a warn­
ing, perhaps, to anarchist or lumpen elements who might resist its 
logic — Lenin indicates how remorseless the system will be: “Escape 
from this national accounting will inevitably become increasingly 
difficult . . . and will probably be accompanied by such swift and se­
vere punishment (for the armed workers are men of practical life, not 
sentimental intellectuals and they will scarcely allow anyone to trifle 
with them), that very soon the necessity of observing the simple, fun­
damental rules of social life in common will have become a fiafiif.’’47
Except for the fact that Lenin’s utopia is more egalitarian and is set 
in the context of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the parallels with 
Le Corbusier’s high modernism are conspicuous. The social order is 
conceived as a vast factory or office—a "smoothly humming machine,” 
as Le Corbusier would have put it, in which "each man would live in 
an ordered relation to the whole.” Neither Lenin nor Le Corbusier 
were unique in sharing this vision, although they were exceptionally 
influential. The parallels serve as a reminder of the extent to which 
much of the socialist left as well as the right were in thrall to the tem­
plate of modem industrial organization. Comparable utopias, a “dream 
of authoritarian, military, egalitarian, bureaucratic socialism which 
was openly admiring of Prussian values,” could be found in Marx, in 
Saint-Simon, and in the science fiction that was widely popular in Rus­

164 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
sia at the time, especially a translation of Edward Bellamy’s Looking 
Backward.48 High modernism was politically polymorphous; it could 
appear in any political disguise, even an anarchist one.
The Lenin of The Agrarian Question
In order to clinch the argument for Lenin's consistently high-mod­
ernist stance, we need only turn to his writings on agriculture, a field 
in which high-modernist views were hotly contested. Most of our evi­
dence can be drawn from a single work, The Agrarian Question, writ­
ten between 1901 and 1907.49
This text was an unremitting condemnation of small-scale family 
farming and a celebration of the gigantic, highly mechanized forms of 
modern agriculture. For Lenin it was not just a question of aesthetics 
of scale but a question of historical inevitability. The difference be­
tween low-technology family farming and large-scale, mechanized 
farming was precisely the difference between the hand-operated looms 
of cottage-industry weavers on one hand and the mechanized looms of 
large textile factories on the other. The first mode of production was 
simply doomed. Lenin’s analogy was borrowed from Marx, who fre­
quently used it as a way of saying that the hand loom gives you feu­
dalism and the power loom gives you capitalism. So suggestive was 
this imagery that Lenin fell back on it in other contexts, claiming, for 
example, in What Is to Be Done? that his opponents, the Economists, 
were using "handicraft methods,” whereas the Bolsheviks operated as 
professional (modern, trained) revolutionaries.
Peasant forms of production—not to mention the peasants them­
selves—were, for Lenin, hopelessly backward. They were mere histor­
ical vestiges that would undoubtedly be swept away, as the cottage- 
industry weavers had been, by the agrarian equivalent of large-scale 
machine industry. “Two decades have passed,” he wrote, “and machin­
ery has driven the small producer from still another of his last refuges, 
as if telling those who have ears to hear and eyes to see that the econ­
omist must always look forward, towards technical progress, or else be 
left behind at once, for he who will not look ahead turns his back on 
history; there is not and there cannot be any middle path.”50 Here and 
in other writings Lenin denounced all the cultivation and social prac­
tices associated with the customary, communal, three-field system of 
land allotments that still pertained in much of Russia. In this case, the 
idea of common property prevented the full development of capital­
ism, which, in turn, was a condition of revolution. “Modern agricul­
tural technique,” he concluded, "demands that all the conditions of the

The Revolutionary Party 165
ancient, conservative, barbarous, ignorant, and pauper methods of 
economy on peasant allotments be transformed. The three-field sys­
tem, the primitive implements, the patriarchical impecuniosity of the 
tiller, the routine methods of stock breeding and crass naive ignorance 
of the conditions and requirements of the market must all be thrown 
overboard.”51
The suitability of a logic drawn from manufacturing and applied to 
agriculture, however, was very much contested. Any number of econ­
omists had carried out detailed studies of labor allocation, production, 
and expenditures for rural producer households. While some were 
perhaps ideologically committed to developing a case for the produc­
tive efficiency of small property, they had a wealth of empirical evi­
dence that had to be confronted.52 They argued that the nature of much 
agricultural production meant that the economic returns of mecha­
nization were minimal when compared to the returns of intensification 
(which focused on manuring, careful breeding, and so on). The returns 
to scale as well, they argued, were minimal or negative beyond the av­
erage acreage of the family farm. Lenin might have taken these argu­
ments less seriously had they all been based on Russian data, where 
the backwardness of rural infrastructure impeded mechanization and 
commercial production. But most of the data came from Germany and 
Austria, comparatively developed countries, where the small farmers 
in question were highly commercialized and responsive to market 
forces.53
Lenin set out to refute the data purporting to show the efficiency or 
competitiveness of family agriculture. He exploited the inconsistencies 
of their empirical evidence and introduced data from other scholars, 
both Russian and German, to make the case against them. Where the 
evidence seemed unassailable, Lenin claimed that the small farmers 
who did survive managed to do so only by starving and overworking 
themselves, their wives and children, their cows, and their plow ani­
mals. Whatever profits the small farms produced were the consequence 
of overwork and underconsumption. Although such patterns of “auto­
exploitation” were not uncommon within peasant families, Lenin’s ev­
idence was not completely convincing. For his (and Marx’s) under­
standing of modes of production, the survival of artisanal handiwork 
and small farming had to be an incidental anachronism. We have since 
learned how efficient and tenacious small-scale production can be, but 
Lenin was in no doubt about what the future held. “This inquiry dem­
onstrates the technical superiority of large-scale production in agri­
culture . . . [and] the overwork and underconsumption of the small 
peasant and his transformation iritixa regular or day-labourer for the

166 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
landlord. . . . The facts prove incontestably that under the capitalist 
system the position of the small peasant in agriculture is in every way 
analogous to that of the handicraftsman in industry.”54
The Agrarian Question also allows us to appreciate an additional 
facet of Lenin’s high modernism: his celebration of the most modern 
technology and, above all, electricity.55 He was famous for claiming 
that "Communism is Soviet Power plus the Electrification of the whole 
countryside.” Electricity had, for him and for most other high mod­
ernists, a nearly mythical appeal. That appeal had to do, I think, with 
the unique qualities of electricity as a form of power. Unlike the mech­
anisms of steam power, direct waterpower, and the internal combus­
tion engine, electricity was silent, precise, and well-nigh invisible. For 
Lenin and many others, electricity was magical. Its great promise for 
the modernization of rural life was that, once transmission lines were 
laid down, power could be delivered over long distances and was in­
stantly available wherever it was needed and in the quantity required. 
Lenin imagined, incorrectly, that it would replace the internal com­
bustion engine in most farm operations. “Machinery powered by elec­
tricity runs more smoothly and precisely, and for that reason it is more 
convenient to use in thrashing, ploughing, milking, cutting fodder.’’56 
By placing power within reach of an entire people, the state could 
eliminate what Marx termed the "idiocy of rural life.”
Electrification was, for Lenin, the key to breaking the pattern of 
petit-bourgeois landholding and hence the only way to extirpate “the 
roots of capitalism” in the countryside, which was “the foundation, the 
basis, of the internal enemy." The enemy "depends on small-scale pro­
duction, and there is only one way of undermining it, namely, to place 
the economy of the country, including agriculture, on a new technical 
basis, that of modern large-scale production. Only electricity provides 
that basis.’’57
Much of the attraction of electricity for Lenin had to do with its per­
fection, its mathematical precision. Man’s work and even the work of 
the steam-driven plow or threshing machine were imperfect; the oper­
ation of an electric machine, in contrast, seemed certain, precise, and 
continuous. Electricity was also, it should be added, centralizing.58 It 
produced a visible network of transmission lines emanating from a 
central power station from which the flow of power was generated, 
distributed, and controlled. The nature of electricity suited Lenin’s 
utopian, centralizing vision perfectly. A map of electric lines from the 
generating plant would look like the spokes of a centralized trans­
portation hub like Paris (see chapter 1), except that the direction of 
flow was one way. Transmission lines blanketed the nation with power

The Revolutionary Party 167
in a way that overcame geography. Electricity equalized access to an 
essential part of the modern world and, not incidentally, brought 
light—both literally and culturally—to the narod (literally, the "dark 
people”).59 Finally, electricity allowed and indeed required planning 
and calculation. The way that electricity worked was very much the 
way that Lenin hoped the power of the socialist state would work.
For Lenin, much the same developmental logic applied to the top 
elite of the vanguard party, the factory, and the farm. Professionals, 
technicians, and engineers would replace amateurs as leaders. Cen­
tralized authority based on science would prevail. As with Le Corbu­
sier, the degree of functional specificity within the organization, the 
degree of order provided by routines and the substitutability of units, 
and the extent of mechanization were all yardsticks of superior effi­
ciency and rationality. In the case of farms and factories, the larger 
and more capital intensive they were, the better. One can already 
glimpse in Lenin’s conception of agriculture the mania for machine- 
tractor stations, the establishment of large state farms and eventual 
collectivization (after Lenin’s death), and even the high-modernist 
spirit that would lead to such vast colonization schemes as Khrush­
chev’s Virgin Lands initiative. At the same time, Lenin’s views have a 
strong Russian lineage. They bear a family resemblance to Peter the 
Great’s project for Saint Petersburg and to the huge model military 
colonies set up by Alexei Arakcheev with the patronage of Alexander I 
in the early nineteenth century—both designed to drag Russia into the 
modern world.
By focusing on Lenin’s high-modernist side, we risk simplifying an 
exceptionally complex thinker whose ideas and actions were rich with 
crosscurrents. During the revolution he was capable of encouraging 
the communal seizure of land, autonomous action, and the desire of 
rural Soviets "to learn from their own mistakes.”60 He decided, at the 
end of a devastating civil war and a grain-procurement crisis, to shelve 
collectivization and encourage small-scale production and petty trade. 
Some have suggested that in his last writings he was more favorably dis­
posed to peasant farming and, it is speculated, would not have forced 
through the brutal collectivization that Stalin ordered in 1929.
Despite the force of these qualifications, there is little reason, I think, 
to believe that Lenin ever abandoned the core of his high-modernist 
convictions.61 This is apparent even in how he phrases his tactical re­
treat following the Kronstadt uprising in 1921 and the continuing 
urban food crisis: "Until we have remolded the peasant, ... until large- 
scale machinery has recast him, we must assure him of the possibility 
of running his economy without restrictions. We must find forms of co­

168 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
existence with the small farmer, . . . since the remaking of the small 
farmer, the reshaping of his whole psychology and all his habits, is a 
task requiring generations."62 If this is a tactical retreat, the acknowl­
edgment that the transformation of the peasants will take generations 
does not exactly sound like the words of a general who expects to re­
sume the offensive soon. On the other hand, Lenin’s faith in mecha­
nization as the key to the transformation of a recalcitrant human na­
ture is undiminished. There is a new modesty—the fruit of effective 
peasant resistance—about how tortuous and long the path to a mod­
ern, socialized agriculture will be, but the vista, once the journey is 
made, looks the same.
Luxemburg: Physician and Midwife to the Revolution
Rosa Luxemburg was more than merely a contemporary of Lenin. She 
was an equally committed revolutionary and Marxist who was assas­
sinated, along with Karl Liebknecht, in Berlin in 1919 at the behest of 
her less revolutionary allies on the left. Although Jane Jacobs was a 
critic of Le Corbusier and high-modernist urban planning in general, 
Le Corbusier had almost certainly never heard of Jacobs before he 
died. Lenin, on the other hand, had met Luxemburg. They wrote largely 
for the same audience and in the knowledge of each other’s opinions, 
and indeed Luxemburg specifically refuted Lenin’s arguments about 
the vanguard party and its relation to the proletariat in a revolutionary 
setting. We will chiefly be concerned with the essays in which Luxem­
burg most directly confronts Lenin’s high-modernist views: “Organiza­
tional Questions of Russian Social Democracy” (1904), “Mass-Strike, 
Party, and Trade Unions” (1906), and her posthumously published "The 
Russian Revolution" (written in 1918, first published in 1921, after the 
Kronstadt uprising).
Luxemburg differed most sharply with Lenin in her relative faith 
in the autonomous creativity of the working class. Her optimism in 
“Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions” is partly due to the fact that it 
was written, unlike What Is to Be Done? after the object lesson of 
worker militancy provided by the 1905 revolution. Luxemburg was es­
pecially struck by the massive response of the Warsaw proletariat to 
the revolution of 1905. On the other hand, “Organizational Questions 
of Russian Social Democracy" was written before the events of 1905 
and in direct reply to What Is to Be Done? This essay was a key text in 
the refusal of the Polish party to place itself under the central disci­
pline of the Russian Social Democratic Party.63
In emphasizing the differences between Lenin and Luxemburg,

The Revolutionary Party 169
we must not overlook the ideological common ground they took for 
granted. They shared, for example, Marxist assumptions about the 
contradictions of capitalist development and the inevitability of revo­
lution. They were both enemies of gradualism and of anything more 
than tactical compromises with nonrevolutionary parties. Even at the 
strategic level, they both argued for the importance of a vanguard party 
on the grounds that the vanguard party was more likely to see the 
whole situation (the “totality"), whereas most workers were more likely 
to see only their local situation and their particular interests. Neither 
Lenin nor Luxemburg had what might be called a sociology of the 
party. That is, it did not occur to them that the intelligentsia of the 
party might have interests that did not coincide with the workers' in­
terests, however defined. They were quick to see a sociology of trade- 
union bureaucracies but not a sociology of the revolutionary Marxist 
party.
Luxemburg, in fact, was not above using the metaphor of the fac­
tory manager, as did Lenin, to explain why the worker might be wise to 
follow instructions in order to contribute to a larger result not imme­
diately apparent from where he stood. Where the difference arises, 
however, is in the lengths to which this logic is pursued. For Lenin, the 
totality was exclusively in the hands of the vanguard party, which had 
a virtual monopoly of knowledge. He imagined an all-seeing center— 
an eye in the sky, as it were—which formed the basis for strictly hier­
archical operations in which the proletariat became mere foot soldiers 
or pawns. For Luxemburg, the party might well be more farsighted 
than the workers, but it would nevertheless be constantly surprised 
and taught new lessons by those whom it presumed to lead.
Luxemburg viewed the revolutionary process as being far more 
complex and unpredictable than did Lenin, just as Jacobs saw the cre­
ation of successful urban neighborhoods as being far more complex 
and mysterious than did Le Corbusier. The metaphors Luxemburg 
used, as we shall see, were indicative. Eschewing military, engineer­
ing, and factory parallels, she wrote more frequently of growth, devel­
opment, experience, and learning.64
The idea that the vanguard party could either order or prohibit a 
mass strike, the way a commander might order his soldiers to the 
front or confine them to barracks, struck Luxemburg as ludicrous. 
Any attempt to so engineer a strike was both unrealistic and morally 
inadmissible. She rejected the instrumentalism that underlay this 
view. "Both tendencies [ordering or prohibiting a mass strike] pro­
ceed from the same, pure anarchist [sic] notion that the mass strike is 
merely a technical means of struggle which can be ‘decided’ or ‘for­

170 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
bidden’ at pleasure, according to one’s knowledge and conscience, a 
kind of pocket-knife which one keeps clasped in his packet, ‘ready for 
all emergencies,’ or decides to unclasp and use.”6S A general strike, or 
a revolution for that matter, was a complex social event involving the 
wills and knowledge of many human agents, of which the vanguard 
party was only one element.
Revolution as a Living Process
Luxemburg looked on strikes and political struggles as dialecti­
cal, historical processes. The structure of the economy and the work­
force helped to shape, but never determine, the options available. 
Thus, if industry was small scale and geographically scattered, strikes 
would typically be small and scattered as well. Each set of strikes, how­
ever, forced changes in the structure of capital. If workers won higher 
wages, for example, the increases might provoke consolidations in the 
industry, mechanization, and new patterns of supervision, all of which 
would influence the character of the next round of strikes. A strike 
would also, of course, teach the workforce new lessons and alter the 
character of its cohesion and leadership.66 This insistence on process 
and human agency served Luxemburg as a warning against a narrow 
view of tactics. A strike or a revolution was not simply an end toward 
which tactics and command ought to be directed; the process leading 
to it was at the same time shaping the character of the proletariat. How 
the revolution was made mattered as much as whether it was made at 
all, for the process itself had heavy consequences.
Luxemburg found Lenin’s desire to turn the vanguard party into a 
military general staff for the working class to be both utterly unreal­
istic and morally distasteful. His hierarchical logic ignored the inev­
itable autonomy of the working class (singly and in groups), whose 
own interests and actions could never be machine-tooled into strict 
conformity. What is more, even if such discipline were conceivable, by 
imposing it the party would deprive itself of the independent, creative 
force of a proletariat that was, after all, the subject of the revolution. 
Against Lenin’s aspiration for control and order Luxemburg juxta­
posed the inevitably disorderly, tumultuous, and living tableau of large- 
scale social action. “Instead of a fixed and hollow scheme of sober po­
litical action executed with a prudent plan decided by the highest 
committees,” she wrote, in what was a clear reference to Lenin, “we see 
a vibrant part of life in flesh and blood which cannot be cut out of the 
larger frame of the revolution: The mass strike is bound by a thousand 
veins to all parts of the revolution.”67 When contrasting her under­

The Revolutionary Party 171
standing to Lenin’s, she consistently reached for metaphors from com­
plex, organic processes, which cannot be arbitrarily carved up without 
threatening the vitality of the organism itself. The idea that a rational, 
hierarchical executive committee might deploy its proletarian troops 
as it wished not only was irrelevant to real political life but was also 
dead and hollow.68
In her refutation of What Is to Be Done? Luxemburg made clear 
that the cost of centralized hierarchy lay in the loss of creativity and 
initiative from below: "The ‘discipline’ Lenin has in mind is by no 
means only implanted in the proletariat by the factory, but equally by 
the barracks, by the modern bureaucracy, by the entire mechanism of 
the centralized bourgeois state apparatus. . . . The ultracentrism advo­
cated by Lenin is permeated in its very essence by the sterile spirit of a 
nightwatchman (Nachtwachtergeist) rather than by a positive and cre­
ative spirit. He concentrated mostly on controlling the party, not on fer­
tilizing it, on narrowing it down, not developing it, on regimenting and 
not unifying it.”69
The core of the disagreement between Lenin and Luxemburg is 
caught best in the figures of speech they each use. Lenin comes across 
as a rigid schoolmaster with quite definite lessons to convey—a school­
master who senses the unruliness of his pupils and wants desperately 
to keep them in line for their own good. Luxemburg sees that unruli­
ness as well, but she takes it for a sign of vitality, a potentially valuable 
resource; she fears that an overly strict schoolmaster will destroy the 
pupils’ enthusiasm and leave a sullen, dispirited classroom where noth­
ing is really learned. She argues elsewhere, in fact, that the German 
Social Democrats, by their constant efforts at close control and disci­
pline, have demoralized the German working class.70 Lenin sees the 
possibility that the pupils might influence a weak, timorous teacher 
and deplores it as a dangerous counterrevolutionary step. Luxemburg, 
for whom the classroom bespeaks a genuine collaboration, implicitly 
allows for the possibility that the teacher might just learn some valu­
able lessons from the pupils.
Once Luxemburg began thinking of the revolution as analogous to a 
complex natural process, she concluded that the role of a vanguard 
party was inevitably limited. Such processes are far too complicated to 
be well understood, let alone directed or planned in advance. She was 
deeply impressed by the autonomous popular initiatives taken all over 
Russia after the shooting of the crowd before the Winter Palace in 1905. 
Her description, which I quote at length, invokes metaphors from na­
ture to convey her conviction that centralized control is an illusion.

172 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
As the Russian Revolution [1905] shows to us, the mass strike is such a 
changeable phenomenon that it reflects in itself all phases of political 
and economic struggle, all stages and moments of the revolution. Its 
applicability, its effectiveness, and the moments of its origin change 
continually. It suddenly opens new, broad perspectives of revolution 
just where it seemed to have come to a narrow pass; and it disappoints 
where one thought he could reckon on it in full certitude. Now it flows 
like a broad billow over the whole land, now it divides itself into a gi­
gantic net of thin streams; now it bubbles forth from under the ground 
like a fresh spring, now it trickles flat along the ground. ... All [forms 
of popular struggle] run through one another, next to each other, across 
one another, flow in and over one another; it is an eternal, moving, 
changing sea of appearances.71
The mass strike, then, was not a tactical invention of the vanguard 
party to be used at the appropriate moment. It was, rather, the “living 
pulse-beat of the revolution and at the same time its most powerful 
driving-wheel, . . . the phenomenal form of the proletarian struggle in 
the revolution."72 From Luxemburg’s perspective, Lenin must have 
seemed like an engineer with hopes of damming a wild river in order 
to release it at a single stroke in a massive flood that would be the rev­
olution. She believed that the “flood” of the mass strike could not be 
predicted or controlled; its course could not be much affected by pro­
fessional revolutionists, although they could, as Lenin actually did, 
ride that flood to power. Luxemburg’s understanding of the revolu­
tionary process, curiously enough, provided a better description of 
how Lenin and the Bolsheviks came to power than did the utopian sce­
nario in What Is to Be Done?
A grasp of political conflict as process allowed Luxemburg to see 
well beyond what Lenin considered to be failures and dead ends. Writ­
ing of 1905, she emphasized that “after every foaming wave of political 
action a fructifying deposit remains from which a thousand stalks of 
economic struggle shoot forth.”73 The analogy she drew to organic pro­
cesses conveyed both their autonomy and their vulnerability. To extract 
from the living tissue of the proletarian movement a particular kind of 
strike for instrumental use would threaten the whole organism. With 
Lenin in mind she wrote, "If the contemplative theory proposes the 
artificial dissection of the mass strike to get at the ‘pure political mass 
strike,’ then by this dissection, as with any other, it will not perceive 
the phenomenon in its living essence, but will kill it all together.”74 Lux­
emburg, then, saw the workers’ movement in much the same light as 
Jacobs saw the city: as an intricate social organism whose origin, dy­
namics, and future were but dimly understood. To nevertheless inter­
vene and dissect the workers' movement was to kill it, just as carving

The Revolutionary Party 173
up the city along strict functional lines produced a lifeless, taxider­
mist's city.
If Lenin approached the proletariat as an engineer approached his 
raw materials, with a view toward shaping them to his purposes, Lux­
emburg approached the proletariat as a physician would. Like any pa­
tient, the proletariat had its own constitution, which limited the kind 
of interventions that could be made. The physician needed to respect 
the patient’s constitution and assist according to its potential strengths 
and weaknesses. Finally, the autonomy and history of the patient 
would inevitably influence the outcome. The proletariat could not be 
reshaped from the ground up and fitted neatly into a predetermined 
design.
But the major, recurrent theme of Luxemburg’s criticism of Lenin 
and the Bolsheviks generally was that their dictatorial methods and 
their mistrust of the proletariat made for bad educational policy. It 
thwarted the development of the mature, independent working class 
that was necessary to the revolution and to the creation of socialism. 
Thus she attacked both the German and Russian revolutionists for 
substituting the ego of the vanguard party for the ego of the prole­
tariat— a substitution that ignored the fact that the objective was to 
create a self-conscious workers’ movement, not just to use the prole­
tariat as instruments. Like a confident and sympathetic guardian, she 
anticipated false steps as part of the learning process. "However, the 
nimble acrobat,” she charged, referring to the Social Democratic 
Party, “fails to see that the true subject to whom this role of director 
falls is the collective ego of the working class which insists on its right 
to make its own mistakes and learn the historical dialectic by itself. Fi­
nally, we must frankly admit to ourselves that the errors made by a 
truly revolutionary labor movement are historically infinitely more 
fruitful and valuable than the infallibility of the best of all possible 
'central committees.’ ”75
Nearly fifteen years later, a year after the October 1917 Bolshevik 
seizure of power, Luxemburg was attacking Lenin in precisely the 
same terms. Her warnings, so soon after the revolution, about the di­
rection in which the dictatorship of the proletariat was headed seem 
prophetic.
She believed that Lenin and Trotsky had completely corrupted a 
proper understanding of the dictatorship of the proletariat. To her, it 
meant rule by the whole proletariat, which required the broadest po­
litical freedoms for all workers (though not for enemy classes) so that 
they could bring their influence and wisdom to bear on the building of 
socialism. It did not mean, as Lenin and Trotsky assumed, that a small

174 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
circle of party leaders would exercise dictatorial power merely in the 
name of the proletariat. Trotsky’s proposal that the constituent assem­
bly not convene because circumstances had changed since its election 
struck Luxemburg as a cure that was worse than the disease. Only an 
active public life could remedy the shortcomings of representative 
bodies. By concentrating absolute power in so few hands, the Bolshe­
viks had "blocked up the fountain of political experience and the source 
of this rising development [the attaining of higher stages of socialism] 
by their suppression of public life."76
Beneath this dispute was not just a difference in tactics but a funda­
mental disagreement about the nature of socialism. Lenin proceeded as 
if the road to socialism were already mapped out in detail and the task 
of the party were to use the iron discipline of the party apparatus to 
make sure that the revolutionary movement kept to that road. Luxem­
burg, on the contrary, believed that the future of socialism was to be 
discovered and worked out in a genuine collaboration between work­
ers and their revolutionary state. There were no "ready-made prescrip­
tions” for the realization of socialism, nor was there "a key in any so­
cialist party program or textbook.”77 The openness that characterized a 
socialist future was not a shortcoming but rather a sign of its superior­
ity, as a dialectical process, over the cut-and-dried formulas of utopian 
socialism. The creation of socialism was "new territory. A thousand 
problems—only experience is capable of correcting and opening new 
ways. Only unobstructed, effervescing life falls into a thousand new 
forms and improvisations, brings to light creative force, itself corrects 
all mistaken attempts.”78 Lenin’s use of decrees and terror and what 
Luxemburg called the “dictatorial force of the factory overseer" de­
prived the revolution of this popular creative force and experience. 
Unless the working class as a whole participated in the political pro­
cess, she added ominously, “socialism will be decreed from behind a 
few official desks by a dozen intellectuals.’’79
Looking ahead, so soon after the revolution, to the closed and au­
thoritarian political order Lenin was constructing, Luxemburg’s pre­
dictions were chilling but accurate: “But with the repression of politi­
cal life in the land as a whole, life in the soviets must also become 
crippled. Without general elections, without unrestricted freedom of 
the press and assembly, without a free struggle of opinion, life dies out 
in every public institution. . . . Public life gradually falls asleep. ... In 
reality only a dozen outstanding heads [party leaders] do the leading 
and an elite of the working class is invited to applaud the speeches of 
the leaders, and to approve proposed resolutions unanimously—at 
bottom then, a clique affair,... a dictatorship in the bourgeois sense.”80

The Revolutionary Party 175
Aleksandra Kollontay and the Workers’ Opposition to Lenin
Aleksandra Kollontay was in effect the local voice of a Luxemburgian 
critique among the Bolsheviks after the revolution. A revolutionary ac­
tivist, the head of the women’s section of the Central Committee 
(Zhenotdel), and, by early 1921, closely associated with the Workers' 
Opposition, Kollontay was a thorn in Lenin’s side. He regarded the 
sharply critical pamphlet she wrote just before the Tenth Party Con­
gress in 1921 as a nearly treasonous act. The Tenth Party Congress 
opened just as the suppression of the workers’ and sailors’ revolt in 
Kronstadt was being organized and in the midst of the Makno uprising 
in the Ukraine. To attack the party leadership at such a perilous mo­
ment was a treacherous appeal to “the base instincts of the masses.”
There was a direct connection between Luxemburg and her Rus­
sian colleague. Kollontay had been deeply impressed by reading Lux­
emburg's Social Reform or Revolution early in the century and had 
actually met Luxemburg at a socialist meeting in Germany. While Kol­
lontay’s pamphlet echoed most of Luxemburg’s criticisms of central­
ized, authoritarian socialist practice, its historical context was distinc­
tive. Kollontay was making her case as part of the Workers' Opposition 
argument for an all-Russian congress of producers, freely elected from 
the trade unions, which would direct production and industrial plan­
ning. Alexander Shlyiapnikov, a close ally of Kollontay, and other trade 
unionists were alarmed at the increasingly dominant role of technical 
specialists, the bureaucracy, and the party center and the exclusion of 
workers’ organizations. During the civil war, martial-law techniques of 
management were perhaps understandable. But now that the civil war 
was largely won, the direction of socialist construction seemed at stake. 
Kollontay brought to her case for trade-union co-management of in­
dustry a wealth of practical experience acquired in the frustrating job 
of negotiating with state organs on behalf of working women who had 
organized creches and canteens. In the end, the Workers’ Opposition 
was outlawed and Kollontay was silenced, but not before leaving be­
hind a prophetic legacy of criticism.81
Kollontay’s pamphlet attacked the party state, which she compared 
to an authoritarian schoolteacher, in much the same terms used by 
Luxemburg. She complained, above all, that the relationship between 
the central committee and the workers had become a stark one-way 
relationship of command. The trade unions were seen as a mere "con­
necting link" or transmission belt of the party’s instructions to the 
workers; unions were expected to “bring up the masses” in exactly the 
way a schoolteacher whose curriculum and lesson plans are mandated

176 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
from above passes those lessons on to pupils. She castigated the party 
for its out-of-date pedagogical theory, which left no room for the po­
tential originality of the students. “When one begins to turn over the 
pages of the stenographic minutes and speeches made by our promi­
nent leaders, one is astonished by the unexpected manifestation of 
their pedagogical activities. Every author of the thesis proposes the 
most perfect system of bringing up the masses. But all these systems of 
‘education’ lack provisions for freedom of experiment, for training and 
for expression of creative abilities by those who are to be taught. In 
this respect also all our pedagogues are behind the times."82
There is some evidence that Kollontay's work on behalf of women 
had a direct bearing on her case for the Workers’ Opposition. Just as 
Jacobs was afforded a different view of how the city functioned by 
virtue of her additional roles as housewife and mother, so Kollontay 
saw the party from the vantage point of an advocate for women whose 
work was rarely taken seriously. She accused the party of denying 
women opportunities in organization of “creative tasks in the sphere of 
production and development of creative abilities’’ and of confining 
them to the “restricted tasks of home economics, household duties, 
etc.”83 Her experience of being patronized and condescended to as a 
representative of the women’s section seems directly tied to her accu­
sation that the party was also treating the workers as infants rather 
than as autonomous, creative adults. In the same passage as her charge 
that the party thought women fit only for home economics, she 
mocked Trotsky’s praise for the workers at a miner’s congress, who 
had voluntarily replaced shop windows, as showing that he wanted to 
limit them to mere janitorial tasks.
Like Luxemburg, Kollontay believed that the building of socialism 
could not be accomplished by the Central Committee alone, however 
farseeing it might be. The unions were not mere instruments or trans­
mission belts in the building of socialism; they were to a great extent the 
subjects and the creators of a socialist mode of production. Kollontay 
put the fundamental difference succinctly: “The Workers’ Opposition 
sees in the unions the managers and creators of the communist econ­
omy, whereas Bukharin, together with Lenin and Trotsky, leave to them 
only the role of schools of communism and no more.”84
Kollontay shared Luxemburg’s conviction that the practical experi­
ence of industrial workers on the factory floor was indispensable knowl­
edge that the experts and technicians needed. She did not want to min­
imize the role of specialists and officials; they were vital, but they could 
do their job effectively only in a genuine collaboration with the trade 
unions and workers. Her vision of the form this collaboration might

The Revolutionary Party 177
take closely resembles that of an agricultural extension service and 
farmers to whose needs the service is closely tied. That is, technical 
centers concerned with industrial production would be established 
throughout Russia, but the tasks they addressed and the services they 
provided would be directly responsive to the demands of the produc­
ers.85 The experts would serve the producers rather than dictating to 
them. To this end Kollontay proposed that a host of specialists and 
officials, who had no practical factory experience and who had joined 
the party after 1919, be dismissed—at least until they had done some 
manual labor.
She clearly saw, as did Luxemburg, the social and psychological 
consequences of frustrating the independent initiatives of workers. Ar­
guing from concrete examples—workers procuring firewood, estab­
lishing a dining hall, and opening a nursery—she explained how they 
were thwarted at every turn by bureaucratic delay and pettifoggery: 
“Every independent thought or initiative is treated as a ‘heresy,’ as a vi­
olation of party discipline, as an attempt to infringe on the preroga­
tives of the center, which must 'foresee’ everything and ‘decree’ every­
thing and anything." The harm done came not just from the fact that 
the specialists and bureaucrats were more likely to make bad decisions. 
The attitude had two other consequences. First, it reflected a "distrust 
towards the creative abilities of the workers,” which was unworthy of 
the "professed ideals of our party.” Second, and most important, it 
smothered the morale and creative spirit of the working class. In their 
frustration at the specialists and officials, “the workers became cynical 
and said, ‘let [the] officials themselves take care of us.' ’’ The end result 
was an arbitrary, myopic layer of officials presiding over a dispirited 
workforce putting in a "bad-faith” day on the factory floor.86
Kollontay’s point of departure, like Luxemburg’s, is an assumption 
about what kinds of tasks are the making of revolutions and the creat­
ing of new forms of production. For both of them, such tasks are voy­
ages in uncharted waters. There may be some rules of thumb, but there 
can be no blueprints or battle plans drawn up in advance; the numer­
ous unknowns in the equation make a one-step solution inconceivable. 
In more technical language, such goals can be approached only by a 
stochastic process of successive approximations, trial and error, exper­
iment, and learning through experience. The kind of knowledge re­
quired in such endeavors is not deductive knowledge from first prin­
ciples but rather what Greeks of the classical period called metis, a 
concept to which we shall return. Usually translated, inadequately, as 
"cunning,” metis is better understood as the kind of knowledge that can 
be acquired only by long practice at similar but rarely identical tasks,

178 TRANSFORMING VISIONS
which requires constant adaptation to changing circumstances. It is 
to this kind of knowledge that Luxemburg appealed when she charac­
terized the building of socialism as “new territory” demanding “im­
provisation” and “creativity.” It is to this kind of knowledge that Kol­
lontay appealed when she insisted that the party leaders were not 
infallible, that they needed the "everyday experience" and “practical 
work of the basic class collectives" of those "who actually produce 
and organize production at the same time.”87 In an analogy that any 
Marxist would recognize, Kollontay asked whether it was conceivable 
that the cleverest feudal estate managers could have invented early 
capitalism by themselves. Of course not, she answered, because their 
knowledge and skills were directly tied to feudal production, just as 
the technical specialists of her day had learned their lessons within a 
capitalist framework. There was simply no precedent for the future 
now being forged.
Echoing, for rhetorical effect, a sentiment that both Luxemburg 
and Lenin had uttered, Kollontay claimed that “it is impossible to de­
cree communism. It can be created only in the process of practical re­
search, through mistakes, perhaps, but only by the creative powers of 
the working class itself." While specialists and officials had a collabo­
rative role of vital importance, "only those who are directly bound to 
industry can introduce into it animating innovations.”88
For Lenin, the vanguard party is a machine for making a revolution and 
then for building socialism—tasks whose main lines have, it is as­
sumed, already been worked out. For Le Corbusier, the house is a ma­
chine for living, and the city planner is a specialist whose knowledge 
shows him how a city must be built. For Le Corbusier, the people are ir­
relevant to the process of city planning, although the result is designed 
with their well-being and productivity in mind. Lenin cannot make the 
revolution without the proletariat, but they are seen largely as troops to 
be deployed. The goals of revolution and scientific socialism are, of 
course, also for the benefit of the working class. Each of these schemes 
implies a single, unitary answer discoverable by specialists and hence a 
command center, which can, or ought to, impose the correct solution.
Kollontay and Luxemburg, in contrast, take the tasks at hand to 
be unknowable in advance. Given the uncertainty of the endeavor, a 
plurality of experiments and initiatives will best reveal which lines of 
attack are fruitful and which are barren. The revolution and social­
ism will fare best, as will Jacobs’s city, when they are joint productions 
between technicians and gifted, experienced amateurs. Above all, there 
is no strict distinction between means and ends. Luxemburg’s and

The Revolutionary Party 179
Kollontay’s vanguard party is not producing a revolution or socialism 
in the straightforward sense that a factory produces, say, axles. Thus 
the vanguard party cannot be adequately judged, as a factory might, by 
its output—by how many axles of a certain quality it makes with a 
given labor force, capitalization, and so on—no matter how it goes 
about producing that result. Also, the vanguard party of Luxemburg 
and Kollontay is at the same time producing a certain kind of working 
class—a creative, conscious, competent, and empowered working 
class—that is the precondition of its achieving any of its other goals. 
Put positively, the way the trip is made matters at least as much as the 
destination. Put negatively, a vanguard party can achieve its revolu­
tionary results in ways that defeat its central purpose.


Part 3
The Social Engineering of Rural 
Settlement and Production


Legibility is a condition of manipulation. Any substantial state inter­
vention in society—to vaccinate a population, produce goods, mobilize 
labor, tax people and their property, conduct literacy campaigns, con­
script soldiers, enforce sanitation standards, catch criminals, start uni­
versal schooling—requires the invention of units that are visible. The 
units in question might be citizens, villages, trees, fields, houses, or peo­
ple grouped according to age, depending on the type of intervention. 
Whatever the units being manipulated, they must be organized in a 
manner that permits them to be identified, observed, recorded, counted, 
aggregated, and monitored. The degree of knowledge required would 
have to be roughly commensurate with the depth of the intervention. 
In other words, one might say that the greater the manipulation envis­
aged, the greater the legibility required to effect it.
It was precisely this phenomenon, which had reached full tide by 
the middle of the nineteenth century, that Proudhon had in mind when 
he declared, “To be ruled is to be kept an eye on, inspected, spied on, 
regulated, indoctrinated, sermonized, listed and checked off, esti­
mated, appraised, censured, ordered about. ... To be ruled is at every 
operation, transaction, movement, to be noted, registered, counted, 
priced, admonished, prevented, reformed, redressed, corrected.”1
From another perspective, what Proudhon was deploring was in 
fact the great achievement of modern statecraft. How hard-won and 
tenuous this achievement was is worth emphasizing. Most states, to 
speak broadly, are "younger” than the societies that they purport to ad­
minister. States therefore confront patterns of settlement, social rela­
183

184 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
tions, and production, not to mention a natural environment, that have 
evolved largely independent of state plans.2 The result is typically a di­
versity, complexity, and unrepeatability of social forms that are rela­
tively opaque to the state, often purposely so. Consider, for a moment, 
the patterns in such urban settlements as Bruges or the medina of an 
old Middle Eastern city touched on earlier (see chapter 2). Each city, 
each quarter, each neighborhood is unique; it is the historical vector 
sum of millions of designs and activities. While its form and function 
surely have a logic, that logic is not derived from any single, overall 
plan. Its complexity defies easy mapping. Any map, moreover, would 
be spatially and temporally limited. The map of a single neighborhood 
would provide little guidance to the unique intricacies of the next 
neighborhood, and a description that was satisfactory today would be 
inadequate in a few years.
If the state's goals are minimal, it may not need to know much 
about the society. Just as a woodsman who takes only an occasional 
load of firewood from a large forest need have no detailed knowledge 
of that forest, so a state whose demands are confined to grabbing a few 
carts of grain and the odd conscript may not require a very accurate or 
detailed map of the society. If, however, the state is ambitious — if it 
wants to extract as much grain and manpower as it can, short of pro­
voking a famine or a rebellion, if it wants to create a literate, skilled, 
and healthy population, if it wants everyone to speak the same lan­
guage or worship the same god—then it will have to become both far 
more knowledgeable and far more intrusive.
How does the state get a handle on the society? Here and in the 
next two chapters, I am especially concerned with the logic behind 
large-scale attempts to redesign rural life and production from above. 
Seen from the center, the royal court or the seat of state, this process 
has often been described as a “civilizing process.”31 prefer to see it as 
an attempt at domestication, a kind of social gardening devised to 
make the countryside, its products, and its inhabitants more readily 
identifiable and accessible to the center. Certain elements of these ef­
forts at domestication seem, if not universal, at least very common, 
and they may be termed “sedentarization," “concentration,” and “radi­
cal simplification" of both settlement and cultivation.
We shall examine in some detail two notorious schemes of agrarian 
simplification—collectivization in Soviet Russia and ujamaa villages 
in Tanzania—searching both for the larger political logic of their de­
sign and for the reasons behind their manifold failures as schemes of 
production. First, however, it may help to provide a schematic illustra­
tion of this process from the history of Southeast Asia, which reveals a

Rural Settlement and Production 185
great continuity of purpose that joins the projects of the precolonial, 
colonial, and independence regimes together with the modern state’s 
progressive capacity to realize these projects of planned settlement 
and production.
The demography of precolonial Southeast Asia was such that control 
of land per se, unless it was a strategically vital estuary, strait, or pass, 
was seldom decisive in state building. Control of the population— 
roughly five persons per square kilometer in 1700—mattered far more. 
The key to successful statecraft was typically the ability to attract and 
hold a substantial, productive population within a reasonable radius of 
the court. Given the relative sparseness of the population and the ease 
of physical flight, the control of arable land was pointless unless there 
was a population to work it. The precolonial kingdom thus trod a nar­
row path between a level of taxes and corvee exactions that would sus­
tain a monarch’s ambitions and a level that would precipitate whole­
sale flight. Precolonial wars were more often about rounding up 
captives and settling them near the central court than asserting a ter­
ritorial claim. A growing, productive population settled in the ambit of 
a monarch’s capital was a more reliable indicator of a kingdom’s 
power than its physical extent.
The precolonial state was thus vitally interested in the sedentariza- 
tion of its population—in the creation of permanent, fixed settlements. 
The greater the concentration of people, providing that they produced 
an economic surplus, the greater the ease of appropriating grain, 
labor, and military service. At the crudest level, this determinist geo­
graphical logic is nothing more than an application of standard theo­
ries of location. As Johann Heinrich von Thiinen, Walter Christaller, 
and G. William Skinner have amply demonstrated, the economics of 
movement, other things being equal, tend to produce recurring geo­
graphical patterns of market location, crop specialization, and admin­
istrative structure.4 The political appropriation of labor and grain 
tends to obey much the same locational logic, favoring population con­
centration rather than dispersion and reflecting a logic of appropria­
tion based on transportation costs.5 In this context, much of the classi­
cal literature on statecraft is preoccupied with the techniques of 
attracting and holding a population in an environment where they can 
flee to the nearby frontier or settle under the wing of another nearby 
prince. The expression "to vote with one’s feet” had a literal meaning in 
much of Southeast Asia.6
Traditional Thai statecraft hit on a novel technique for minimizing 
flight and attaching commoners to the state or to their noble lords. The

186 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Thai devised a system of tattoos for literally marking commoners with 
symbols making it clear who “belonged” to whom. Such tattooing is 
evidence that exceptional measures were required to identify and fix a 
subject population inclined to vote with its feet. So common was phys­
ical flight that a large number of bounty hunters made a living cours­
ing the forests in search of runaways to return to their lawful owners.7 
Similar problems beset the estates of Roman Catholic friars in the 
early years of Spain’s dominion in the Philippines. The Tagalogs who 
were resettled and organized for supervised production on the Latin 
American model frequently fled the harsh labor regime. They were 
known as remontados, that is, peasants who had gone “back up to the 
hills,” where they enjoyed more autonomy.
More generally, for precolonial and colonial Southeast Asia, it might 
be helpful to think in terms of state spaces and nonstate spaces. In the 
first, to put it crudely, the subject population was settled rather densely 
in quasi-permanent communities, producing a surplus of grain (usu­
ally of wet rice) and labor which was relatively easily appropriated by 
the state. In the second, the population was sparsely settled, typically 
practiced slash-and-burn or shifting cultivation, maintained a more 
mixed economy (including, for example, polyculture or reliance on 
forest products), and was highly mobile, thereby severely limiting the 
possibilities for reliable state appropriation. State spaces and nonstate 
spaces were not merely preexisting ecological and geographical set­
tings that encouraged or discouraged the formation of states. A major 
objective of would-be rulers was to create and then expand state spaces 
by building irrigation works, capturing subjects in wars, forcing settle­
ment, codifying religions, and so on. The classical state envisaged a con­
centrated population, within easy range, producing a steady supply of 
easily transportable, storable grain and tribute and providing a surplus 
of manpower for security, war, and public works.
Edmund Leach’s perceptive effort to understand the frontiers of 
Burma implicitly followed this logic in its reconstruction of the tradi­
tional Burmese polity. He suggested that we look at the precolonial 
Burmese state not as a physically contiguous territory, as we would in 
the context of modern states, but as a complex patchwork that fol­
lowed an entirely different logic. We should picture the kingdom, he 
insisted, in terms of horizontal slices through the topography. Follow­
ing this logic, Burma was, in practice, a collection of all the sedentary, 
wet-rice producers settled in valleys within the ambit of the court cen­
ter. These would be, in the terms suggested above, the state spaces. The 
next horizontal stratum of the landscape from, say, five hundred feet 
to fifteen hundred feet would, given its different ecology, contain in­

Rural Settlement and Production 187
habitants who practiced shifting cultivation, were more widely scat­
tered, and were therefore less promising subjects of appropriation. 
They were not an integral part of the kingdom, although they might 
regularly send tribute to the central court. Still higher elevations would 
constitute yet other ecological, political, and cultural zones. What Leach 
proposed, in effect, is that we consider all relatively dense, wet-rice 
settlements within range of the capital as "the kingdom” and the rest, 
even if relatively close to the capital, as "nonstate spaces.”8
The role of statecraft in this context becomes that of maximizing 
the productive, settled population in such state spaces while at the 
same time drawing tribute from, or at least neutralizing, the nonstate 
spaces.9 These stateless zones have always played a potentially subver­
sive role, both symbolically and practically. From the vantage point of 
the court, such spaces and their inhabitants were the exemplars of 
rudeness, disorder, and barbarity against which the civility, order, and 
sophistication of the center could be gauged.10 Such spaces, it goes 
without saying, have served as refuges for fleeing peasants, rebels, ban­
dits, and the pretenders who have often threatened kingdoms.
Of course, the ecology of different elevations is only one among 
many factors that might characterize nonstate spaces. They also ap­
pear to share one or more of the following distinctive features: they are 
relatively impenetrable (wild, trackless, labyrinthine, inhospitable); 
their population is dispersed or migratory; and they are unpromising 
sites for surplus appropriation.11 Thus marshes and swamps (one thinks 
of the now beleaguered Marsh Arabs on the Iraqi-Iranian border), 
ever-shifting deltas and estuaries, mountains, deserts (favored by no­
madic Berbers and Bedouins), and the sea (home to the so-called sea 
gypsies of southern Burma), and, more generally, the frontier have all 
served as “nonstate spaces” in the sense that I have been using the 
term.12
Contemporary development schemes, whether in Southeast Asia 
or elsewhere, require the creation of state spaces where the govern­
ment can reconfigure the society and economy of those who are to be 
“developed." The transformation of peripheral nonstate spaces into 
state spaces by the modern, developmentalist nation-state is ubiqui­
tous and, for the inhabitants of such spaces, frequently traumatic. 
Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing's sensitive account of the attempts of the Indo­
nesian state to capture, as it were, the nomadic Meratus hill peoples of 
Kalimantan describes a striking case in point. The Meratus live, as she 
notes, in an area that, “so far, has eluded the clarity and visibility re­
quired for model development schemes." As migratory hunter-gatherers 
who at the same time practice shifting cultivation, who live in con­

188 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
stantly changing kinship units, who are widely dispersed over a de­
manding terrain, and who are, in Indonesian eyes, pagans, the Mera- 
tus are a tough case for development. Indonesian officials have tried, 
in their desultory fashion, to concentrate the Meratus in planned vil­
lages near the main roads. The implicit goal was to create a fixed, con­
centrated population that officials in charge of the management of iso­
lated populations could see and instruct when touring the district.13 
Meratus immobility was the precondition of state supervision and de­
velopment, whereas much of the identity of the Meratus as a people 
depended on “unhampered mobility.”14
The inaccessibility of the Meratus was, in state-development par­
lance and in the eyes of government officials, an index of their lamen­
table backwardness. They were described by their would-be civilizers 
as "not yet arranged" or “not yet ordered” (belum di-ator), as “not yet 
brought to religion” (belum berugama), and their cultivation practices 
were described as “disorderly agriculture” (pertanian yang tidak ter- 
atur). For their part, the Meratus grasped the essentials of what the 
government had in mind for them. They had been asked to settle along 
the main tracks through the forest, one local leader observed, “so the 
government can see the people.” The clustered houses they were asked 
to settle in were meant, they believed, to “look good if the government 
came to visit.”15 Cast in a discourse of development, progress, and civ­
ilization, the plans of the Indonesian state for the Meratus peoples are 
at the same time a synoptic project of legibility and concentration.
It is in the context of actual rebellion where the effort to create and 
sharply distinguish state spaces from nonstate spaces is carried to its 
logical conclusion. The nature of military threat requires clearly defined 
and easily monitored and patrolled state spaces, such as forts, forced 
settlements, or internment camps. Modern examples of this can be 
found in the so-called new villages in Malaya during the Emergency 
following World War II, which were designed particularly to sequester 
a Chinese smallholder and rubber-tapping population and prevent it 
from providing manpower, food, cash, and supplies to a largely Chi­
nese guerrilla force in the hinterland beyond. In an arrangement later 
copied in the “strategic hamlets” in Vietnam, the reluctant residents 
were lodged in identical, numbered houses arrayed in straight lines.16 
The population’s movement in and out was strictly monitored. They 
were one short step away from the concentration camps built in war­
time to create and maintain a legible, bounded, concentrated state 
space and seal it off as completely as possible from the outside. Here, 
direct control and discipline are more important than appropriation. 
In recent times there have been unprecedented efforts to reclaim non­

Rural Settlement and Production 189
state space for the state. In any case, that is one way to characterize 
the massive use of Agent Orange to defoliate large sections of forest 
during the Vietnam War, thus render the forest legible and safe (for 
government forces, that is).
The concept of state spaces, suitably modified for the context of a mar­
ket economy, can also help us to resolve an apparent paradox in colo­
nial agrarian policy in Southeast Asia. How do we explain the decided 
colonial preference for plantation agriculture over smallholder pro­
duction? The grounds for the choice can certainly not have been effi­
ciency. For almost any crop one can name, with the possible exception 
of sugarcane,17 smallholders have been able historically to out-com- 
pete larger units of production. Time and time again, the colonial 
states found, small producers, owing to their low fixed costs and flexi­
ble use of family labor, could consistently undersell state-managed or 
private-sector plantations.
The paradox is largely resolved, I believe, if we consider the “effi­
ciencies” of the plantation as a unit of taxation (both taxes on profits 
and various export levies), of labor discipline and surveillance, and of 
political control. Take, for example, rubber production in colonial 
Malaya. At the beginning of the rubber boom in the first decade of the 
twentieth century, British officials and investors no doubt believed that 
rubber produced by estates, which had better planting stock, better 
scientific management, and more available labor, would prove more 
efficient and profitable than rubber produced by smallholders.18 When 
they discovered they were wrong, however, officials persisted in sys­
tematically favoring rubber estates at some considerable cost to the 
overall economy of the colony. The infamous Stevenson scheme in 
Malaya during the worldwide depression was a particularly blatant at­
tempt to preserve the failing estate sector of the rubber industry by 
limiting smallholder production. Without it, most estates would have 
perished.
The fact that, in protecting the estate sector, the colonizers were 
also protecting the interests of their countrymen and those of metro­
politan investors was only one factor in explaining their policy. If it 
were the main reason, one would expect the policy to lapse with the 
country’s independence. As we shall shortly see, it did not. The planta­
tions, although less efficient than smallholders as producers, were far 
more convenient as units of taxation. It was easier to monitor and tax 
large, publicly-owned businesses than to do so for a vast swarm of 
small growers who were here today and gone tomorrow and whose 
landholdings, production, and profits were illegible to the state. But

190 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
because plantations specialized in a single crop, it was a simple matter 
to assess their production and profits. A second advantage of estate 
rubber production was that it typically provided centralized forms of 
residence and labor that were far more amenable to central political 
and administrative control. Estates were, in a word, far more legible 
communities than were the Malay kampung, which had its own his­
tory, leadership, and mixed economy.
A comparable logic can be usefully applied to the establishment of 
federal land schemes in independent Malaysia. Why did the Malaysian 
state elect to establish large, costly, bureaucratically monitored settle­
ments in the J 960s and 1970s when the frontier was already being ac­
tively pioneered by large-scale voluntary migration? Pioneer settle­
ment cost the state virtually nothing and had historically created 
viable household enterprises that grew and marketed cash crops. As 
an economic proposition, the huge rubber and palm oil concerns es­
tablished by the government made little sense. They were enormously 
costly to set up, the capital expenditure per settler being far beyond 
what a rational businessman would have invested.
Politically and administratively, however, the advantages of these 
large, centrally planned, and centrally run government schemes were 
manifold. At a time when the attempted revolution of the Malayan 
Communist Party was still fresh in the minds of the country’s Malay 
rulers, planned settlements had some of the advantages of strategic 
hamlets. They were laid out according to a simple grid pattern and 
were immediately legible to an outside official. The house lots were 
numbered consecutively, and the inhabitants were registered and mon­
itored far more closely than in open frontier areas. Malaysian settlers 
could be, and were, carefully selected for age, skills, and political reli­
ability; villagers in the state of Kedah, where I worked in the late 1970s, 
understood that if they wanted to be selected for a settlement scheme, 
they needed a recommendation from a local politician of the ruling 
party.
The administrative and economic situation of the Malaysian set­
tlers was comparable to that of the “company towns" of early industri­
alization, where everyone worked at comparable jobs, were paid by 
the same boss, lived in company housing, and shopped at the same 
company store. Until the plantation crops were mature, the settlers 
were paid a wage. Their production was marketed through state chan­
nels, and they could be dismissed for any one of a large number of in­
fractions against the rules established by the scheme's officials. The 
economic dependency and direct political control meant that such 
schemes could regularly be made to produce large electoral majorities

Rural Settlement and Production 191
for the ruling party. Collective protest was rare and could usually be 
snuffed out by the sanctions available to the administrators. It goes 
without saying that the settlements of the Federal Land Development 
Authority (fe l d a ) allowed the state to control the mix of export crops, 
to monitor production and processing, and to set producer prices in 
order to generate revenue.
The publicly stated rationale for planned settlement schemes was 
almost always couched in the discourse of orderly development and 
social services (such as the provision of health clinics, sanitation, ade­
quate housing, education, clean water, and infrastructure). The public 
rhetoric was not intentionally insincere; it was, however, misleadingly 
silent about the manifold ways in which orderly development of this 
kind served important goals of appropriation, security, and political 
hegemony that could not have been met through autonomous frontier 
settlement, fe l d a  schemes were “soft” civilian versions of the new vil­
lages created as part of counterinsurgency policy. The dividend they 
paid was less an economic return than a dividend in expanding state 
spaces.
State plans of sedentarization and planned settlement have rarely 
gone as anticipated—in Malaysia or elsewhere. Like the scientific for­
est or the grid city, the targets of development have habitually escaped 
the fine-tuned control aspired to by their inventors. But we must never 
overlook the fact that the effect of these schemes, however inflected by 
local practice, lies as much in what they replace as in the degree to 
which they live up to their own rhetoric.
The concentration of population in planned settlements may not 
create what state planners had in mind, but it has almost always dis­
rupted or destroyed prior communities whose cohesion derived mostly 
from nonstate sources. The communities thus superseded—however 
objectionable they may have been on normative grounds—were likely 
to have had their own unique histories, social ties, mythology, and ca­
pacity for joint action. Virtually by definition, the state-designated set­
tlement must start from the beginning to build its own sources of co­
hesion and joint action. A new community is thus, also by definition, a 
community demobilized, and hence a community more amenable to 
control from above and outside.19


6 Soviet Collectivization, 
Capitalist Dreams
The master builders of Soviet society were rather more like Niemeyer 
designing Brasilia than Baron Haussmann retrofitting Paris. A combi­
nation of defeat in war, economic collapse, and a revolution had pro­
vided the closest thing to a bulldozed site that a state builder ever gets. 
The result was a kind of ultrahigh modernism that in its audacity re­
called the utopian aspects of its precursor, the French Revolution.
This is not the place, nor am I the most knowledgeable guide, for an 
extensive discussion of Soviet high modernism.1 What I aim to do, in­
stead, is to emphasize the cultural and aesthetic elements in Soviet 
high modernism. This will in turn pave the way for an examination of 
an illuminating point of direct contact between Soviet and American 
high modernism: the belief in huge, mechanized, industrial farms.
In certain vital respects, Soviet high modernism is not a sharp break 
from Russian absolutism. Ernest Gellner has argued that of the two 
facets of the Enlightenment—the one asserting the sovereignty of the 
individual and his interests, the other commending the rational au­
thority of experts—it was the second that spoke to rulers who wanted 
their “backward" states to catch up. The Enlightenment arrived in Cen­
tral Europe, he concludes, as a "centralizing rather than a liberating 
force.”2
Strong historical echoes of Leninist high modernism can thus be 
found in what Richard Stites calls the "administrative utopianism” of 
the Russian czars and their advisers in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. This administrative utopianism found expression in a suc­
cession of schemes to organize the population (serfs, soldiers, workers,
193

194 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
functionaries) into institutions "based upon hierarchy, discipline, reg­
imentation, strict order, rational planning, a geometrical environment, 
and a form of welfarism.’’3 Peter the Great’s Saint Petersburg was the 
urban realization of this vision. The city was laid out according to a 
strict rectilinear and radial plan on completely new terrain. Its straight 
boulevards were, by design, twice as wide as the tallest building, which 
was, naturally, at the geometric center of the city. The buildings them­
selves reflected function and hierarchy, as the facade, height, and ma­
terial of each corresponded to the social class of its inhabitants. The 
city’s physical layout was in fact a legible map of its intended social 
structure.
Saint Petersburg had many counterparts, urban and rural. Under 
Catherine the Great, Prince Grigory Potemkin established a whole se­
ries of model cities (such as Ekaterinoslav) and model rural settlements. 
The next two czars, Paul and Alexander I, inherited Catherine’s passion 
for Prussian order and efficiency.4 Their adviser, Alexei Arakcheev, es­
tablished a model estate on which peasants wore uniforms and fol­
lowed elaborate instructions on upkeep and maintenance, to the point 
of carrying “punishment books” inscribed with records of their viola­
tions. This estate was made the basis of a far bolder plan for a network 
of widely scattered, self-sufficient military colonies, which by the late 
1820s included 750,000 people. This attempt to create a new Russia, in 
contrast to the disorder, mobility, and flux of a frontier society, quickly 
succumbed to popular resistance, corruption, and inefficiency. Long 
before the Bolsheviks took power, in any case, the historical landscape 
was littered with the wreckage of many miscarried experiments in au­
thoritarian social planning.
Lenin and his confederates could implement their high-modernist 
plans starting from nearly zero. The war, the revolution, and the subse­
quent famine had gone a long way toward dissolving the prerevolu­
tionary society, particularly in the cities. A general collapse of industrial 
production had provoked a vast exodus from the cities and a virtual re­
gression to a barter economy. The ensuing four-year civil war further 
dissolved existing social ties as well as schooling the hard-pressed Bol­
sheviks in the methods of “war Communism”—requisitions, martial 
law, coercion.
Working on a leveled social terrain and harboring high-modernist 
ambitions in keeping with the distinction of being the pioneers of the 
first socialist revolution, the Bolsheviks thought big. Nearly everything 
they planned was on a monumental scale, from cities and individual 
buildings (the Palace of Soviets) to construction projects (the White 
Sea Canal) and, later, the great industrial projects of the first Five-Year

Soviet Collectivization 195
Plan (Magnitogorsk), not to mention collectivization. Sheila Fitz­
patrick has appropriately called this passion for sheer size “giganto- 
mania."5 The economy itself was conceived as a well-ordered machine, 
where everyone would simply produce goods of the description and 
quantity specified by the central state's statistical bureau, as Lenin had 
foreseen.
A transformation of the physical world was not, however, the only 
item on the Bolshevik agenda. It was a cultural revolution that they 
sought, the creation of a new person. Members of the secular intelli­
gentsia were the most devoted partisans of this aspect of the revolu­
tion. Campaigns to promote atheism and to suppress Christian rituals 
were pressed in the villages. New "revolutionary" funeral and mar­
riage ceremonies were invented amidst much fanfare, and a ritual of 
“Octobering" was encouraged as an alternative to baptism.6 Cremation 
—rational, clean, economical—was promoted. Along with this secu­
larization came enormous and widely popular campaigns to promote 
education and literacy. Architects and social planners invented new 
communal living arrangements designed to supersede the bourgeois 
family pattern. Communal food, laundry, and child-care services 
promised to free women from the traditional division of labor. Hous­
ing arrangements were explicitly intended to be “social condensers."
The “new man”—the Bolshevik specialist, engineer, or functionary— 
came to represent a new code of social ethics, which was sometimes 
simply called kultura. In keeping with the cult of technology and sci­
ence, kultura emphasized punctuality, cleanliness, businesslike direct­
ness, polite modesty, and good, but never showy, manners.7 It was this 
understanding of kultura and the party’s passion for the League of 
Time, with its promotion of time consciousness, efficient work habits, 
and clock-driven routine, that were so brilliantly caricatured in Eu­
gene Zamiatin’s novel We and that later became the inspiration for 
George Orwell’s 1984.
What strikes an outside observer of this revolution in culture and 
architecture is its emphasis on public form—on getting the visual and 
aesthetic dimensions of the new world straight. One can perhaps see 
this best in what Stites calls the “festivals of mustering" organized by 
the cultural impresario of the early Soviet state, Anatoly Lunacharsky.8 
In the outdoor dramas he produced, the revolution was reenacted on 
a scale that must have seemed as large as the original, with cannons, 
bands, searchlights, ships on the river, four thousand actors, and 
thirty-five thousand spectators.9 Whereas the actual revolution had all 
the usual messiness of reality, the reenactment called for military pre­
cision, and the various actors were organized by platoon and mobi­

196 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
lized with semaphore and field telephones. Like mass exercises, the 
public spectacle gave a retroactive order, purpose, and central direc­
tion to the events, which were designed to impress the spectator, not to 
reflect the historical facts.10 If one can see in Arakcheev’s military 
colonies an attempt to prefigure, to represent, a wished-for order, then 
perhaps Lunacharsky’s staged revolution can be seen as a representa­
tion of the wished-for relationship between the Bolsheviks and the pro­
letarian crowd. Little effort was spared to see that the ceremony 
turned out right. When Lunacharsky himself complained that churches 
were being demolished for the May Day celebrations, Lazar Kagan- 
ivich, the city boss of Moscow, replied, “And my aesthetics demand that 
the demonstration processions from the six districts of Moscow should 
all pour into Red Square at the same time.”11 In architecture, public 
manners, urban design, and public ritual, the emphasis on a visible, 
rational, disciplined social facade seemed to prevail.12 Stites suggests 
that there is some inverse relation between this public face of order 
and purpose and the near anarchy that reigned in society at large: "As 
in the case of all such utopias, its organizers described it in rational, 
symmetrical terms, in the mathematical language of planning, control 
figures, statistics, projections and precise commands. As in the vision 
of military colonies, which the utopian plan faintly resembled, its ra­
tional facade barely obscured the oceans of misery, disorder, chaos, 
corruption and whimsicality that went with it.”13
One possible implication of Stites’s assertion is that, in some cir­
cumstances, what I call the miniaturization of order may be substi­
tuted for the real thing. A facade or a small, easily managed zone of 
order and conformity may come to be an end in itself; the representa­
tion may usurp the reality. Miniatures and small experiments have, of 
course, an important role in studying larger phenomena. Model air­
craft built to scale and wind tunnels are essential steps in the design of 
new airplanes. But when the two are confused—when, say, the gen­
eral mistakes the parade ground for the battlefield itself—the conse­
quences are potentially disastrous.
A Soviet-American Fetish: Industrial Farming
Before plunging into a discussion of the practice and logic of Soviet 
collectivization, we should recognize that the rationalization of farm­
ing on a huge, even national, scale was part of a faith shared by social 
engineers and agricultural planners throughout the world.14 And they 
were conscious of being engaged in a common endeavor. Like the ar­
chitects of the Congres Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne, they

Soviet Collectivization 197
kept in touch through journals, professional conferences, and exhibi­
tions. The connections were strongest between American agronomists 
and their Russian colleagues—connections that were not entirely 
broken even during the Cold War. Working in vastly different eco­
nomic and political environments, the Russians tended to be envious 
of the level of capitalization, particularly in mechanization, of Ameri­
can farms while the Americans were envious of the political scope of 
Soviet planning. The degree to which they were working together to 
create a new world of large-scale, rational, industrial agriculture can 
be judged by this brief account of their relationship.
The high tide of enthusiasm for applying industrial methods to agri­
culture in the United States stretched roughly from 1910 to the end of 
the 1930s. Agricultural engineers, a new specialty, were the main car­
riers of this enthusiasm; influenced by currents in their parent disci­
pline, industrial engineering, and most particularly by the doctrines of 
the prophet of time-motion studies, Frederick Taylor, they reconceptu­
alized the farm as a “food and fiber factory.’’15 Taylorist principles of 
scientifically measuring work processes in order to break them down 
into simple, repetitive motions that an unskilled worker could learn 
quickly might work well enough on the factory floor,16 but their appli­
cation to the variegated and nonrepetitive requirements of growing 
crops was questionable. Agricultural engineers therefore turned to 
those aspects of farm operation that might be more easily standard­
ized. They tried to rationalize the layout of farm buildings, to stan­
dardize machinery and tools, and to promote the mechanization of 
major grain crops.
The professional instincts of the agricultural engineers led them to 
try to replicate as much as possible the features of the modern factory. 
This impelled them to insist on enlarging the scale of the typical small 
farm so that it could mass-produce standard agricultural commodities, 
mechanize its operation, and thereby, it was thought, greatly reduce 
the unit cost of production.17
As we shall see later, the industrial model was applicable to some, 
but not all, of agriculture. It was nonetheless applied indiscriminately 
as a creed rather than a scientific hypothesis to be examined skepti­
cally. The modernist confidence in huge scale, centralization of pro­
duction, standardized mass commodities, and mechanization was so 
hegemonic in the leading sector of industry that it became an article of 
faith that the same principles would work, pari passu, in agriculture.
Many efforts were made to put this faith to the test. Perhaps the 
most audacious was the Thomas Campbell "farm" in Montana, begun 
— or, perhaps I should say, founded—in 1918.18 It was an industrial

198 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
farm in more than one respect. Shares were sold by prospectuses de­
scribing the enterprise as an “industrial opportunity”; J. P. Morgan, the 
financier, helped to raise $2 million from the public. The Montana Farm­
ing Corporation was a monster wheat farm of ninety-five thousand 
acres, much of it leased from four Native American tribes. Despite the 
private investment, the enterprise would never have gotten off the 
ground without help and subsidies from the Department of Interior 
and the United States Department of Agriculture (u sd a).
Proclaiming that farming was about 90 percent engineering and 
only 10 percent agriculture, Campbell set about standardizing as much 
of his operation as possible. He grew wheat and flax, two hardy crops 
that needed little if any attention between planting and harvest time.19 
The land he farmed was the agricultural equivalent of the bulldozed 
site of Brasilia. It was virgin soil, with a natural fertility that would 
eliminate the need for fertilizer. The topography also vastly simplified 
matters: it was flat, with no forests, creeks, rocks, or ridges that 
would impede the smooth course of machinery over its surface. In 
other words, the selection of the simplest, most standardized crops 
and the leasing of something very close to a blank agricultural space 
were calculated to favor the application of industrial methods. In the 
first year Campbell bought thirty-three tractors, forty binders, ten 
threshing machines, four combines, and one hundred wagons; he em­
ployed about fifty men most of the year, but hired as many as two hun­
dred during the peak season.20
This is not the place to chronicle the fortunes of the Montana 
Farming Corporation, and in any event Deborah Fitzgerald has done 
so splendidly.21 Suffice it to note that a drought in the second year and 
the elimination of a government support for prices the following year 
led to a collapse that cost J. P. Morgan $ 1 million. The Campbell farm 
faced other problems besides weather and prices: soil differences, labor 
turnover, the difficulty of finding skilled, resourceful workers who would 
need little supervision. Although the corporation struggled on until 
Campbell's death in 1966, it provided no evidence that industrial farms 
were superior to family farms in efficiency and profitability. The ad­
vantages industrial farms did have over smaller producers were of an­
other kind. Their very size gave them an edge in access to credit, polit­
ical influence (relevant to taxes, support payments, and the avoidance 
of foreclosure), and marketing muscle. What they gave away in agility 
and quality labor they often made up for in their considerable political 
and economic clout.
Many large industrial farms managed along scientific lines were es­
tablished in the 1920s and 1930s.22 Some of them were the stepchil­

Soviet Collectivization 199
dren of depression foreclosures that left banks and insurance compa­
nies holding many farms they could not sell. Such "chain farms,” con­
sisting of as many as six hundred farmsteads organized into one inte­
grated operation (one farm to farrow pigs, say, and another to feed 
them out, along the lines of contemporary "contract farming" for poul­
try), were quite common, and buying into them was a speculative in­
vestment.23 They proved no more competitive to the family farm than 
did Campbell’s corporation. In fact, they were so highly capitalized that 
they were vulnerable to unfavorable credit markets and lower farm 
gate prices, given their high fixed costs in payroll and interest. The 
family farm could, by contrast, more easily tighten its belt and move 
into a subsistence mode.
The most striking proposal designed to reconcile the American 
small-property regime with huge economies of scale and scientific, 
centralized management was that of Mordecai Ezekial and Sherman 
Johnson in 1930. They outlined a “national farming corporation" that 
would incorporate all farms. It would be vertically integrated and cen­
tralized and “could move raw farming materials through the individ­
ual farms of the country, could establish production goals and quotas, 
distribute machinery, labor and capital, and move farm products from 
one region to another for processing and use. Bearing a striking re­
semblance to the industrial world, this organizational plan was a sort 
of gigantic conveyor belt.”24 Ezekial was no doubt influenced by his 
recent tour of Russian collective farms as well as by the plight of the 
depression-stricken economy. Johnson and Ezekial were hardly alone 
in calling for centralized industrial farming on a massive scale, not just 
as a response to economic crisis but as a matter of confidence in an in­
eluctable high-modernist future. The following expression of that con­
fidence is fairly representative: "Collectivization is posed by history 
and economics. Politically, the small farmer or peasant is a drag on 
progress. Technically, he is as antiquated as the small machinists who 
once put automobiles together by hand in little wooden sheds. The 
Russians have been the first to see this clearly, and to adapt themselves 
to historical necessity.’’25
Behind these admiring references to Russia was less a specifically 
political ideology than a shared high-modernist faith. That faith was re­
inforced by something on the order of an improvised, high-modernist 
exchange program. A great many Russian agronomists and engineers 
came to the United States, which they regarded as the Mecca of indus­
trial farming. Their tour of American agriculture nearly always in­
cluded a visit to Campbell’s Montana Farming Corporation and to M. 
L. Wilson, who in 1928 headed the Department of Agricultural Eco­

200 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
nomics at Montana State University and later became a high-level 
official in the Department of Agriculture under Henry Wallace. The 
Russians were so taken with Campbell’s farm that they said they would 
provide him with 1 million acres if he would come to the Soviet Union 
and demonstrate his farming methods.26
Traffic in the other direction was just as brisk. The Soviet Union 
had hired thousands of American technicians and engineers to help in 
the design of various elements of Soviet industrial production, includ­
ing the production of tractors and other farm machinery. By 1927, the 
Soviet Union had also purchased twenty-seven thousand American 
tractors. Many of the American visitors, such as Ezekial, admired So­
viet state farms, which by 1930 offered the promise of collectivized 
agriculture on a massive scale. The Americans were impressed not just 
by the sheer size of the state farms but also by the fact that technical 
specialists—agronomists, economists, engineers, statisticians—were, 
it seemed, developing Russian production along rational, egalitarian 
lines. The failure of the Western market economy in 1930 reinforced 
the attractiveness of the Soviet experiment. Visitors traveling in either 
direction returned to their own country thinking that they had seen the 
future.27
As Deborah Fitzgerald and Lewis Feuer argue, the attraction that 
collectivization held for American agricultural modernizers had little 
to do with a belief in Marxism or an affinity for Soviet life.28 "Rather it 
was because the Soviet idea of growing wheat on an industrial scale 
and in an industrial fashion was similar to American ideas about the 
direction American agriculture should take.”29 Soviet collectivization 
represented, to these American viewers, an enormous demonstration 
project without the political inconveniences of American institutions; 
“that is, the Americans viewed the giant Soviet farms as huge experi­
ment stations on which Americans could try out their most radical 
ideas for increasing agricultural production, and, in particular, wheat 
production. Many of the things they wished to learn more about simply 
could not be tried in America, partly because it would cost too much, 
partly because no suitable large farmsite was available, and partly be­
cause many farmers and farm laborers would be alarmed at the impli­
cations of this experimentation.’’30 The hope was that the Soviet exper­
iment would be to American industrial agronomy more or less what 
the Tennessee Valley Authority was to be to American regional plan­
ning: a proving ground and a possible model for adoption.
Although Campbell did not accept the Soviet offer of a vast demon­
stration farm, others did. M. L. Wilson, Harold Ware (who had exten­
sive experience in the Soviet Union), and Guy Riggin were invited to

Soviet Collectivization 201
plan a huge mechanized wheat farm of some 500,000 acres of virgin 
land. It would be, Wilson wrote to a friend, the largest mechanized 
wheat farm in the world. They planned the entire farm layout, labor 
force, machinery needs, crop rotations, and lockstep work schedule in a 
Chicago hotel room in two weeks in December 1928.31 The fact that they 
imagined that such a farm could be planned in a Chicago hotel room un­
derlines their presumption that the key issues were abstract, technical 
interrelationships that were context-free. As Fitzgerald perceptively ex­
plains: "Even in the U.S., those plans would have been optimistic, actu­
ally, because they were based on an unrealistic idealization of nature 
and human behavior. And insofar as the plans represented what the 
Americans would do if they had millions of acres of flat land, lots of la­
borers, and a government commitment to spare no expense in meeting 
production goals, the plans were designed for an abstract, theoretical kind 
of place. This agricultural place, which did not correspond to America, 
Russia, or any other actual location, obeyed the laws of physics and 
chemistry, recognized no political or ideological stance.”32
The giant sovkhoz, named Verblud, which they established near 
Rostov-on-Don, one thousand miles south of Moscow, comprised 
375,000 acres that were to be sown to wheat. As an economic proposi­
tion, it was an abject failure, although in the early years it did produce 
large quantities of wheat. The detailed reasons for the failure are of 
less interest for our purposes than the fact that most of them could be 
summarized under the rubric of context. It was the specific context of 
this specific farm that defeated them. The farm, unlike the plan, was 
not a hypothecated, generic, abstract farm but an unpredictable, com­
plex, and particular farm, with its own unique combination of soils, so­
cial structure, administrative culture, weather, political strictures, ma­
chinery, roads, and the work skills and habits of its employees. As we 
shall see, it resembled Brasilia in being the kind of failure typical of 
ambitious high-modernist schemes for which local knowledge, prac­
tice, and context are considered irrelevant or at best an annoyance to 
be circumvented.
Collectivization in Soviet Russia
What we have here isn’t a mechanism, it’s people living here. You can't get 
them squared around until they get themselves arranged. I used to think of the 
revolution as a steam engine, but now I see that it’s not.
—Andrei Platonov, Chevengur
The collectivization of Soviet agriculture was an extreme but diagnos­
tic case of authoritarian high-modernist planning. It represented an

202 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
unprecedented transformation of agrarian life and production, and it 
was imposed by all the brute force at the state's disposal. The officials 
who directed this massive change, moreover, were operating in rela­
tive ignorance of the ecological, social, and economic arrangements 
that underwrote the rural economy. They were flying blind.
Between early 1930 and 1934, the Soviet state waged a virtual war 
in the countryside. Realizing that he could not depend on the rural 
Soviets to “liquidate the kulaks’’ and collectivize, Stalin dispatched 
twenty-five thousand battle-tested, urban Communists and proletari­
ans with full powers to requisition grain, arrest resistors, and collec­
tivize. He was convinced that the peasantry was trying to bring down 
the Soviet state. In reply to a personal letter from Mikhail Sholokhov 
(author of And Quiet Flows the Don) alerting him to the fact that peas­
ants along the Don were on the verge of starvation, Stalin replied, “The 
esteemed grain growers of your district (and not only of your district 
alone) carried on an ‘Italian strike’ (ital'ianka), sabotage!, and were 
not loathe to leave the workers and the Red Army without bread. That 
the sabotage was quiet and outwardly harmless (without bloodshed) 
does not change the fact that the esteemed grain growers waged what 
was virtually a ‘quiet’ war against Soviet power. A war of starvation, 
dear comrade Sholokhov.”33
The human costs of that war are still in dispute, but they were un­
deniably grievous. Estimates of the death toll alone, as a result of the 
“dekulakization” and collectivization campaigns and the ensuing fam­
ine, range from a “modest” 3 or 4 million to, as some current Soviet fig­
ures indicate, more than 20 million. The higher estimates have, if any­
thing, gained more credibility as new archival material has become 
available. Behind the deaths rose a level of social disruption and vio­
lence that often exceeded that of the civil war immediately following 
the revolution. Millions fled to the cities or to the frontier, the infamous 
gulag was vastly enlarged, open rebellion and famine raged in much of 
the countryside, and more than half of the nation's livestock (and draft 
power) was slaughtered.34
By 1934, the state had “won" its war with the peasantry. If ever a war 
earned the designation “Pyrrhic victory,” this is the one. The sovkhoz 
(state farms) and kolkhoz (collective farms) failed to deliver on any of 
the specifically socialist goals envisioned by Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, and 
most Bolsheviks. They were an evident failure in raising the level of 
grain production or of producing cheap and abundant foodstuffs for 
an urban, industrializing workforce. They failed to become the techni­
cally efficient and innovative farms that Lenin had anticipated. Even in 
the realm of electrification, Lenin’s touchstone of modernization, only

Soviet Collectivization 203
one in twenty-five collective farms had electricity by the eve of World 
War II. By no measure had the collectivization of agriculture created 
“new men and women” in the countryside or abolished the cultural 
difference between the country and the city. For the next half-century, 
the yields per hectare of many crops were stagnant or actually infe­
rior to the levels recorded in the 1920s or the levels reached before 
the Revolution.35
At another level, collectivization was, in a curious state-centric way, 
a qualified success. Collectivization proved a rough-and-ready instru­
ment for the twin goals of traditional statecraft: appropriation and po­
litical control. Though the Soviet kolkhoz may have failed badly at gen­
erating huge surpluses of foodstuffs, it served well enough as a means 
whereby the state could determine cropping patterns, fix real rural 
wages, appropriate a large share of whatever grain was produced, and 
politically emasculate the countryside.36
The great achievement, if one can call it that, of the Soviet state in 
the agricultural sector was to take a social and economic terrain sin­
gularly unfavorable to appropriation and control and to create institu­
tional forms and production units far better adapted to monitoring, 
managing, appropriating, and controlling from above. The rural soci­
ety that the Soviet state inherited (and for a time encouraged) was one 
in which the allies of the czarist state, the great landlords and the aristo­
cratic officeholders, had been swept away and been replaced by small­
holding and middle peasants, artisans, private traders, and all sorts of 
mobile laborers and lumpen elements.37 Confronting a tumultuous, 
footloose, and "headless" (acephalous) rural society which was hard to 
control and which had few political assets, the Bolsheviks, like the sci­
entific foresters, set about redesigning their environment with a few 
simple goals in mind. They created, in place of what they had inherited, 
a new landscape of large, hierarchical, state-managed farms whose 
cropping patterns and procurement quotas were centrally mandated 
and whose population was, by law, immobile. The system thus devised 
served for nearly sixty years as a mechanism for procurement and con­
trol at a massive cost in stagnation, waste, demoralization, and eco­
logical failure.
That collectivized agriculture persisted for sixty years was a tribute 
less to the plan of the state than to the improvisations, gray markets, 
bartering, and ingenuity that partly compensated for its failures. Just 
as an "informal Brasilia,” which had no legitimate place in official 
plans, arose to make the city viable, so did a set of informal practices 
lying outside the formal command economy—and often outside Soviet 
law as well—arise to circumvent some of the colossal waste and

204 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
inefficiencies built into the system. Collectivized agriculture, in other 
words, never quite operated according to the hierarchical grid of its 
production plans and procurements.
What seems clear, in the brief account that follows, is that collec­
tivization per se cannot be laid solely at the feet of Stalin, though he 
bore much responsibility for its exceptional speed and brutality.38 A 
collectivized agriculture was always part of the Bolshevik map of the 
future, and the great procurement struggles of the late 1920s could 
hardly have had any other outcome in the context of the decision to 
pursue forced-draft industrialization. The party’s high-modernist faith 
in great collectivist schemes survived long after the desperate impro­
visations of the early 1930s. That faith, which claimed to be both aes­
thetic and scientific, is clearly visible in a much later agrarian high- 
modernist dream: namely, Khrushchev’s virgin lands scheme, launched 
well after Stalin’s death and after his crimes during collectivization 
had been publicly denounced. What is remarkable is how long these 
beliefs and structures prevailed, in spite of the evidence of their mani­
fold failings.
Round One: The Bolshevik State and the Peasantry
It sometimes seems to me that if I could persuade everyone to say “system­
atize" each time he wanted to say "liberate” and to say "mobilization" every 
time he wanted to say “reform” or "progress” I would not have to write long 
books about government-peasant interaction in Russia.
— George Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize
In the particular book quoted above, Yaney was writing about pre­
revolutionary Russia, but he could just as easily have been writing 
about the Bolshevik state. Until 1930, the continuities between the 
rural policy of the Leninist state and its czarist predecessor are more 
striking than their differences. There is the same belief in reform from 
above and in large, modern, mechanized farms as the key to produc­
tive agriculture. There is also, alas, the same high level of ignorance 
about a very complex rural economy coupled, disastrously, with heavy- 
handed raids on the countryside to seize grain by force. Although the 
continuities persisted even after the institutional revolution of 1930, 
what is new about the all-out drive to collectivize is the revolutionary 
state’s willingness to completely remake the institutional landscape of 
the agrarian sector, and at whatever cost.
The new Bolshevik state faced a rural society that was significantly 
more opaque, resistant, autonomous, and hostile than the one en­
countered by the czarist bureaucracy. If the czarist officials had pro­

Soviet Collectivization 205
voked massive defiance and evasion in their "crude Muscovite tribute- 
collecting methods” during World War I,39 there was every reason to 
suspect that the Bolsheviks would have an even harder time squeezing 
grain from the countryside.
If much of the countryside was hostile to the Bolsheviks, the senti­
ment was abundantly reciprocated. For Lenin, as we have seen, the 
Land Decree, which gave to the peasants the land that they had seized, 
had been a strategic maneuver designed to buy rural quiescence while 
power was consolidated; he had no doubt that peasant smallholdings 
must eventually be abolished in favor of large, socialized farms. For 
Trotsky, the sooner what he called "the Russia of icons and cockroaches” 
was transformed and “urbanized,” the better. And for many of the newly 
urbanized, rank-and-file Bolsheviks, the abolition of the “dark and back­
ward peasant world” was a "vital part of their own emerging personal 
and working-class identity.”40
The peasantry was virtually terra incognita to the Bolsheviks. At the 
time of the revolution, the party had throughout Russia a grand total of 
494 “peasant” members (most of them probably rural intelligentsia).41 
Most villagers had never seen a Communist, although they may well 
have heard of the Bolshevik decree confirming peasant ownership of 
the land that had been seized. The only revolutionary party with any 
rural following was the Social Revolutionaries, whose populist roots 
tended to make them unsympathetic to Lenin’s authoritarian outlook.
The effects of the revolutionary process itself had rendered rural so­
ciety more opaque and hence more difficult to tax. There had already 
been a sweeping seizure of land, dignified, retrospectively, by the in­
appropriate term "land reform.” In fact, after the collapse of the offen­
sive into Austria during the war and the subsequent mass desertions, 
much of the land of the gentry and church, as well as "crown land,” had 
been absorbed by the peasantry. Rich peasants cultivating independent 
farmsteads (the “separators” of the Stolypin reforms) were typically 
forced back into the village allotments, and rural society was in effect 
radically compressed. The very rich had been dispossessed, and many 
of the very poor became smallholders for the first time in their lives. 
According to one set of figures, the number of landless rural laborers 
in Russia dropped by half, and the average peasant holding increased 
by 20 percent (in the Ukraine, by 100 percent). A total of 248 million 
acres was confiscated, almost always by local initiative, from large and 
small landlords and added to peasant holdings, which now averaged 
about 70 acres per household.42
From the perspective of a tax official or a military procurement 
unit, the situation was nearly unfathomable. The land-tenure status in

206 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
each village had changed dramatically. Prior landholding records, if 
they existed at all, were entirely unreliable as a guide to current land 
claims. Each village was unique in many respects, and, even if it could 
in principle have been “mapped,” the populations mobility and mili­
tary turmoil of the period all but guaranteed that the map would have 
been made obsolete in six months or sooner. The combination, then, of 
smallholdings, communal tenure, and constant change, both spatial 
and temporal, operated as an impenetrable barrier to any finely tuned 
tax system.
Two additional consequences of the revolution in the countryside 
compounded the difficulties of state officials. Before 1917, large peas­
ant farms and landlord enterprises had produced nearly three-fourths 
of the grain marketed for domestic use and export. It was this sector of 
the rural economy that had fed the cities. Now it was gone. The bulk of 
the remaining cultivators were consuming a much larger share of their 
own yield. They would not surrender this grain without a fight. The 
new, more egalitarian distribution of land meant that extracting any­
thing like the czarist "take" in grain would bring the Bolsheviks in con­
flict with the subsistence needs of small and middle peasants.43
The second and perhaps decisive consequence of the revolution 
was that it had greatly enhanced the determination and capacity of 
peasant communities to resist the state. Every revolution creates a tem­
porary power vacuum when the power of the ancien regime has been 
destroyed but the revolutionary regime has not yet asserted itself 
throughout the territory. Inasmuch as the Bolsheviks were largely 
urban and found themselves fighting an extended civil war, the power 
vacuum in much of the countryside was unusually pronounced. It was 
the first time, as Orlando Figes reminds us, that the villages, although 
in straitened circumstances, were free to organize their own affairs.44 
As we have seen, the villagers typically forced out or burned out the 
gentry, seized the land (including rights to common land and forests), 
and forced the separators back into the communes. The villages tended 
to behave as autonomous republics, well disposed to the Reds as long 
as they confirmed the local "revolution," but strongly resistant to forced 
levies of grain, livestock, or men from any quarter. In this situation, the 
fledgling Bolshevik state, arriving as it often did in the form of military 
plunder, must have been experienced by the peasantry as a reconquest 
of the countryside by the state—as a brand of colonization that threat­
ened their newly won autonomy.
Given the political atmosphere in rural Russia, even a government 
having detailed knowledge of the agricultural economy, a local base of 
support, and a knack for diplomatic tact would have confronted great

Soviet Collectivization 207
difficulties. The Bolsheviks lacked all three. A tax system based on in­
come or wealth was possible only with a valid cadastral map and an up- 
to-date census, neither of which existed. Farm income, moreover, var­
ied greatly with regard to yields and prices from year to year, so any 
income tax would have had to have been exceptionally sensitive to 
these conditions in local harvests. Not only did the new state lack the 
basic information it needed to govern efficiently, it had also largely de­
stroyed the czarist state apparatus of local officials, gentry, and special­
ists in finance and agronomy who had managed, however inadequately, 
to collect taxes and grain during the war. Above all, the Bolsheviks gen­
erally lacked the village-level native trackers who could have helped 
them to find their way in a hostile and confusing environment. The vil­
lage soviets that were supposed to play this role were typically headed 
by villagers loyal to local interests rather than to the center. An alter­
native organ, the Committee of the Rural Poor (kombedy), which pur­
ported to represent the rural proletariat in local class struggles, was ei­
ther successfully coopted by the village or locked in often violent 
conflict with the village soviet.45
The inscrutability of the mir to most Bolshevik officials was not 
simply a result of their urban social origins and the admitted complex­
ity of village affairs. It was also the product of a conscious local strat­
egy, one that had demonstrated its protective value in earlier conflicts 
with the gentry and the state. The local commune had a long history of 
underreporting its arable land and overreporting its population in 
order to appear as poor and untaxable as possible.46 As a result of such 
deception in the census of 1917, the arable land in Russia had been un­
derestimated by about 15 percent. Now, in addition to the woodland, 
pastures, and open land that the peasantry had earlier converted into 
cropland without reporting it, they had an interest in hiding much of 
the land they had just seized from the landlords and the gentry. Vil­
lage committees did, of course, keep records for allocating allotment 
land, organizing communal plow teams, fixing grazing schedules, and 
so on, but none of these records was made available either to officials 
or to the kombedy. A popular saying of the period captures the situa­
tion nicely: the peasant “owned by decree" (that is, the Land Decree) 
but “lived secretly.”
How did the hard-pressed state find its way in this labyrinth? 
Where possible, the Bolsheviks did try to establish large state farms or 
collective farms. Many of these were “Potemkin collectives" designed 
merely to give cover of legitimacy to existing practices. But where 
they were not a sham, they revealed the political and administrative 
attractiveness of a radical simplification of the landholding and tax­

208 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
paying unit in the countryside. Yaney’s summary of the logic entailed 
is impeccable.
From a technical point of view it was infinitely easier to plough up 
large units of land without regard for individual claims than it was to 
identify each family allotment, measure its value in the peasants' tradi­
tional terms, and then painfully transpose it from scattered strips into 
a consolidated farm. Then, too, a capital city administrator could not 
help but prefer to supervise and tax large productive units and not 
have to deal with separate farmers. . . . The collective had a dual ap­
peal to authentic agrarian reformers. They represented a social ideal 
for rhetorical purposes, and at the same time they seemed to simplify 
the technical problems of land reform and state control.47
In the turmoil of 1917-21, not many such agrarian experiments were 
possible, and those that were attempted generally failed badly. They 
were, however, a straw in the wind for the full collectivization cam­
paign a decade later.
Unable to remake the rural landscape, the Bolsheviks turned to the 
same methods of forced tribute under martial law that had been used 
by their czarist predecessors during the war. The term "martial law,” 
however, conveys an orderliness that was absent from actual practice. 
Armed bands (otriady)—some authorized and others formed sponta­
neously by hungry townsmen—plundered the countryside during the 
grain crisis of spring and summer 1918, securing whatever they could. 
Insofar as grain procurement quotas were set at all, they were “purely 
mechanical accounting figures originating from an unreliable estimate 
of arable and assuming a good harvest." They were, from the begin­
ning, “fictional and unfulfillable.”48 The procurement of grain looked 
more like plunder and theft than delivery and purchase. Over 150 dis­
tinct uprisings, by one estimate, erupted against the state’s grain seiz­
ures. Since the Bolsheviks had, in March 1918, renamed themselves 
the Communist Party, many of the rebels claimed to be for the Bolshe­
viks and the Soviets (whom they associated with the Land Decree) and 
against the Communists. Lenin, referring to the peasant uprisings in 
Tambov, the Volga, and the Ukraine, declared that they posed more of 
a threat than all the Whites put together. Desperate peasant resistance 
had in fact all but starved the cities out of existence,49 and in early 
1921, the party, for the first time, turned its guns on its own rebellious 
sailors and workers in Kronstadt. At this point the beleaguered party 
beat a tactical retreat, abandoning War Communism and inaugurating 
the New Economic Policy (n e p), which condoned free trade and small 
property. As Figes notes, “Having defeated the White Army, backed by 
eight Western powers, the Bolshevik government surrendered before

Soviet Collectivization 209
its own peasants.’’50 It was a hollow victory. The deaths from the 
hunger and epidemics of 1921-22 nearly equaled the toll claimed by 
World War I and the civil war combined.
Round Two: High Modernism and Procurement
The conjunction of a high-modernist faith in what agriculture 
should look like in the future and a more immediate crisis of state ap­
propriation helped to spark the all-out drive to collectivization in the 
winter of 1929-30. In focusing on just these two issues, we must nec­
essarily leave to others (and they are a multitude) the gripping issues 
of the human costs of collectivization, the struggle with the "right” op­
position led by Bukharin, and whether Stalin intended to liquidate 
Ukrainian culture as well as many Ukrainians.
There is no doubt that Stalin shared Lenin’s faith in industrial agri­
culture. The aim of collectivization, he said in May 1928, was “to trans­
fer from small, backward, and fragmented peasant farms to consoli­
dated, big, public farms, provided with machines, equipped with the 
data of science, and capable of producing the greatest quantity of grain 
for the market.”51
This dream had been deferred in 1921. There had been some hope 
that a gradually expanding collective sector in the 1920s could provide 
as much as one-third of the country’s grain needs. Instead, the collec­
tivized sector (both the state farms and the collective farms), which ab­
sorbed 10 percent of the labor force, produced a dismal 2.2 percent of 
gross farm production.52 When Stalin decided on a crash industrial­
ization program, it was clear that the existing socialist agricultural 
sector could not provide either the food for a rapidly growing urban 
workforce or the grain exports necessary to finance the imported tech­
nology needed for industrial growth. The middle and rich peasants, 
many of them newly prosperous since the New Economic Policy, had 
the grain he needed.
Beginning in 1928, the official requisition policy put the state on a 
collision course with the peasantry. The mandated delivery price of 
grain was one-fifth of the market price, and the regime returned to 
using police methods as peasant resistance stiffened.53 When the pro­
curements faltered, those who refused to deliver what was required 
(who, along with anyone else opposing collectivization, were called 
kulaks, regardless of their economic standing) were arrested for de­
portation or execution, and all their grain, equipment, land, and live­
stock were seized and sold. The orders sent to those directly in charge 
of grain procurement specified that they were to arrange meetings of

210 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
poor peasants to make it seem as if the initiative had come from below. 
It was in the context of this war over grain, and not as a carefully 
planned policy initiative, that the decision to force “total" (sploshnaia) 
collectivization was made in late 1929. Scholars who agree on little 
else are in accord on this point: the overriding purpose of collectiviza­
tion was to ensure the seizure of grain. Fitzpatrick begins her study of 
the collectives with this assertion: “The main purpose of collectiviza­
tion was to increase state grain procurements and reduce the peasants' 
ability to withhold grain from the market. This purpose was obvious to 
peasants from the start, since the collectivization drive of the winter of 
1929-30 was the culmination of more than two years of bitter struggle 
between the peasants and the state over grain procurements.”54 Robert 
Conquest concurs: “The collective farms were essentially a chosen 
mechanism for extracting grain and other products.”55
It appears that this was also how the vast majority of the peasantry 
saw it, judging from their determined resistance and what we know of 
their views. The seizure of grain threatened their survival. The peasant 
depicted in Andrei Platonov’s novel about collectivization sees how the 
seizure of grain negates the earlier land reform: “It’s a sly business. 
First you hand over the land, and then you take away the grain, right 
down to the last kernel. You can choke on land like that! The muzhik 
doesn’t have anything left from the land except the horizon. Who are 
you fooling?’’56 At least as threatening was the loss of what little margin 
of social and economic autonomy the peasantry had achieved since the 
revolution. Even poor peasants were afraid of collectivization, because 
“it would involve giving up one’s land and implements and working 
with other families, under orders, not temporarily, as in the army, but 
forever—it means the barracks for life.”57 Unable to rely on any sig­
nificant rural support, Stalin dispatched twenty-five thousand “pleni­
potentiaries” (party members) from the towns and factories “to destroy 
the peasant commune and replace it by a collective economy subordi­
nate to the state,” whatever the cost.58
Authoritarian High-Modemist Theory and the Practice of Serfdom
If the move to “total” collectivization was directly animated by the 
party’s determination to seize the land and the crops sown on it once 
and for all, it was a determination filtered through a high-modernist 
lens. Although the Bolsheviks might disagree about means, they did 
think they knew exactly what modern agriculture should look like in 
the end; their understanding was as much visual as scientific. Modern 
agriculture was to be large in scale, the larger the better; it was to be

Soviet Collectivization 211
highly mechanized and run hierarchically along scientific, Taylorist 
principles. Above all, the cultivators were to resemble a highly skilled 
and disciplined proletariat, not a peasantry. Stalin himself, before prac­
tical failures discredited a faith in colossal projects, favored collec­
tive farms (“grain factories”) of 125,000 to 250,000 acres, as in the 
American-assisted scheme described earlier.59
The utopian abstraction of the vision was matched, on the ground, 
by wildly unrealistic planning. Given a map and a few assumptions 
about scale and mechanization, a specialist could devise a plan with 
little reference to local knowledge and conditions. A visiting agricul­
tural official wrote back to Moscow from the Urals in March 1930 to 
complain that, "on the instruction of the Raion Executive Committee, 
twelve agronomists have been sitting for twenty days composing an 
operational-production plan for the non-existent raion commune with­
out ever leaving their offices or going out into the field.”60 When an­
other bureaucratic monstrosity in Velikie Lukie in the west proved un­
wieldy, the planners simply reduced the scale without sacrificing 
abstraction. They divided the 80,000-hectare scheme into thirty-two 
equal squares of 2,500 hectares each, with one square constituting a 
kolkhoz. “The squares were drawn on a map without any reference to 
actual villages, settlements, rivers, hills, swamps or other demographic 
and topological characteristics of the land.”61
Semiotically, we cannot understand this modernist vision of agri­
culture as an isolated ideological fragment. It is always seen as the 
negation of the existing rural world. A kolkhoz is meant to replace a 
mir or village, machines to replace horse-drawn plows and hand labor, 
proletarian workers to replace peasants, scientific agriculture to re­
place folk tradition and superstition, education to replace ignorance 
and malokultumyi, and abundance to replace bare subsistence. Col­
lectivization was meant to spell the end of the peasantry and its way of 
life. The introduction of a socialist economy entailed a cultural revolu­
tion as well; the "dark” narod, the peasants who were perhaps the great 
remaining, intractable threat to the Bolshevik state, were to be re­
placed by rational, industrious, de-Christianized, progressive-thinking 
kolkhoz workers.62 The scale of collectivization was intended to efface 
the peasantry and its institutions, thereby narrowing the gulf between 
the rural and urban worlds. Underlying the whole plan, of course, 
was the assumption that the great collective farms would operate like 
factories in a centralized economy, in this case fulfilling state orders 
for grain and other agricultural products. As if to drive the point 
home, the state confiscated roughly 63 percent of the entire harvest in 
1931.

212 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
From a central planner's perspective, one great advantage of col­
lectivization is that the state acquired control over how much of each 
crop was sown. Starting with the state's needs for grains, meat, dairy 
products, and so on, the state could theoretically build those needs into 
its instructions to the collective sector. In practice, the sowing plans 
imposed from above were often wholly unreasonable. The land de­
partments, which prepared the plans, knew little about the crops they 
were mandating, the inputs needed to grow them locally, or local soil 
conditions. Nevertheless, they had quotas to fill, and fill them they did. 
When, in 1935, A. Iakovlev, the head of the Central Committee's agri­
cultural department, called for collective farms to be managed by “per­
manent cadres” who "genuinely knew their fields," he implied that the 
present incumbents did not.63 We catch a glimpse of the disasters from 
the Great Purges of 1936-37, when a certain amount of peasant criti­
cism of kolkhoz officials was briefly encouraged in order to detect 
“wreckers." One kolkhoz was instructed to plow meadows and open 
land, without which they could not have fed their livestock. Another 
received sowing orders that doubled the previous acreage allotted for 
hay fields by taking in private plots and quicksands.64
The planners clearly favored monoculture and a far-reaching, strict 
division of labor. Entire regions, and certainly individual kolkhozy, 
were increasingly specialized, producing only, say, wheat, livestock, 
cotton, or potatoes.65 In the case of livestock production, one kolkhoz 
would produce fodder for beef cattle or hogs while another would 
raise and breed them. The logic behind kolkhoz and regional special­
ization was roughly comparable to the logic behind functionally spe­
cific urban zones. Specialization reduced the number of variables that 
agronomists had to consider; it also increased the administrative rou- 
tinization of work and hence the power and knowledge of central 
officials.
Procurement followed a comparable centralizing logic. Starting 
with the needs of the plan and a usually unreliable estimate of the har­
vest, a series of quotas for every oblast, raion, and kolkhoz was me­
chanically derived. Each kolkhoz then claimed that its quota was im­
possible to fulfill and appealed to have it lowered. Actually meeting a 
quota, they knew from bitter experience, only raised the ante for the 
next round of procurements. In this respect collective farmers were in 
a more precarious situation than industrial workers, who still received 
their wages and ration cards whether or not the factory met its quota. 
For the kolkhozniki, however, meeting the quota might mean starva­
tion. Indeed, the great famine of 1933-34 can only be called a collec­
tivization and procurement famine. Those who were tempted to make

Soviet Collectivization 213
trouble risked running afoul of a more grisly quota: the one for kulaks 
and enemies of the state.
For much of the peasantry, the authoritarian labor regime of the 
kolkhoz seemed not only to jeopardize their subsistence but to revoke 
many of the freedoms they had won since their emancipation in 1861. 
They compared collectivization to the serfdom their grandparents re­
membered. As one early sovkhoz worker put it, "The sovkhozy are al­
ways forcing the peasant to work; they make the peasants weed their 
fields. And they don't even give us bread or water. What will come of 
all this? It’s like barschina [feudal labor dues] all over again.”66 The 
peasants began to say that the acronym for the All-Union Communist 
Party—v k p— stood for vtoroe krepostnoe pravo, or “second serfdom.”67 
The parallel was not a mere figure of speech; the resemblances to serf­
dom were remarkable.68 The kolkhoz members were required to work 
on the state’s land at least half-time for wages, in cash or kind, that 
were derisory. They depended largely on their own small private 
plots to grow the food they needed (other than grain), although they 
had little free time to cultivate their gardens.69 The quantity to be de­
livered and price paid for kolkhoz produce was set by the state. The 
kolkhozniki owed annual corvee labor dues for roadwork and cartage. 
They were obliged to hand over quotas of milk, meat, eggs, and so on 
from their private plots. The collective's officials, like feudal masters, 
were wont to use kolkhoz labor for their private sidelines and had, in 
practice if not in law, the arbitrary power to insult, beat, or deport the 
peasants. As they were under serfdom, they were legally immobilized. 
An internal passport system was reintroduced to clear the cities of "un­
desirable and unproductive residents" and to make sure that the peas­
antry did not flee. Laws were passed to deprive the peasantry of the 
firearms they used for hunting. Finally, the kolkhozniki living outside 
the village nucleus (khutor dwellers), often on their old farmsteads, 
were forcibly relocated, beginning in 1939. This last resettlement af­
fected more than half a million peasants.
The resulting labor rules, property regime, and settlement pattern 
did in fact resemble a cross between plantation or estate agriculture 
on one hand and feudal servitude on the other.
As a vast, state-imposed blueprint for revolutionary change, collec­
tivization was at least as notable for what it destroyed as for what it 
built. The initial intent of collectivization was not just to crush the re­
sistance of well-to-do peasants and grab their land; it was also to dis­
mantle the social unit through which that resistance was expressed: 
the mir. The peasant commune had typically been the vehicle for orga­
nizing land seizures during the revolution, for orchestrating land use

214 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
and grazing, for managing local affairs generally, and for opposing 
procurements.70 The party had every reason to fear that if the collec­
tives were based on the traditional village, they would simply reinforce 
the basic unit of peasant resistance. Hadn’t the village soviets quickly 
escaped the state’s control? Huge collectives, then, had the decided ad­
vantage of bypassing village structures altogether. They could be run 
by a board consisting of cadres and specialists. If the giant kolkhoz 
was then divided into sections, one specialist could be named manager 
of each, ‘“like the bailiffs in the old days’ [of serfdom] as [one] ... re­
port wryly noted.’’71 Eventually, except in frontier areas, practical con­
siderations prevailed and a majority of the kolkhozy coincided roughly 
with the earlier peasant commune and its lands.
The kolkhoz was not, however, just window dressing hiding a tradi­
tional commune. Almost everything had changed. All the focal points 
for an autonomous public life had been eliminated. The tavern, rural 
fairs and markets, the church, and the local mill disappeared; in their 
places stood the kolkhoz office, the public meeting room, and the school. 
Nonstate public spaces gave way to the state spaces of government 
agencies, albeit local ones.
The concentration, legibility, and centralization of social organiza­
tion and production can be seen in the map of the state farm at Verch- 
nyua Troitsa (Upper Trinity) in Tver Oblast (figure 28).72 Much of the 
old village has been removed from the center and relocated on the out­
skirts (legend reference 11).73 Two-story apartment houses containing 
sixteen flats each have been clustered near the center (legend refer­
ences 13, 14, 15; see also figure 29), while the local administration and 
trade center, school, and community building, all public institutions 
run by the state, lie close to the center of the new grid. Even allowing 
for the exaggerated formalism of the map, the state farm is a far cry 
from the sprawl and autonomous institutional order of the precollec­
tivized village; a photograph showing the old-style housing and a lane 
illustrates the stark visual contrast (see figure 30).
Compared to Haussmann’s retrofitting of the physical geography of 
Paris to make it legible and to facilitate state domination, the Bolshe­
viks’ retrofitting of rural Russia was far more thoroughgoing. In place 
of an opaque and often obstinate mir, it had fashioned a legible 
kolkhoz. In place of myriad small farms, it had created a single, local 
economic unit.74 With the establishment of hierarchical state farms, a 
quasi-autonomous petite bourgeoisie was replaced with dependent 
employees. In place, therefore, of an agriculture in which planting, 
harvesting, and marketing decisions were in the hands of individual 
households, the party-state had built a rural economy where all these 
decisions would be made centrally. In place of a peasantry that was

28. Plan of the state farm at Verchnyua Troitsa (Upper Trinity) in Tver Oblast, 
showing the following sites: 1, community center; 2, monument; 3, hotel; 4, local 
administration and trade center; 5, school; 6, kindergarten; 7-8, museums; 9, 
shop; 10, bathhouse; 11, old wooden house moved from new construction area; 
12, old village; 13-15, two- and three-story houses; 16, garage (private); and 17, 
agricultural sites (farm, storage, water tower, and so on)
29. At Verchnyua Troitsa, one of the new village's two-story houses, each con­
taining sixteen flats

Houses along a lane in the old village at Verchnyua Troitsa

Soviet Collectivization 217
technically independent, it had created a peasantry that was directly 
dependent on the state for combines and tractors, fertilizer, and seeds. 
In place of a peasant economy whose harvests, income, and profits 
were well-nigh indecipherable, it had created units that were ideal for 
simple and direct appropriation. In place of a variety of social units with 
their own unique histories and practices, it had created homologous 
units of accounting that could all be fitted into a national administra­
tive grid. The logic was not unlike the management scheme at McDon­
ald’s: modular, similarly designed units producing similar products, 
according to a common formula and work routine. Units can easily be 
duplicated across the landscape, and the inspectors coming to assess 
their operations enter legible domains which they can evaluate with a 
single checklist.
Any comprehensive assessment of sixty years of collectivization 
would require both archival material only now becoming available and 
abler hands than my own. What must strike even a casual student of 
collectivization, however, is how it largely failed in each of its high- 
modernist aims, despite huge investments in machinery, infrastruc­
ture, and agronomic research. Its successes, paradoxically, were in the 
domain of traditional statecraft. The state managed to get its hands on 
enough grain to push rapid industrialization, even while contending 
with staggering inefficiencies, stagnant yields, and ecological devasta­
tion.75 The state also managed, at great human cost, to eliminate the so­
cial basis of organized, public opposition from the rural population. On 
the other hand, the state’s capacity for realizing its vision of large, pro­
ductive, efficient, scientifically advanced farms growing high-quality 
products for market was virtually nil.
The collectives that the state had created manifested in some ways 
the facade of modern agriculture without its substance. The farms were 
highly mechanized (by world standards), and they were managed by 
officials with degrees in agronomy and engineering. Demonstration 
farms really did achieve large yields, although often at prohibitive 
costs.76 But in the end none of this could disguise the many failures of 
Soviet agriculture. Only three sources of these failures are noted here, 
because they will concern us later.77 First, having taken from the peas­
ants both their (relative) independence and autonomy as well as their 
land and grain, the state created a class of essentially unfree laborers 
who responded with all the forms of foot-dragging and resistance prac­
ticed by unfree laborers everywhere. Second, the unitary administra­
tive structure and imperatives of central planning created a clumsy 
machine that was utterly unresponsive to local knowledge or to local 
conditions. Finally, the Leninist political structure of the Soviet Union

218 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
gave agriculture officials little or no incentive to adapt to, or negotiate 
with, its rural subjects. The very capacity of the state to essentially re- 
enserf rural producers, dismantle their institutions, and impose its will, 
in the crude sense of appropriation, goes a long way toward explaining 
the state’s failure to realize anything but a simulacrum of the high- 
modernist agriculture that Lenin so prized.
State Landscapes of Control and Appropriation
Drawing on the history of Soviet collectivization, I shall now venture a 
few more frankly speculative ideas about the institutional logic of au­
thoritarian high modernism. Then I shall suggest a way of grasping 
why such massive social bulldozing may have worked tolerably well 
for some purposes but failed dismally for others — an issue to which 
we shall return in later chapters.
The headlong drive to collectivization was animated by the short­
term goal of seizing enough grain to push rapid industrialization.78 
Threats and violence had worked, up to a point, for the harvests of 
1928 and 1929, but each annual turn of the screw elicited more eva­
sion and resistance from the peasantry. The bitter fact was that the So­
viet state faced an exceptionally diverse population of commune-based 
smallholders whose economic and social affairs were nearly unintelli­
gible to the center. These circumstances offered some strategic advan­
tages to a peasantry waging a quiet guerrilla war (punctuated by open 
revolt) against state claims. The state, under the existing property re­
gime, could only look forward to a bruising struggle for grain each year, 
with no assurance of success.
Stalin chose this moment to strike a decisive blow. He imposed a 
designed and legible rural landscape that would be far more amenable 
to appropriation, control, and central transformation. The social and 
economic landscape he had in mind was of course the industrial model 
of advanced agriculture—large, mechanized farms run along factory 
lines and coordinated by state planning.
It was a case of the “newest state” meeting the “oldest class” and at­
tempting to remake it into some reasonable facsimile of a proletariat. 
Compared to the peasantry, the proletariat was already relatively more 
legible as a class, and not just because of its central place in Marxist 
theory. The proletariat’s work regimen was regulated by factory hours 
and by man-made techniques of production. In the case of new indus­
trial projects like the great steel complex at Magnitogorsk, the plan­
ners could start virtually from zero, as with Brasilia. The peasants, on 
the other hand, represented a welter of small, individual household en­

Soviet Collectivization 219
terprises. Their settlement pattern and social organization had a his­
torical logic far deeper than that of the factory floor.
One purpose of collectivization was to destroy these economic and 
social units, which were hostile to state control, and to force the peas­
antry into an institutional straitjacket of the state’s devising. The new 
institutional order of collective farms would now be compatible with 
the state’s purposes of appropriation and directed development. Given 
the quasi-civil war conditions of the countryside, the solution was as 
much a product of military occupation and “pacification” as of “social­
ist transformation.”79
It is possible, I believe, to say something more generally about the 
“elective affinity" between authoritarian high modernism and certain 
institutional arrangements.80 What follows is rather crude and provi­
sional, but it will serve as a point of departure. High-modernist ideolo­
gies embody a doctrinal preference for certain social arrangements. 
Authoritarian high-modernist states, on the other hand, take the next 
step. They attempt, and often succeed, in imposing those preferences 
on their population. Most of the preferences can be deduced from the 
criteria of legibility, appropriation, and centralization of control. To 
the degree that the institutional arrangements can be readily moni­
tored and directed from the center and can be easily taxed (in the 
broadest sense of taxation), then they are likely to be promoted. The im­
plicit goals behind these comparisons are not unlike the goals of pre­
modern statecraft.81 Legibility, after all, is a prerequisite of appropria­
tion as well as of authoritarian transformation. The difference, and it is 
a crucial one, lies in the wholly new scale of ambition and intervention 
entertained by high modernism.
The principles of standardization, central control, and synoptic leg­
ibility to the center could be applied to many other fields; those noted 
in the accompanying table are only suggestive. If we were to apply 
them to education, for example, the most illegible educational system 
would be completely informal, nonstandardized instruction determined 
entirely by local mutuality. The most legible educational system would 
resemble Hippolyte Taine’s description of French education in the 
nineteenth century, when “the Minister of Education could pride him­
self, just by looking at his watch, which page of Virgil all schoolboys of 
the Empire were annotating at that exact moment.”82 A more exhaus­
tive table would replace the dichotomies with more elaborate continua 
(open commons landholding, for example, is less legible and taxable 
than closed commons landholding, which in turn is less legible than 
private freeholding, which is less legible than state ownership). It is no 
coincidence that the more legible or appropriable form can more read-

220 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Legibility of Social Groups, Institutions, and Practices
Illegible
Legible
Settlements
* Temporary encampments of
» Permanent villages,
hunter-gatherers, nomads,
estates, and plantations
slash-and-burn cultivators, 
pioneers, and gypsies
of sedentary peoples
• Unplanned cities and
• Planned grid cities and
neighborhoods: Bruges in
neighborhoods:
1500, medina of Damascus, 
Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 
Paris, in 1800
Brasilia, Chicago
Economic units
* Small property, petite 
bourgeoisie
• Large property
• Small peasant farms
• Large farms
• Artisanal production
• Factories (proletariat)
• Small shops
• Large commercial 
establishments
• Informal economy,
» Formal economy, "on
"off the books”
the books"
Property
• Open commons, communal
» Collective farms
regimes
property
• Private property
• State property
• Local records
* National cadastral survey
Technical and
resource organizations
Water
• Local customary use,
• Centralized dam,
local irrigation societies
irrigation control
Transportation » Decentralized webs 
and networks
• Centralized hubs
Energy
* Cow pats and brushwood
• Large generating stations
gathered locally or local 
electric generating stations
in urban centers
Identification
* Unregulated local naming 
customs
* Permanent patronyms
* No state documentation
* National system of iden­
of citizens
tification cards, docu­
ments, or passports
ily be converted into a source of rent—either as private property or as 
the monopoly rent of the state.
The Limits of Authoritarian High Modernism
When are high-modernist arrangements likely to work and when are 
they likely to fail? The abject performance of Soviet agriculture as an 
efficient producer of foodstuffs was, in retrospect, "overdetermined”

Soviet Collectivization 221
by many causes having little to do with high modernism per se: the 
radically mistaken biological theories of Trofim Lysenko, Stalin’s ob­
sessions, conscription during World War II, and the weather. And it is 
apparent that centralized high-modernist solutions can be the most 
efficient, equitable, and satisfactory for many tasks. Space explora­
tion, the planning of transportation networks, flood control, airplane 
manufacturing, and other endeavors may require huge organizations 
minutely coordinated by a few experts. The control of epidemics or of 
pollution requires a center staffed by experts receiving and digesting 
standard information from hundreds of reporting units.
On the other hand, these methods seem singularly maladroit at such 
tasks as putting a really good meal on the table or performing surgery. 
This issue will be addressed at length in chapter 8, but some valuably 
suggestive evidence can be gleaned from Soviet agriculture. If we 
think of particular crops, it is apparent that collective farms were suc­
cessful at growing some crops, especially the major grains; wheat, rye, 
oats, barley, and maize. They were notably inefficient at turning out 
other products, especially fruits, vegetables, small livestock, eggs, dairy 
products, and flowers. Most of these crops were supplied from the mi­
nuscule private plots of the kolkhoz members, even at the height of col­
lectivization.83 The systematic differences between these two categor­
ies of crops helps to explain why their institutional setting might vary.
Let us take wheat as an example of what I will call a "proletarian 
crop” and compare it with red raspberries, which I think of as the ul­
timate “petit-bourgeois crop.” Wheat lends itself to extensive large- 
scale farming and mechanization. One might say that wheat is to col­
lectivized agriculture what the Norway spruce is to centrally managed, 
scientific forestry. Once planted, it needs little care until harvest, when 
a combine can cut and thresh the grain in one operation and then blow 
it into trucks bound for granaries or into railroad cars. Relatively 
sturdy in the ground, wheat remains sturdy once harvested. It is rela­
tively easy to store for extended periods with only small losses to 
spoilage. The red raspberry bush, on the other hand, requires a partic­
ular soil to be fruitful; it must be pruned annually; it requires more 
than one picking, and it is virtually impossible to pick by machine. 
Once packed, raspberries last only a few days under the best condi­
tions. They will spoil within hours if packed too tightly or if stored at 
too high a temperature. At virtually every stage the raspberry crop 
needs delicate handling and speed, or all is lost.
Little wonder, then, that fruits and vegetables—petit-bourgeois 
crops—were typically not grown as kolkhoz crops but rather as side­
lines produced by individual households. The collective sector in effect

222 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
ceded such crops to those who had the personal interest, incentive, and 
horticultural skills to grow them successfully. Such crops can, in prin­
ciple, be grown by huge centralized enterprises as well, but they must 
be enterprises that are elaborately attentive to the care of the crops and 
to the care of the labor that tends them. Even where such crops are 
grown on large farms, the farms tend to be family enterprises of smaller 
size than wheat farms and are insistent on a stable, knowledgeable 
workforce. In these situations, the small family enterprise has, in the 
terms of neoclassical economics, a comparative advantage.
Another way in which wheat production is different from raspberry 
production is that the growing of wheat involves a modest number of 
routines that, because the grain is robust, allow some slack or play. 
The crop will take some abuse. Raspberry growers, because successful 
cultivation of their crop is complex and the fruit is delicate, must be 
adaptive, nimble, and exceptionally attentive. Successful raspberry 
growing requires, in other words, a substantial stock of local knowl­
edge and experience. These distinctions will prove germane to the Tan­
zanian example, to which we now turn, and later to our understanding 
of local knowledge.

7 Compulsory Villagization in 
Tanzania: 
Aesthetics and Miniaturization
The ujamaa village campaign in Tanzania from 1973 to 1976 was a 
massive attempt to permanently settle most of the country’s population 
in villages, of which the layouts, housing designs, and local economies 
were planned, partly or wholly, by officials of the central government. 
We shall examine the Tanzanian experience for three reasons. First, the 
campaign was by most accounts the largest forced resettlement scheme 
undertaken in independent Africa up to that time; at least 5 million 
Tanzanians were relocated.1 Second, documentation of the villagiza­
tion process is abundant, thanks to the international interest in the ex­
periment and the relatively open character of Tanzanian political life. 
Finally, the campaign was undertaken largely as a development and 
welfare project and not, as has often been the case, as part of a plan of 
punitive appropriation, ethnic cleansing, or military security (as in 
South Africa’s forced removals and homeland schemes under apar­
theid). Compared with Soviet collectivization, the ujamaa village cam­
paign was a case of large-scale social engineering by a relatively be­
nign and weak state.
Many other large-scale resettlement schemes can be subjected to 
much the same analysis. If, in the Tanzanian case, Chinese and Rus­
sian models as well as Marxist-Leninist rhetoric play an important ide­
ological role, we should not imagine that these were the only sources 
of inspiration for such schemes.2 We could as easily have examined the 
huge forced removals under apartheid policies in South Africa, which 
were far more brutal and economically destructive. We could also have 
analyzed any number of the many large-scale capitalist schemes for
223

224 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
production, often requiring substantial population movements, that 
have been undertaken with international assistance in poor countries.3 
Julius Nyerere, Tanzania’s head of state, viewed the permanent reset­
tlement in ways that were strikingly continuous with colonial policy, as 
we shall see, and his ideas about both mechanization and economies of 
scale in agriculture were part and parcel of international development 
discourse at the time. That discourse of modernization was, in turn, 
heavily influenced by the model of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the 
development of capital-intensive agriculture in the United States, and 
the lessons of economic mobilization from World War II.4
In contrast to Soviet collectivization, Tanzanian villagization was 
not conceived as an all-out war of appropriation. Nyerere made a point 
of warning against the use of administrative or military coercion, in­
sisting that no one should be forced, against his or her will, into the 
new villages. And in fact the disruptions and inhumanities of Nyerere’s 
program, however serious for its victims, were not in the same league 
as those inflicted by Stalin. Even so, the ujamaa campaign was coer­
cive and occasionally violent. It proved, moreover, a failure, ecologi­
cally as well as economically.
Even in this “softer" version of authoritarian high modernism, cer­
tain family resemblances stand out. The first is the logic of “improve­
ment.” As in the "unimproved” forest, the existing patterns of settlement 
and social life in Tanzania were illegible and resistant to the narrow 
purposes of the state. Only by radically simplifying the settlement pat­
tern was it possible for the state to efficiently deliver such development 
services as schools, clinics, and clean water. Mere administrative con­
venience was hardly the only objective of state officials, and that is our 
second point. The thinly veiled subtext of villagization was also to re­
organize human communities in order to make them better objects of 
political control and to facilitate the new forms of communal farming 
favored by state policy. In this context, there are striking parallels be­
tween what Nyerere and Tanzanian African National Union (ta n u) en­
visioned and the program of agriculture and settlement initiated by the 
colonial regimes in East Africa. The parallels suggest that we have 
stumbled across something generic about the projects of the modern 
developmentalist state.
Beyond this second criterion of bureaucratic management, how­
ever, lay a third resemblance that had nothing directly to do with effi­
ciency. As in the Soviet case, there was also, I believe, a powerful aes­
thetic dimension. Certain visual representations of order and efficiency, 
although they may have made eminent sense in some original context, 
are detached from their initial moorings. High-modernist plans tend to

Villagization in Tanzania 225
“travel” as an abbreviated visual image of efficiency that is less a sci­
entific proposition to be tested than a quasi-religious faith in a visual 
sign or representation of order. As Jacobs suggested, they may substi­
tute an apparent visual order for the real thing. The fact that they look 
right becomes more important than whether they work; or, better put, 
the assumption is that if the arrangement looks right, it will also, ipso 
facto, function well. The importance of such representations is mani­
fested in a tendency to miniaturize, to create such microenvironments 
of apparent order as model villages, demonstration projects, new cap­
itals, and so on.
Finally, like Soviet collectives, ujamaa villages were economic and 
ecological failures. For ideological reasons, the designers of the new so­
ciety had paid virtually no attention to the local knowledge and prac­
tices of cultivators and pastoralists. They had also forgotten the most 
important fact about social engineering: its efficiency depends on the 
response and cooperation of real human subjects. If people find the 
new arrangement, however efficient in principle, to be hostile to their 
dignity, their plans, and their tastes, they can make it an inefficient 
arrangement.
Colonial High-Modernist Agriculture in East Africa
For the colonial state did not merely aspire to create, under its control, a
human landscape of perfect visibility; the condition of this visibility was that
everyone, everything, had (as it were) a serial number.
— Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities
Colonial rule has always been meant to be profitable for the colonizer. 
This implied, in a rural society, stimulating cultivation for the market. 
A variety of such means as head taxes payable in cash or in valuable 
crops, private-sector plantations, and the encouragement of white set­
tlers were deployed to this end. Beginning during World War II and 
especially after it, the British in East Africa turned to planning large- 
scale development projects and mobilizing the required labor. A straw 
in the wind was the conscription of nearly thirty thousand laborers 
for work on plantations (particularly sisal plantations) during the war. 
Postwar schemes, although they often had prewar precedents, were 
far more ambitious: a gigantic groundnut (peanut) scheme; various 
rice, tobacco, cotton, and cattle schemes; and, above all, elaborate soil- 
conservation plans mandating a strict regimen of practices. Resettle­
ment and mechanization were integral parts of many schemes.5 The 
vast majority of these projects were neither popular nor successful. In 
fact, one of the standard explanations for the successes of tanu in the

226 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
countryside was precisely the widespread popular resentment against 
colonial agricultural policy—particularly forced conservation mea­
sures and such livestock regulations as destocking and cattle dipping.6
The most searching account of the logic underlying these schemes 
of “welfare colonialism” is William Beinert’s study of neighboring Mal­
awi (then Nyasaland).7 Although the ecology is different in Malawi, the 
broad lines of its agricultural policy varied little from that attempted 
elsewhere in British East Africa. For our purposes, what is most strik­
ing is the degree to which the assumptions of the colonial regime 
matched those of the independent, and far more legitimate, socialist 
state of Tanzania.
The point of departure for colonial policy was a complete faith in 
what officials took for “scientific agriculture” on one hand and a nearly 
total skepticism about the actual agricultural practices of Africans on 
the other. As a provincial agricultural officer in the Shire (Tchiri) Val­
ley put it, “The African has neither the training, skill, nor equipment to 
diagnose his soil erosion troubles nor can he plan the remedial mea­
sures, which are based on scientific knowledge, and this is where I think 
we rightly come in."8 Although the officer’s sentiment was no doubt 
perfectly sincere, one cannot fail to note how it justified, at the same 
time, the importance and authority of agricultural experts over mere 
practitioners.
In keeping with the planning ideology of the time, the experts were 
inclined to propose elaborate projects — a “total development scheme,” 
a "comprehensive land usage scheme."9 But there were enormous ob­
stacles to imposing a complicated and draconian set of regulations on a 
population of cultivators well aware of environmental constraints and 
convinced of the logic of their own farming practices. Pushing ahead 
autocratically only courted protest and evasion. It was in just such con­
texts that the strategy of resettlement was so appealing. Opening new 
land or repurchasing the estates of white settlers allowed officials to 
start from scratch with compact village sites and consolidated individ­
ual plots. The newly recruited settlers could then be relocated to a pre­
pared, legible site replacing the scattered residences and complex 
tenure patterns found elsewhere. The more the planners filled in the 
details—that is, the more that huts were built or specified, sites de­
marcated, fields cleared and plowed, and plants selected (and some­
times sown)—the greater the chance of controlling the scheme and 
keeping it to its designed form.
The planning of the lower Shire Valley along these lines, Beinert 
makes clear, was not an entirely scientific exercise. The scheme’s de­
signers were deploying a set of technical beliefs associated with mod­

Villagization in Tanzania 227
ern agriculture, very few of which had been verified in the context of 
local conditions. They were also deploying a set of aesthetic and visual 
standards, some of them obviously originating in the temperate West, 
which had come to symbolize an ordered and productive agriculture.10 
They were driven by what Beinert called the “technical imagination of 
what might be possible.”
In the case of ridging and bunding in the lower river, the imagination 
had an almost pictorial quality; they looked forward to a valley of reg­
ular fields, neatly ridged, between long straight contour bunds, below a 
line of storm drains topped by forests. It was a rectangular contoured 
order which would render the environment susceptible to control, fa­
cilitate technical transformation of, and controls over, peasant agricul­
ture and, perhaps, accord with their sense of planned beauty. It was 
this solution which would make adequate production possible. But 
driven by their technical conviction and imagination, they were unre­
sponsive to the effects of their interventions on peasant society and 
peasant culture.11
Aesthetic order in the agricultural and forest landscape was replicated 
in the human geography as well.12 A series of model villages, spread 
evenly across the rectangular grid of fields and linked by roads, would 
become the center of technical and social services. The fields them­
selves were so arrayed as to facilitate the dryland rotational farming 
built into the scheme. In fact, the Shire Valley project was to be a 
miniature version of the Tennessee Valley Authority, complete with 
dams along the river and sites indicated for capital-intensive process­
ing plants. A three-dimensional model, along the lines of an architect’s 
model of a new town, was constructed to show, in miniature, what the 
whole project would look like when completed.13
The plans for human settlement and land use in the lower Shire Val­
ley “failed almost completely.” The reasons for their failure presage the 
fiasco of the ujamaa villages. Local cultivators, for example, resisted 
the generic colonial solution to soil erosion; ridging. As later research 
showed, in this context their resistance was both economically and eco­
logically sound. Ridging on sandy soil was unstable, tending to create 
larger erosion gullies in the rainy season, and ridging caused the soil to 
dry out quickly during the dry season, encouraging white ants to attack 
the roots of crops. Would-be settlers hated the regimentation of the gov­
ernment schemes; a “model settlement with communal farming” drew 
no voluntary migrants and had to be converted into a government maize 
farm using wage labor. The prohibitions on farming the settlement's rich 
marshland (dimba) deterred volunteers. Later, officials conceded that 
they, and not the peasants, had been mistaken in this respect.

228 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
The lower Shire Valley project miscarried for two larger reasons 
that are crucial to our understanding of the limits of high-modernist 
planning. The first is that the planners operated with a model of the 
agricultural environment that was standardized for the entire valley. It 
was precisely this assumption that made it possible to specify the gen­
eric, and apparently permanent, solution of a particular dryland rota­
tion for all cultivators. The solution was a static, freeze-frame answer 
to a dynamic and variegated valley environment. In contrast, the peas­
ants possessed a flexible repertoire of strategies depending on the tim­
ing and extent of the floods, the microlocal soil compositions, and so 
on—strategies that were to some degree unique to each farmer, each 
plot of land, and to each growing season. The second reason behind the 
failure was that the planners also operated with a standardized model 
of the cultivators themselves, assuming that all peasants would desire 
roughly the same crop mix, techniques, and yields. Such an assump­
tion completely ignored key variables, such as family size and compo­
sition, sideline occupations, gender divisions of labor, and culturally 
conditioned needs and tastes. The fact was that each family had its 
own particular mix of resources and goals that would affect its agricul­
tural strategy year by year in ways that the overall plan did not provide 
for. As a plan, it was both aesthetically pleasing to its inventors and also 
precise and consistent within its own strict parameters. As a scheme for 
development, however, it was the kind of environmental and social taxi­
dermy that doomed it almost from the start. Ironically, successful, vol­
untary, pioneer settlement outside the government’s purview and with­
out any financial assistance continued apace. This disorderly, illegible, 
but more productive settlement was castigated as squatting and se­
verely reproved, although without much practical effect.
The abject failure of the ambitious groundnuts scheme in Tanganyika 
just after World War II is also instructive as a dress rehearsal for mas­
sive villagization.14 The joint venture between the United African Com­
pany (a subsidiary of Unilever) and the colonial state proposed the 
clearing of no fewer than 3 million acres of bush that would, when cul­
tivated, yield more than half a million tons of peanuts to be converted 
to cooking oil for export. The scheme was conceived during the post­
war high tide of faith in the economic prowess of a command economy 
joined to large capitalist firms. By 1950, when less than 10 percent of 
the acreage had been cleared and not as many nuts had been grown as 
seeds had been sown, the project was abandoned.
The reasons for the failure were legion. In development circles, in 
fact, the groundnuts scheme is one of a handful of legendary failures 
cited as examples of what not to do. At least two of the ingredients of

Villagization in Tanzania 229
this disaster relate to the failure of the lower Shire Valley project and 
to the later disaster of large-scale villagization. First, the design for the 
scheme was narrowly agronomic and abstract. Very general figures for 
the tractor hours needed to clear land, the amounts of fertilizer and 
pesticide needed to attain a given yield per acre, and so forth were ap­
plied to the new terrain. No detailed mapping of soils, rainfall pat­
terns, or topography and certainly no experimental trials had been un­
dertaken. Field reconnaissance was allotted a mere nine weeks, much 
of it conducted from the air! The general figures proved wildly erro­
neous precisely because they were heedless of the particularities of the 
locality: clayey soil that compacted in the dry season, irregular rain­
fall, crop diseases for which there were no resistant plant varieties, in­
appropriate machinery for the soil and terrain.
The second fatal premise in the design of the scheme was its “blind 
faith in machinery and large-scale operation.’’15 The project’s founder, 
Frank Samuel, had a motto: “No operation will be performed by hand 
for which mechanical equipment is available.”16 The scheme was es­
sentially a quasi-military operation perhaps derived from wartime ex­
perience and designed to be technically self-contained. The plan’s level 
of abstraction resembles that of the Soviet collective wheat farm laid 
out by Wilson, Ware, and Riggin in their Chicago hotel room in 1928 
(see chapter 6). The groundnuts scheme intentionally bypassed African 
smallholders in order to create a colossal industrial farm under Euro­
pean management. As such, the project might have reflected relative 
factor prices on, say, the plains of Kansas, but surely not in Tangan­
yika. Had it succeeded in growing peanuts in any quantities, it would 
have grown them on grossly uneconomic terms. Capitalist high mod­
ernism of the utopian kind that inspired the groundnuts scheme was 
no more appropriate to Tanzania than would be the template of villag­
ization and collectivist, socialist production that inspired Nyerere.
Villages and "Improved” Farming in Tanzania Before 1973
The vast majority of the Tanzanian rural population was, in terms of 
legibility and appropriation, outside the reach of the state. At indepen­
dence, an estimated 11 out of 12 million rural dwellers lived "scattered” 
across the landscape. With the exception of densely settled areas in 
the cool, wet highlands where substantial amounts of coffee and tea 
were grown and marketed, much of the population practiced subsis­
tence farming or pastoralism. Much of what they did sell was offered at 
local markets largely outside the ambit of state supervision and taxa­
tion. The objective of colonial agricultural policy and also of the inde­

230 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
pendent state of Tanzania (and seconded, early on, by the World Bank) 
was to assemble more of the population into fixed, permanent settle­
ments and to promote forms of agriculture that would yield a greater 
marketable surplus, especially for export.17 Whether these policies took 
the form of private ventures or socialized agriculture, they were strate­
gies designed, as Goran Hyden has said, “to capture the peasantry.”18 
The nationalist regime of tanu was, of course, much more legitimate 
than its colonial predecessor. But we should not forget that much of the 
popularity of tanu in rural areas rested on its endorsement of resistance 
to the onerous and mandatory agricultural regulations of the colonial 
state.19 As in Russia, the peasantry had taken advantage of the interreg­
num at independence to ignore or defy policies declared in the capital.
At the outset, villagization was a central goal of Nyerere and of 
ta n u. The purpose of village formation was at this stage threefold: the 
delivery of services; the creation of a more productive, modern agri­
culture; and the encouragement of communal, socialist forms of coop­
eration. Nyerere outlined the importance of village living as early as 
1962, in his inaugural address to Tanzania’s parliament.
And if you ask me why the government wants us to live in villages, the 
answer is just as simple: unless we do we shall not be able to provide 
ourselves with the things we need to develop our land and to raise our 
standard of living. We shall not be able to use tractors; we shall not be 
able to provide schools for our children; we shall not be able to build 
hospitals, or have clean drinking water; it will be quite impossible to 
start small village industries, and instead we shall have to go on de­
pending on the towns for all our requirements; and if we had a plenti­
ful supply of electric power we should never be able to connect it up to 
each isolated homestead.20
By 1967, in a major policy statement called "Socialism and Rural 
Development," Nyerere elaborated on the specifically socialist aspect 
of the campaign for village living. It was clear to him that if the present 
pattern of capitalist development continued, Tanzania would eventu­
ally develop a class of wealthy “kulak” (the Russian term then in vogue 
in tanu circles) farmers who would reduce their neighbors to the status 
of wage laborers. Ujamaa villages (that is, socialist cooperatives) would 
set the rural economy on a different path. “What is here being pro­
posed," Nyerere explained, “is that we in Tanzania should move from 
being a nation of individual peasant producers who are gradually 
adopting the incentives and ethics of the capitalist system. Instead we 
should gradually become a nation of ujamaa villages where the people 
co-operate directly in small groups and where these small groups co­
operate together for joint enterprises.”21

Villagization in Tanzania 231
For Nyerere, village living, development services, communal agri­
culture, and mechanization were a single indissoluble package. Farm­
ers who were scattered hither and yon could not easily be educated or 
treated for common illnesses, could not learn the techniques of mod­
ern agriculture, could not even cooperate, unless they first moved to 
villages. He declared: "The first and absolutely essential thing to do, 
therefore, if we want to be able to start using tractors for cultivation, is 
to begin living in proper villages. . .. We shall not be able to use tractors 
[if we have no villages].”22 Modernization required, above all, physical 
concentration into standardized units that the state might service and 
administer. Little wonder that electrification and tractors, those em­
blems of development, were on the tip of Nyerere's tongue as well as 
Lenin’s.23 There is, I believe, a powerful aesthetic of modernization at 
play here. A modern population must live in communities with a cer­
tain physical layout—not just villages, but proper villages.
Nyerere, unlike Stalin, at first insisted that the creation of ujamaa 
villages be gradual and completely voluntary. He imagined that a few 
families would move their houses to be closer together and would plant 
their crops nearby, after which they might open a communal plot. Suc­
cess would attract others. “Socialist communities cannot be estab­
lished by compulsion,” he declared. They "can only be established with 
willing members; the task of leadership and of Government is not to 
try and force this kind of development, but to explain, encourage, and 
participate.”24 Later on, in 1973, having gauged the general resistance 
to villagization on government terms, Nyerere would change his mind. 
By then the seeds of coercion had been sown, by a politicized, author­
itarian bureaucracy and also by Nyerere’s underlying conviction that 
the peasants did not know what was good for them. Thus, immediately 
after disavowing "compulsion” in the sentence just quoted, Nyerere 
concedes, “It may be possible— and sometimes necessary—to insist on 
all farmers in a given area growing a certain acreage of a particular 
crop until they realize that this brings them a more secure living, and 
then do not have to be forced to grow it.”25 If the peasants could not be 
persuaded to act in their own interest, they might have to be coerced. 
This logic was a replication of that in the 1961 World Bank report as­
sociated with Tanganyika’s first five-year plan. That report was laced 
with the era’s standard discourse about having to overcome the habits 
and superstitions of a backward and obstinate peasantry. The report 
also doubted whether persuasion alone would get the job done. While 
its authors hoped that “social emulation, cooperation, and the expan­
sion of community development services” would transform attitudes, 
they warned darkly that “where incentives, emulation and propaganda

232 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
are ineffective, enforcement or coercive measures of an appropriate 
sort will be considered.”26
Scores of village settlements and cultivation schemes were initiated 
in the 1960s. Despite their great variety—some were joint ventures be­
tween the state and foreign firms, some were government or parastatal 
schemes, and others were spontaneous popular initiatives—most were 
judged to be failures and closed down, either by decree or by attrition. 
Three aspects of these schemes seem especially relevant to under­
standing the all-out villagization campaign that began in 1973.
The first was a penchant for creating pilot schemes. In itself this ap­
proach made sense, since policy makers could learn what would work 
and what would not before embarking on more ambitious plans. Many 
such schemes, however, became showpiece demonstration farms ab­
sorbing huge amounts of scarce equipment, funds, and personnel. For 
a time, a few of these precious miniatures of progress and moderniza­
tion were maintained. One influential scheme involving a mere three 
hundred settlers managed to acquire four bulldozers, nine tractors, a 
field car, seven lorries, a maize mill, an electric generator, and a cadre 
of about fifteen administrators and specialists, 150 laborers, and twelve 
artisans.27 It was, after a fashion, a successful example of a modern 
farm, providing that one overlooked its truly legendary inefficiency and 
the fact that it was irrelevant to the Tanzanian situation.
The second aspect prefiguring the Tanzanian experience was that, 
given single-party rule, an authoritarian administrative tradition, and a 
dictator (albeit a rather benevolent one)28 who wanted results, the nor­
mal bureaucratic pathologies were exaggerated. Sites for new settle­
ments were often chosen, not by economic logic, but by finding “blank 
spots" on the map (preferably near roads) where the settlers might be 
dumped.29 In the West Lake (west of Lake Victoria) region (1970), a 
member of Parliament and five technical specialists descended briefly 
to design a four-year plan (1970-1974) for all ujamaa villages in the re­
gion. They were obviously under great pressure to please their superi­
ors by promising huge increases in cultivation and production which 
were "utterly unrealistic and completely out of touch with any possible 
development in the village."30 The plans were promulgated without any 
real consultation and were based on abstract assumptions about ma­
chine use, days of labor, rates of land clearance, and a new crop regi­
men, not unlike the groundnut scheme or the Soviet collective hatched 
in a Chicago hotel room.
Finally, where the pressure was greatest to create new villages, 
TANU activists and officials ignored Nyerere’s advice against compul­
sion. Thus, when he decided in 1970 that the entire population of

Villagization in Tanzania 233
Dodoma (a drought-prone region in central Tanzania) should be relo­
cated to ujamaa villages within fourteen months, officials sprang into 
action. Relying on everyone’s sharp memories of a regional famine in 
1969, the officials let it be understood that only those dwelling in uja­
maa villages would ever receive famine relief. Those who already lived 
in ujamaa villages with fewer than the stipulated minimum of 250 fam­
ilies were often forced to amalgamate with another settlement to reach 
the required size. Communal plots were built into the new settlements, 
as were, in theory, labor regulations and cropping schedules. When an 
agricultural officer insisted that there be no discussion of the official 
decision to enlarge one village’s communal field to 170 acres, absorb­
ing the adjacent private plots, he was thrown out of the village meeting 
in a rare open revolt. An M.R who sided with the village was barred 
from running again and placed under surveillance, while the district’s 
tanu chairman, who did likewise, was removed and placed under house 
arrest. Dodoma was a preview of what was to come.
Lest there be any doubt that villagization meant central control and 
not simply village formation and communal farming, the sorry fate of 
the Ruvuma Development Association (r d a) settled the matter.31 The 
rda was an umbrella organization representing fifteen communal vil­
lages scattered over one hundred miles in the Songea, a remote and 
poor district in the southwestern part of the country. Unlike most uja­
maa villages, these were the spontaneous creation of young local mili­
tants in ta n u. They began in 1960, long before Nyerere's policy decla­
ration of 1967, with each village inventing its own forms of communal 
enterprise. Early on, Nyerere singled out one of the villages, Litowa, 
heralding it as a place where he could send people to see rural social­
ism in action.32 Its school, milling cooperative, and marketing associa­
tion were the envy of neighboring villages. Given the high level of pa­
tronage and financial backing the villagers attracted, it is hard to tell 
how economically sound their enterprises were. They did, however, 
anticipate Nyerere's declared policy of local control and nonauthori­
tarian cooperation. The villagers were, on the other hand, independent 
and assertive vis-a-vis the state. Having won over many of the local 
party officials and having pioneered village cooperation on their own, 
they were not about to let themselves simply be absorbed into bureau­
cratic party routines. When each family in these villages was ordered 
to grow one acre of fire-cured tobacco, a crop they considered to be 
labor-intensive and without profit, they openly protested through their 
organization. In 1968, following a high-level visit by ta n u’s central com­
mittee, the rd a was officially banned as an illegal organization, its as­
sets seized, and its functions assumed by the party and bureaucracy.33

234 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Although it put into practice Nyerere's espoused goals, its refusal to fit 
into the centralized scheme of the party was fatal.
“To Live in Villages Is an Order”
With his order of December 1973,34 Nyerere ended a period of villag­
ization marked by sporadic but unauthorized coercion and put the en­
tire machinery of the state behind compulsory, universal villagization.35 
Whatever restraining influence that his public disavowal of the use of 
force had provided was now nullified; it was replaced by the desire of 
the party and bureaucracy to produce the quick results he wanted. Vil­
lagization was, after all, for their own benefit, as Juma Mwapachu, an 
official in charge of forced settlement in the district of Shinyanga, ex­
plained. "The 1974 Operation [Planned] Villages was not to be a matter 
of persuasion but of coercion. As Nyerere argued, the move had to be 
compulsory because Tanzania could not sit back seeing the majority 
of its people leading a ‘life of death.’ The State, had, therefore, to take 
the role of the ‘father’ in ensuring that its people chose a better and 
more prosperous life for themselves.’’36 New villages and communal 
farming had been an official policy priority at least since 1967, but the 
results had been a disappointment. Now it was time to insist on vil­
lage living, Nyerere claimed, as the only way to promote development 
and increased production. The official term employed after 1973 was 
"planned” villages (not “ujamaa” villages), presumably to distinguish 
them both from the communal-production regime of ujamaa villages, 
which had failed, and from the unplanned settlements and homesteads 
in which Tanzanians now resided.
The actual campaign was called Operation Planned Villages, con­
juring in the popular mind images of military operations. And so it 
was. The operational plan specified, by the book, a six-phase sequence: 
“educate [or "politicize”] the people, search for a suitable site, inspect 
the location, plan the village and demarcate the land clearly, train the 
officials in the methodology of ujamaa, and resettlement.”37 The se­
quence was both inevitable and involuntary. Given the “crash” nature 
of the campaign, educating the people did not mean asking their con­
sent; it meant telling them that they had to move and why it was in 
their best interest. The pace was, moreover, double-quick. The dress 
rehearsal in Dodoma in 1970 had allowed planning teams one day per 
village plan; the new campaign stretched the planning apparatus even 
thinner.
Nor was the speed of the operation a mere by-product of adminis­
trative haste. The planners felt that the shock of lightning-quick settle­

Villagization in Tanzania 235
ment would have a salutary effect. It would rip the peasantry from their 
traditional surroundings and networks and would put them down in 
entirely new settings where, it was hoped, they could then be more 
readily remade into modern producers following the instructions of 
experts.38 In a larger sense, of course, the purpose of forced settlement 
is always disorientation and then reorientation. Colonial schemes for 
state farms or private plantations, as well as the many plans to create a 
class of progressive yeoman farmers, operated on the assumption that 
revolutionizing the living arrangements and working environments of 
people would transform them fundamentally. Nyerere was fond of con­
trasting the loose, autonomous work rhythms of traditional cultivators 
with the tight-knit, interdependent discipline of the factory.39 Densely 
settled villages with cooperative production would move the Tanzanian 
population toward that ideal.
Rural Tanzanians were understandably reluctant to move into new 
communities planned by the state. Their past experience, whether be­
fore independence or after, warranted their skepticism. As cultivators 
and pastoralists, they had developed patterns of settlement and, in 
many cases, patterns of periodic movements that were finely tuned 
adaptations to an often stingy environment which they knew excep­
tionally well. The state-mandated movement threatened to destroy the 
logic of this adaptation. Administrative convenience, not ecological 
considerations, governed the selection of sites; they were often far 
from fuelwood and water, and their population often exceeded the car­
rying capacity of the land. As one specialist foresaw: "Unless villagiza­
tion can be coupled with infrastructural inputs to create a novel tech­
nology to master the environment, the nucleated settlement pattern 
may, by itself, be counter-productive in economic terms and destruc­
tive of the ecological balance maintained under the traditional settle­
ment pattern. Nucleated settlement will mean over-crowding . . . with 
people and domestic animals and the accompanying soil erosion, gully 
formation, and dust bowls which are common features in situations 
where the human initiative has suddenly overtaxed the carrying ca­
pacity of the land.”40
Given the resistance of the population and the bureaucratic-military 
imperative of a crash program, violence was inevitable. Threats were 
all but universal. Those slated to move were again told that famine re­
lief would be accorded only to those who moved peacefully. The militia 
and the army were mobilized to provide transport and to compel com­
pliance. People were told that if they did not pull down their houses 
and load them into the government trucks, the authorities would pull 
down the houses. In order to prevent those forcibly moved from re­

236 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
turning, many homes were burned. Typical of the reports that came 
out of Tanzania was the following description by a student in the poor 
region of Kigoma: “Force and brutality was used. The police were the 
ones empowered together with some government officials. For exam­
ple at Katanazuza in Kalinzi, . . . the police had to take charge physi­
cally. In some areas where peasants refused to pack their belongings 
and board the Operation lorries and trucks, their houses were de­
stroyed through burning or pulling them down. House destruction was 
witnessed in Nyange village. It became a routine order of the day. And 
the peasants had unconditionally to shift. It was a forceful villagization 
in some villages.”41 When the peasantry realized that open resistance 
was dangerous and probably futile, they saved what they could, often 
fleeing the new village at the first opportunity.42
Such incentives as clinics, piped water, and schools were offered to 
those who went peacefully. Sometimes they did, although they tried to 
insist on a written contract with officials and to require that the new 
services promised them be established before they moved. Positive in­
ducements were, apparently, more typical of the early, voluntary phase 
of villagization than the later, compulsory phase. A few regions were 
little affected; officials there simply designated many existing settle­
ments as planned villages and left it at that. There was both an eco­
nomic and political logic to the exclusions. Wealthy, densely settled 
areas such as West Lake and Kilimanjaro were largely spared for three 
reasons; farmers there were already living in populous villages; their 
undisturbed productivity in cash crops was vital for state revenues and 
foreign exchange; and the groups residing in these areas were over­
represented among the bureaucratic elite. Some critics suggested that 
the higher the proportion of government officials from an area, the 
later (and more desultory) its villagization.43
When Nyerere learned exactly how thin was the fiction of persua­
sion and how widespread were the brutalities, he expressed his dis­
may He decried the failure to compensate peasants for their destroyed 
huts and allowed that some officials had moved people to unsuitable 
locations that lacked water or sufficient arable land. "Despite our of­
ficial policies and despite all our democratic institutions, some lead­
ers do not listen to the people," he admitted. “They find it much easier 
to tell people what to do.”44 But it was “absurd to pretend that these 
cases were typical of villagization,”45 let alone to call off the campaign. 
Nyerere wanted local authorities to be knowledgeable, close to the 
people, and persuasive in putting across state policy; he did not, any 
more than Lenin did, want them to obey the peoples wishes. Not sur­
prisingly, the sources agree that virtually all village meetings were one­

Villagization in Tanzania 237
way affairs of lectures, explanations, instructions, scoldings, prom­
ises, and warnings. The assembled villagers were expected to be what 
Sally Falk Moore has appropriately called “ratifying bodies public,” 
giving populist legitimacy to decisions made elsewhere.46 Far from 
achieving this populist legitimacy, the villagization campaign created 
only an alienated, skeptical, demoralized, and uncooperative peas­
antry for which Tanzania would pay a huge price, both financially and 
politically.47
A Streamlined People and Their Crops
The planned new villages followed both a bureaucratic logic and an 
aesthetic logic. Nyerere and his planners had a visual idea of just how a 
modern village should look. Such visual ideas become powerful tropes. 
Take the word "streamline," for example. “Streamlining” has become a 
powerful image for modern forms, conveying economy, sleekness, 
efficiency, and minimal friction or resistance. Politicians and admin­
istrators hasten to cash in on the symbolic capital behind the term by 
declaring that they will streamline this agency or that corporation, al­
lowing the audience’s visual imagination to fill in the details of a bu­
reaucratic equivalent of a sleek locomotive or jet. Thus it is that a term 
that has a specific, contextual meaning in one field (aerodynamics) 
comes to be generalized to subjects where its meaning is more visual 
and aesthetic than scientific. Above all, as we shall see, the aesthetic of 
the new village was a negation of the past. First, however, to the ad­
ministrative logic.
What greeted Nyerere when he visited new villages in the district of 
Shinyanga (northwest Tanzania) in early 1975 was fairly typical of bu­
reaucratic haste and insensibility.48 Some of the villages were laid out 
as “one long street of houses stretching for miles like the wagons of a 
locomotive.”49 It appeared to Nyerere that this was a crude case of sim­
ply "dumping" the settlers. But such linear villages did have a curious 
logic behind them. Administrators had a penchant for locating new vil­
lages along the major roads, where they could be most easily reached 
and monitored.50 Roadside siting rarely made economic sense; it did, 
on the other hand, demonstrate how the goal of extending the state’s 
control over the peasantry often trumped the state’s other goal of rais­
ing agricultural production. As Stalin had learned, a captured peas­
antry was not necessarily a productive peasantry.
The visual aesthetics of how a proper new village should look com­
bined elements of administrative regularity, tidiness, and legibility 
linked to an overall Cartesian order. This was the modern administra­

238 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
tive village, and it was implicitly associated with a modern, disci­
plined, and productive peasantry. One astute observer, sympathetic to 
the aims of villagization, noted the overall effect. "The new approach,” 
he explained, “was more in line with bureaucratic thinking and with 
what a bureaucracy can do effectively: enforced movement of the peas­
ants into new ‘modern’ settlements, i.e., settlements with houses placed 
close together, in straight lines, along the roads, and with the fields 
outside the nucleated village, organized in block farms, each block con­
taining the villager’s individual plots, but with only one type of crop, 
and readily accessible for control by the agricultural extension officer 
and eventual cultivation by government tractors.”51
As the exercise of village creation was repeated, the administrative 
image of the modern village became increasingly codified, a known 
protocol that almost any bureaucrat could reproduce. "The first re­
sponse of the West Lake leaders, when they were called upon to imple­
ment ujamaa in the Region, was to think of resettlement. Creating new 
settlements had several advantages. They were highly visible, and easy 
to organize right from the beginning in the orderly, nice looking way 
preferred by bureaucrats with the houses and shambas [gardens, 
farms] in straight lines, etc.”52 Reconstructing the historical lineage of 
this composite picture of modern rural life would be fascinating, al­
though tangential to our purposes. No doubt it owes something to co­
lonial policy and hence to the look of the modern European rural land­
scape, and we also know that Nyerere was impressed with what he 
saw on his trips to the Soviet Union and to China. What is significant, 
however, is that the modern planned village in Tanzania was essen­
tially a point-by-point negation of existing rural practice, which in­
cluded shifting cultivation and pastoralism; polycropping; living well 
off the main roads; kinship and lineage authority; small, scattered set­
tlements with houses built higgledy-piggledy; and production that was 
dispersed and opaque to the state. The logic of this negation seemed 
often to prevail over sound ecological or economic considerations.
Communal Farming and Intensive Production
Collecting Tanzanians into villages was seen from the very begin­
ning as a necessary step in establishing completely new forms of agri­
cultural production in which the state would play the major role. The 
first five-year plan was explicit.
Although the improvement approach [as opposed to the transformation
approach] can contribute to increasing production in . . . zones [with
low and irregular rainfall], it cannot in all events give rise to very sub-

Villagization in Tanzania 239
stantial results because of the dispersal of the farm producers, the 
impoverishment of the soils by the practice of bush burning and con­
siderable difficulties in marketing products. The policy which Govern­
ment has decided to pursue with respect to all these zones consists in 
re-grouping and resettling farmers on the most favorable soil, installing 
there a system of private or collective ownership and introducing su­
pervised crop rotation and mixed farming that would permit the mainte­
nance of soil fertility.53
The population concentrated in planned villages would, by degrees, 
grow cash crops (as specified by the agricultural experts) on commu­
nal fields with state-supplied machinery. Their housing, their local ad­
ministration, their agricultural practices, and, most important, their 
workdays would be overseen by state authorities.
The forced villagization campaign itself had such a disastrous effect 
on agricultural production that the state was in no position to press 
ahead immediately with full-scale communal farming. Huge imports 
of food were necessary from 1973 through 1975.54 Nyerere declared 
that the 1.2 billion shillings spent for food imports would have bought 
one cow for every Tanzanian family. Roughly 60 percent of the new vil­
lages were located on semiarid land unsuitable for permanent cultiva­
tion, requiring peasants to walk long distances to reach viable plots. 
The chaos of the move itself and the slow process of adapting to a new 
ecological setting meant further disruptions of production.55
Until 1975, the state’s effort to control production outside its own 
state schemes took the classic colonial form: laws mandating that each 
household grow certain crops on a minimum number of acres. A vari­
ety of fines and penalties were deployed to enforce these measures. In 
one region, officials announced that no one would be allowed to go to 
market or ride a bus unless he could prove that he was cultivating the 
required seven and one-half acres of land. In another case, famine re­
lief was withheld until each villager had planted one acre of cassava in 
accordance with the minimum acreage law.56 One major source of the 
conflict leading to the dissolution of the Ruvuma ujamaa villages was 
the forced cultivation of fire-cured tobacco at what the villagers took to 
be confiscatory prices. As the colonizers had understood long before, 
forced cultivation of this kind could be successfully imposed only on a 
peasantry that was physically concentrated and therefore able to be 
monitored and, if necessary, disciplined.57
The next step was regulated, communal production.58 This form of 
cultivation was anticipated in the Villages and Ujamaa Villages Act 
(1975), which established "village collective farms” and required vil­
lage authorities to draw up annual work plans and production targets.

240 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
In practice, the size of each communal field and its production plan 
were typically set by an agricultural field officer (who was eager to 
please his superiors) and the village chief, with little or no wider con­
sultation.59 The result was a labor plan that bore no relation to the sea­
sonal supply of local labor, let alone the peasants’ own goals. Work on 
the collective village farm was experienced as little different from cor­
vee labor. Villagers had no choice in the matter, and it was rare for their 
work to yield a profit. Even though extension agents were directed to 
devote their efforts exclusively to the communal fields, the crops were 
often unsuitable, the soil infertile, the seed and fertilizer late to arrive, 
and the promised tractor with plow nowhere in sight. These shortcom­
ings, plus the provision that any profit (a very rare event) from the com­
munal field could be counted as revenue for the village committee, 
meant that the work was deeply resented.
In theory, the system of political and labor control was thorough 
and inescapable. Villages were divided into sections (mitaa) and each 
section into several cells (mashina, made up of ten households). The 
residential order was replicated on the communal fields. Each section 
was responsible for the cultivation of a segment of the communal field, 
and within that segment, each cell was responsible for a correspond­
ing fragment. Again in theory, the cell leader was responsible for labor 
mobilization and surveillance.60 Structurally, then, the parallels in the 
residential and labor-disciplinary hierarchies were designed to make 
them perfectly transparent and legible to the authorities.
In practice, the system broke down quickly. The areas actually 
under communal cultivation were typically far smaller than the figures 
officially reported.61 Most section and village authorities were content 
to go through the motions when it came to communal cultivation. And 
they were reluctant to impose fines on their neighbors who neglected 
the labor rules in order to tend to their all-important private plots.
As a response to such pervasive foot-dragging, many communal 
fields were divided up, and each household was made responsible for 
cultivating, say, half an acre.62 It was no longer necessary to coordi­
nate labor for working a single large field, and the responsibility for 
cultivation, and hence sanctions, could now be pinpointed. The new 
system resembled the colonial forced cultivation system, with one dif­
ference: the plots were physically consolidated for easier supervision. 
Still, the absence of any appreciable return from this labor meant that 
each household focused on its private holding and treated the commu­
nal plot as an onerous residual activity, despite occasional official 
warnings that the priorities should be inverted.63 The disparity in yields 
naturally reflected the disparity in attention.

Villagization in Tanzania 241
The aim of Tanzanian rural policy from 1967 through the early 
1980s was to reconfigure the rural population into a form that would 
allow the state to impose its development agenda and, in the process, to 
control the work and production of cultivators. Nowhere is this more 
explicit than in the document for the third five-year plan (1978): "In 
the rural sector, the Party has had great success in resettling the rural 
peasantry in villages where it is now possible to identify able-bodied in­
dividuals able to work and also to identify the acreage available for 
agricultural purposes. . . . The plan intends to make sure that in every 
workplace, rural or urban, our implementing organs set specific work 
targets each year.. . . The village government will see to it that all Party 
policies in respect of development programmes are adhered to.”64 In 
case the purpose of visibility and control was doubted, the plan went 
on to explain that agricultural development “in our present condi­
tions" calls for “setting up work timetables and production targets.”65 
Communal farms (now called village government farms) were man­
dated. But as Henry Bernstein notes, with the incomplete collectiviza­
tion of land and the unwillingness to resort to truly draconian en­
forcement measures, these communal farms were bound to founder.66
The underlying premise of Nyerere’s agrarian policy, for all its rhe­
torical flourishes in the direction of traditional culture, was little dif­
ferent from that of colonial agrarian policy. That premise was that the 
practices of African cultivators and pastoralists were backward, un­
scientific, inefficient, and ecologically irresponsible. Only close super­
vision, training, and, if need be, coercion by specialists in scientific 
agriculture could bring them and their practices in line with a modern 
Tanzania. They were the problem to which the agricultural experts 
were the solution.
It was precisely the assumption, to quote a Tanzanian civil servant, 
of a “traditional outlook and unwillingness to change"67 that required 
the entire series of agricultural schemes, from ujamaa villages to forced 
relocation to the supervised cultivation launched by the colonial and 
the independent regimes. This view of the peasantry permeates the 
1964 World Bank report and the first Tanganyikan five-year plan. Al­
though the plan notes that "significant inroads have been made into 
the conservatism of the rural population, who as they become orga­
nized into co-operatives, respond encouragingly,”68 it argues that more 
extensive measures are called for. Thus the 1964 plan declares: “How 
to overcome the destructive conservatism of the people, and generate 
the drastic agrarian reforms which must be effected if the country is to 
survive is one of the most difficult problems the political leaders of 
Tanzania have to face.”69

242 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Nyerere entirely agreed with the majority of the extension officials, 
who believed that their job was to “overcome [the farmers’] apathy and 
attachment to outmoded practices.”70 He and the World Bank saw eye- 
to-eye in having the first plan provide for sixty new settlement schemes 
in which farmers who followed the rules would receive land. There is 
no mistaking this picture of a willfully ignorant and less than diligent 
class of cultivators in Nyerere’s first broadcast as prime minister in 
1961: “If you have cotton unpicked on your shamba, if you have culti­
vated half an acre less than you could cultivate, if you are letting the 
soil run needlessly off your land, or if your shamba is full of weeds, if 
you deliberately ignore the advice given you by the agricultural ex­
perts, then you are a traitor in the battle.”71
The logical counterpart to the lack of faith of the ordinary culti­
vator was the hyperfaith of the agricultural experts and the "blind faith 
in machines and large scale operations.”72 Just as the planned village 
was a vast "improvement” in legibility and control over past settlement 
practices, the planned agriculture offered by the experts was, in its leg­
ibility and order, an “improvement” on the infinite variety and muddle 
of smallholdings and their existing techniques.73 In the new villages, 
the settlers' private plots (shambas) were generally mapped out by sur­
veyors and were trim, square or rectangular plots of equal size, placed 
side by side in straight rows (figure 31). Their design followed the 
same logic as the segmented communal plots: a logic of clarity and ad­
ministrative ease rather than agronomic sense. Thus when a scheme 
for tea cultivation was begun, the smallholders were required to plant 
their tea in a single block “because it was easier for the extension staff 
to work on tea that was planted in the same place.”74
The order of the fields was replicated in the order of the plants 
within the fields. Tanzanian farmers often planted two or more crops 
together in the same field (a technique variously called polycropping, 
intercropping, or relay cropping). In the coffee-growing areas, for ex­
ample, coffee was often interplanted with bananas, beans, and other 
annuals. For most agronomists, this practice was anathema. As one 
dissenting specialist explained, "The agricultural extension service has 
been encouraging farmers to plant pure-stand coffee and considering 
this practice the sine qua non of modern farming.”75 If the crop were ba­
nanas, the banana trees must also be in pure stands. Agricultural field 
officers judged their accomplishments by whether each crop under their 
supervision was planted in straight, properly spaced rows and was not 
mixed with any other cultigen.76 Like large-scale mechanized farming, 
monocropping had a scientific rationale in particular contexts, but ex­
tension officers often promoted monocropping uncritically as an article

Villagization in Tanzania 243
31. Plan for a ujamaa village: Makazi 
Mapya, Omulunazi, Rushwa, Tanzania
of faith in the catechism of modern farming. While empirical evidence 
was even then mounting in favor of the ecological soundness and pro­
ductivity of some intercropping regimes, the faith continued unabated. 
What is clear, however, is that monocropping and row planting vastly fa­
cilitate the work of administrators and agronomists. Both techniques fa­
cilitate inspection and calculations of acreage and yield; they greatly 
simplify field trials by minimizing the number of variables at play in any 
one field; they streamline the job of extension recommendations and the 
supervision of cultivation; and, finally, they simplify control of the har­
vest. The simplified and legible field crop offers to state agricultural 
officers many of the same advantages that the "stripped-down" com­
mercial forest offered to scientific foresters and revenue officers.
Bureaucratic Convenience, Bureaucratic Interests
Authoritarian social engineering is apt to display the full range of 
standard bureaucratic pathologies. The transformations it wishes to ef­
fect cannot generally be brought about without applying force or with­
out treating nature and human subjects as if they were functions in a 
few administrative routines. Far from being regrettable anomalies, these

244 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
behavioral by-products are inherent in high-modernist campaigns of 
this kind. I am purposely ignoring here the more obvious inhumanities 
that are inevitable whenever great power is placed in the hands of 
largely unaccountable state authorities who are under pressure from 
above to produce results despite popular resistance. Instead, I stress 
two key elements of the bureaucratic response typified by the ujamaa 
village campaign: first, the civil servants’ inclination to reinterpret the 
campaign so that it called for results that they could more easily de­
liver, and second, their disposition to reinterpret the campaign in line 
with what was in their corporate interests.
The first tendency was most readily apparent in the displacement 
of goals toward strictly quantitative criteria of performance. What 
might be called a “substantive ujamaa village,” whose residents had 
freely consented to move, had agreed on how to manage a communal 
plot, and were productive farmers managing their own local affairs 
(Nyerere’s initial vision), was replaced by a "notional ujamaa village,” 
an integer that could be added to an avalanche of statistics. Thus 
party cadres and civil servants, in showing how much they had accom­
plished, emphasized the numbers of people moved, new villages cre­
ated, house lots and communal fields surveyed, wells drilled, areas 
cleared and plowed, tons of fertilizer delivered, and tanu branches set 
up. No matter if a given ujamaa village was not much more than a few 
truckloads of angry peasants and their belongings, unceremoniously 
dumped at a site marked off with a few surveyors’ stakes; it still 
counted as one ujamaa village to the officials’ credit. In addition, a 
pettifogging aesthetics might prevail over substance. The desire to 
have all the houses in a planned village perfectly aligned, which was 
presumably linked to easy surveying and the desire to please the in­
specting officials, might require that a house be dismantled in order to 
move it a scant fifty feet to the surveyor’s line.77
The “productivity of the political apparatus” was judged by numer­
ical results that permitted aggregation and, perhaps more important, 
comparisons.78 And when officials realized that their futures depended 
on producing impressive figures quickly, a process of competitive em­
ulation was unleashed. One official described the atmosphere that 
caused him to abandon an initial strategy of selective implementation 
and to plunge ahead.
This [strategy] was found to be unworkable, for two main reasons. First, 
there was a competitive attitude (particularly between regions) with all 
its political overtones. Here was a moment for self-aggrandizement by 
proving ability to mobilize a rural population wholesale. Reports were 
coming in from Mara Region that they were about to complete their op­

Villagization in Tanzania 245
eration when we had not started at all. Top party officials were herald­
ing and positively reinforcing the achievements of resettlement in Geita 
District. Who, in such circumstances, would have wished to lag behind? 
Political leaders therefore called for quick measures to complete the re­
settlement exercise in a short time. Such a rushed exercise caused prob­
lems, of course, in the form of poorly planned villages.79
Nyerere, necessarily perceiving the campaign largely through sets 
of statistics and self-congratulatory official reports, exacerbated the 
competitive atmosphere. His glowing report to TANU was a delirium of 
numbers, targets, and percentages.80
Consider, for example, the question of villagization. In my report to the 
1973 tanu Conference I was able to say that 2,028,164 people were liv­
ing in villages. Two years later, in June 1975,1 reported to the next tanu 
Conference that approximately 9,100,000 people were living in village 
communities. Now there are about 13,065,000 people living together in 
7,684 villages. This is a tremendous achievement. It is an achievement 
of tanu and Government leaders in cooperation with the people of Tan­
zania. It means that something like 70% of our people have moved 
their homes in the space of about three years.81
The second, and surely most ominous, deflection of the ujamaa 
campaign brought off by state authorities was to see that its imple­
mentation systematically served to underwrite their status and power. 
As Andrew Coulson has perceptively noted, in the actual process of 
creating new villages, the administrators and party officials (them­
selves competitors) effectively evaded all those policies that would 
have diminished their privileges and power while exaggerating those 
that reinforced their corporate sway. Thus such ideas as allowing small 
ujamaa villages like Ruvuma to operate free of government interfer­
ence (before 1968), pupils’ involvement in decision making in schools 
(1969), workers’ participation in management (1969-70), and the 
power to elect village councils and leadership (1973-75) were all hon­
ored in the breach.82 High-modernist social engineering is ideal soil 
for authoritarian pretensions, and Tanzanian officialdom made the 
most of this chance to consolidate its position.83
The Idea of a “National Plantation”
Villagization was meant to radically concentrate Tanzania’s peas­
antry in order to regiment it politically and economically. If it worked, 
it would transform the dispersed, autonomous, and illegible populations 
that had thus far eluded most of the state policies they found onerous. 
The planners pictured, instead, a population settled in government-

246 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
designed villages under tight administrative control, planting commu­
nal fields in which pure-stand crops were grown according to state 
specifications. If we allow for the continued existence of substantial 
private plots and the (related) weakness of labor control, the whole 
scheme came perilously close to looking like a vast, albeit noncontigu­
ous, state plantation. What a neutral observer might have taken as a 
new form of servitude, however benevolent, was largely unquestioned 
by the elites, for the policy sailed under the banner of “development.”
It seems incredible, in retrospect, that any state could proceed with 
so much hubris and so little information and planning to the disloca­
tion of so many million lives. It seems, again in retrospect, a wild and 
irrational scheme which was bound to fail both the expectations of its 
planners and the material and social needs of its hapless victims.
The inhumanities of compulsory villagization were magnified by 
the deeply ingrained authoritarian habits of the bureaucracy and by 
the pell-mell rush of the campaign. To concentrate on such administra­
tive and political shortcomings, however, is to miss the point. Even if 
the campaign had been granted more time, more technical skill, and a 
better “bedside manner,” the party-state could not possibly have assem­
bled and digested the information necessary to make a fundamentally 
schematic plan succeed. The existing economic activity and physical 
movement of the Tanzanian rural population were the consequences of 
a mind-bogglingly complex, delicate, and pliable set of adaptations to 
their diverse social and material environment.84 As in the customary 
land-tenure arrangements examined in chapter 1, these adaptations 
defy administrative codification because of their endless local vari­
ability, their elaboration, and their plasticity in the face of new condi­
tions. If land tenure defies codification, then, it stands to reason that 
the connections structuring the entire material and social life of each 
particular group of peasants would remain largely opaque to both spe­
cialists and administrators.
Under the circumstances, wholesale, by-the-book resettlement made 
a havoc of peasant lives. Only a few of the most obvious ecological fail­
ures of villagization will serve to illustrate the pattern of ignorance. 
Peasants were forcibly moved from annually flooded lands that were 
vital to their cropping regime and shifted to poor soils on high ground. 
They were, as we have seen, moved to all-weather roads where the soil 
was unfamiliar or unsuitable for the crops envisaged. Village living 
placed cultivators far from their fields, thus thwarting the crop watch­
ing and pest control that more dispersed homesteads made possible. 
The concentration of livestock and people often had the unfortunate 
consequence of encouraging cholera and livestock epidemics. For the

Villagization in Tanzania 247
highly mobile Maasai and other pastoralists, the scheme of creating 
ujamaa ranches by herding cattle to a single location was an unmiti­
gated disaster for range conservation and pastoral livelihoods.85
The failure of ujamaa villages was almost guaranteed by the high- 
modernist hubris of planners and specialists who believed that they 
alone knew how to organize a more satisfactory, rational, and produc­
tive life for their citizens. It should be noted that they did have some­
thing to contribute to what could have been a more fruitful develop­
ment of the Tanzanian countryside. But their insistence that they had a 
monopoly on useful knowledge and that they impose this knowledge 
set the stage for disaster.
Settling people into supervised villages was emphatically not 
uniquely the brainchild of the nationalist elites of independent Tan­
zania. Villagization had a long colonial history in Tanzania and else­
where, as program after program was devised to concentrate the pop­
ulation. The same techno-economic vision was shared, until very late 
in the game, by the World Bank, United States Agency for Interna­
tional Development (u s a id ), and other development agencies contri­
buting to Tanzanian development.86 However enthusiastic they were in 
spearheading their campaign, the political leaders of Tanzania were 
more consumers of a high-modernist faith that had originated else­
where much earlier than they were producers.
What was perhaps distinctive about the Tanzanian scheme was its 
speed, its comprehensiveness, and its intention to deliver such collec­
tive services as schools, clinics, and clean water. Although consider­
able force was applied in seeing the scheme through, even then its con­
sequences were not nearly as brutal or irremediable as those of Soviet 
collectivization.87 The Tanzanian state’s relative weakness and unwill­
ingness to resort to Stalinist methods88 as well as the Tanzanian peas­
ants’ tactical advantages, including flight, unofficial production and 
trade, smuggling, and foot-dragging, combined to make the practice of 
villagization far less destructive than the theory.89
The "Ideal” State Village: Ethiopian Variation
The pattern of compulsory villagization in Ethiopia uncannily resem­
bles that of Russia in its coerciveness and Tanzania in its ostensible ra­
tionale. Beyond the obvious shared socialist terrain and official visits 
by Ethiopian officials to Tanzania to observe its program in action,90 
there seems to be a deeper affinity at work between the assertion of 
state authority in the countryside, on one hand, and the results in terms 
of process and actual physical plans, on the other. The continuity of

248 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Nyerere's plans with those of the colonizers is obvious in the Tanzanian 
case. In Ethiopia, which was never colonized, resettlement can be 
seen as a century-old project of the imperial dynasty to subjugate non- 
Amharic-speaking peoples and, more generally, to bring fractious 
provinces under central control.
Although the Marxist revolutionary elite that seized power in early 
1974 resorted to forced settlement at an early stage, its leader, Lieu­
tenant Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam and the Dergue—the shadowy 
ruling body of the revolutionary regime—did not call for full-scale vil­
lagization until 1985. The policy anticipated the eventual resettlement 
of all 33 million rural Ethiopians. Echoing Nyerere, Mengistu declared, 
“The scattered and haphazard habitation and livelihood of Ethiopian 
peasants cannot build socialism. . . . Insofar as efforts are dispersed 
and livelihood is individual, the results are only hand-to-mouth exis­
tence amounting to fruitless struggle and drudgery, which cannot build 
a prosperous society.”91 The other explanations for village settlement 
were no different from those given in Tanzania: concentration would 
bring services to scattered populations, permit state-designed social 
production (producer cooperatives), and allow mechanization and po­
litical education.92
Socialism and its precondition, villagization, were virtually Men­
gistu ’s way of saying “modern.” In his justification for massive reset­
tlement, he decried Ethiopia’s reputation as "a symbol of backwardness 
and a valley of ignorance." He called on Ethiopians to "rally together 
to free farming from the ugly forces of nature.” Finally, he condemned 
pastoralism per se, praising villagization as a way “to rehabilitate our 
nomad society.”93
The pace of resettlement, however, was far more brutal in Ethiopia, 
inadvertently helping to lay the groundwork for the subsequent rebel­
lions that brought down the regime. By March 1986, a scant year into 
the operation, the regime claimed that 4.6 million peasants had been 
settled in 4,500 villages.94 Only three months were allotted between 
the first “agitation and propaganda” (read, "command”) and the move 
itself—often over huge distances. All accounts suggest that many of 
the new settlements received almost nothing in the way of services and 
had more of the aspect of a penal colony than of a functioning village.
Forced villagization in the Arsi region was apparently planned di­
rectly from the center in Addis Ababa, with little or no local participa­
tion. There was a strict template which local surveyors and adminis­
trators were ordered to follow. The plan was carefully replicated in 
each location, inasmuch as this was not a regime inclined to tolerate 
local improvisation. “But the local recruits learned their jobs well, for

Villagization in Tanzania 249
the villages and their 1,000 [square] meter compounds, carefully 
marked by pegs and sod cuts, have followed the geometric grid pat­
tern required by the guidelines. In fact, some villages have been too 
rigidly laid out; for example, one farmer had to move his large, well- 
constructed tukul [traditional thatched house] some 20 feet so that it 
would be 'in line’ with all the other buildings in its row.”95
The close alignment between theory and practice can be seen by 
comparing the layout of a government plan for an ideal village with 
an aerial photograph of a new village (figures 32 and 33). Notice the 
central location of all key government functions. A standardizing, 
round-number, bureaucratic mentality is obvious from the fact that 
each village was expected to have one thousand inhabitants and each 
compound one thousand square meters.96 If every village had the same 
population and the same land allotment, a single model could simply 
be applied everywhere; no local knowledge would be required. The 
identical disposition of land in each settlement would make it that 
much easier for the authorities to send out general directives, to mon­
itor crop production, and to control the harvest through the new Agri­
cultural Marketing Corporation (am c). The generic plan was particu­
larly convenient for the hard-pressed surveyors, precisely because it 
bore no relation whatever to local ecological, economic, or social pat­
terns. In order to facilitate the uniform design of the cookie-cutter vil­
lages, the planning officials were directed to choose flat, cleared sites 
and to insist on straight roads and similar, numbered houses.97
The objects of this exercise in geometry were under no illusions 
about its purpose. When they were finally free to talk, refugees in So­
malia told their interviewers that the new settlement pattern was de­
vised to control dissidence and rebellion, to prevent people from 
leaving, to “make it easier to watch the people," to control the crops, to 
register possessions and livestock, and (in Wollega) to “allow them to 
take our boys to war more easily."98
In “model producer cooperatives," standardized housing was pro­
vided: square, tin-roofed houses (chika bets). Elsewhere, traditional 
housing (tukuls) were disassembled and reconstructed in the rigidly 
stipulated order. As in Russia, all the private shops, tea houses, and 
small trading establishments were abolished, leaving only such state 
spaces as the village’s mass organization and peasant association of­
fices, literacy shed, health clinic, or state cooperative shop as public 
gathering places. In contrast to the Tanzanian experience, the Ethiopian 
campaign had a much stronger military component, as peasants were 
moved great distances with a view to military pacification and political 
emasculation.99 Needless to say, the draconian conditions of Ethiopian

250 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Crop areas on 1000 m1 compounds
32. A government plan for a standard socialist village, Arsi region, Ethiopia. The 
layout shows I, a mass organization office; 2, a kindergarten; 3, a health clinic; 4, 
a state cooperative shop; 5, peasant association office; 6, reserve plots; 7, a pri­
mary school; 8, a sports field; 9, a seed-multiplication center; 10, a handicrafts 
center; and 11, an animal-breeding station. Detail 12 depicts an enlargement of 
compound sites, and detail 13 is an enlargement of two sites, showing the neigh­
borhood latrine at 14.
villagization meant that it was even more destructive of peasant live­
lihoods and of the environment than its Tanzanian counterpart.100
A full appreciation of the toll of forced resettlement in Ethiopia ex­
tends far beyond the standard reports of starvation, executions, defor­
estation, and failed crops. The new settlements nearly always failed 
their inhabitants as human communities and as units of food produc­
tion. The very fact of massive resettlement nullified a precious legacy 
of local agricultural and pastoral knowledge and, with it, some thirty 
to forty thousand functioning communities, most of them in regions 
that had regularly produced food surpluses.
A typical cultivator in Tigray, a location singled out for harsh mea­
sures, planted an average of fifteen crops a season (such cereal crops

Villagization in Tanzania 251
33. Aerial view of a resettlement site in southwestern Ethiopia, 1986
as teff, barley, wheat, sorghum, corn, millet; such root crops as sweet 
potatoes, potatoes, onions; some legumes, including horsebeans, len­
tils, and chickpeas; and a number of vegetable crops, including pep­
pers, okra, and many others).101 It goes without saying that the farmer 
was familiar with each of several varieties of any crop, when to plant 
it, how deeply to sow it, how to prepare the soil, and how to tend and 
harvest it. This knowledge was place specific in the sense that the suc­
cessful growing of any variety required local knowledge about rainfall 
and soils, down to and including the peculiarities of each plot the 
farmer cultivated.102 It was also place specific in the sense that much of 
this knowledge was stored in the collective memory of the locality: an 
oral archive of techniques, seed varieties, and ecological information.
Once the farmer was moved, often to a vastly different ecological 
setting, his local knowledge was all but useless. As Jason Clay empha­
sizes, “Thus, when a farmer from the highlands is transported to set­
tlement camps in areas like Gambella, he is instantly transformed 
from an agricultural expert to an unskilled, ignorant laborer, com­
pletely dependent for his survival on the central government.’’103 Re­
settlement was far more than a change in scenery. It took people from 
a setting in which they had the skills and resources to produce many of 
their own basic needs and hence the means of a reasonably self- 
sufficient independence. It then transferred them to a setting where 
these skills were of little or no avail. Only in such circumstances was

252 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
it possible for camp officials to reduce migrants to mendicants whose 
obedience and labor could be exacted for subsistence rations.
Although the drought that coincided with forced migration in Ethi­
opia was real enough, much of the famine to which international aid 
agencies responded was a product of the massive resettlement.104 The 
destruction of social ties was almost as productive of famine as were 
the crop failures induced by poor planning and ignorance of the new 
agricultural environment. Communal ties, relations with kin and 
affines, networks of reciprocity and cooperation, local charity and de­
pendence had been the principal means by which villagers had man­
aged to survive periods of food shortage in the past. Stripped of these 
social resources by indiscriminate deportations, often separated from 
their immediate family and forbidden to leave, the settlers in the camps 
were far more vulnerable to starvation than they had been in their 
home regions.
The immanent logic, never achieved, of the Dergue's rural policy is 
telling. If implemented successfully, rural Ethiopians would have been 
permanently settled along the main roads in large, legible villages, 
where uniform, numbered houses would have been set in a grid cen­
tered on the headquarters of the peasant association (that is, the party), 
where the chairman, his deputies, and the militia maintained their 
posts. Designated crops would have been grown collectively, with ma­
chinery, on flat fields laid out uniformly by state surveyors and then 
harvested for delivery to state agencies for distribution and sale abroad. 
Labor would have been closely supervised by experts and cadres. In­
tended to modernize Ethiopian agriculture and, not incidentally, to 
strengthen the control of the Dergue, the policy was literally fatal to 
hundreds of thousands of cultivators and, finally, to the Dergue itself.
Conclusion
In quiet and untroubled times, it seems to every administrator that it is only by 
his efforts that the whole population under his rule is kept going, and in this 
consciousness of being indispensable every administrator finds the chief re­
ward of his labor and efforts. While the sea of history remains calm the ruler- 
administrator in his frail bark, holding it with a boat hook to the ship of the 
people and himself moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he 
is holding on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and 
the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship moves inde­
pendently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no longer reaches the 
moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead of appearing a ruler and 
a source of power, becomes an insignificant, useless, feeble man.
— Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace

Villagization in Tanzania 253
The conflict between the officials and specialists actively planning the 
future on one hand and the peasantry on the other has been billed by 
the first group as a struggle between progress and obscurantism, ra­
tionality and superstition, science and religion. Yet it is apparent from 
the high-modernist schemes we have examined that the "rational" plans 
they imposed were often spectacular failures. As units of production, 
as human communities, or as a means of delivering services, the 
planned villages failed the people they were intended, sometimes sin­
cerely, to serve. In the long run they even failed their originators as 
units of growing appropriation or as a way of securing the loyalty of 
the rural population, although they may have still served effectively, in 
the short run at least, as a way of detaching a population from its cus­
tomary social network and thus thwarting collective protest.
High Modernism and the Optics of Power
If the plans for villagization were so rational and scientific, why did 
they bring about such general ruin? The answer, I believe, is that such 
plans were not scientific or rational in any meaningful sense of those 
terms. What these planners carried in their mind's eye was a certain 
aesthetic, what one might call a visual codification of modern rural 
production and community life. Like a religious faith, this visual codi­
fication was almost impervious to criticism or discontinuing evidence. 
The belief in large farms, monocropping, “proper” villages, tractor- 
plowed fields, and collective or communal farming was an aesthetic 
conviction undergirded by a conviction that this was the way in which 
the world was headed—a teleology.103 For all but a handful of special­
ists, these were not empirical hypotheses derived from particular con­
texts in the temperate West that would have to be carefully examined 
in practice. In a given historical and social context—say, wheat grow­
ing by farmers breaking new ground on the plains of Kansas—many 
elements of this faith might have made sense.106 As a faith, however, it 
was generalized and applied uncritically in widely divergent settings 
with disastrous results.
If the proverbial man from Mars were to stumble on the facts here, 
he could be forgiven if he were confused about exactly who was the 
empiricist and who was the true believer. Tanzanian peasants had, for 
example, been readjusting their settlement patterns and farming prac­
tices in accordance with climate changes, new crops, and new markets 
with notable success in the two decades before villagization. They 
seemed to have an eminently empirical, albeit cautious, outlook on 
their own practices. By contrast, specialists and politicians seemed to

254 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
be in the unshakable grip of a quasi-religious enthusiasm made even 
more potent in being backed by the state.
This was not just any faith. It had a direct relation to the status 
and interests of its bearers. Because the bearers of this visual codifica­
tion saw themselves as self-conscious modernizers of their societies, 
their vision required a sharp and morally loaded contrast between 
what looked modern (tidy, rectilinear, uniform, concentrated, simpli­
fied, mechanized) and what looked primitive (irregular, dispersed, com­
plicated, unmechanized). As the technical and political elite with a mo­
nopoly on modern education, they used this visual aesthetic of progress 
to define their historic mission and to enhance their status.
Their modernist faith was self-serving in other respects as well. 
The very idea of a national plan, which would be devised at the capi­
tal and would then reorder the periphery after its own image into 
quasi-military units obeying a single command, was profoundly cen­
tralizing. Each unit at the periphery was tied not so much to its neigh­
boring settlement as to the command center in the capital; the lines of 
communication rather resembled the converging lines used to orga­
nize perspective in early Renaissance paintings. “The convention of 
perspective . . . centers everything in the eye of the beholder. It is like 
a beam from a lighthouse—only instead of travelling outward, ap­
pearances travel in. The conventions called those appearances reality. 
Perspective makes the single eye the center of the visible world. Every­
thing converges on the eye as to the vanishing point of infinity. The vis­
ible world is arranged for the spectator as the universe was once 
thought to be arranged for God.”107
The image of coordination and authority aspired to here recalls 
that of mass exercises—thousands of bodies moving in perfect unison 
according to a meticulously rehearsed script. When such coordination 
is achieved, the spectacle may have several effects. The demonstration 
of mass coordination, its designers hope, will awe spectators and par­
ticipants with its display of powerful cohesion. The awe is enhanced by 
the fact that, as in the Taylorist factory, only someone outside and 
above the display can fully appreciate it as a totality; the individual 
participants at ground level are small molecules within an organism 
whose brain is elsewhere. The image of a nation that might operate 
along these lines is enormously flattering to elites at the apex—and, of 
course, demeaning to a population whose role they thus reduce to that 
of ciphers. Beyond impressing observers, such displays may, in the 
short run at least, constitute a reassuring self-hypnosis which serves to 
reinforce the moral purpose and self-confidence of the elites.108
The modernist visual aesthetic that animated planned villages has a

Villagization in Tanzania 255
curiously static quality to it. It is rather like a completed picture that 
cannot be improved upon.109 Its design is the result of scientific and 
technical laws, and the implicit assumption is that, once built, the task 
then becomes one of maintaining its form. The planners aim to have 
each new village look like the last. Like a Roman military commander 
entering a new camp, the official arriving from Dar es Salaam would 
know exactly where everything could be found, from the tanu head­
quarters to the peasant association and the health clinic. Every field 
and every house would also, in principle, be nearly identical and lo­
cated according to an overall scheme. To the degree that this vision 
had been realized in practice, it would have made absolutely no con­
nections to the particularities of place and time. It would be a view 
from nowhere. Instead of the unrepeatable variety of settlements 
closely adjusted to local ecology and subsistence routines and instead 
of the constantly changing local response to shifts in demography, cli­
mate, and markets, the state would have created thin, generic villages 
that were uniform in everything from political structure and social 
stratification to cropping techniques. The number of variables at play 
would be minimized. In their perfect legibility and sameness, these vil­
lages would be ideal, substitutable bricks in an edifice of state plan­
ning. Whether they would function was another matter.
The Failure of Grids
Ideas cannot digest reality.
—Jean-Paul Sartre
It is far easier for would-be reformers to change the formal struc­
ture of an institution than to change its practices. Redesigning the 
lines and boxes in an organizational chart is simpler than changing 
how that organization in fact operates. Changing the rules and regula­
tions is simpler than eliciting behavior that conforms to them.110 Re­
designing the physical layout of a village is simpler than transforming 
its social and productive life. For obvious reasons, political elites— 
particularly authoritarian high-modernist elites—typically begin with 
changes in the formal structure and rules. Such legal and statutory 
changes are the most accessible and the easiest to rearrange.
Anyone who has worked in a formal organization—even a small 
one strictly governed by detailed rules—knows that handbooks and 
written guidelines fail utterly in explaining how the institution goes 
successfully about its work. Accounting for its smooth operation are 
nearly endless and shifting sets of implicit understandings, tacit coor­

256 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
dinations, and practical mutualities that could never be successfully 
captured in a written code. This ubiquitous social fact is useful to em­
ployees and labor unions. The premise behind what are tellingly called 
work-to-rule strikes is a case in point. When Parisian taxi drivers want 
to press a point on the municipal authorities about regulations or fees, 
they sometimes launch a work-to-rule strike. It consists merely in fol­
lowing meticulously all the regulations in the Code routier and thereby 
bringing traffic throughout central Paris to a grinding halt. The drivers 
thus take tactical advantage of the fact that the circulation of traffic is 
possible only because drivers have mastered a set of practices that 
have evolved outside, and often in contravention, of the formal rules.
Any attempt to completely plan a village, a city, or, for that matter, 
a language is certain to run afoul of the same social reality. A village, 
city, or language is the jointly created, partly unintended product of 
many, many hands. To the degree that authorities insist on replacing 
this ineffably complex web of activity with formal rules and regula­
tions, they are certain to disrupt the web in ways that they cannot pos­
sibly foresee.111 This point is most frequently made by such proponents 
of laissez-faire as Friedrich Hayek, who are fond of pointing out that a 
command economy, however sophisticated and legible, cannot begin 
to replace the myriad, rapid, mutual adjustments of functioning mar­
kets and the price system.112 In this context, however, the point applies 
in important ways to the even more complex patterns of social inter­
action with the material environment that we call a city or a village. 
Cities with a long history may be called “deep" or “thick" cities in the 
sense that they are the historical product of a vast number of people 
from all stations (including officialdom) who are long gone. It is possi­
ble, of course, to build a new city or a new village, but it will be a "thin” 
or "shallow” city, and its residents will have to begin (perhaps from 
known repertoires) to make it work in spite of the rules. In cases like 
Brasilia or Tanzania’s planned villages, one can understand why state 
planners may prefer a freshly cleared site and a “shocked" population 
moved abruptly to the new setting in which the planners’ influence is 
maximized. The alternative is to reform in situ an existing, functioning 
community that has more social resources for resisting and refashion­
ing the transformation planned for it.
The thinness of artificially designed communities can be compared 
to the thinness of artificially designed languages.113 Communities 
planned at a single stroke—Brasilia or the planned village in Tanzania 
or Ethiopia—are to older, unplanned communities as Esperanto is to, 
say, English or Burmese. One can in fact design a new language that in 
many respects is more logical, simpler, more universal, and less irreg­

Villagization in Tanzania 257
ular and that would technically lend itself to more clarity and preci­
sion. This was, of course, precisely the objective of Esperanto’s inven­
tor, Lazar Zamenhof, who also imagined that Esperanto, which was 
also known as international language, would eliminate the parochial 
nationalisms of Europe.114 Yet it is also perfectly obvious why Es­
peranto, which lacked a powerful state to enforce its adoption, failed 
to replace the existing vernaculars or dialects of Europe. (As social lin­
guists are fond of saying, "A national language is a dialect with an 
army") It was an exceptionally thin language, without any of the reso­
nances, connotations, ready metaphors, literature, oral history, id­
ioms, and traditions of practical use that any socially embedded lan­
guage already had. Esperanto has survived as a kind of utopian 
curiosity, a very thin dialect spoken by a handful of intelligentsia who 
have kept its promise alive.
The Miniaturization of Perfection and Control
The pretense of authoritarian high-modernist schemes to discipline 
virtually everything within their ambit is bound to encounter intract­
able resistance. Social inertia, entrenched privileges, international 
prices, wars, environmental change, to mention only a few factors, en­
sure that the results of high-modernist planning will look substantially 
different from what was originally imagined. Such is even the case 
where, as in Stalinist collectivization, the state devotes great resources 
to enforcing a high degree of formal compliance with its directives. 
Those who have their hearts set on realizing such plans cannot fail to 
be frustrated by stubborn social realities and material facts.
One response to this frustration is a retreat to the realm of appear­
ances and miniatures—to model cities and Potemkin villages, as it 
were.115 It is easier to build Brasilia than to fundamentally transform 
Brazil and Brazilians. The effect of this retreat is to create a small, rel­
atively self-contained, utopian space where high-modernist aspirations 
might more nearly be realized. The limiting case, where control is max­
imized but impact on the external world is minimized, is in the mu­
seum or the theme park.116
This miniaturization of perfection, I think, has a logic all its own, 
in spite of its implicit abandonment of large-scale transformations. 
Model villages, model cities, military colonies, show projects, and dem­
onstration farms offer politicians, administrators, and specialists an op­
portunity to create a sharply defined experimental terrain in which the 
number of rogue variables and unknowns are minimized. If, of course, 
such experiments make it successfully from the pilot stage to general

258 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
application, then they are a perfectly rational form of policy planning. 
There are advantages to miniaturization. The constriction of focus 
makes possible a far higher degree of social control and discipline. By 
concentrating the material and personnel resources of the state at a 
single point, miniaturization can approximate the architecture, layout, 
mechanization, social services, and cropping patterns that its vision 
calls for. Small islands of order and modernity, as Potemkin well under­
stood, are politically useful to officials who want to please their superi­
ors with an example of what they can accomplish. If their superiors are 
sufficiently closeted and misinformed, they may mistake, as Catherine 
the Great apparently did with Potemkin’s convincing scenery, the exem­
plary instance for the larger reality.117 The effect is to banish at one 
place and one time, in a kind of high-modernist version of Versailles 
and Le Petit Trianon, the larger loss of control.
The visual aesthetic of miniaturization seems significant as well. 
Just as the architectural drawing, the model, and the map are ways of 
dealing with a larger reality that is not easily grasped or manageable 
in its entirety, the miniaturization of high-modernist development of­
fers a visually complete example of what the future looks like.
Miniaturization of one kind or another is ubiquitous. It is tempt­
ing to wonder whether the human tendency to miniaturization—to 
create "toys” of larger objects and realities that cannot so easily be 
manipulated—does not also have a bureaucratic equivalent. Yi-fu 
Tuan has brilliantly examined how we miniaturize, and thereby do­
mesticate, the larger phenomena that are outside our control, often 
with benign intentions. Under this elastic rubric, he includes bonsai, 
bonseki, and gardens (a miniaturization of the plant world) along with 
dolls and dollhouses, toy locomotives, toy soldiers and weapons of war, 
and “living toys” in the form of specially bred fish and dogs.118 While 
Tuan concentrates on more or less playful domestication, something of 
the same desire for control and mastery can also, it would seem, oper­
ate on the larger scale of bureaucracies. Just as substantive goals, the 
achievement of which are hard to measure, may be supplanted by thin, 
notional statistics—the number of villages formed, the number of 
acres plowed—so may they also be supplanted by microenvironments 
of modernist order.
Capital cities, as the seat of the state and of its rulers, as the sym­
bolic center of (new) nations, and as the places where often powerful 
foreigners come, are most likely to receive close attention as veritable 
theme parks of high-modernist development. Even in their contempo­
rary secular guises, national capitals retain something of the older tra­
dition of being sacred centers for a national cult. The symbolic power

Villagization in Tanzania 259
of high-modernist capitals depends not, as it once did, on how well 
they represent a sacred past but rather on how fully they symbolize the 
utopian aspirations that rulers hold for their nations. As ever, to be 
sure, the display is meant to exude power as well as the authority of the 
past or of the future.
Colonial capitals were fashioned with these functions in mind. The 
imperial capital of New Delhi, designed by Edwin Lutyens, was a stun­
ning example of a capital intended to overawe its subjects (and per­
haps its own officials) with its scale and its grandeur, with its proces­
sional axes for parades demonstrating military power and its triumphal 
arches. New Delhi was naturally intended as a negation of what then be­
came Old Delhi. One central purpose of the new capital was captured 
nicely by the private secretary to George V in a note about the future 
residence of the British viceroy. It must, he wrote, be “conspicuous and 
commanding,” not dominated by the structures of past empires or by 
the features of the natural landscape. "We must now let [the Indian] see 
for the first time the power of Western science, art, and civilization.”119 
Standing at its center for a ceremonial occasion, one might forget for a 
moment that this tiny gem of imperial architecture was all but lost in a 
vast sea of Indian realities which either contradicted it or paid it no 
heed.
A great many nations, some of them former colonies, have built 
entirely new capitals rather than compromise with an urban past 
that their leaders were determined to transcend; one thinks of Brazil, 
Pakistan, Turkey, Belize, Nigeria, the Ivory Coast, Malawi, and Tanza­
nia.120 Most were built following the plans of Western or Western- 
trained architects, even when they attempted to incorporate references 
to vernacular building traditions. As Lawrence Vale points out, many 
new capitals seem intended as completed and self-contained objects. 
No subtraction, addition, or modification is contemplated—only ad­
miration. And in their strategic use of hills and elevation, of complexes 
set behind walls or water barriers, of finely graded structural hierar­
chy reflecting function and status, they also convey an impression of 
hegemony and domination which was unlikely to prevail beyond the 
city limits.121
Nyerere planned a new capital, Dodoma, that was to be somewhat 
different. The ideological commitments of the regime were to be ex­
pressed in an architecture that was purposely not monumental. Several 
interconnected settlements would undulate with the landscape, and the 
modest scale of the buildings would eliminate the need for elevators 
and air conditioning. Dodoma was very definitely, however, intended 
to be a utopian space that both represented the future and explicitly

260 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
negated Dar es Salaam. The master plan for Dodoma condemned Dar 
as a “dominant focus of development, . .. the antithesis of what Tanza­
nia is aiming for, and is growing at a pace, which if not checked, will 
damage the city as a humanist habitat and Tanzania as an egalitarian 
socialist-state.”122 While planning villages for everyone else whether 
they liked it or not, the rulers also designed for themselves a new sym­
bolic center incorporating, not by accident, I think, a hilltop refuge 
amidst manicured, orderly surroundings.
If the intractable difficulties of transforming existing cities can lead 
to the temptation to erect a model capital city, so can the difficulties of 
transforming existing villages prompt a retreat into miniaturization. 
One major variant of this tendency was the creation of carefully con­
trolled production environments by frustrated colonial extension offi­
cers. Coulson notes the logic involved: "If a farmer could not be 
forced, or persuaded, the only alternatives were to ignore them alto­
gether and go for mechanized agriculture controlled by outsiders (as 
in the Groundnuts Scheme, or on settler farms controlled by Euro­
peans), or to take them right away from the traditional surroundings, 
to settlement schemes where in return for receiving land they might 
perhaps agree to follow the instructions of the agricultural staff.”123
Still another variant was the attempt to distill out of the general 
population a cadre of progressive farmers who would then be mobi­
lized to practice modern agriculture. Such policies were followed in 
elaborate detail in Mozambique and were important in colonial Tan­
zania as well.124 When the state confronted a “brick wall of peasant 
conservatism,” notes a 1956 document from the Tanganyika Depart­
ment of Agriculture, it became necessary “to withdraw the effort from 
some portions so as to concentrate on small selected points, a proce­
dure which has come to be known as the ‘focal-point approach.’ ”125 In 
their desire to isolate the small sector of the agricultural population 
that they thought would respond to scientific agriculture, the extension 
agents frequently overlooked other realities that bore directly on their 
substantive mission—realities that were under their nose but not 
under their aegis. Pauline Peters thus describes an effort in Malawi to 
depopulate a rural area of all but those whom the agricultural author­
ities had designated “master farmers.” Extension agents were attempt­
ing to create a microlandscape of "neatly-bounded, mixed-farming 
lot[s] based on rotation of single-stand crops which would replace the 
scattered, multi-cropped farming they considered backward. In the 
meantime, they entirely ignored an autonomous and general rush to 
plant tobacco—the very transformation they were trying to bring 
about by force.’’126

Villagization in Tanzania 261
The planned city, the planned village, and the planned language 
(not to mention the command economy) are, we have emphasized, 
likely to be thin cities, villages, and languages. They are thin in the 
sense that they cannot reasonably plan for anything more than a few 
schematic aspects of the inexhaustibly complex activities that charac­
terize "thick” cities and villages. One all-but-guaranteed consequence 
of such thin planning is that the planned institution generates an 
unofficial reality—a “dark twin”—that arises to perform many of the 
various needs that the planned institution fails to fulfill. Brasilia, as 
Holston showed, engendered an "unplanned Brasilia” of construction 
workers, migrants, and those whose housing and activities were nec­
essary but were not foreseen or were precluded by the plan. Nearly 
every new, exemplary capital city has, as the inevitable accompani­
ment of its official structures, given rise to another, far more “disor­
derly" and complex city that makes the official city work—that is virtu­
ally a condition of its existence. That is, the dark twin is not just an 
anomaly, an "outlaw reality”; it represents the activity and life without 
which the official city would cease to function. The outlaw city bears 
the same relation to the official city as the Parisian taxi drivers’ actual 
practices bear to the Code routier.
On a more speculative note, I imagine that the greater the pretense 
of and insistence on an officially decreed micro-order, the greater the 
volume of nonconforming practices necessary to sustain that fiction. 
The most rigidly planned economies tend to be accompanied by large 
"underground, ‘gray, ’ informal,” economies that supply, in a thousand 
ways, what the formal economy fails to supply.127 When this economy 
is ruthlessly suppressed, the cost has often been economic ruin and 
starvation (the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution in 
China; the autarkic, moneyless economy of Pol Pot’s Cambodia). Ef­
forts to force a country’s inhabitants to maintain permanent, fixed res­
idences tend to produce large, illegal, undocumented populations in 
urban areas where they have been forbidden to go.128 The insistence on 
a rigid visual aesthetic at the core of the capital city tends to produce 
settlements and slums teeming with squatters who, as often as not, 
sweep the floors, cook the meals, and tend the children of the elites 
who work in the decorous, planned center.129

8 Taming Nature: 
An Agriculture of Legibility 
and Simplicity
Yes, enumerate the carriage parts —
Still not a carriage.
When you begin making decisions and cutting it up 
rules and names appear 
And once names appear, you should know when to stop. 
— Tao-te-ching
The necessarily simple abstractions of large bureaucratic institutions, 
as we have seen, can never adequately represent the actual complexity 
of natural or social processes. The categories that they employ are too 
coarse, too static, and too stylized to do justice to the world that they 
purport to describe.
For reasons that will become apparent, state-sponsored high- 
modernist agriculture has recourse to abstractions of the same order. 
The simple “production and profit” model of agricultural extension 
and agricultural research has failed in important ways to represent the 
complex, supple, negotiated objectives of real farmers and their com­
munities. That model has also failed to represent the space in which 
farmers plant crops—its microclimates, its moisture and water move­
ment, its microrelief, and its local biotic history. Unable to effectively 
represent the profusion and complexity of real farms and real fields, 
high-modernist agriculture has often succeeded in radically simplify­
ing those farms and fields so they can be more directly apprehended, 
controlled, and managed. I emphasize the radical simplification of agri­
cultural high modernism because agriculture is, even in its most rudi­
mentary, neolithic forms, inevitably a process of simplifying the floral 
profusion of nature.1 How else are we to understand the process by 
which man has encouraged certain species of flora that he found use­
ful and discouraged others that he found a nuisance?
The logic behind the radical simplification of the field is almost pre­
cisely identical to the logic behind the radical simplification of the 
forest. In fact, a simplified agriculture, which was developed earlier,
262

Taming Nature 263
served as the model for scientific forestry. The guiding idea was the 
maximization of the crop yield or profit.2 The forests were reconceptu­
alized as "timber farms" in which a single species of tree was planted 
in straight rows and harvested like a crop when it was “mature.” The 
preconditions of such simplifications were the existence of a commod­
ity market and competitive pressure, on states as well as on entrepre­
neurs, to maximize profits or revenue. In the monocropped field and 
single-species forest alike, the innumerable other members of the bi­
otic community were ignored unless they had some direct bearing on 
the health and yield of the species to be harvested. Such narrowing of 
attention to a single outcome—invariably the one of most commercial 
or fiscal interest—confers an analytical power that allows foresters 
and agronomists to track carefully the influence of other factors on this 
single dependent variable. Within its ambit, there is no denying the ex­
traordinary power of this approach to increase yields. As we shall see, 
however, this potent but narrow perspective is troubled both by certain 
inevitable blind spots and by phenomena that lie outside its restricted 
field of vision. To continue the metaphor, this narrowness in turn 
means that production agronomy is occasionally blindsided by factors 
outside its analytical focus and is forced, by the resulting crisis, to take 
a broader perspective.
The question we shall address in this chapter is why a model of 
modern, scientific agriculture that has apparently been successful in 
the temperate, industrializing West has so often foundered in the Third 
World. In spite of these indifferent results, the model has been pressed 
by colonial modernizers, independent states, and international agen­
cies. In Africa, where the results have been particularly sobering, an 
agronomist with great experience has claimed that “one of the crucial 
lessons of the past fifty years or so of ecological research focused on 
African agriculture is that the ‘dramatic modernization’ option has a 
track record so poor that a return to slower and more incremental ap­
proaches must now be given serious and sustained attention.”3
We will not be much concerned in this discussion with the particu­
lar reasons that made this scheme or that cropping plan fail. To be sure, 
the familiar bureaucratic pathologies as well as openly predatory prac­
tices have often greatly compounded these failures. My claim, however, 
is that the origin of these failures can be traced to a deeper level; these 
were, in other words, systemic failures and would have occurred under 
the best assumptions about administrative efficiency and probity.
At least four elements seem to be at work in these systemic failures. 
The first two are linked to the historical origin and institutional nexus 
of high-modernist agriculture. First, given their discipline’s origin in

264 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
the temperate, industrializing West, the bearers of modernism in agri­
cultural planning inherited a series of unexamined assumptions about 
cropping and field preparation that turned out to work badly in other 
contexts. Second, given the presumptions about expertise embodied in 
modernist agricultural planning, the actual schemes were continually 
bent to serve the power and status of officials and of the state organs 
they controlled.4
The third element, however, operates at a deeper level: it is the sys­
tematic, cyclopean shortsightedness of high-modernist agriculture that 
courts certain forms of failure. Its rigorous attention to productionist 
goals casts into relative obscurity all the outcomes lying outside the im­
mediate relationship between farm inputs and yields. This means that 
both long-term outcomes (soil structure, water quality, land-tenure re­
lations) and third-party effects, or what welfare economists call "exter­
nalities," receive little attention until they begin to affect production.
Finally, the very strength of scientific agricultural experimentation— 
its simplifying assumptions and its ability to isolate the impact of a sin­
gle variable on total production—is incapable of dealing adequately 
with certain forms of complexity. It tends to ignore, or discount, agri­
cultural practices that are not assimilable to its techniques.
Lest there be any misunderstanding about my purpose here, I want 
to emphasize that this is not a general offensive against modern agro­
nomic science, let alone an attack on the culture of scientific research. 
Modern agronomic science, with its sophisticated plant breeding, plant 
pathology, analysis of plant nutrition, soil analysis, and technical virtu­
osity, is responsible for creating a fund of technical knowledge that is by 
now being used in some form by even the most traditional cultivators. 
My purpose, rather, is to show how the imperial pretensions of agro­
nomic science—its inability to recognize or incorporate knowledge cre­
ated outside its paradigm—sharply limited its utility to many cultiva­
tors. Whereas farmers, as we shall see, seem pragmatically alert to 
knowledge coming from any quarter should it serve their purposes, 
modern agricultural planners are far less receptive to other ways of 
knowing.
Varieties of Agricultural Simplification
Early Agriculture
Cultivation is simplification. Even the most cursory forms of agri­
culture typically produce a floral landscape that is less diverse than an 
unmanaged landscape. The crops that mankind has cultivated have,

Taming Nature 265
when fully domesticated, become dependent for their survival upon 
the management of cultivators—such activities as making a clearing, 
burning brush, breaking the soil, weeding, pruning, manuring. Strictly 
speaking, a crop in the field is not an artificial landscape, inasmuch as 
all fauna, not excluding human beings, modify their environment in 
the course of food gathering. What is certain, however, is that most of 
Homo sapiens's cultivars have been so adapted to their altered land­
scape that they have become ‘“biological monsters’" which could not 
survive in the wild.5
Millennia of variation and conscious human selection have fa­
vored cultivars that are systematically different from their wild and 
weedy cousins.6 Our convenience has led us to prefer plants that have 
large seeds and are easy to germinate, have more blossoms and hence 
more fruit, and whose fruits are more easily threshed or shelled. Culti­
vated maize thus has a few large ears with large kernels whereas wild 
or semidomesticated maizes have very small cobs with small kernels. 
The difference is most starkly captured by the contrast between the 
huge, seed-laden commercial sunflower and its diminutive woodland 
relative.
Beyond the question of the harvest itself, of course, cultivators have 
also selected for scores of other properties: texture, flavor, color, stor­
age quality, aesthetic value, grinding and cooking qualities, and so on. 
The breadth of human purposes has led not to a single, ideal cultivar of 
each species but rather to a great many varieties, each distinctive in 
some important way. Thus we have the varieties of barley grown for 
porridge, for bread, for beer, and for feeding livestock; and thus “sweet 
sorghum for chewing, white-seeded types for bread, small, dark, red- 
seeded types for beer, and strong-stemmed, fibrous types for house- 
construction and basketry.”7
The greatest selection pressure, however, came from the dominant 
anxiety of cultivators: that they not starve. This most basic of existen­
tial concerns also led to a great variety of cultivars, termed the “land- 
races” of the various crops. Landraces are genetically variable pop­
ulations that respond differently to different soil conditions, levels of 
moisture, temperature, sunlight, diseases and pests, microclimates, and 
so forth. Over time, traditional cultivators, operating as experienced 
applied botanists, have developed literally thousands of landraces of a 
single species. A working knowledge of many, if not all, of these land­
races provided cultivators with enormous flexibility in the face of en­
vironmental factors that they could not control.8
For our purposes, the long development of so many landraces is 
significant in at least two respects. First, while early farmers were

266 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
transforming and simplifying their natural environment, they also had 
a surpassing interest in fostering a certain kind of diversity. A combi­
nation of their wide interests and their concern about the food supply 
impelled them to select and protect many landraces. The genetic vari­
ability of the crops they grew provided some built-in insurance against 
drought, flooding, plant diseases, pests, and the seasonal vagaries of 
climate.9 A pathogen might affect one landrace but not another; some 
landraces would do well in a drought, others in wet conditions; some 
would do well in clayey soil, others in sandy soil. Placing a large num­
ber of prudent bets, finely tuned to microlocal conditions, the cultiva­
tor maximized the dependability of a tolerable harvest.
The variety of landraces is significant in another sense. All modern 
crops of any economic significance are the product of landraces. Until 
about 1930 all scientific crop breeding was essentially a process of se­
lection from among the existing landraces.10 Landraces and their wild 
progenitors and “escapes” represent the “germ plasm” or seed-stock 
capital upon which modern agriculture is based. In other words, as 
James Boyce has put it, modern varieties and traditional agriculture 
are complements, not substitutes.11
Twentieth-Century Agriculture
Modern, industrial, scientific farming, which is characterized by 
monocropping, mechanization, hybrids, the use of fertilizers and pes­
ticides, and capital intensiveness, has brought about a level of stan­
dardization into agriculture that is without historical precedent. Far 
beyond mere monocropping on the model of scientific forestry ex­
plored earlier, this simplification has entailed a genetic narrowing 
fraught with consequences that we are only beginning to comprehend.
One of the basic sources of increasing uniformity in crops arises 
from the intense commercial pressures to maximize profits in a com­
petitive mass market. Thus the effort to increase planting densities in 
order to stretch the productivity of land encouraged the adoption of 
varieties that would tolerate crowding. Greater planting densities 
have, in turn, intensified the use of commercial fertilizers and there­
fore the selection of subspecies known for high fertilizer (especially ni­
trogen) uptake and response. At the same time, the growth of great su­
permarket chains, with their standardized routines of shipping, 
packaging, and display, has inexorably led to an emphasis on unifor­
mity of size, shape, color, and “eye appeal.”12 The result of these pres­
sures was to concentrate on the small number of cultivars that met 
these criteria while abandoning others.

Taming Nature 267
The production of uniformity in the field is best grasped, however, 
through the logic of mechanization. As factor prices in the West have, 
since at least 1950, favored the substitution of farm machinery for 
hired labor, the farmer has sought cultivars that were compatible with 
mechanization. That is, he selected crops whose architecture did not 
interfere with tractors or sprayers, which ripened uniformly, and 
which could be picked in a “once-over" pass of the machine.
Given the techniques of hybridization being developed at roughly 
the same time, it was but a short step to creating new crop varieties 
bred explicitly for mechanization. “Genetic variability," as Jack Ralph 
Kloppenberg notes, “is the enemy of mechanization.”13 In the case of 
corn, hybridization—the progeny of two inbred lines—produces a 
field of the genetically identical individuals that are ideal for mech­
anization. Varieties developed with machinery in mind were available 
as early as 1920, when Henry Wallace joined forces with a manu­
facturer of harvesting equipment to cultivate his new, stiff-stalked va­
riety with a strong shank connecting the ear to the stalk. An entire 
field of plant breeding, termed “phytoengineering” was thus born in 
order to adapt the natural world to machine processing. “Machines 
are not made to harvest crops,” noted two proponents of phytoengi­
neering. “In reality, crops must be designed to be harvested by ma­
chine.”14 Having been adapted to the cultivated field, the crop was 
now adapted to mechanization. The “machine-friendly" crop was 
bred to incorporate a series of characteristics that made it easier to 
harvest it mechanically. Among the most important of these charac­
teristics were resilience, a concentrated fruit set, uniformity of plant 
size and architecture, uniformity of fruit shape and size, dwarfing (in 
the case of tree crops especially), and fruits that easily break away 
from the plant.15
The development of the "supermarket tomato" by G. C. (Jack) 
Hanna at the University of California at Davis in the late 1940s and 
1950s is an early and diagnostic case.16 Spurred by the wartime short­
age of field labor, researchers set about inventing a mechanical har­
vester and breeding the tomato that' would accommodate it. The 
tomato plants eventually bred for the job were hybrids of low stature 
and uniform maturity that produced similarly sized fruits with thick 
walls, firm flesh, and no cracks; the fruits were picked green in order 
to avoid being bruised by the grasp of the machinery and were 
artificially ripened by ethylene gas during transport. The results were 
the small, uniform winter tomatoes, sold four to a package, which 
dominated supermarket shelves for several decades. Taste and nutri­
tional quality were secondary to machine compatibility. Or to put it

268 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
more charitably, the breeders did what they could to develop the best 
tomato within the very sharp constraints of mechanization.
The imperatives of maximizing profits and hence, in this case, of 
mechanizing the harvest worked powerfully to transform and simplify 
both the field and the crop. Relatively inflexible, nonselective machines 
work best in flat fields with identical plants growing uniform fruits of 
perfectly even maturity. Agronomic science was deployed to approxi­
mate this ideal: large, finely graded fields; uniform irrigation and nu­
trients to regulate growth; liberal use of herbicides, fungicides, and in­
secticides to maintain uniform health; and, above all, plant breeding to 
create the ideal cultivar.
The Unintended Consequences of Simplification
Reviewing the history of major crop epidemics, beginning with the 
Irish potato famine in 1850, a committee of the United States National 
Research Council concluded: “These encounters show clearly that 
crop mono-culture and genetic uniformity invite epidemics. All that is 
needed is the arrival on the scene of a parasite that can take advantage 
of the vulnerability. If the crop is uniformly vulnerable, so much the 
better for the parasite. In this way virus diseases have devastated sugar 
beets with 'yellows,' peaches with yellows, potatoes with leaf roll and 
X and Y viruses, cocoa with swollen shoot, clover with sudden death, 
sugarcane with mosaic, and rice with hoja blanca."17 After a corn leaf 
blight had devastated much of the 1970 corn crop, the committee had 
been convened in order to consider the genetic vulnerability of all major 
crops. One of the pioneer breeders of hybrid corn, Donald Jones, had 
foreseen the problems that the loss of genetic diversity might bring: 
"Genetically uniform pure line varieties are very productive and highly 
desirable when environmental conditions are favorable and the vari­
eties are well-protected from pests of all kinds. When these external 
factors are not favorable, the result can be disastrous . . . due to some 
new virulent parasite."18
The logic of epidemiology in crops is relatively straightforward in 
principle. All plants have some resistance to pathogens; otherwise they 
and the pathogen (if it preyed upon only that plant) would disappear. 
At the same time, all plants are genetically vulnerable to certain 
pathogens. If a field is populated exclusively by genetically identical 
individuals, such as single-cross hybrids or clones, then each plant is 
vulnerable in exactly the same way to the same pathogen, be it a virus, 
fungus, bacterium, or nematode.19 Such a field is an ideal genetic habi­
tat for the proliferation of precisely those strains or mutants of path­

Taming Nature 26
ogens that thrive and feed on this particular cultivar. The uniform 
habitat, especially one in which plants are crowded, exerts a natural- 
selection pressure, as it were, that favors such pathogens. Given the 
right seasonal conditions for the pathogen to multiply (temperature, 
humidity, wind, and so on), the classic conditions for the geometric 
progression of an epidemic are in place.20
In contrast, diversity is the enemy of epidemics. In a field with 
many species of plants, only a few individuals are likely to be suscep­
tible to a given pathogen, and they are likely to be widely scattered. 
The mathematical logic of the epidemic is broken.21 A monocropped 
field, as the National Research Council report noted, increases vulner­
ability appreciably inasmuch as all members of the same plant species 
share much of their genetic inheritance. But where a field is populated 
by many genetically diverse landraces of a given species, the risk is 
vastly reduced. Any agricultural practice that increases diversity over 
time and space, such as crop rotation or mixed cropping on a farm or 
in a region, acts as a barrier to the spread of epidemics.
The modern regime of pesticide use, which has arisen over the past 
fifty years, must be seen as an integral feature of this genetic vulnera­
bility, not as an unrelated scientific breakthrough. It is precisely be­
cause hybrids are so uniform and hence disease prone that quasi­
heroic measures have to be taken to control the environment in which 
they are grown. Such hybrids are analogous to a human patient with 
a compromised immune system who must be kept in a sterile field lest 
an opportunistic infection take hold. The sterile field, in this case, has 
been established by the blanket use of pesticides.22
Corn, as the most widely planted crop in the United States (85 mil­
lion acres in 1986)23 and the first one to be hybridized, has provided 
nearly ideal conditions for insect, disease, and weed buildup. Pesticide 
use is correspondingly high. Corn accounts for one-third of the total 
market for herbicides and one-quarter of the market for insecticides.24 
One of the long-term effects, which is readily predictable according to 
the theory of natural selection, has been the emergence of resistant 
strains among insects, fungi, and weeds, necessitating either larger 
doses or a new set of chemical agents. Some pathogens, again pre­
dictably, have developed what is termed "cross-resistance” to a whole 
class of pesticides.25 As more generations of the pathogen are exposed 
to the pesticide, the likelihood that resistant strains will emerge is cor­
respondingly greater. Above and beyond the troubling consequences of 
pesticide use for the organic matter in the soil, groundwater quality, 
human health, and the ecosystem, pesticides have exacerbated some 
existing crop diseases while creating new ones.26

270 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Just prior to the com leaf blight in the South in 1970, 71 percent of 
all acreage in corn was planted to only six hybrids. The specialists in­
vestigating the blight stressed the pressures of mechanization and 
product uniformity that led to a radically narrower genetic crop base. 
“Uniformity," the report asserted, "is the key word.”27 Most of the hy­
brids had been developed by the male-sterile method using "Texas cyto­
plasm.” It was this uniformity that was attacked by the fungus Helmin- 
thosporium maydis; those hybrids created without Texas cytoplasm 
suffered only trivial damage. The pathogen was not new; in its report, 
the National Research Council committee imagined that it was proba­
bly in existence when Squanto showed the Pilgrims how to plant corn. 
While H. maydis may have from time to time produced more virulent 
strains, “American corn was too variable to give the new strain a very 
good foothold.”28 What was new was the vulnerability of the host.
The report went on to document the fact that “most major crops are 
impressively uniform genetically and impressively vulnerable [to epi­
demics].”29 Exotic germ plasm from a rare Mexican landrace proved to 
be the solution to breeding new hybrids that were less susceptible to 
the blight. In this and many other cases, it was only the genetic diver­
sity created by a long history of landrace development by nonspecial­
ists that provided a way out.30 Like the formal order of the planned sec­
tion of Brasilia or collectivized agriculture, modern, simplified, and 
standardized agriculture depends for its existence on a “dark twin" of 
informal practices and experience on which it is, ultimately, parasitic.
The Catechism of High-Modernist Agriculture
The model and promise of American agricultural modernism was ab­
solutely hegemonic in the three decades from 1945 to 1975. It was the 
prevailing “export model.” Hundreds of irrigation and dam projects 
modeled roughly on the Tennessee Valley Authority (tva) were begun; 
many large and highly capitalized agricultural schemes were inaugu­
rated with great fanfare; and thousands of advisers were dispatched. 
There was a continuity in personnel as well as in ideas. Economists, en­
gineers, agronomists, and planners who had served in the tva, the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, or the Department of the Treasury moved to 
the United Nations, the Food and Agriculture Organization, or u sa id, 
bringing their experience and ideas with them. A combination of Amer­
ican political, economic, and military hegemony, the promise of loans 
and assistance, concerns about world population and food supply, and 
the great productivity of American agriculture made for a degree of 
self-confidence in the American model that is hard to overestimate.

Taming Nature 271
A few skeptics like Rachel Carson were beginning to question the 
model, but they were greatly outnumbered by a chorus of visionaries 
who saw an unlimited and brilliant future ahead. Typical of the opti­
mism was an article by James B. Billard entitled "More Food for Our 
Multiplying Millions: The Revolution in American Agriculture,” which 
appeared in a 1970 issue of National Geographic,31 Its vision of the 
farm of the future, reproduced here in figure 34, was not an idle fan­
tasy; it was, we are told, drawn "with the guidance of U.S. Department 
of Agriculture specialists.” Billard’s text is one long paean to mecha­
nization, scientific marvels, and huge scale. For all the technical wiz­
ardry, he envisions a process of simplification of the landscape and 
centralization of command. Fields will be larger, with fewer trees, 
hedges, and roads; plots may be "several miles long and a hundred 
yards wide"; “weather control” will prevent hailstorms and tornadoes; 
atomic energy will "level hills” and make irrigation water from seawa­
ter; satellites, sensors, and airplanes will spot plant epidemics while 
the farmer sits in his control tower.
At the operational level, the credo of American agriculture for ex­
port incorporated the same fundamental convictions. Both the ex­
porters and the vast majority of their eager clients were committed to 
the following truths: the superior technical efficiency of large-scale 
farms, the importance of mechanization to save labor and break tech­
nical bottlenecks, the superiority of monocropping and hybrids over 
polycropping and landraces, and the advantages of high-input agricul­
ture, including commercial fertilizers and pesticides. Above all, they 
believed in large, integrated, planned projects rather than piecemeal 
improvements, partly because the large, capital-intensive schemes could 
be planned as nearly pure technical exercises, rather like the design of 
the Soviet collective farm that was invented in a Chicago hotel room. 
The greater the industrial content of a scheme and the more its envi­
ronment could be made uniform (through controlled irrigation and 
nutrients, the use of tractors and combines, the development of flat 
fields), the less was left to chance.32 Local soils, local landscape, local 
labor, local implements, and local weather appeared to be almost ir­
relevant to the prepackaged projects. At the same time, schemes con­
ceived along these lines emphasized the technical expertise of the 
planners, the possibility of central control, and, not least, a "module” 
that could be redeployed to almost any locale. For local elites anxious 
to have a modern show project over which they could preside, the ad­
vantages were also obvious.
The lamentable fate of the vast majority of these projects, whether 
private or public, is by now a matter of record.33 They failed in most

34. Illustration of the farm of the future, painted by Davis Meltzer "with the guidance of U.S. Department of Agriculture specialists,” from a 
1970 issue of National Geographic. The caption details the farm of the early twenty-first century: "Grainfields stretch like fairways and cattle 
pens resemble high-rise apartments. . . . Attached to a modernistic farmhouse, a bubble-topped control tower hums with a computer, weather 
reports, and a farm-price ticker tape. A remote-controlled tiller-combine glides across the 10-mile-long wheat field on tracks that keep the 
heavy machine from compacting the soil. Threshed grain, funneled into a pneumatic tube beside the field, flows into storage elevators rising 
close to a distant city. The same machine that cuts the grain prepares the land for another crop. A similar device waters neighboring strips of 
soybeans as a jet-powered helicopter sprays insecticides.
"Across a service road, conical mills blend feed for beef cattle, fattening in multilevel pens that conserve ground space. Tubes carry the 
feed to be mechanically distributed. A central elevator transports the cattle up and down, while a tubular side drain flushes wastes to be bro­
ken down for fertilizer. Beside the farther pen, a processing plant packs beef into cylinders for shipment to market by helicopter and mono­
rail. Illuminated plastic domes provide controlled environments for growing high-value crops such as strawberries, tomatoes, and celery. 
Near a distant lake and recreation area, a pumping station supplies water for the vast operation.”

Taming Nature 273
cases despite lavish credit subsidies and strong administrative back­
ing. While each failure had its own peculiarities, the level of abstrac­
tion at which most projects were conceived was fatal. Imported faith 
and abstraction prevailed, as we shall see, over close attention to the 
local context.
Modernist Faith Versus Local Practices
We can explore the contrast between imported faith and local context by 
juxtaposing several tenets of the catechism of high-modernist agricul­
ture with the local practices that appeared to violate them. And as we 
shall see, contrary to contemporary expectations, these practices turned 
out to be scientifically sound and in some cases superior to the program 
of farming being urged or imposed by the agricultural reformers.
Monoculture and Polyculture
Nothing better illustrates the myopic credo of high-modernist agri­
culture, originating in temperate zones and brought to the tropics, than 
its nearly unshakable faith in the superiority of monoculture over the 
practice of poly culture found in much of the Third World.
To take West African indigenous farming systems as an example, 
colonial agricultural specialists encountered what seemed to them to be 
an astonishingly diverse regime of polycropping, with as many as four 
crops (not to mention subspecies) in the same field simultaneously.34 A 
fairly representative instance of what met their eyes is depicted in 
figure 35. The visual effect, to Western eyes, was one of sloppiness and 
disorder. Given their visual codification of modern agricultural prac­
tice, most specialists knew, without further empirical investigation, 
that the apparent disorder of the crops was a symptom of backward 
techniques; it failed the visual test of scientific agriculture. Campaigns 
to replace polyculture with pure-stand planting were pushed with 
equal fervor by colonial officials and, after independence, by their 
local successors.
We have gradually come to understand a quite specific logic of 
place—in particular, tropical soils, climate, and ecology—that helps 
to explain the functions of polyculture. The diversity of species natu­
rally occurring in a tropical setting is, other things being equal, con­
sistently greater than the diversity of species in a temperate setting. An 
acre of tropical forest will have far more species of plants, although 
fewer individuals of each species, than will an acre of temperate wood­
land. Thus unmanaged nature in temperate climates looks more or-

274 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
35. Construction of stick bunds across incipient gullies 
in a Sierra Leone rice field
derly because it is less diverse, and this may play a role in the visual 
culture of Westerners.35 In favoring polyculture, the tropical cultivator 
also imitates nature in his techniques of cultivation. Polyculture, like 
the tropical forest itself, plays an important role in protecting thin soils 
from the erosive effects of wind, rain, and sunlight. Furthermore, the 
seasonality of tropical agriculture is governed more by the timing of 
rains than by temperature. For this reason, a variety of polycropping 
strategies allows farmers to hedge their bets about the rains, holding 
the soil with drought-resistant crops and interspersing among them 
crops that can take best advantage of the rains. Finally, the creation of 
a uniform, controlled farming environment is intrinsically more diffi­
cult in a tropical setting than in a temperate one, and, where popula­

Taming Nature 275
tion densities are low, the labor requirements of extensive terracing or 
irrigation are uneconomic in the strict neoclassical sense of the word.
Here one may recall Jane Jacobs’s important distinction between 
visual orderliness on one hand and functional working order on the 
other. The city desk of a newspaper, a rabbit’s intestines, or the interior 
of an aircraft engine may certainly look messy, but each one reflects, 
sometimes brilliantly, an order related to the function it performs. In 
such instances the apparent surface disarray obscures a more pro­
found logic. Polyculture was a floral variant of such order. Only a very 
few colonial specialists managed to peer behind the visual confusion to 
its logic. One of them was Howard Jones, a mycologist in Nigeria, who 
wrote in 1936:
[To the European] the whole scheme seems . . . laughable and ridicu­
lous, and in the end he would probably conclude that it is merely foolish 
to crowd different plants together in this childish way so that they may 
choke one another. Yet if one looks at it more closely there seems a rea­
son for everything. The plants are not growing at random, but have been 
planted at proper distances on hillocks of soil arranged in such a way 
that when rain falls it does not waterlog the plants, nor does it pour off 
the surface and wash away the fine soil. . . . The soil is always occupied 
and is neither dried up by the sun nor leached out by the rain, as it 
would be if it were left bare. . . . This is but one of many examples that 
might be given that should warn us to be very cautious and thorough be­
fore we pass judgement upon native agriculture. The whole method of 
farming and outlook of the farmer are so entirely new to us that we are 
strongly tempted to call it foolish from an instinctive conservatism.36
Elsewhere in the tropical world, a few astute observers were un­
covering a different agricultural logic. A striking example of visual order 
versus working order was provided by Edgar Anderson, on the basis of 
his botanical work in rural Guatemala. He realized that what ap­
peared to be overgrown, “riotous” dump heaps that no Westerner 
would have taken for gardens exhibited, on closer inspection, an ex­
ceptionally efficient and well-thought-out order. Anderson sketched 
one of these gardens (figures 36 and 37), and his description of the 
logic he discerned in it is worth quoting at length.
Though at first sight there seems little order, as soon as we started map­
ping the garden, we realized that it was planted in fairly definite cross­
wise rows. There were fruit trees, native and European in great variety: 
annonas, cherimoyas, avocados, peaches, quinces, plums, a fig, and a 
few coffeebushes. There were giant cacti grown for their fruit. There 
was a large plant of rosemary, a plant of rue, some poinsettias, and a 
fine semiclimbing tea rose. There was a whole row of the native domes­
ticated hawthorn, whose fruits like yellow, doll-size apples, make a de-

276 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
36. Edgar Anderson’s drawing of an orchard 
garden in Santa Lucia, Guatemala
licious conserve. There were two varieties of corn, one well past bear­
ing and now serving as a trellis for climbing string beans which were 
just coming into season, the other, a much taller sort, which was tas- 
seling out. There were specimens of a little banana with smooth wide 
leaves which are the local substitute for wrapping paper, and are also 
used instead of cornhusks in cooking the native variant of hot tamales. 
Over it all clambered the luxuriant vines of the various cucurbits. Chay- 
ote, when finally mature, has a large nutritious root weighing several 
pounds. At one point there was a depression the size of a small bathtub 
where a chayote root had recently been excavated; this served as a 
dump heap and compost for the waste from the house. At one end of the 
garden was a small beehive made from boxes and tin cans. In terms of 
our American and European equivalents, the garden was a vegetable 
garden, an orchard, a medicinal garden, a dump heap, a compost heap, 
and a beeyard. There was no problem of erosion though it was at the top 
of a steep slope; the soil surface was practically all covered and appar­
ently would be during most of the year. Humidity would be kept during 
the dry season and plants of the same sort were so isolated from one an­
other by intervening vegetation that pests and diseases could not readily 
spread from plant to plant. The fertility was being conserved; in addi-

Taming Nature 277
37. In his drawing of an orchard garden in 
Santa Lucia, Anderson used glyphs that identify 
not only the plants but also their general cate­
gories. Circular glyphs indicate fruit trees of 
European origin (plum, peach); rounded, irreg­
ular glyphs indicate fruit trees of American ori­
gin (manzanilla). Dotted lines stand for climb­
ing vegetables, small circles for subshrubs, 
large stars for succulents, and wedge-shaped 
figures for plants in the banana family. The nar­
row mass seen at the right side of figure 36 rep­
resents a hedge of chichicaste, a shrub used by 
the Mayas.
tion to the waste from the house, mature plants were being buried in be­
tween the rows when their usefulness was over.
It is frequently said by Europeans and European Americans that 
time means nothing to an Indian. This garden seemed to me to be a 
good example of how the Indian, when we look more than superficially 
into his activities, is budgeting his time more efficiently than we do. 
The garden was in continuous production but was taking only a little 
effort at any one time: a few weeds pulled when one came down to pick 
the squashes, corn and bean plants dug in between the rows when the 
last of the climbing beans were picked, and a new crop of something 
else planted above them a few weeks later.37

278 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Like the micrologic of the Guatemalan garden, the logic of West 
African polycropping systems, long dismissed as being primitive, has 
finally been recognized. In fact, they came under investigation partly 
as a reaction against the many monocropping schemes that miscar­
ried. The advantages were often evident even at the level of narrow 
productivist outcomes; and once other goals such as sustainability, 
conservation, and food security were considered, their advantages 
seemed especially striking.
Various forms of polyculture are the norm in 80 percent of West 
Africa’s farmland.38 Given what we now know, this should occasion lit­
tle surprise. Intercropping systems are best adapted to soils of low fer­
tility, which characterize much of West Africa. Their use produces 
greater gains in yield on such soils than on soils of high fertility.39 One 
reason seems to be that optimal planting densities are greater in inter­
cropping than in monocropping, and the resulting crowding appears, 
for reasons that are poorly understood but may have to do with root 
fungi interactions, to improve the performance of each cultivar. Crowd­
ing at the later stage of cropping also helps to suppress weeds, which 
are otherwise a major constraint in tropical farming. Since the mix­
ture of cultivars usually combines grains and legumes (maize and 
sorghum, for example, with cowpeas and groundnuts), each crop has 
complementary nutritional needs and rooting systems that extract nu­
trients from different levels in the soil.40 In the case of relay cropping, 
it appears that the residues of the first crop gathered benefit the re­
maining crop. The diversity of cultivars on the same field also has a 
beneficial effect, on the health of the crops and hence on yields. Mixed 
crops and the scattering of particular cultivars limit the habitat of var­
ious pests, diseases, and weeds that otherwise might build up to dev­
astating proportions, as they do on monocropped plots.41 In fact, two 
specialists who were very much out of step with the agronomic estab­
lishment of the 1930s and 1940s went so far as to suggest that “the sys­
tematic study of mixed cropping and other native practices might lead 
to comparatively minor modifications in Yoruba and other forms of 
agriculture, which might in the aggregate do more to increase crop 
production and soil fertility than revolutionary changes to green ma­
nuring or mixed farming.”42
The multistoried effect of polyculture has some distinct advantages 
for yields and soil conservation. “Upper-story” crops shade "lower- 
story” crops, which are selected for their ability to thrive in the cooler 
soil temperature and increased humidity at ground level. Rainfall 
reaches the ground not directly but as a fine spray that is absorbed with 
less damage to soil structure and less erosion. The taller crops often

Taming Nature 279
serve as a useful windbreak for the lower crops. Finally, in mixed or 
relay cropping, a crop is in the field at all times, holding the soil to­
gether and reducing the leaching effects that sun, wind, and rain exert, 
particularly on fragile land. Even if polyculture is not to be preferred 
on the grounds of immediate yield, there is much to recommend it in 
terms of sustainability and thus long-term production.
Our discussion of mixed cropping has thus far dealt only with the 
narrow issues of yield and soil conservation. It has overlooked the cul­
tivators themselves and the various other ends that they seek by using 
such techniques. The most significant advantage of intercropping, Paul 
Richards claims, is its great flexibility, “the scope [it] offers for a range 
of combinations to match individual needs and preferences, local con­
ditions, and changing circumstances within each season and from sea­
son to season.”43 Farmers may polycrop in order to avoid labor bottle­
necks at planting and at harvest.44 Growing many different crops is 
also an obvious way to spread risks and improve food security. Cultiva­
tors can reduce the danger of going hungry if they sow, instead of only 
one or two cultivars, crops of long and short maturity, crops that are 
drought resistant and those that do well under wetter conditions, 
crops with different patterns of resistance to pests and diseases, crops 
that can be stored in the ground with little loss (such as cassava), and 
crops that mature in the "hungry time” before other crops are gath­
ered.45 Finally, and perhaps most important, each of these crops is em­
bedded in a distinctive set of social relations. Different members of the 
household are likely to have different rights and responsibilities with 
respect to each crop. The planting regimen, in other words, is a re­
flection of social relations, ritual needs, and culinary tastes; it is not 
just a production strategy that a profit-maximizing entrepreneur took 
straight out of the pages of a text in neoclassical economics.
The high-modernist aesthetic and ideology of most colonial agrono­
mists and their Western-trained successors foreclosed a dispassionate 
examination of local cultivation practices, which were regarded as de­
plorable customs for which modern, scientific farming was the correc­
tive. A critique of such hegemonic ideas comes, if it comes at all, not 
from within, but typically from the margins, where the intellectual point 
of departure and operating assumptions, as was the case with Jacobs, 
are substantially different. Thus the case for the rationality of mixed 
cropping has largely come from rogue figures outside the establishment.
Perhaps the most striking of these figures was Albert Howard (later 
Sir Albert), an agricultural researcher who worked under local patron­
age for more than three decades in India. He was known chiefly for the 
Indore process, a scientific procedure of making humus from organic

280 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
wastes, and unlike most Western agronomists, he was an avid observer 
of forest ecology and indigenous practices. Concerned above all with 
soil fertility and sustainable agriculture, Howard observed that the nat­
ural diversity of the forest and local polycropping practices were both 
successful means of maintaining or increasing soil health and fertility. 
Soil fertility was a matter of not simply chemical composition but also 
structural properties; the soil's tilth (or crumb structure), its degree of 
aeration, its moisture-holding power, and the “fungus bridge” (the my- 
corrhizal association) necessary to humus creation.46 Some but not all 
elements in this complex soil interaction could be precisely measured, 
while others could be recognized by a practiced observer but not read­
ily measured. Howard undertook elaborate experiments in humus pro­
duction, soil structure, and plant response and was able to show field- 
trial yield results superior to those achieved by standard Western 
practices. His main concern, however, was not with how many bushels 
of wheat or maize could be gotten from an acre as with the health and 
quality of the crops and soil over the long haul.
The case for polyculture has worked its way back to the West, al­
though it remains one voiced by only a tiny minority. Rachel Carson, in 
her revolutionary book Silent Spring, published in 1962, traced the de­
structive use of massive doses of pesticides and herbicides to mono­
cropping itself. The problem with insects, she explained, resulted from 
the “devotion of immense acreage to a single crop. Such a system set 
the stage for explosive increases in specific insect populations. Single 
crop farming does not take advantage of the principles by which na­
ture works, it is agriculture as an engineer might conceive it to be. Na­
ture has introduced great variety into the landscape, but man has dis­
played passion for simplifying it. . . . One important check is a limit on 
the amount of suitable habitat for each species.”47 Just as Howard be­
lieved that monoculture had contributed to the loss of soil fertility and 
its corrective, the growing use of chemical fertilizers (260 pounds per 
acre in the United States in 1970), so Carson argued that monoculture 
spawned the exploding population of pests and its corrective, the mas­
sive application of insecticides — a cure that turned out to be worse 
than the disease.
For these and other reasons, there are at least faint indications that 
some forms of polycropping might be suitable for Western farmers as 
well as Africans.48 This is not the place to attempt to demonstrate the 
superiority of polyculture over monoculture, nor am I qualified to do 
so. There is no single, context-free answer to this issue, for answers 
would depend on any number of variables, including the goals sought, 
the crops sown, and the microsettings in which they were planted.

Taming Nature 281
What I have tried to demonstrate, however, is that polyculture, even on 
the narrow production-oriented grounds favored by Western agron­
omy, merited empirical examination as one among many agricultural 
strategies. That it was instead dismissed summarily by all but a hand­
ful of rogue agronomists is a tribute to the power both of imperialist 
ideology and of the visual aesthetic of agricultural high modernism.
The case of polyculture also raises an issue relevant to both agri­
cultural practice and social structure, an issue that we will ponder at 
greater length in the remainder of this book: the resilience and durabil­
ity of diversity. Whatever its other virtues or demerits, polyculture is a 
more stable, more easily sustainable form of agriculture than mono­
cropping. It is more likely to produce what economists call Hicksian 
income: income that does not undermine factor endowments, which 
will permit that income flow to continue indefinitely into the future. 
Polyculture is, at the same time, more supple and adaptable. That is, it 
is more easily able to absorb stress and damage without being devas­
tated. Elegant research has recently shown that, at least up to a point, 
the more cultivars that a given plot has, the more productive and resil­
ient it is.49 Polyculture, as we have seen, is more resistant to the insults 
of weather and pests, not to mention more generous in the improve­
ments it effects in the soil. Even if monoculture could be shown to al­
ways give superior yields in the short run, polyculture might still be 
considered to have decisive long-term advantages.50 The evidence from 
forestry has some application to agriculture as well: monocropped 
forests like those in Germany and Japan have led to ecological prob­
lems so severe that restoration ecology has been called to the rescue in 
order to reestablish something approaching the earlier diversity (in in­
sects, flora, and fauna) necessary to the health of the forest.51
Here it is worth noting the strong parallel between the case for di­
versity in cultivation and forestry and the case that Jacobs made for 
diversity in urban neighborhoods. The more complex the neighborhood, 
she reasoned, the better it will resist short-term shocks in business con­
ditions and market prices. Diversity, by the same token, provides many 
potential growth points which can benefit from new opportunities. A 
highly specialized neighborhood, by contrast, is like a gambler placing 
all his bets on one turn of the roulette wheel. If he wins, he wins big; if 
he loses, he may lose everything. For Jacobs, of course, a key point 
about the diversity of a neighborhood is the human ecology it fosters. 
The variety of locally available goods and services and the complex 
human networks that it makes possible, the foot traffic that promotes 
safety, the visual interest that an animated and convenient neighbor­
hood provides—all interact to make such a location’s advantages cu­

282 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
mulative.52 The diversity and complexity that cause systems of flora to 
become more durable and resilient work, at another level apparently, to 
cause human communities to become more nimble and satisfactory.
Permanent Fields Versus Shifting Cultivation
Most West African farmers practiced some form of shifting cultiva­
tion.53 Variously called slash-and-burn cultivation, swiddening, and ro­
tational bush fallow, shifting cultivation involves the temporary culti­
vation of a field cleared by cutting and burning most of the vegetation. 
After being worked for a few years, the field is abandoned for a new 
plot. Eventually, when new growth has restored the original field to 
something like its original fertility, it is cultivated again. Polycropping 
and minimum tillage were often combined with shifting cultivation.
Like polycropping, shifting cultivation, as we shall see, turns out to 
be a rational, efficient, and sustainable technique under the soil, cli­
mate, and social conditions where it is generally practiced. Polycrop­
ping and shifting cultivation are almost invariably associated. Harold 
Conklins early, detailed, and still unsurpassed account of shifting culti­
vation in the Philippines noted that, for a newly cleared plot, the average 
number of cultivars in a single season was between forty and sixty.54 At 
the same time, shifting cultivation is an exceptionally complex and 
hence quite illegible form of agriculture from the perspective of a sover­
eign state and its extension agents. The fields themselves are “fugitive,” 
going in and out of cultivation at irregular intervals—hardly promising 
material for a cadastral map. The cultivators themselves, of course, are 
often fugitive as well, moving periodically to be near their new clear­
ings. Registering or monitoring such populations, let alone turning 
them into easily assessable taxpayers, is a Sisyphean task.55 The project 
of the state and the agricultural authorities, as we saw in the Tanzanian 
case, was to replace this illegible and potentially seditious space with 
permanent settlements and permanent (preferably monocropped) fields.
Shifting cultivation also gave offense to agricultural modernizers of 
whatever race, because it violated in almost every respect their under­
standing of what modern agriculture had to look like. “Early attitudes 
to shifting cultivation were almost entirely negative,” Richards notes. 
“It was a bad system: exploitative, untidy, and misguided.”56 The finely 
adapted logic of shifting cultivation depended on disturbing the land­
scape and ecology as little as possible and mimicking, where it could, 
many of the symbiotic associations of local plants. This meant that such 
fields looked far more like unimproved nature than the neatly mani­
cured, rectilinear fields that most agricultural officers were used to.

Taming Nature 283
The ecological caution of shifting cultivation, in other words, was the 
reason behind the appearances that so offended development officials.
Rotational bush fallow had a good many other advantages that 
were rarely appreciated. It upheld the physical properties of upland 
and hill soils which, once destroyed, were difficult to restore. The ro­
tation itself, where land was abundant, ensured the long-run stability 
of the practice. Shifting cultivators rarely removed large trees or 
stumps — a custom that limited erosion and helped the soil structure 
but that struck agricultural officials as sloppy and unsightly. With some 
exceptions, swidden plots were cultivated by hoe or dibble stick rather 
than plowed. To Westernized agronomists, it appeared that the farmers 
were merely "scratching the surface” of their soils out of a deplorable 
ignorance or sloth. Where they encountered farming systems involving 
deep plowing and monocropping, they believed they had encountered 
a more advanced and industrious population.57 The burning of the 
brush accumulated in clearing a new swidden was also condemned as 
wasteful. After a time, however, both shallow cultivation and burning 
were found to be highly beneficial; the former preserved the soil, espe­
cially in areas of high rainfall, while the latter reduced pest popu­
lations and provided valuable nutrients to the crop. Experiments 
showed, in fact, that burning the brush in the field (rather than hauling 
it off) contributed to better yields, as did a carefully timed burn.58
To someone trained to a Western perspective, the total effect of such 
cultivation practices had “backwardness" written all over it—heaps of 
brush waiting to be burned on unplowed, half-cleared fields littered 
with stumps and planted with several interspersed crops, none of them 
sown in straight rows. And yet, as the hard evidence accumulated, it was 
clear that appearances were deceiving, even in productionist terms. As 
Richards concludes, “The proper test for any practice was whether it 
worked in the environment concerned, not whether it looked ‘advanced’ 
or ‘backward.’ Testing requires carefully controlled input-output trials. 
If ‘shallow’ cultivation on ‘partially cleared’ land gives better returns 
relative to the inputs expended than rival systems, and these results can 
be sustained over time, then the technique is a good one, irrespective of 
whether it was invented yesterday or a thousand years ago.”59 Lost in the 
early blanket condemnations of shifting cultivation was the realization 
that the practice was deployed in a highly discriminating way by African 
cultivators. Most farmers combined permanent bottomland cultivation 
of some kind with swidden cultivation of the more fragile hillsides, up­
lands, or forests. Rather than not knowing any better, as was often as­
sumed, most shifting cultivators were familiar with a range of cropping 
techniques among which they selected with care.

284 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
Fertilizer Versus Fertility
The best fertilizer on any farm is the footsteps of the owner.
— Confucius
Commercial fertilizers have often been touted as magical inocula­
tions for improving poor soils and raising yields; extension agents have 
routinely referred to fertilizers and pesticides as medicine for the soil. 
The actual results have often been disappointing. Two major reasons 
for the disappointment are directly relevant to our larger argument.
First, recommendations for fertilizer applications are inevitably 
gross simplifications. Their applicability to any particular field is ques­
tionable, since a map of soil classes is likely to overlook an enormous 
degree of microvariation between and within fields. The conditions 
under which fertilizers are applied, the “dosage,” the soil structure, the 
crops for which they are intended, and the weather immediately prior 
and subsequent to their application can all greatly influence their up­
take and effect. As Richards observes, the unavoidable variation by 
farm and field "requires a more open-ended approach, with, in all prob­
ability, farmers doing much of the necessary experimentation for 
themselves."60
Second, fertilizer formulas suffer from an analytical narrowness. 
The formulas themselves derive from the work of a remarkable Ger­
man scientist, Justus Freiherr von Liebig, who, in a classic manuscript 
published in 1840, identified the main chemical nutrients present in 
the soil and to whom we still owe the current standard fertilizer recipe 
(N, P, K). It was a brilliant scientific advance, with far-reaching and 
usually beneficial results. Where it tended to get into trouble, however, 
was when it posed as “imperial” knowledge—when it was touted as 
the way in which all soil deficiencies could be remedied.61 As Howard 
and others have painstakingly shown, there are a range of intervening 
variables — including the physical structure of the soil, aeration, tilth, 
humus, and the fungus bridge—that greatly influence plant nutrition 
and soil fertility.62 Chemical fertilizers can in fact so thoroughly oxidize 
beneficial organic matter as to destroy its crumb structure and con­
tribute to a progressive alkalization and a loss of fertility.63
The details are less important than the larger point: an effective soil 
science must not stop at chemical nutrients; it must encompass ele­
ments of physics, bacteriology, entomology, and geology, and that is at 
a minimum. Ideally, then, a practical approach to fertilizers requires, 
simultaneously, a general, interdisciplinary knowledge, which a single 
specialist is unlikely to have, and attention to the particularity of a 
given field, which only the farmer is likely to have. A procedure that

Taming Nature 285
blends a purely chemical nutrient perspective with soil classification 
grids and that leaves the particular field far behind is a recipe for inef­
fectiveness or even disaster.
A History of "Unauthorized” Innovation
For most colonial officials and their successors, high-modernist 
commitments led them to form inaccurate assumptions about indige­
nous agriculture and blinded them to its dynamism. Far from being 
timeless, static, and rigid, indigenous agricultural practices were con­
stantly being revised and adapted. Some of this plasticity was part of a 
broad repertoire of techniques that could be adjusted, for example, to 
different patterns of rainfall, soils, pitches of land, market opportuni­
ties, and labor supplies. Most African cultivators were typically utilizing 
more than one cultivation technique during a season and knew many 
more that might come in handy. When entirely novel cultivars from the 
New World became available, they were adopted with alacrity where 
appropriate. Thus maize, cassava, potatoes, chiles, and a variety of New 
World pulses and gourds were incorporated into many African plant­
ing regimens.64
The history of "on-farm" experimentation, selection, and adaptation 
was, of course, a very old story indeed, both in Africa and elsewhere. 
Ethnobotany and paleobotany have been able to trace in some histor­
ical detail how hybrids and variants of, for example, the main Old 
World grains or New World maize were selected and propagated for a 
host of different uses and growing conditions. The same observation 
holds true for those plants that are vegetatively propagated—that is, 
propagated by cuttings rather than by seeds.65
On a strictly dispassionate view, more specialists would have con­
cluded that there were many grounds for considering every African 
farm as something of a small-scale experimental station. It stands to 
reason that any community of cultivators who must wrest their living 
from a stingy and variable environment will rarely overlook the op­
portunity to improve their security and food supply. The limits to local 
knowledge must also be emphasized. Indigenous cultivators knew their 
own environment and its possibilities remarkably well. But they of 
course lacked the knowledge that such tools of modern science as the 
microscope, aerial photography, and scientific plant breeding could 
provide. They often lacked, as did many cultivators elsewhere, the tech­
nology or the access to technology that make, say, large-scale irriga­
tion schemes and highly mechanized agriculture possible. Like peas­
ants in the Mediterranean Basin, China, and India, they were capable

286 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
of damaging their ecosystem, even if low population densities had thus 
far spared them from making this mistake.66 But if most agricultural 
specialists had appreciated how much the indigenous farmer did know, 
had appreciated her practical, experimental temper and willingness to 
adopt new crops and techniques when they met local needs, such spe­
cialists would have concluded, with Robert Chambers, that “indigenous 
agricultural knowledge, despite being ignored or overridden by consul­
tant experts, is the single largest knowledge resource not yet mobilized 
in the development enterprise."67
The Institutional Affinities of High-Modemist Agriculture
The willful disdain for local competence shown by most agricultural 
specialists was not, I believe, simply a case of prejudice (of the edu­
cated, urban, and Westernized elite toward the peasantry) or of the aes­
thetic commitments implicit in high modernism. Rather, official atti­
tudes were also a matter of institutional privilege. To the degree that the 
cultivators' practices were presumed reasonable until proven other­
wise, to the degree that specialists might learn as much from the farmer 
as vice versa, and to the degree that specialists had to negotiate with 
farmers as political equals, would the basic premise behind the officials’ 
institutional status and power be undermined. The unspoken logic be­
hind most of the state projects of agricultural modernization was one of 
consolidating the power of central institutions and diminishing the au­
tonomy of cultivators and their communities vis-a-vis those institutions. 
Every new material practice altered in some way the existing distri­
bution of power, wealth, and status; and the agricultural specialists’ 
claims to be neutral technicians with no institutional stake in the out­
come can hardly be accepted at face value.68
The centralizing effects of Soviet collectivization and ujamaa vil­
lages were perfectly obvious. So are those of large irrigation projects, 
where authorities decide when to release the water, how to distribute 
it, and what water fees to charge, or of agricultural plantations, where 
the workforce is supervised as if it were in a factory setting.69 For colo- 
nialized farmers, the effect of such centralization and expertise was a 
radical de-skilling of the cultivators themselves. Even in the context of 
family farms and a liberal economy, this was in fact the utopian pros­
pect held up by Liberty Hyde Bailey, a plant breeder, apostle of agri­
cultural science, and the chairman of the Country Life Commission 
under Theodore Roosevelt. Bailey declared, “There will be established 
in the open country plant doctors, plant breeders, soil experts, health

Taming Nature 287
experts, pruning and spraying experts, forest experts, recreation ex­
perts, market experts,. . . [and] housekeeping experts,.. . [all of whom 
are ] needed for the purpose of giving special advice and direction.”70 
Baileys future was one organized almost entirely by a managerial 
elite: “Yet we are not to think of society as founded wholly on small 
separate tracts, of ‘family farms,’ occupied by persons who live merely 
in contentment; this would mean that all landsmen would be essen­
tially laborers. We need to hold on the land many persons who possess 
large powers of organization, who are managers, who can handle af­
fairs in a bold way: it would be fatal to the best social and spiritual re­
sults if such persons could find no adequate opportunities on the land 
and were forced into other occupations.”71
In spite of these hopeful pronouncements and intentions, if one ex­
amines carefully many of the agricultural innovations of the twentieth 
century—innovations that seemed purely technical and hence neutral 
—one cannot but conclude that many of them created commercial and 
political monopolies that inevitably diminished the autonomy of the 
farmer. The revolution in hybrid seeds, particularly corn, had this ef­
fect.72 Since hybrids are either sterile or do not breed “true,” the seed 
company that has bred the parents of the hybrid-cross has valuable 
property in hybrid seed, which it can sell every year, unlike the open- 
pollinated varieties which the farmer can select himself.73
A similar but not identical centralizing logic applied to the high- 
yielding varieties ( hy v s) of wheat, rice, and maize developed over the 
past thirty years. Their enormous impact on yields (an impact that var­
ied widely by crop and growing conditions) depended on combining a 
massive response to nitrogen application with short, tough stalks that 
prevented lodging. Realizing their potential yield required abundant 
water (usually via irrigation), large applications of commercial fertil­
izer, and the periodic application of pesticides. Mechanization of field 
preparation and harvesting was also promoted. As with hybrids, the 
lack of biological diversity in the fields meant that each generation of 
hyvs was likely to succumb to infestations of fungus, rust, or insects, 
necessitating the purchase of new seeds and new pesticides (as the in­
sects built up resistance). The resulting biological arms race, which 
plant breeders and chemists believe that they can continue to win, is 
one that puts the cultivator increasingly in the hands of public and pri­
vate specialists. As with the truly democratic aspects of Nyerere’s poli­
cies, those elements of research and policy that might threaten the po­
sition of a managerial elite tended either not to be explored at all or, if 
explored, to be "selected against” in policy implementation.

288 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
The Simplifying Assumptions of Agricultural Science
This attempt at total control is an invitation to disorder. And the rule seems to 
be that the more rigid and exclusive is the specialist’s boundary, and the 
stricter the control within it, the more disorder rages around it. One can take 
a greenhouse and grow summer vegetables in the wintertime, but in doing so 
one creates a vulnerability to the weather and to the possibility of failure 
where none existed before. The control by which a tomato plant lives through 
January is much more problematic than the natural order by which an oak 
tree or a titmouse lives through January.
—Wendell Berry, The Unsettling of America
Most of the elements of state development programs have not been 
merely the whims of powerful elites. Even villagization in Tanzania had 
long been the subject of apparently sound agroeconomic analysis. 
Schemes for the introduction of such new crops as cotton, tobacco, 
groundnuts, and rice as well as plans for mechanization, irrigation, 
and fertilizer regimens had been preceded by lengthy technical studies 
and field trials. Why, then, have such a large number of these schemes 
failed to deliver anything like the results foreseen for them? A closely 
related question, which we will address in the next chapter, is why so 
many successful changes in agricultural practices and production have 
been pioneered, not by the state, but by the autonomous initiative of 
cultivators themselves.
The Isolation of Experimental Variables
The record shows, it seems to me, that a substantial part of the prob­
lem lies in the systematic and necessary limitations of scientific work 
whenever the ultimate purpose of that work is practical adoption by a 
diverse set of practitioners working in a large variety of conditions. 
That is, some of the problems lie deeper than the institutional tempta­
tions to central control, the pathologies of administration, or the pen­
chant for aesthetically satisfying but uneconomic show projects. Even 
under the best of circumstances, the laboratory results and the data 
from the experimental plots of research stations are a long country 
mile from the human and natural environments where they must ulti­
mately find a home.
The normal procedure in scientific agricultural research has his­
torically been to focus almost exclusively on crop-by-crop experiments 
designed to test the impact of variations in inputs on yields. More re­
cently, other variables have come under scrutiny. Thus experiments 
might test yields under different soil and moisture conditions or deter­
mine which hybrids resisted lodging or ripened in a way that facili­

Taming N ature 289
tated machine harvesting. Ecologically conscious research has often 
proceeded in the same fashion: by isolating one by one the variables 
that might contribute, say, to biological resistance of a certain variety 
of fruit to a particular pest.
The isolation of a very few variables—ideally just two, while con­
trolling all others—is a key tenet of experimental science.74 As a pro­
cedure, it is both valuable and necessary to scientific work. Only by 
radically simplifying the experimental situation is it possible to guar­
antee unambiguous, verifiable, impersonal, and universal results.75 As 
a pioneer in chaos theory has put it: “There is a fundamental presump­
tion in physics that the way you understand the world is that you keep 
isolating its ingredients until you understand the stuff you think is truly 
fundamental. Then you presume that the other things you don’t under­
stand are details. The assumption is that there are a small number of 
principles that you can discern by looking at things in their pure state — 
this is the truly analytic notion—and somehow you put these together 
in some more complicated ways when you want to solve more dirty 
problems. If you can."76 In agricultural research, controlling for all 
possible variables except those under experimental scrutiny required 
normalizing assumptions about such things as weather, soils, and land­
scapes, not to mention normalizing assumptions, often implicit, about 
farm size, labor availability, and the desires of cultivators. “Test-tube 
research,’’ of course, most closely approximated the ideal of controls.77 
Even the experimental plot on a research station, however, was itself a 
radical simplification. It maximized the degree of control "within a 
small and highly simplified enclosure" and ignored the rest, leaving it 
“totally out of control.”78
It is easy to see how monoculture and attention to quantitative 
yields would fit most comfortably within this paradigm. Monoculture 
eliminates all other cultivars that might complicate the design, while 
concern with quantitative yields avoids the thorny measurement prob­
lems that would arise if a particular quality or taste were the objective. 
The science of forestry is easiest when one is interested only in the 
commercial wood from a single species of tree. The science of agricul­
ture is easiest when it is a question of the most efficient way of getting 
as many bushels as possible of one hybrid of maize from a “normal­
ized” acre.
A progressive loss of experimental control occurs when one moves 
from the laboratory to the research plot on an experimental station 
and then to field trials on actual farms. Richards notes the unease such 
a move aroused among researchers in West Africa, who were anxious 
about making their research more practical yet concerned about any

290 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
relaxing of experimental conditions. After discussing how the farms se­
lected for trials ought to be relatively homogeneous so that they would 
respond in uniform ways to the experimental results, the researchers 
went on to lament the experimental control that they they lost by leav­
ing the research station. “It may be difficult,” they wrote, “to plant at 
all locations within a few days and almost impossible to find farm plots 
of uniform soil.” They continued, “Other types of interference, such as 
pest attacks or bad weather, may affect some treatments and not oth­
ers.”79 This is, Richards explains, a "salutary reminder of one of the rea­
sons why ‘formal’ scientific research procedures on experimental sta­
tions, with the stress on controlling all variables except the one or two 
under direct investigation, ‘miss the point’ as far as many small-holders 
are concerned. The main concern of farmers is how to cope with these 
complex interactions and unscheduled events. From the scientist’s point 
of view (particularly in relation to the need to secure clear-cut results for 
publication), on-farm experimentation poses a tough challenge.”80
To the extent that science is obliged to deal simultaneously with the 
complex interactions of many variables, it begins to lose the very char­
acteristics that distinguish it as modern science. Nor does the accumu­
lation of many narrow experimental studies add up to the same thing 
as a single study of such complexity. This is not, I must repeat, a case 
against the experimental techniques of modern scientific research. Any 
extensive, on-farm research study that did not reduce the complexity of 
interactions might be able to show, as farmers can, that a set of prac­
tices produced “good results”: say, high yields. But it would not be able 
to isolate the key factors responsible for this result. The case that I am 
making instead recognizes the power and utility of scientific work, 
within its domain, and recognizes its limitations in dealing with the 
kinds of problems for which its techniques are ill suited.
Blind Spots
Returning once again to the case of polyculture, we can see why 
agronomists might have scientific as well as aesthetic and institutional 
grounds for opposing polycropping. Complex forms of intercropping 
introduce too many variables into simultaneous play to offer much 
chance of unambiguous experimental proof of causal relations. We 
know that certain polycultural techniques, particularly those combining 
nitrogen-fixing legumes with grains, are quite productive, but we know 
little about the precise interactions that bring about these results.81 And 
we find problems in teasing out causation even when we confine our 
attention to the single dependent variable of quantitative yields.82 If we

Taming N ature 291
relax this restriction of focus and begin to consider a wider range of 
dependent variables (outcomes), such as soil fertility, interactions with 
livestock (fodder, manuring), compatibility with family labor supply, 
and so on, the difficulties of comparison rapidly become intractable to 
scientific method.
The nature of the scientific problem here is strongly analogous to 
that of complexity in physical systems. The elegantly simple formulas 
of Newton’s laws of mechanics make it relatively easy to calculate the 
orbits of two heavenly bodies once we know their respective masses 
and the distance between them. Add one more body, however, and the 
calculation of orbits resulting from the interaction becomes far more 
complex. When there are ten bodies interacting (this is the simplified 
version of our solar system),83 no orbits ever exactly repeat themselves, 
and there is no way to predict the long-term state of the system. As 
each new variable is introduced, the number of ramifying interactions 
to be taken into account grows geometrically.
It does not stretch the facts too far, I think, to claim that scientific 
agricultural research has an elective affinity with agricultural tech­
niques that lie within reach of its powerful methods. Maximizing the 
yields of pure-stand crops is one technique where its power can be used 
to best advantage. Insofar as its institutional power has permitted, agri­
cultural agencies, like scientific foresters, have tended to simplify their 
environments in ways that make them more amenable to their system 
of knowledge. The forms of agriculture that conformed to their mod­
ernist aesthetic and their politico-administrative interests also hap­
pened to fit securely within the perimeter of their professional sci­
entific vocation.84
What of the “disorder” outside the realm of the experimental design? 
Extra-experimental interactions can in fact prove beneficial when they 
strengthen the desired effect.85 There is no a priori reason for antici­
pating what their effects might be; what is significant is that they lie 
wholly outside the experimental model.
Occasionally, however, these effects have been both important and 
potentially threatening. A striking example from the years between 
1947 and 1960 was the massive, worldwide use of pesticides, the most 
infamous of which was d d t. d d t was sprayed to kill mosquito popula­
tions and thereby reduce the many diseases that the pests carry. The 
experimental model was largely confined to determining the dosage 
concentrations and application conditions required for eradicating 
mosquito populations. Within its field of vision, the model was suc­
cessful; d d t did kill mosquitos and dramatically reduced the incidence 
of endemic malaria and other diseases.86 It also had, as we slowly be­

292 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
came aware, devastating ecological effects, as residues were absorbed 
by organisms all along the food chain, of which humans are of course 
also a part. The consequences of the use of d d t and other pesticides On 
soil, water, fish, insects, birds, and fauna were so intricate that we have 
not yet gotten to the bottom of them.
Weak Peripheral Vision
Part of the problem was that the side effects were constantly rami­
fying. A first-order effect—say, the decline or disappearance of a local 
insect population—led to changes in flowering plants, which changed 
the habitat for other plants and for rodents, and so on. Another part of 
the problem was that the effects of pesticides on other species were ex­
amined only under experimental conditions. Yet the application of d d t 
was under field conditions, and as Carson pointed out, scientists had 
no idea what the interactive effects of pesticides were when they were 
mixed with water and soil and acted upon by sunlight.
That awareness of these interaction effects came from outside the 
scientific paradigm itself is both interesting and, I think, diagnostic. It 
began, in particular, when people gradually came to realize that the 
songbird population had suffered a radical decline. Public alarm at 
what was not happening anymore outside their kitchen windows led, 
eventually (through scientific research), to a tracing of how d d t con­
centrations in the organs of birds led to fragile eggshells and reproduc­
tive failure. This finding in turn stimulated a host of related inquiries 
into the effects of pesticides and ultimately to legislation banning the 
use of DDT. In this case, as in others, the power of the scientific para­
digm was achieved partly by its exclusion of extra-experimental vari­
ables that have often circled back, as it were, to take their revenge.
The logic of agroeconomic analysis of farming efficiency and profits 
also wins its power by a comparable restriction of the field of focus. Its 
tools are used to best advantage in examining the microeconomics of 
the farm as a firm. On the basis of its necessary simplifying assumptions 
about factor costs, inputs, weather, labor use, and prices, it can show 
how profitable or unprofitable it might be to use a particular piece of 
machinery, to buy irrigation equipment, or to raise one crop rather 
than another. Studies of this kind and also of marketing have tended to 
demonstrate the economies of scale achievable by large, highly capi­
talized, and highly mechanized operations. Outside this narrow per­
spective are hundreds of considerations that are necessarily bracketed, 
in a manner similar to that used in experimental science. But here, in 
agroeconomic analysis, the human agents adopting this view have the

Taming N ature 293
political capacity, in the short run at least, to make certain that they are 
not held economically responsible for the larger "extra-firm" conse­
quences of their logic. The pattern in agriculture in the United States 
was clearly outlined by a rogue economist testifying to Congress in 
1972.
Only in the past decade has serious attention been given to the fact that 
the large agricultural firm is . . . able to achieve benefits by externaliz­
ing certain costs. The disadvantages of large scale operation fall largely 
outside the decision-making framework of the large farm firm. Prob­
lems of waste disposal, pollution control, added burdens on public ser­
vice, deterioration of rural social structures, impairment of the tax 
base, and the political consequences of a concentration of economic 
power have typically not been considered as costs of large scale, by the 
firm. They are unquestionably costs to the larger community.
In theory, large scale operation should enable the firm to bring a wide 
range of both costs and benefits within its internal decision-making 
framework. In practice the economic and political power that accom­
panies large scale provides constant temptation to the large firm to 
take the benefits and pass on the costs.87
In other words, although the business analysts of the agricultural firms 
have weak peripheral vision, the political clout that such firms possess 
both individually and collectively can help them avoid being blindsided.
Shortsightedness
Nearly all studies purporting to evaluate decisions of interest to 
farmers are experiments that last one or at most a few seasons. Implic­
itly, the logic behind a research design of this kind is that the long-run 
effects will not contradict the short-run findings. The question of the 
time horizon of research is directly relevant even to those for whom 
the maximization of yields is the holy grail. Unless they are exclusively 
interested in immediate yields, no matter what the consequences, their 
attention must be directed to the issue of sustainability or to Hicksian 
income. Perhaps the most significant practical division is thus not be­
tween those who would design agricultural policy with cultural and 
social goals in mind (such as the preservation of the family farm, the 
landscape, or diversity) and those who want to maximize production 
and profit, but rather between productionists with a short view and 
productionists with a long view. After all, concern about soil erosion 
and water supply was motivated less often by regard for the environ­
ment than by regard for the sustainability of current production.
The relatively short-run orientation of crop studies and farm eco­
nomics works to exclude even those long-run results of interest to the

294 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
productionists. Many of the claims for polyculture, for example, assert 
its superiority over the long haul as a system of production. A poly­
cropping trial of twenty or more years, as Stephen Marglin has sug­
gested, might well reach conclusions that are quite different from 
those derived from a trial that lasts a season or two.88 It is not at all im­
plausible that the process of open pollination and selection by farmers, 
as opposed to hybridization, might have developed cultivars roughly 
equal in yield to the best hybrids and superior to them in many other 
respects, including profitability.89 The paper profits of scientific, mono­
cropped forests, we now realize, were achieved at considerable cost to 
the long-term health and productivity of the forest. One would have 
supposed that since most farms are family enterprises, there would 
have been more studies of cropping and firm economics that took as 
their analytical unit of time the entire family cycle of one generation.90
Nothing in the logic of the scientific method itself seems to require 
that a short-run perspective prevail; rather, such a perspective seems to 
be a response to institutional and perhaps commercial pressures. On 
the other hand, the need to isolate a few variables while assuming every­
thing else constant and the bracketing of interaction effects that lie 
outside the experimental model are very definitely inscribed in scien­
tific method. They are a condition of the formidable clarity it achieves 
within its field of vision. Taken together, the parts of the landscape oc­
cluded by actual scientific practice—the blind spots, the periphery, 
and the long view—also constitute a formidable portion of the real 
world.
The Simplifying Practice of Scientific Agriculture
Some Yields Are More Equal Than Others
Modern agricultural research commonly proceeds as if yields, per 
unit of scarce inputs, were the central concern of the farmer. The as­
sumption is enormously convenient; like the commercial wood of sci­
entific forestry, the generic, homologous, uniform commodities thus 
derived create the possibility both of quantitative comparisons be­
tween the yield of different cultivation techniques and of aggregate sta­
tistics. The familiar tabulations of acres planted, yields per acre, and 
total production from year to year are usually the decisive measure of 
success in a development program.
But the premise that all rice, all corn, and all millet are "equal,” how­
ever useful, is simply not a plausible assumption about any crop unless 
it is purely a commodity for sale in the market.91 Each subspecies of 
grain has distinctive properties, not just in how it grows but in its qual­

Taming Nature 295
ities as a grain once harvested. In some cultures, certain varieties of 
rice are grown for use in certain distinctive dishes; other varieties of 
rice may be used only for specific ritual purposes or in the settlement 
of local debts. Some of the complex considerations that go into distin­
guishing one rice from another in terms of their cooking properties 
alone can be appreciated from Richards’s observations about how the 
considerations are weighed in Sierra Leone.
A phrase like “it cooks badly” is often a catch-all for a range of proper­
ties connected with storage, preparation and consumption, going well 
beyond subjective questions of "taste.” Is the variety concerned well- 
adapted to local food processing techniques? Is it readily peeled, 
milled, and pounded? How much water and fuel does it require in 
cooking? How long does it keep, prior to cooking and once cooked? 
Mende women claim that improved swamp rices are much less palat­
able than the harder "upland" rices when served up a second time. 
With the right kind of rice, it is possible to cut down the number of 
times it is necessary to cook during busy periods on the farm. Since 
cooking sometimes takes up to 3-4 hours per day (including the time 
taken to husk rice, prepare a fire and collect water) this is a factor of no 
small importance when labour is short.92
So far, we have considered only the husked grain. What if we 
broaden our view to take in the rest of the plant? At once we see that 
there is a great deal more to be harvested from a plant than its seed 
grains. Thus a Central American peasant may not be interested only in 
the number and size of the corn kernels she harvested. She may also be 
interested in using the cobs for fodder and scrub brushes; the husk and 
leaves for wrappers, thatch, and fodder; and the stalks as trellises for 
climbing beans, as fodder, and as temporary fencing. The fact that 
Central American farmers know of many more maize varieties than do 
their counterparts in the Corn Belt of the United States is partly re­
lated to the uses to which different varieties are put. Maize may also be 
sold in the market for any of these purposes and thus prized for qualities 
other than its kernels. The same story could, of course, be told about vir­
tually any widely grown cultivar. Its various parts from various stages 
of growth may come in handy as twine, vegetable dyes, medicinal poul­
tices, greens to eat raw or to cook, packaging material, bedding, or 
items for ritual or decorative purposes.
Even from a commercial point of view, then, the plant is not simply 
its grain. Nor are all grains of all subspecies and hybrids of maize and 
rice equal. The yield of seeds by weight or volume may therefore be 
only one of many ends—and perhaps not the most important one—for 
a cultivator. But once scientific agriculture or plant breeding begins to 
introduce this enormous range of value and uses into its own calcula­

296 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
tions, it is once again in the Newtonian dilemma of the ten heavenly 
bodies. And even if it were able to represent some of this complexity in 
its models, these usages are subject to change without notice.
Experimental Plots Versus Actual Fields
All environments, as we noted earlier, are intractably local. There is 
always what we might call the translation problem in converting the 
generic, standardized High Church Latin which emanates from labs 
and experimental stations into the vernacular of the local parish. Stan­
dardized solutions to field preparation, planting schedules, and fertil­
izer requirements always have to be adjusted when they are applied to, 
say, a stony, low-lying, north-facing field which has just grown two 
crops of oats. Agricultural scientists at research stations and extension 
agents are very much aware of this translation problem, as are spe­
cialists in any applied science. The question is always how to discover 
and convey findings so that they will be helpful to farmers. As long as 
the findings or solutions are not simply imposed, the farmer must de­
cide if they meet his needs.
Like cadastral maps, the experimental plots of agricultural re­
search stations cannot begin to represent the diversity and variability 
of farmers’ fields. The researchers must operate on the basis of standard, 
normal-range assumptions about soil, field preparation, weeding, rain­
fall, temperature, and so on, whereas each farmer’s field is a unique 
concatenation of circumstances, actions, and events, some of which are 
knowable in advance (soil composition) and some of which are out of 
anyone’s hands (the weather). The interactions among these and other 
variables are at least as important as the status of each; thus the effects 
of an early monsoon on rocky soil that has just been weeded are dif­
ferent from those of an early monsoon on waterlogged land that has 
not been weeded.
The averages and normalizations of experimental work obscure the 
fact that an average weather year or a standard soil is a statistical fic­
tion. As Wendell Berry puts it:
The industrial version of agriculture has it that farming brings the 
farmer annually, over and over again, to the same series of problems, to 
each one of which there is always the same generalized solution, and 
therefore, that industry’s solution can be simply and safely substituted 
for his solution. But that is false. On a good farm, because of weather 
and other so-called variables, neither the annual series of problems nor 
any of the problems individually is ever quite the same two years run­
ning. The good farmer (like the artist, the quarterback, the statesman)

Taming Nature 297
must be master of many possible solutions, one of which he must 
choose under pressure and apply with skill in the right place at the 
right time.93
Soil, although it is not as capriciously variable day by day as the 
weather, is often exceptionally variable within the same field. The essen­
tial simplifications of agricultural science require, first, that soil be 
sorted into a small number of categories based on acidity, nitrogen lev­
els, and other qualities. For analyzing the soil of a single field, the prac­
tice is to gather bits of soil from several parts of the field and to com­
bine them in the sample to be analyzed so that it will represent an 
average. This procedure implicitly recognizes the substantial variation 
in soil quality over a given field. The recommended fertilizer applica­
tion may therefore not be right for any part of the field, but compared 
to applications derived from other formulas, it will be “less wrong," on 
average, for the field as a whole. Once again, Berry cautions us against 
these generalizations: “Most farms, even most fields, are made up of dif­
ferent kinds of soil patterns and soil sense. Good farmers have always 
known this and have used the land accordingly; they have been careful 
students of the natural vegetation, soil depth, and structure, slope and 
drainage. They are not appliers of generalizations, theoretical or meth­
odological or mechanical.”94 When, to the complexity and variation of 
the soil conditions, we add the practice of polyculture, the obstacles to 
a successful application of a general formula become virtually insur­
mountable. The knowledge we do have of the limits on some plants’ tol­
erance of temperature and moisture does not ensure that they will nec­
essarily thrive within these limits. The typical plant is “awfully finicky 
about just where and when it will grow, under exactly what conditions 
it will germinate," as Edgar Anderson explains. “The vastly more intri­
cate business of which plants they will and will not tolerate as neigh­
bors and under what conditions, has never been looked into except in 
a preliminary way for a few species.”95
Indigenous farmers are exceptionally alert to microfeatures of ter­
rain and environment that are important to cultivation. Two examples 
from Richards’s analysis of West Africa will serve to illustrate the small 
details that are simply too minute to be visible within a standardizing 
grid. Among the bewildering variety of small-scale, local irrigation prac­
tices, Richards classifies at least eleven different kinds, some with sub- 
variations. All depend directly on locally specific details of topography, 
soil, flooding, rainfall, and so on, with the type of irrigation used depend­
ing on whether the area is a seasonally flooded delta, saucer-shaped 
depression with poor drainage, or an inland valley swamp. These small

298 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
“schemes," which take advantage of the existing possibilities of the 
landscape, are a far cry from vast engineered schemes in which no ef­
fort is spared to modify the landscape in conformity with the engi­
neering plan.
Richards’s second example shows how West African farmers used a 
rather simple but ingenious choice in what strain of rice to plant to help 
them cope with a local pest. Mende farmers on one area of Sierra Leone 
had, against the textbook advice on the varieties of rice to be preferred, 
selected a variant of rice with long awns (beard or bristles) and glumes 
(bracts). The textbook reasoning was probably that such varieties were 
lower yielding or that the awns and glumes would simply add more 
chaff that would have to be winnowed after threshing. The farmers’ rea­
soning was that the long awns and glumes discouraged birds from eat­
ing the bulk of their rice before it ever made it to the threshing floor. 
These details about microirrigation and the damage caused by birds are 
vital for local cultivators, but such details do not and cannot appear on 
the high-flying mapping of modern agricultural planning.
Many critics of scientific agriculture have claimed not only that it 
has systematically favored large-scale, production-oriented monocul­
ture but that its research findings are of at best limited use, since all 
agriculture is local. Howard argued for a fundamentally different prac­
tice, basing it on two premises. The first was that experimental plots 
could not yield helpful results.
Small plots and farms are very different things. It is impossible to man­
age a small plot as a self-contained unit in the same way as a good farm 
is conducted. The essential relation between livestock and the land is 
lost; there are no means of maintaining the fertility of the soil by suit­
able rotations as is the rule in good farming. The plot and the farm are 
obviously out of relation; the plot does not even represent the field in 
which it occurs. A collection of field plots cannot represent the agricul­
tural problem they set out to investigate. . . . What possible advantage 
therefore can be obtained by the application of higher mathematics to 
a technique which is so fundamentally unsound?96
Howard’s second premise is that many of the most important indi­
cations of a farm and a crop’s health are qualitative: “Can a mutually 
interacting system like the crop and the soil, for example, dependent on 
a multitude of factors which are changing from week-to-week and year- 
to-year, ever be made to yield quantitative results corresponding to the 
precision of mathematics?”97 As Howard sees it, the danger is that the 
narrow, experimental, and exclusively quantitative approach will suc­
ceed in completely driving out the other forms of local knowledge and 
judgment possessed by most cultivators.

Taming Nature 299
But Howard and others, it seems to me, miss the most important 
abstraction of experimental work in scientific agriculture. How can we 
define how useful this research is until we know the ends to which cul­
tivators will put it? Useful for what? It is at the level of human agency 
where scientific agriculture constructs its greatest abstraction: the cre­
ation of a stock character, the Everyman cultivator, who is interested 
only in realizing the greatest yields at the least cost.
Fictional Farmers Versus Real Farmers
Not only are the weather, the crops, and the soil complex and vari­
able; the farmer is, too. Season by season and frequently day by day, mil­
lions of cultivators are pursuing an innumerable variety of compli­
cated goals. These goals and the shifting mix between them defy any 
simple model or description.
Profitable production of one or more major crops, the usual stan­
dard of agricultural research, is obviously one purpose shared by most 
cultivators. It is instructive, nevertheless, to observe how deeply medi­
ated this goal is by other purposes that may indeed usurp it altogether. 
The complexities I suggest below merely scratch the surface.
Each farm family has its unique endowment of land, skills, tools, 
and labor, which greatly constrain how it farms. Consider only one as­
pect of labor supply: a “labor-rich” farm with many able-bodied young 
workers has options in growing labor-intensive crops, in planting sched­
ules, and in developing artisan sidelines that are not easily available to 
“labor-poor” farms. Furthermore, the same family farm will go through 
several stages in the course of a family cycle of development.98 Farmers 
who migrate out for wage work during part of the year may plant 
crops of early or late maturity or crops requiring little care in order to 
accommodate their migratory schedule.
As we saw earlier, a particular crop’s profit may be tied to more 
than just its yield in grain and the cost of producing it. The stubble of 
a crop may be crucial as fodder for livestock or waterfowl. A crop may 
be vital because of what it does to the soil in rotation with other crops 
or how it assists another crop with which it is interplanted. A crop may 
be less important for its grain that for what it supplies, in raw material, 
for artisanal production, whether that material is sold in the market or 
used at home. Families who live close to the subsistence line may 
choose their crops, not on the basis of their profitability, but on the 
basis of how steady their yields are and whether they can be eaten if 
their market price plunges.
The complexities thus far introduced could, at least in principle, be

300 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
accommodated within a drastically modified, neoclassical notion of 
economic maximization, even though it would be too elaborate to 
model easily. Once we add such considerations as aesthetics, rituals, 
taste, and social and political considerations, this is no longer the 
case. There are any number of perfectly rational but noneconomic 
reasons for wanting to grow a certain crop in a certain way, whether 
because one wishes to maintain cooperative relations with neighbors 
or because a particular crop is linked to group identity. Such cultural 
habits are perfectly compatible with commercial success, as the expe­
rience of the Amish, Mennonites, and Hutterites demonstrates. As long 
as we are pointing to the high level of abstraction of “the farm family” 
for whom scientific agricultural research does its work, we should 
note that, in much of the world, an understanding of the practices in 
use on almost any farm will require distinguishing the purposes of the 
various members of the family. Each family enterprise is, on closer in­
spection, a partnership—albeit typically unequal—with its own in­
ternal politics.
The units of “farmer" and “farm community" are, finally, every bit 
as intricate and fluid as the weather, soil, and landscape. Mapping 
them is even more problematic than, say, analyzing the soil. The rea­
son, I think, is that while the farmer’s expertise may occasionally fail 
him in assessing his own soil, we will not doubt the farmer’s expertise 
in knowing his own mind and interests.99
Just as the buzzing complexity and plasticity of customary land 
tenure practices cannot be satisfactorily represented in the straitjacket 
of modern freehold property law, so the complex motives and goals of 
cultivators and the land they farm cannot be effectively portrayed by 
the standardizations of scientific agriculture. The schematic represen­
tations so important for experimental work can and have produced im­
portant new knowledge, which, suitably adapted, has been incorpo­
rated into most agricultural routines. But such abstractions, again like 
those of freehold tenure, are powerful misrepresentations that usually 
circle back to influence reality. They operate, at a minimum, to gener­
ate research and findings most applicable to farms that meet the de­
scription of their schematization: large, monocropped, mechanized, 
commercial farms producing solely for the market. In addition, this 
standardization is typically linked to public policy in the form of tax in­
centives, loans, price supports, marketing subsidies, and, significantly, 
handicaps imposed on enterprises that do not fit the schematization, 
which systematically operate to nudge reality toward the grid of its ob­
servations. The effect is nothing like the shock therapy of the cam­
paigns for Soviet collectivization or ujamaa villages, which relied more

Taming Nature 301
on sticks than carrots. But over the long haul such a powerful grid can, 
and does, change the landscape.
Two Agricultural Logics Compared
If the logic of actual farming is one of an inventive, practiced response 
to a highly variable environment, the logic of scientific agriculture is, 
by contrast, one of adapting the environment as much as possible to its 
centralizing and standardizing formulas. Thanks to the pioneering work 
of Jan Douwe van der Ploeg, it is possible to spell out how this logic 
works for potato cultivation in the Andes.100
Van der Ploeg calls indigenous potato cultivation in the Andes a 
"craft.”101 The cultivator begins with an exceptionally diverse local ecol­
ogy and aims at both successfully adapting to it and gradually improv­
ing it. Andean farmers’ skills have allowed them to achieve results that 
are quite respectable in terms of narrow productionist goals and ex­
traordinarily so in terms of reliability of yields and sustainability.
The typical farmer cultivates anywhere from twelve to fifteen dis­
tinct parcels as well as other plots on a rotating basis.102 Given the great 
variety of conditions on each plot (altitude, soil, history of cultivation, 
slope, orientation to wind and sun), each field is unique. The very idea 
of a “standard field” in this context is an empty abstraction. “Some fields 
contain only one cultivar, others between two and ten, sometimes in­
terplanted in the same row or with each in its own row.”103 Each culti­
var is a well-placed bet in its niche. The variety of cultivars makes for 
local experimentation with new crosses and hybrids, each of which is 
tested and exchanged among farmers, and the many landraces of pota­
toes thus developed have unique characteristics that become well 
known. From the appearance of a new variety to its substantial use in 
the fields takes at least five or six years. Each season is the occasion for 
a new round of prudent bets, with last season’s results in terms of yield, 
disease, prices, and response to changed plot conditions having been 
carefully weighed. These farms are market-oriented experiment sta­
tions with good yields, great adaptability, and reliability. Perhaps more 
important, they are not just producing crops; they are reproducing 
farmers and communities with plant breeding skills, flexible strategies, 
ecological knowledge, and considerable self-confidence and autonomy.
Compare this “craft-based" potato production with the inherent 
logic of scientific agriculture. The process begins with the definition of 
an ideal plant type. “Ideal” is defined mainly, but not only, in terms of 
yields. Professional plant breeders then begin synthesizing the strains 
that might combine to form a new genotype with the desired charac­

302 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
teristics. Then, and only then, are the plant strains grown in experimen­
tal plots in order to determine the conditions under which the potential 
of the new genotype will be realized. The basic procedure is exactly the 
reverse of Andean craft production, where the cultivator begins with 
the plot, its soil, and its ecology and then selects or develops varieties 
that will likely thrive in this setting. The variety of cultivars in such a 
community is in large part a reflection of the variety of both local needs 
and ecological conditions. In scientific potato growing, by contrast, the 
point of departure is the new cultivar or genotype, in service of which 
every effort is made to transform and homogenize field conditions so 
that the field meets the genotype’s specific requirements.
The logic of beginning with an ideal genotype and then transforming 
nature to accord with its growing conditions has some predictable con­
sequences. Extension work essentially becomes the attempt to remake 
the farmer's field to suit the genotype. This usually requires the appli­
cation of nitrogen fertilizer and pesticides, which must be purchased 
and applied at the right moment. It usually also requires a watering 
regimen that in many cases only irrigation can possibly satisfy.104 The 
timing of all operations for this genotype (planting, cultivating, fertil­
izer spreading, and so forth) are spelled out carefully. The logic of the 
process—a logic not even remotely realized on the ground—is to trans­
form the farmers into “standard" farmers growing the required geno­
type on similar soils and leveled fields and according to the instruc­
tions printed right on the seed packages, applying the same fertilizers, 
pesticides, and amounts of water. It is a logic of homogenization and 
the virtual elimination of local knowledge. To the degree that this ho­
mogenization is successful, the genotype will likely succeed in terms of 
production levels in the short run. Conversely, to the degree that such 
homogenization is impossible, the genotype will fail.
Once the job of the agricultural specialist is defined as one of rais­
ing all farmers’ plots to the uniform condition that will realize the new 
cultivar s promise, there is no further need to attend to the great variety 
of conditions—some of which are unalterable—on actual farmers' 
fields. Rather than have the facts on the ground muddy a simple, uni­
tary research issue, it was more convenient to try to impose a research 
abstraction on the fields (and lives) of farmers. Given the intractable 
ecological variety of the Andes, this was a nearly fatal step.105 Rarely 
have agricultural specialists asked themselves, as did the Russian S. R 
Fridolin well before the revolution, whether they might not be working 
from the wrong angle: “He realized that his work was actually harm­
ing the peasants. Instead of learning what local conditions were and 
then making agricultural practice fit these conditions better, he had

Taming Nature 303
been trying to 'improve' local practice so that it would conform to ab­
stract standards.”106 It is little wonder that scientific agriculture tends 
to favor the creation of large artificial practices and environments — 
irrigation schemes, large and leveled fields, the application of fertilizer 
by formula, greenhouses, pesticides—all of which allow a homoge­
nization and control of nature within which "ideal” experimental con­
ditions for its genotypes can be maintained.
There is, I think, a larger lesson here. An explicit set of rules will 
take you further when the situation is cut-and-dried. The more static 
and one-dimensional the stereotype, the less the need for creative in­
terpretation and adaptation. In the Andes, van der Ploeg implies, the 
"rules” attached to the new potato were so restrictive that they could 
never be successfully translated to the great variety of local farming ver­
naculars. One of the major purposes of state simplifications, collec­
tivization, assembly lines, plantations, and planned communities alike 
is to strip down reality to the bare bones so that the rules will in fact 
explain more of the situation and provide a better guide to behavior. To 
the extent that this simplification can be imposed, those who make the 
rules can actually supply crucial guidance and instruction. This, at any 
rate, is what I take to be the inner logic of social, economic, and produc­
tive de-skilling. If the environment can be simplified down to the point 
where the rules do explain a great deal, those who formulate the rules 
and techniques have also greatly expanded their power. They have, 
correspondingly, diminished the power of those who do not. To the de­
gree that they do succeed, cultivators with a high degree of autonomy, 
skills, experience, self-confidence, and adaptability are replaced by cul­
tivators following instructions. Such reduction in diversity, movement, 
and life, to recall Jacobs’s term, represents a kind of social “taxidermy."
The new potato genotype, as van der Ploeg shows, usually fails, if 
not immediately, within three or four years. Unlike the ensemble of in­
digenous varieties, the new cultivar thrives within a narrower band of 
environmental conditions. Many things, in other words, must go right 
for the new cultivar to produce well, and if any of these things goes 
wrong (too much hot weather, late delivery of fertilizer, and so forth), 
the yields suffer dramatically. Within a few years the new genotypes 
“become incapable of generating even low levels of production."107
In practice, however, the vast majority of Andean cultivators are 
neither purely traditional cultivators nor mindless followers of the sci­
entific specialists. They are, instead, crafting unique amalgams of strat­
egies that reflect their aims, their resources, and their local conditions. 
Where the new potatoes seem to fit their purposes, they may plant 
some, but they may interplant them with other cultivars and may sub­

304 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
stitute dung, or plow in green manure (alfalfa, clover), rather than 
apply the standard fertilizer package. They are constantly inventing 
and experimenting with different rotations, timing, and weeding tech­
niques. But because of the very particularity of these thousands of "in­
field experiments” and the specialists’ studied inattention to them, they 
are illegible, if not invisible, to scientific research. Farmers, being poly­
theists when it comes to agricultural practice, are quick to seize what­
ever seems useful from the epistemic work of formal science. But the 
researchers, trained as monotheists, seem all but incapable of absorb­
ing the informal experimental results of practice.
Conclusion
The great confidence that high-modernist agriculture has inspired 
among its practitioners and partisans should not surprise us. It is as­
sociated with unparalleled agricultural productivity in the West and 
with the power and prestige of the scientific and industrial revolu­
tions. Little wonder, then, that the tenets of high modernism, as talis­
mans of the true faith, should have been carried throughout the world 
uncritically and indeed with the conviction that they lighted the way to 
agricultural progress.1081 believe that this uncritical, and hence unsci­
entific, trust in the artifacts and techniques of what became codified 
as scientific agriculture was responsible for its failures. The logical 
companion to a complete faith in a quasi-industrial model of high- 
modernist agriculture was an often explicit contempt for the practices 
of actual cultivators and what might be learned from them. Whereas a 
scientific spirit would have counseled skepticism and dispassionate in­
quiry into these practices, modern agriculture as a blind faith preached 
scorn and summary dismissal.
Actual cultivators in West Africa and elsewhere should more accu­
rately have been understood as lifelong experimenters conducting in­
field seasonal trials, the results of which they incorporated into their 
ever-evolving repertoire of practices. Inasmuch as these experimenters 
were and are surrounded by hundreds or thousands of other local ex­
perimenters with whom they share research findings and the knowl­
edge of generations of earlier research as codified in folk wisdom, they 
could be said to have instant access to the popular equivalent of an im­
pressive research library. Now it is also undeniably the case that they 
carry out most of their research without the proper experimental con­
trols and are therefore prone to drawing false inferences from their 
findings. They are also limited by what they can observe; micropro­
cesses only visible in the laboratory necessarily escape them. Nor is it

Taming Nature 305
clear that the ecological logic that seems to work well on a single farm 
over the long haul will at the same time produce sustainable aggregate 
results for an entire region.
That said, it is also the case, however, that West African cultivators 
have at their disposal a lifetime of careful, local observation and the 
fine-grained knowledge of the locality that no research scientist can 
hope to duplicate for the same terrain. And let us not fail to note what 
kind of experimenters these are. Their lives and the lives of their fami­
lies depend directly on the outcomes of their field experiments. Given 
these important positional advantages, one would have imagined that 
agricultural scientists would have paid attention to what these farmers 
did know. It was their failure to do so, Howard claims, that constitutes 
the great shortcoming of modern scientific agriculture: “The approach 
to the problems of farming must be made from the field, not from the 
laboratory. The discovery of the things that matter is three quarters of 
the battle. In this the observant farmer and labourer, who have spent 
their lives in close contact with nature, can be of greatest help to the 
investigator. The views of the peasantry in all countries are worthy of 
respect; there is always good reason for their practices; in matters like 
the cultivation of mixed crops they themselves are still the pioneers."109 
Howard credits most of his own findings about soil, humus, and root 
action to a careful observation of indigenous farming practice. And he 
is rather disdainful of agricultural specialists who "do not have to take 
their own advice”—that is, who have never had to see their own crop 
through from planting to harvest.110
Why, then, the unscientific scorn for practical knowledge? There are 
at least three reasons for it, as far as I can tell. The first is the “profes­
sional" reason mentioned earlier: the more the cultivator knows, the 
less the importance of the specialist and his institutions. The second is 
the simple reflex of high modernism: namely, a contempt for history 
and past knowledge. As the scientist is always associated with the mod­
ern and the indigenous cultivator with the past that modernism will 
banish, the scientist feels that he or she has little to learn from that 
quarter. The third reason is that practical knowledge is represented 
and codified in a form uncongenial to scientific agriculture. From a nar­
row scientific view, nothing is known until and unless it is proven in a 
tightly controlled experiment. Knowledge that arrives in any form other 
than through the techniques and instruments of formal scientific pro­
cedure does not deserve to be taken seriously. The imperial pretense 
of scientific modernism admits knowledge only if it arrives through the 
aperture that the experimental method has constructed for its admis­
sion. Traditional practices, codified as they are in practice and in folk

306 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION
sayings, are seen presumptively as not meriting attention, let alone 
verification.
And yet, as we have seen, cultivators have devised and perfected a 
host of techniques that do work, producing desirable results in crop 
production, pest control, soil preservation, and so forth. By constantly 
observing the results of their field experiments and retaining those 
methods that succeed, the farmers have discovered and refined prac­
tices that work, without knowing the precise chemical or physical rea­
sons why they work. In agriculture, as in many other fields, “practice 
has long preceded theory.”111 And indeed some of these practically suc­
cessful techniques, which involve a large number of simultaneously in­
teracting variables, may never be fully understood by the techniques of 
science. We turn, then, to a closer examination of practical knowledge, 
a kind of knowledge that high modernism has ignored to its peril.

Part 4
The Missing Link


9 Thin Simplifications and 
Practical Knowledge: 
Metis
No battle—Tarutino, Borodino, or Austerlitz—takes place as those who planned 
it anticipated. That is an essential condition.
—Tolstoy, War and Peace
We have repeatedly observed the natural and social failures of thin, for­
mulaic simplifications imposed through the agency of state power. 
The utilitarian commercial and fiscal logic that led to geometric, mono­
cropped, same-age forests also led to severe ecological damage. Where 
the formula had been applied with the greatest rigor, it eventually be­
came necessary to attempt to restore much of the forest’s original di­
versity and complexity—or rather, to create a “virtual” forest that 
would mimic the robustness and durability of the “prescientific” forest.
The planned “scientific city,” laid out according to a small number 
of rational principles, was experienced as a social failure by most of its 
inhabitants. Paradoxically, the failure of the designed city was often 
averted, as was the case in Brasilia, by practical improvisations and il­
legal acts that were entirely outside the plan. Just as the stripped-down 
logic behind the scientific forest was an inadequate recipe for a healthy, 
"successful” forest, so were the thin urban-planning schemata of Le 
Corbusier an inadequate recipe for a satisfactory human community.
Any large social process or event will inevitably be far more com­
plex than the schemata we can devise, prospectively or retrospectively, 
to map it. Lenin had every reason, as a would-be head of the vanguard 
party, to emphasize military discipline and hierarchy in the revolu­
tionary project. After the October Revolution, the Bolshevik state au­
thorities had every reason, once again, to exaggerate the central, all- 
seeing role of the party in bringing the revolution about. And yet we 
know — and Lenin and Luxemburg knew—that the revolution had 
been a close call, relying more on the improvisations, missteps, and
309

310 THE MISSING LINK
strokes of luck that Tolstoy described in War and Peace than on the pre­
cision of a parade-ground drill.
The thin simplifications of agricultural collectivization and cen­
trally planned production have met a comparable fate, whether on the 
collective farms of the former Soviet Union or in the ujamaa villages of 
Nyerere s Tanzania. Here again, the schemes that did not collapse alto­
gether managed to survive thanks largely to desperate measures either 
not envisaged or else expressly prohibited by the plan. Thus an infor­
mal economy developed in Russian agriculture, operating on tiny pri­
vate plots and and the “theft” of time, equipment, and commodities from 
the state sector and supplying most of the dairy products, fruit, veg­
etables, and meat in the Russian diet.1 Thus the forcibly resettled Tanza­
nians successfully resisted collective production and drifted back to 
sites more suitable for grazing and cultivation. At times, the price of an 
unyielding imposition of state simplifications on agrarian life and pro­
duction— Stalin’s forced collectivization or China’s Great Leap For­
ward—was famine. As often as not, however, state officials recoiled be­
fore the abyss and came to tolerate, if not condone, a host of informal 
practices that in fact underwrote the survival of the official scheme.
These rather extreme instances of massive, state-imposed social en­
gineering illustrate, I think, a larger point about formally organized so­
cial action. In each case, the necessarily thin, schematic model of social 
organization and production animating the planning was inadequate 
as a set of instructions for creating a successful social order. By them­
selves, the simplified rules can never generate a functioning commu­
nity, city, or economy. Formal order, to be more explicit, is always and 
to some considerable degree parasitic on informal processes, which the 
formal scheme does not recognize, without which it could not exist, 
and which it alone cannot create or maintain.
This homely insight has long been of great tactical value to genera­
tions of trade unionists who have used it as the basis of the work-to- 
rule strike. In a work-to rule action (the French call it greve du zele), 
employees begin doing their jobs by meticulously observing every one 
of the rules and regulations and performing only the duties stated in 
their job descriptions. The result, fully intended in this case, is that the 
work grinds to a halt, or at least to a snail’s pace. The workers achieve 
the practical effect of a walkout while remaining on the job and follow­
ing their instructions to the letter. Their action also illustrates pointedly 
how actual work processes depend more heavily on informal under­
standings and improvisations than upon formal work rules. In the long 
work-to-rule action against Caterpillar, the large equipment manufac­
turer, for example, workers reverted to following the inefficient proce­

Practical Knowledge 311
dures specified by the engineers, knowing they would cost the company 
valuable time and quality, rather than continuing the more expeditious 
practices they had long ago devised on the job.2 They were relying on 
the tested assumption that working strictly by the book is necessarily 
less productive than working with initiative.
This perspective on social order is less an analytical insight than a 
sociological truism. It does offer, however, a valuable point of departure 
for understanding why authoritarian, high-modernist schemes are po­
tentially so destructive. What they ignore—and often suppress—are 
precisely the practical skills that underwrite any complex activity. My 
aim in this chapter is to conceptualize these practical skills, variously 
called know-how (savoir faire or arts de faire),3 common sense, experi­
ence, a knack, or metis. What are these skills? How are they created, 
developed, and maintained? What is their relation to formal epistemic 
knowledge? I hope to show that many forms of high modernism have 
replaced a valuable collaboration between these two dialects of knowl­
edge with an “imperial" scientific view, which dismisses practical know­
how as insignificant at best and as dangerous superstitions at worst. 
The relation between scientific knowledge and practical knowledge is, 
as we shall see, part of a political struggle for institutional hegemony by 
experts and their institutions. Taylorism and scientific agriculture are, 
on this reading, not just strategies of production, but also strategies of 
control and appropriation.
Metis: The Contours of Practical Knowledge
Following the illuminating studies of Marcel Detienne and Jean-Pierre 
Vernant, we can find in the Greek concept of metis a means of compar­
ing the forms of knowledge embedded in local experience with the 
more general, abstract knowledge deployed by the state and its techni­
cal agencies.4 Before elaborating the concept and its use, we will turn 
to a brief example in order to illustrate the vernacular character of 
local knowledge and ground the discussion that follows.
When the first European settlers in North America were wondering 
when and how to plant New World cultivars, such as maize, they turned 
to the local knowledge of their Native American neighbors for help. 
They were told by Squanto, according to one legend (Chief Massasoit, 
according to another), to plant corn when the oak leaves were the size 
of a squirrel’s ear.5 Embedded in this advice, however folkloric its ring 
today, is a finely observed knowledge of the succession of natural 
events in the New England spring. For Native Americans it was this or­
derly succession of, say, the skunk cabbage appearing, the willows be­

312 THE MISSING LINK
ginning to leaf, the red-wing blackbird returning, and the first hatch 
of the mayfly that provided a readily observable calendar of spring. 
While the timing of these events might be earlier or later in a given year 
and while the pace of their succession might be more drawn out or ac­
celerated, the sequence of the events was almost never violated. As a 
rule of thumb, it was a nearly foolproof formula for avoiding a frost. 
We almost certainly distort Squanto’s advice, as the colonists perhaps 
did, by reducing it to a single observation. Everything we know about 
indigenous technical knowledge suggests that it relies on an accumu­
lation of many partly redundant signals. If other indications did not 
confirm the oak-leaf formula, a prudent planter might delay further.
Compare this advice to that based on more universalistic units of 
measurement. A typical local edition of The Farmer’s Almanac is a case 
in point. It may suggest planting corn after the first full moon in May 
or after a specified date, such as May 20. In New England, at any rate, 
this advice would require considerable adjustment by latitude and al­
titude. A date that would serve for southern Connecticut would not suit 
Vermont; a date that worked in the valleys would not be right for the 
hills (especially the north-facing slopes); a date that worked near the 
coast would not work inland. And the almanac’s date is almost certainly 
a fail-safe date, since the worst thing that could happen to an almanac 
publisher would be to have his or her advice lead to a crop failure. As a 
result of this commercial caution, some valuable growing time may 
have been lost in the interest of certainty.6
The Native American maxim, by contrast, is vernacular and local, 
keyed to common features of the local ecosystem; it inquires about oak 
leaves in this place, and not oak leaves in general. Despite its specificity, 
it travels remarkably well. It can be deployed successfully anywhere in 
temperate North America where there are oak trees and squirrels. The 
precision provided by the observed sequence almost certainly gains a 
few days of growing time while not appreciably raising the risk of 
planting before a hard frost.
Practical knowledge like Squanto's can, of course, be translated 
into more universalistic scientific terms. A botanist might observe that 
the first growth of oak leaves is made possible by rising ground and 
ambient temperatures, which also assure that maize will grow and that 
the probability of a killing frost is negligible. The mean soil tempera­
ture at a given depth might do just as well. Along these lines, the early 
nineteenth-century mathematician, Adolph Quetelet, turned his scien­
tific eye to the mundane problem of when the lilacs would bloom in 
Brussels. He concluded, after much rigorous observation, that the li­
lacs burst into bloom "when the sum of the squares of the mean daily

Practical Knowledge 313
temperature since the last frost added up to (4264C) squared."7 Knowl­
edge this certainly is! Given the techniques for making the required 
observations, it is probably quite accurate. But it is hardly practical. 
Quetelet's playful formula alerts us to a hallmark of most practical, 
local knowledge: it is as economical and accurate as it needs to be, no 
more and no less, for addressing the problem at hand.
One hesitates before introducing yet another unfamiliar term, such 
as "metis,” into this discussion. In this case, however, "metis" seems to 
better convey the sorts of practical skills that I have in mind than do 
such plausible alternatives as “indigenous technical knowledge,” “folk 
wisdom," "practical skills," techne, and so on.8
The concept comes to us from the ancient Greeks. Odysseus was fre­
quently praised for having metis in abundance and for using it to outwit 
his enemies and make his way home. Metis is typically translated into 
English as “cunning” or “cunning intelligence." While not wrong, this 
translation fails to do justice to the range of knowledge and skills repre­
sented by metis. Broadly understood, metis represents a wide array of 
practical skills and acquired intelligence in responding to a constantly 
changing natural and human environment. Odysseus's metis was in evi­
dence, not only in his deceiving of Circe, the Cyclops, and Polyphemus 
and in binding himself to the mast to avoid the Sirens, but also in hold­
ing his men together, in repairing his ship, and in improvising tactics 
to get his men out of one tight spot after another. The emphasis is both 
on Odysseus’s ability to adapt successfully to a constantly shifting situ­
ation and on his capacity to understand, and hence outwit, his human 
and divine adversaries.
All human activities require a considerable degree of metis, but 
some activities require far more. To begin with skills that require adapt­
ing to a capricious physical environment, the acquired knowledge of 
how to sail, fly a kite, fish, shear sheep, drive a car, or ride a bicycle re­
lies on the capacity for metis. Each of these skills requires hand-eye co­
ordination that comes with practice and a capacity to "read" the waves, 
the wind, or the road and to make the appropriate adjustments. One 
powerful indication that they all require metis is that they are excep­
tionally difficult to teach apart from engaging in the activity itself. One 
might imagine trying to write down explicit instructions on how to ride 
a bicycle, but one can scarcely imagine that such instructions would en­
able a novice to ride a bicycle on the first try. The maxim “Practice 
makes perfect” was devised for such activities as this, inasmuch as the 
continual, nearly imperceptible adjustments necessary for riding a bi­
cycle are best learned by having to make them. Only through an ac­
quired "feel” for balanced motion do the required adjustments become

314 THE MISSING LINK
automatic.9 No wonder that most crafts and trades requiring a touch 
or feel for implements and materials have traditionally been taught by 
long apprenticeships to master craftsmen.
There is no doubt that some individuals seem to get the hang of a 
particular skill and master it more quickly than most other people. 
But beyond this ineffable difference (which often spells the difference 
between competence and genius), riding a bike, sailing, fishing, shear­
ing sheep, and so on can be learned through practice. Since every road, 
wind, stream, and sheep is different and continually changing, the best 
practitioner, like Odysseus, will have had experience under many differ­
ent conditions. If your life depended on your ship coming through rough 
weather, you would surely prefer a successful captain with long experi­
ence to, say, a brilliant physicist who had analyzed the natural laws of 
sailing but who had never actually sailed a vessel.
Those specialists who deal with emergencies and disasters are also 
exemplary of metis. Firefighters, rescue squads, paramedics, mine- 
disaster teams, doctors in hospital emergency rooms, crews that repair 
downed electrical lines, teams that extinguish fires in oil fields, and, as 
we shall see, farmers and pastoralists in precarious environments must 
respond quickly and decisively to limit damage and save lives. Although 
there are rules of thumb that can be and are taught, each fire or acci­
dent is unique, and half the battle is knowing which rules of thumb to 
apply in which order and when to throw the book away and improvise.
Red Adair’s team, which has been hired worldwide to cap well­
head fires, was a striking and diagnostic case. Before the Gulf War of 
1990, his was the only team with any appreciable “clinical" experience, 
and he could set his own price. Each fire presented new problems and 
required an inspired mixture of experience and improvisation. We can 
imagine, at almost opposite ends of a spectrum, Adair on one hand and 
a minor clerk performing highly repetitive steps on the other. Adair’s 
job cannot, by definition, be reduced to a routine. He must begin with 
the unpredictable—an accident, a fire—and then devise the techniques 
and equipment (from an existing repertoire, to be sure, but one in­
vented largely by him) required to extinguish that fire and cap that 
well.10 The clerk, by contrast, deals with a predictable, routinized en­
vironment that can often be ordered in advance and down to the small­
est detail. Adair cannot simplify his environment in order to apply a 
cookie-cutter solution.
The examples thus far introduced have been mostly concerned with 
the relation between people and their physical environment. But metis 
equally applies to human interaction. Think of the complex physical 
activities that require constant adjustment to the movement, values,

Practical Knowledge 315
desires, or gestures of others. Boxing, wrestling, and fencing require 
instant, quasi-automatic responses to an opponent’s moves, which can 
be learned only through long practice of the activity itself. Here the el­
ement of deception enters as well. The successful boxer will learn to 
feint a move in order to provoke a response of which he can then take 
advantage. If we move from physical contests to such cooperative ac­
tivities as dancing, music, or lovemaking, a similar practiced respon­
siveness born of experience is essential. Many sports combine both the 
cooperative and the competitive aspects of metis. A soccer player must 
learn not only the moves of his or her teammates but also which team 
moves and fakes will deceive their opponents. Such skills, it is impor­
tant to note, are both generic and particular; while each player may be 
more or less skilled at different facets of the game, each team has its 
particular combination of skills, its “chemistry,’’ and each contest with 
an opposing team represents a challenge that is in some ways unique.11
On a much bigger, higher-stakes canvas, war diplomacy and poli­
tics more generally are metis-laden skills. The successful practitioner, 
in each case, tries to shape the behavior of partners and opponents to 
his own ends. Unlike the sailor, who can adjust to the wind and the 
waves but not influence them directly, the general and the politician 
are in constant interaction with their counterparts, each of whom is 
trying to outfox the other. Adapting quickly and well to unpredictable 
events—both natural events, such as the weather, and human events, 
such as the enemy’s move—and making the best out of limited re­
sources are the kinds of skills that are hard to teach as cut-and-dried 
disciplines.
The necessarily implicit, experiential nature of metis seems central. 
A simple experiment in implicit learning conducted by the philosopher 
Charles Peirce may help to convey something of the process. Peirce had 
people lift two weights and judge which of the two was heavier. At first, 
their discrimination was rather crude. But as they practiced for long 
periods, they became able to distinguish accurately quite minute differ­
ences in weight. They could not pinpoint what it was that they sensed 
or felt, but their actual capacity to discriminate grew enormously. Peirce 
took the results as evidence for a kind of subliminal communication 
via “faint sensations" between people. For our purposes, however, it il­
lustrates a rudimentary kind of knowledge that can be acquired only 
by practice and that all but defies being communicated in written or 
oral form apart from actual practice.12
Surveying the range of examples that we have touched on, we can 
venture some preliminary generalizations about the nature of metis 
and about where it is relevant. Metis is most applicable to broadly sim­

316 THE MISSING LINK
ilar but never precisely identical situations requiring a quick and prac­
ticed adaptation that becomes almost second nature to the practitioner. 
The skills of metis may well involve rules of thumb, but such rules are 
largely acquired through practice (often in formal apprenticeship) and 
a developed feel or knack for strategy. Metis resists simplification into 
deductive principles which can successfully be transmitted through 
book learning, because the environments in which it is exercised are so 
complex and nonrepeatable that formal procedures of rational deci­
sion making are impossible to apply. In a sense, metis lies in that large 
space between the realm of genius, to which no formula can apply, and 
the realm of codified knowledge, which can be learned by rote.
The Art of the Locality
Why are the rules of thumb that can be derived from any skilled 
craft still woefully inadequate to its practice? Artists or cooks, Michael 
Oakeshott has noted, may in fact write about their art and try to boil it 
down to technical knowledge, but what they write represents not much 
of what they know but rather only that small part of their knowledge 
that can be reduced to exposition. Knowing a craft’s shorthand rules is 
a very long way from its accomplished performance: "These rules and 
principles are mere abridgements of the activity itself; they do not exist 
in advance of the activity, they cannot properly be said to govern it and 
they cannot provide the impetus of the activity. A complete mastery of 
the principles may exist alongside a complete inability to pursue the 
activity to which they refer, for the pursuit of the activity does not con­
sist in the application of these principles; and even if it did, the knowl­
edge of how to apply them (the knowledge of actually pursuing the ac­
tivity) is not given in a knowledge of them.’’13
Knowing how and when to apply the rules of thumb in a concrete 
situation is the essence of metis. The subtleties of application are im­
portant precisely because metis is most valuable in settings that are 
mutable, indeterminant (some facts are unknown), and particular.14 
Although we shall return to the question of indeterminacy and change, 
here I want to explore further the localness and particularity of metis.
In seamanship, the difference between the more general knowledge 
of navigation and the more particular knowledge of piloting is instruc­
tive. When a large freighter or passenger liner approaches a major port, 
the captain typically turns the control of his vessel over to a local pilot, 
who brings it into the harbor and to its berth. The same procedure is 
followed when the ship leaves its berth until it is safely out into the sea- 
lanes. This sensible procedure, designed to avoid accidents, reflects

Practical Knowledge 317
the fact that navigation on the open sea (a more “abstract” space) is the 
more general skill, while piloting a ship through traffic in a particular 
port is a highly contextual skill. We might call the art of piloting a “local 
and situated knowledge.” What the pilot knows are local tides and cur­
rents along the coast and estuaries, the unique features of local wind 
and wave patterns, shifting sandbars, unmarked reefs, seasonal changes 
in microcurrents, local traffic conditions, the daily vagaries of wind pat­
terns off headlands and along straits, how to pilot in these waters at 
night, not to mention how to bring many different ships safely to berth 
under variable conditions.15 Such knowledge is particular, by defini­
tion; it can be acquired only by local practice and experience. Like a 
bird or an insect that has adapted brilliantly to a narrow ecological 
niche, the pilot knows one harbor. Much of his knowledge would be ir­
relevant if he were suddenly transposed to a different port.16 Despite 
the rather narrow context of this knowledge, it is agreed by captains, 
harbormasters, and, not least, those who insure maritime commerce 
against losses that the pilot’s knowledge of a particular port must pre­
vail. The pilot's experience is locally superior to the general rules of 
navigation.
Mark Twain's classic Life on the Mississippi reflects at great length 
on the knowledge acquired by riverboat pilots. Part of that knowledge 
consists of rules of thumb about surface features that may signal shal­
lows, currents, or other navigational hazards. Much of it, however, con­
sists of a quite specific familiarity with their particular stretch of the 
Mississippi at different seasons and water levels—knowledge that could 
have been gained in that particular place only through experience. Al­
though there is something that might properly be called a knowledge 
of rivers in general, it is a quite thin and unsatisfactory knowledge when 
it comes to making a particular trip on a particular river. A native pilot 
is no less necessary on a given river than a native tracker for a given 
jungle or a local guide in Bruges or in the medina of an ancient Arab 
city.
The practice and experience reflected in metis is almost always 
local. Thus a guide on mountain climbing may be best at Zermatt, 
which she has scaled often; an airplane pilot best on Boeing 747s, on 
which he was trained; and the orthopedic surgeon best at knees, where 
her surgical experience has given her a certain expertise. It is not en­
tirely clear how much of these experts’ metis would be transferable if 
they were suddenly shifted to Mont Blanc, DC3s, and hands.
Every instance of the application of a given skill will require 
specific adjustments for local conditions. For a weaver, each new sup­
ply of yarn or thread handles differently. For a potter, a new supply of

318 THE MISSING LINK
clay “works” differently. Long experience with different materials will 
have the effect of making such adjustments quasi-automatic. The speci­
ficity of knowledge goes even deeper, in the sense that each loom or 
potter’s wheel has its own distinctive qualities, which an artisan comes 
to know and appreciate (or work around). Every general knowledge 
that is actually applied, then, requires some imaginative translation. A 
consummate knowledge of looms in general does not translate directly 
into the successful operation of this particular loom with its peculiari­
ties of design, use, woods, and repairs. To speak of the art of one loom, 
the art of one river, the art of one tractor, or the art of one automobile 
is not preposterous; it is to point to the size and importance of the gap 
between general knowledge and situated knowledge.
We might reasonably think of situated, local knowledge as being 
partisan knowledge as opposed to generic knowledge. That is, the holder 
of such knowledge typically has a passionate interest in a particular out­
come. An insurer of commercial shipping for a large, highly capital­
ized maritime firm can afford to rely on probability distributions for 
accidents. But for a sailor or captain hoping for a safe voyage, it is the 
outcome of the single event, a single trip, that matters. Metis is the 
ability and experience necessary to influence the outcome—to im­
prove the odds—in a particular instance.
The state simplifications and utopian schemes we have examined in 
earlier chapters all concern activities that are carried out in spatially 
and temporally unique settings. While something can indeed be said 
about forestry, revolution, urban planning, agriculture, and rural set­
tlement in general, this will take us only so far in understanding this 
forest, this revolution, this farm. All farming takes place in a unique 
space (fields, soil, crops) and at a unique time (weather pattern, sea­
son, cycle in pest populations) and for unique ends (this family with its 
needs and tastes). A mechanical application of generic rules that ig­
nores these particularities is an invitation to practical failure, social 
disillusionment, or most likely both. The generic formula does not and 
cannot supply the local knowledge that will allow a successful transla­
tion of the necessarily crude general understandings to successful, nu- 
anced, local applications. The more general the rules, the more they 
require in the way of translation if they are to be locally successful. 
Nor is it simply a matter of the captain or navigator realizing at what 
point his rules of thumb are inferior to the intimate local knowledge of 
the pilot. Rather, it is a matter of recognizing that the rules of thumb 
themselves are largely a codification derived from the actual practices 
of sailing and piloting.
One last analogy may help to clarify the relationship between gen­

Practical Knowledge 319
eral rules of thumb and metis. Metis is not merely the specification of 
local values (such as the local mean temperature and rainfall) made in 
order to successfully apply a generic formula to a local case. Taking lan­
guage as a parallel, I believe that the rule of thumb is akin to formal 
grammar, whereas metis is more like actual speech. Metis is no more de­
rivative of general rules than speech is derivative of grammar. Speech 
develops from the cradle by imitation, use, trial and error. Learning a 
mother tongue is a stochastic process—a process of successive, self- 
correcting approximations. We do not begin by learning the alphabet, 
individual words, parts of speech, and rules of grammar and then try­
ing to use them all in order to produce a grammatically correct sen­
tence. Moreover, as Oakeshott indicates, a knowledge of the rules of 
speech by themselves is compatible with a complete inability to speak 
intelligible sentences. The assertion that the rules of grammar are de­
rivative of the practice of actual speech is nearer to the truth. Modern 
language training that aims at competence in speaking recognizes this 
and begins with simple speech and rote repetition in order to imprint 
pattern and accent while leaving the rules of grammar implicit, or else 
introducing them later as a way of codifying and summarizing practi­
cal mastery.
Like language, the metis or local knowledge necessary to the suc­
cessful practice of farming or pastoralism is probably best learned by 
daily practice and experience. Like serving a long apprenticeship, 
growing up in a household where that craft is continually practiced 
often represents the most satisfactory preparation for its exercise. This 
kind of socialization to a trade may favor the conservation of skills 
rather than daring innovation. But any formula that excludes or sup­
presses the experience, knowledge, and adaptability of metis risks inco­
herence and failure; learning to speak coherent sentences involves far 
more than merely learning the rules of grammar.
The Relation with Episteme and Techne
For the Greeks and particularly for Plato, episteme and techne rep­
resented knowledge of an order completely different from metis.17 
Technical knowledge, or techne, could be expressed precisely and com­
prehensively in the form of hard-and-fast rules (not rules of thumb), 
principles, and propositions. At its most rigorous, techne is based on 
logical deduction from self-evident first principles. As an ideal type, it 
radically differs from metis in terms of how it is organized, how it is 
codified and taught, how it is modified, and the analytical precision it 
exhibits.

320 THE MISSING LINK
Where metis is contextual and particular, techne is universal. In the 
logic of mathematics, ten multiplied by ten equals one hundred every­
where and forever; in Euclidean geometry, a right angle represents 
ninety degrees of a circle; in the conventions of physics, the freezing 
point of water is always zero degrees centigrade.18 Techne is settled 
knowledge; Aristotle wrote that techne "came into being when from 
many notions gained from experience, a universal judgement about a 
group of similar things arises.”19 The universality of techne arises from 
the fact that it is organized analytically into small, explicit, logical steps 
and is both decomposable and verifiable. This universality means that 
knowledge in the form of techne can be taught more or less completely 
as a formal discipline. The rules of techne provide for theoretical knowl­
edge that may or may not have practical applications. Finally, techne is 
characterized by impersonal, often quantitative precision and a concern 
with explanation and verification, whereas metis is concerned with per­
sonal skill, or “touch," and practical results.
If the description of techne as an ideal or typical system of knowl­
edge resembles the self-image of modern science, that is no accident. 
The actual practice of science, however, is something else again.20 The 
rules of techne are the specification of how knowledge is to be codi­
fied, expressed, and verified, once it has been discovered. No rules of 
techne or episteme can explain scientific invention and insight. Dis­
covering a mathematical theorem requires genius and perhaps metis; 
the proof of the theorem, however, must follow the tenets of techne.21 
Thus the systematic and impersonal rules of techne facilitate the pro­
duction of knowledge that can be readily assembled, comprehensively 
documented, and formally taught, but they cannot by themselves add to 
that knowledge or explain how it came into being.22
Techne is characteristic, above all, of self-contained systems of rea­
soning in which the findings may be logically derived from the initial 
assumptions. To the degree that the form of knowledge satisfies these 
conditions, to that degree is it impersonal, universal, and completely im­
pervious to context. But the context of metis, as Detienne and Vernant 
emphasize, is characteristically “situations which are transient, shift­
ing, disconcerting and ambiguous, situations which do not lend them­
selves to precise measurement, exact calculation, or rigorous logic.”23 
Nussbaum shows convincingly how Plato attempted, especially in the 
Republic, to transform the realm of love—a realm that almost by defi­
nition is one of contingency, desire, and impulse—into a realm of 
techne or episteme.24 Plato regarded mundane love as subject to the 
lower appetites, and he hoped to purge it of these base instincts so that 
it could more closely resemble the philosopher’s pure search for truth.

Practical Knowledge 321
The superiority of pure reasoning, especially scientific and mathe­
matical logic, lay in the fact that it was “pure of pain, maximally sta­
ble, and directed at the truth.” The objects of such reasoning “are eter­
nally what they are regardless of what human beings do and say.”25 
What one loved, or should love, Plato claimed, was not the beloved him­
self but rather the pure forms of unalloyed beauty reflected in the 
beloved.26 Only in this way could love remain straight and rational, free 
of the appetites.
The spheres of human endeavor that are freest of contingency, 
guesswork, context, desire, and personal experience—and thus free of 
metis—hence came to be perceived as man’s highest pursuits. They are 
the philosopher’s work. One can see why, on the strength of such cri­
teria, Euclidean geometry, mathematics, some self-contained forms of 
analytical philosophy, and perhaps music are considered to be among 
the purest of pursuits.27 Unlike the natural sciences and concrete ex­
periments, these disciplines exist as realms of pure thought, untouched 
by the contingencies of the material world. They begin in the mind or 
on a blank sheet of paper. The Pythagorean theorem, a2 + b2 = c2, is 
true for all right triangles everywhere and forever.
A recurrent theme of Western philosophy and science, including so­
cial science, has been the attempt to reformulate systems of knowledge 
in order to bracket uncertainty and thereby permit the kind of logical 
deductive rigor possessed by Euclidean geometry.28 In the natural sci­
ences, the results have been revolutionary. Where philosophy and the 
human sciences are concerned, the efforts have been just as persistent 
but the results far more ambiguous. Descartes’s famous episteme "I 
think, therefore I am" mimicked the first step in a mathematical proof 
and was an “answer to the disorder that threatened to undo society.”29 
The aim of Jeremy Bentham and the utilitarians was, through their 
calculus of pleasure and pain (hedonism), to reduce the study of ethics 
to a pure natural science, to an examination of "every circumstance by 
which an individual can be influenced, being remarked and invento­
ried, nothing . .. left to chance, caprice, or unguided discretion, every­
thing being surveyed and set down in dimension, number, weight, and 
measure.”30
Even chance (tuche) itself, which techne was designed to master, 
was eventually, thanks to statistics and probability theory, transformed 
into a singular fact that might enter the formulas of techne. Risk, pro­
viding it could be assigned a known probability, became a fact like any 
other, whereas uncertainty (where the underlying probabilities are not 
known) still lay outside techne's reach.31 The intellectual "career” of 
risk and uncertainty is indicative of many fields of inquiry in which the

322 THE MISSING LINK
realm of analysis was reformulated and narrowed to exclude elements 
that could not be quantified and measured but could only be judged. 
Better put, techniques were devised to isolate and domesticate those 
aspects of key variables that might be expressed in numbers (a nation’s 
wealth by gross national product, public opinion by poll numbers, val­
ues by psychological inventories). Neoclassical economics, for exam­
ple, has undergone a transformation along these lines. Consumer pref­
erences are first taken as a given and then counted, in order to bracket 
taste as a major source of uncertainty. Invention and entrepreneurial ac­
tivity are treated as exogenous and cast outside the perimeter of the 
discipline as too intractable to submit to measurement and prediction.32 
The discipline has incorporated calculable risk while exiling those top­
ics where genuine uncertainty prevails (ecological dangers, shifts in 
taste).33 As Stephen Marglin shows, "the emphasis on self-interest, calcu­
lation, and maximization in economics" are classical examples of “self- 
evident postulates” and reflect “more an ideological commitment to the 
superiority of episteme than a serious attempt to unravel the complex­
ities and mysteries of human motivation and behavior.”34
The logic of such reformulations is analogous to the experimental 
practice and self-imposed boundaries of modern scientific agriculture. 
By constricting its field of inquiry, it gained enormously in precision 
and scientific power at the possible expense of irrelevance or unpleas­
ant surprises from beyond its artificial perimeters.35 Techne is most suit­
able to activities “that have a singular end or goal, an end that is speci­
fiable apart from the activity itself, and one susceptible to quantitative 
measurement.”36 Thus the problem most successfully addressed by sci­
entific agriculture is how to grow the largest number of bushels of a 
crop at the least cost per acre, as revealed through one-variable-at-a- 
time trials conducted on experimental plots. Issues of farming life and 
community, family needs, long-term soil structure, ecological diversity, 
and sustainability are either difficult to incorporate or excluded alto­
gether. Formulas of efficiency, production functions, and rational ac­
tion are specifiable only when the ends sought are simple, sharply 
defined, and hence measurable.
The problem, as Aristotle recognized, is that certain practical choices 
cannot, “even in principle, be adequately and completely captured in a 
system of universal rules.”37 He singled out navigation and medicine as 
two activities in which the practical wisdom of long experience is in­
dispensable to superior performance. They were metis-laden activities 
in which responsiveness, improvisation, and skillful, successive approx­
imations were required. If Plato can be credited, Socrates deliberately 
refrained from writing down his teachings, because he believed that the

Practical Knowledge 323
activity of philosophy belonged more to metis than to episteme or 
techne. A written text, even if it takes the form of a philosophical dia­
logue, is a cut-and-dried set of codified rules. An oral dialogue, by 
contrast, is alive and responsive to the mutuality of the participants, 
reaching a destination that cannot be specified in advance. Socrates 
evidently believed that the interaction between teacher and students 
that we now call the Socratic method, and not the resulting text, is 
philosophy.38
Practical Knowledge Versus Scientific Explanation
Only by grasping the potential achievement and range of metis is it 
possible to appreciate the valuable knowledge that high-modernist 
schemes deprive themselves of when they simply impose their plans. 
One major reason why metis is denigrated, particularly in the hege­
monic imperium of scientific knowledge, is that its “findings” are prac­
tical, opportune, and contextual rather than integrated into the gen­
eral conventions of scientific discourse.
We have seen the idiosyncracies of metis at work in the historical 
vernaculars of measurement of area, weight, and volume. The aim was 
always to achieve a local purpose or to express an important local fea­
ture (such as "a farm of two cows”) rather than to accommodate some 
universal unit of measurement. Like Squanto’s maxim, such vernacu­
lar measures apparently often conveyed more information than an ab­
stract measure could. They certainly conveyed information that was 
more locally relevant. It was just this local, practical index, which var­
ied from place to place, that ensured that metis would be confusing, in­
coherent, and unassimilable for purposes of statecraft.
The classification of flora follows much the same logic among in­
digenous people. What matters is local use and value. Thus the categor­
ies into which various plants are sorted follow a logic of practical use: 
good for making soup, good for making twine, helpful in healing cuts, 
effective for settling an upset stomach, poisonous for cattle, useful for 
weaving our cloth, favored by rabbits as food, good for making fences, 
and so on. This knowledge is never static, however; it is constantly being 
expanded through practical experimentation. And the categories into 
which floral reality is divided are clearly not the occasionally invisible 
Linnaean botanical categories favored by scientific researchers.39
The litmus test for metis is practical success. Did the navigator make 
the trip safely? Did Odysseus’s stratagems outwit the Cyclops? Did the 
poultice cure the boil? Was the farmer’s harvest abundant? If a tech­
nique works effectively and repeatedly for the purpose intended, the

324 THE MISSING LINK
practitioners of metis do not pause long to ask why and how it worked, 
to define the precise mechanism of cause and effect. Their intent is not 
to contribute to a wider body of knowledge but to solve the concrete 
problems they face. This does not mean that the practitioners of metis 
do not invent new solutions. They most decidedly do. Until quite re­
cently virtually all the improvements in agriculture have come from the 
field rather than from industry or science. What it does mean, however, 
is that the innovations of metis will typically represent a recombination 
{bricolage, to use Levi-Strauss’s term)40 of existing elements; farmers did 
not invent the tractor to solve their problems of traction power.41 By the 
same token, the bricolage of practical knowledge has often produced 
complex techniques—such as polycropping and soil-building strate­
gies—that work admirably but that science has not (yet?) understood.
The power of practical knowledge depends on an exceptionally 
close and astute observation of the environment. It should by now be 
rather obvious why traditional cultivators like Squanto are such con­
summate observers of their environment, but the reasons bear repeat­
ing in the context of a comparison with scientific knowledge. First, these 
cultivators have a vital, direct stake in the results of close observation. 
Unlike the research scientist or extension agent who does not have to 
take her own advice, the peasant is the immediate consumer of his 
own conclusions. Unlike the typical modern-day farmer, the peasant 
has no outside experts to rely on beyond his experienced neighbors; he 
must make decisions based on what he knows.
Second, the poverty or marginal economic status of many of these 
cultivators is itself, I would argue, a powerful impetus to careful obser­
vation and experimentation. Consider the hypothetical case of two 
fishermen, both of whom must make their living from a river. One 
fisherman lives by a river where the catch is stable and abundant. The 
other lives by a river where the catch is variable and sparse, affording 
only a bare and precarious subsistence. The poorer of the two will 
clearly have an immediate, life-and-death interest in devising new 
fishing techniques, in observing closely the habits of fish, in the careful 
siting of traps and weirs, in the timing and signs of seasonal runs of 
different species, and so forth.
Nor should we forget that the peasant cultivator or pastoralist lives 
year in and year out in the field of observation. He or she will likely 
know things that neither an absentee cultivator nor a research scientist 
would ever notice.42 Finally, as mentioned in the previous chapter, such 
a cultivator is always a member of a community that serves as a living, 
oral reference library for observations, practices, and experiments—a 
body of knowledge that an individual could never amass alone.

Practical Knowledge 325
The experimental temper of “prescientific” peoples, often impelled 
by mortal threats, resulted in many important, efficacious discoveries. 
South American Indians discovered that chewing the bark of the cin­
chona tree was an effective remedy for malaria, without knowing that 
its active ingredient was quinine or why it worked. Westerners knew 
that certain foods consumed in the early spring, such as rhubarb, could 
relieve the symptoms of wintertime scurvy, without knowing anything 
about Vitamin C. The mold from certain breads was used to stem infec­
tions long before the isolation of penicillin.43 According to Anil Gupta, 
roughly three-quarters of the modern pharmacopoeia are derivatives 
of traditionally known medicines.44 Even in the absence of remedies, 
people often knew what measures would lessen their chances of con­
tracting a dreaded contagious disease. The Londoners in Daniel Defoes 
Journal of the Plague Year knew that moving to the country or, failing 
that, sealing oneself up in one’s rooms vastly improved one’s chances of 
surviving the bubonic plague of 1665.45 Knowing, as we now do, that 
the vectors of the plague were the fleas carried by rats, we can appre­
ciate why these strategies often worked, but Defoe’s contemporaries hit 
on these effective solutions even though they thought that the plague 
was caused by vapors.
A most striking illustration of practice preceding science is the 
widespread use of variolation to check the spread of smallpox long be­
fore Sir William Jenner's heralded development of vaccination in 1798. 
The story, which Frederique Apffel Marglin analyzes in impressive de­
tail, is valuable because it demonstrates how purely metis skills led to 
a form of inoculation that mimicked or presaged what is justifiably 
seen as a great milestone in scientific medicine.46 Let me make it clear 
that the last thing I intend here is a defense of traditional medicine vis- 
a-vis modern medical research and experimental method.47 What this 
account does highlight, however, is how frequently local knowledge, 
trial and error, or what we might more generously call the stochastic 
method have produced practical solutions without benefit of scientific 
method.
By at least the sixteenth century, the technique of variolation was 
widely practiced in India, the Middle East, Europe, and China. The 
practice consisted of using human smallpox matter, scratched into the 
skin or inhaled, which gave the recipient a mild, rarely fatal case of 
smallpox. "Fresh” smallpox matter—from the pustules or scabs of 
someone with an active infection contracted in the usual way—was 
never used. The inoculation was typically made with attenuated matter 
saved from those who had had mild cases during last year’s epidemic 
or with matter taken from the pustules of those who had been inocu­

326 THE MISSING LINK
lated the previous year. Dosage could be regulated according to the 
size and age of the patient.
The principle behind variolation, the same principle that forms the 
basis of homeopathy, reflected a much older practice. Inoculation in 
one form or another was widely practiced well before the rise of mod­
ern medicine. In India, variolation was carried out by ritual specialists 
and was thoroughly integrated with the worship of the goddess 
Sithala.48 In other societies, its cultural setting was no doubt different, 
although the actual procedures were remarkably parallel.
Jenner’s discovery of vaccination using cowpox matter was there­
fore not entirely novel. A young girl had told him that she was pro­
tected against smallpox because she had already had cowpox. Jenner, 
following this lead, inoculated his own children with cowpox matter 
and observed that they showed no reaction to a subsequent smallpox 
vaccination. Vaccination was, of course, a great advance over variola­
tion. Because it used live smallpox matter, variolation induced a mild 
but active case that was contagious, and 1 to 3 percent of those so 
treated died from the treatment, a ratio that nonetheless compared fa­
vorably with the one or two in six who perished in an epidemic. Jen­
ner’s technique used killed virus, thus avoiding contagion, and his vac­
cination had a remarkably low iatrogenic rate: only one in a thousand 
died of the vaccination itself. His achievement is rightly celebrated, 
but it is important to recognize that “Jennerian vaccination was not 
an abrupt break with the past, but the direct descendant and heir of 
inoculation.”49
Variolation, though hardly to be preferred to vaccination, was an 
impressive accomplishment of practical prescientific medicine. The 
principle of inoculation had long been grasped, and, one imagines, a 
great many practitioners in affected communities were trying to de­
velop a successful technique. Once the efficacy of a new treatment was 
established, the news must have traveled faster than any epidemic and 
quickly displaced less successful preventative measures. There is no 
magic here. The ingredients of such practical knowledge are simple: a 
pressing need (in this case, a matter literally of life and death), a few 
promising leads that worked in analogous contexts (inoculation), a 
vast army of freelance experimenters willing to try almost anything,50 
time to “simmer" (as the experimenters and their clients observed the 
results of various stratagems through successive epidemics), and the 
sharing (through chains of communication) of the experimental re­
sults. As long as it didn't require an electron microscope, it would in 
fact be surprising if such a combination of passionate interest, close 
observation, large numbers of amateur specialists trying different pos­

Practical Knowledge 327
sibilities, and the time necessary for trial and error did not produce 
many novel solutions to practical problems. The variolators before 
Jenner were not unlike the polycropping cultivators described by Paul 
Richards. They had devised, not just stumbled upon, something that 
worked, without quite knowing exactly why it worked. While this in­
creased their risk of drawing false inferences from what they saw, it 
did not diminish the practical achievements of their bricolage.
Metis, with the premium it places on practical knowledge, experi­
ence, and stochastic reasoning, is of course not merely the now-super­
seded precursor of scientific knowledge. It is the mode of reasoning 
most appropriate to complex material and social tasks where the un­
certainties are so daunting that we must trust our (experienced) intu­
ition and feel our way. Albert Howard’s description of water manage­
ment in Japan offers an instructive example: "Erosion control in Japan 
is like a game of chess. The forest engineer, after studying his eroding 
valley, makes his first move, locating and building one or more check 
dams. He waits to see what Nature’s response is. This determines the 
forest engineer’s next move, which may be another dam or two, an in­
crease in the former dam, or the construction of side retaining walls. 
Another pause for observation, the next move is made, and so on, until 
erosion is checkmated. The operations of natural forces, such as sedi­
mentation and re-vegetation, are guided and used to the best advan­
tage to keep down costs and to obtain practical results. No more is at­
tempted than Nature has already done in the region."51 The engineer in 
Howard’s account recognizes implicitly that he is dealing with “an art 
of one valley.” Each prudent, small step, based on prior experience, 
yields new and not completely predictable effects that become the point 
of departure for the next step. Virtually any complex task involving 
many variables whose values and interactions cannot be accurately 
forecast belongs to this genre: building a house, repairing a car, per­
fecting a new jet engine, surgically repairing a knee, or farming a plot 
of land.52 Where the interactions involve not just the material environ­
ment but social interaction as well—building and peopling new vil­
lages or cities, organizing a revolutionary seizure of power, or collec­
tivizing agriculture—the mind boggles at the multitude of interactions 
and uncertainties (as distinct from calculable risks).
More than thirty-five years ago, in recognition of the refractory 
complexity of ambitious social policy, Charles Lindblom coined the 
memorable expression "the science of muddling through.”53 The phrase 
was meant to capture the spirit of a practical approach to large-scale 
policy problems that could not be completely understood, let alone 
comprehensively addressed. Models of public administration, Lind-

328 THE MISSING LINK
blom complained, implicitly assumed a synoptic mastery of a policy 
initiative, when in practice, knowledge was both limited and frag­
mentary, and means could never be neatly separated from goals. His 
characterization of actual policy practice emphasized a piecemeal ap­
proach of limited comparisons, a sequence of trials and errors fol­
lowed by revised trials, reliance on past experience, and "disjointed in- 
crementalism.”54 Albert Hirschman has made the same point, rather 
more metaphorically, by comparing social policy to house building: 
“The architect of social change can never have a reliable blueprint. 
Not only is each house he builds different from any other that was built 
before, but it necessarily uses new construction materials and even ex­
periments with untested principles of stress and structure. Therefore 
what can be most usefully conveyed by the builders of one house is an 
understanding of the experience that made it at all possible to build 
under these trying circumstances.”55
Taken together, Lindblom’s and Hirschman’s positions amount to a 
well-reasoned strategic retreat from the ambition to comprehensive, 
rational planning. If we can make allowances for the social-science 
jargon, the concepts behind such terms as “bounded rationality” (rather 
than “synoptic mastery”) and "satisficing” (rather than "maximizing”), 
terms invented to describe a world working by educated guesswork 
and rules of thumb, sound very much like metis.
Learning Beyond the Book
A step-by-step "muddling through" approach would seem to be the 
only prudent course in a field like erosion management or public pol­
icy implementation, where surprises are all but guaranteed. The fact 
that in these cases the level of uncertainty and hence of potential dis­
aster can be reduced by breaking down the process into more man­
ageable steps does not imply that any novice could then take charge. 
On the contrary, only someone with wide experience will be able to in­
terpret the results of and reactions to an initial step in order to deter­
mine the next step. One would want hydrologists and policy managers 
who had been surprised many times and have had many successes be­
hind them. Their repertoire of responses would be larger, their judg­
ment in reading the environment surer, their sense of what surprises 
might await them more accurate. Once again, some of their compe­
tence could be interpreted and taught, but much of it would remain 
implicit—a sixth sense that comes with long practice. At the risk of try­
ing to pinpoint the ineffable, I want to suggest how important such 
knowledge is and how difficult it is to translate it into codified form.56

Practical Knowledge 329
Metis knowledge is often so implicit and automatic that its bearer is 
at a loss to explain it.57 A staple of early medical training, I have been 
told, is the story of a physician who, at the turn of the century, had a 
spectacularly high success rate in diagnosing syphilis in its early stages. 
Laboratory tests confirmed his diagnoses, but he himself did not know 
precisely what it was that he detected in the physical exams that led 
him to his conclusions. Intrigued by his success, hospital administrators 
asked two other doctors to closely observe his examination of patients 
over several weeks and to see if they could spot what he was picking 
up. At long last, they and the doctor realized that he was unconsciously 
registering the patients’ slight eye tremor. The eye tremor then became 
a universally recognized symptom of syphilis. Although this insight 
could be codified, what is instructive here is that it could have been 
achieved only through close observation and long clinical experience 
and that, even before then, it could have been known subliminally.
Any experienced practitioner of a skill or craft will develop a large 
repertoire of moves, visual judgments, a sense of touch, or a discrimi­
nating gestalt for assessing the work as well as a range of accurate in­
tuitions born of experience that defy being communicated apart from 
practice. A few brief examples will help to convey the subtlety and nu­
ance of this knowledge. In Indonesia, older Bugis sea captains, sound 
asleep below decks, will awaken the moment there is a change in di­
rection, weather, current, or some combination of the three. As the 
ocean’s waves change amplitude or begin striking the ship from a dif­
ferent direction, a captain immediately senses the change through the 
resulting slight alterations in the roll and pitch of the ship.
In the days when a case of diphtheria in town was still an occasion 
for quarantining the patient at home, a doctor was taking a young med­
ical student along with him on his rounds. When they had been admit­
ted to the front hall of a quarantined house but before they had seen 
the patient, the older man paused and said, “Stop. Smell the odor! 
Never forget this smell; this is the smell of a house with diphtheria."58 
Another doctor once told me that, after seeing thousands of infants at a 
busy clinic, he believed that he could tell with a high degree of accu­
racy, just by looking, whether an infant was seriously ill and needed im­
mediate attention. He couldn’t quite put his finger on the exact visual 
cue that informed his judgment, but he supposed that it was some 
combination of complexion, the expression of the eyes, body tone, and 
animation. Albert Howard once again makes a persuasive case for the 
“practiced eye": “An experienced farmer can tell the health of the soil 
and the quality of the humus by the plants—their vigor, their growth, 
the profuse roots, the ‘glow’ of health. . . . The same is true for the

330 THE MISSING LINK
health of animals on good land.” Indeed, he continues, “it is not neces­
sary to weigh or measure them. A glance on the part of the successful 
grazier, or a butcher accustomed to deal with high class animals, is 
sufficient to tell him whether all is well or whether there is something 
wrong with the soil or the management of the animals, or both.”59
What is the status of such insight or intuition? We might call these 
skills the "tricks of the trade” (in the nondeceptive sense) that most 
“crafty" practitioners acquire.60 Notice that virtually all the experienced 
judgments described in these anecdotes could be verified by tests and 
measurements. Diphtheria can be detected in the laboratory, a child’s 
anemia can be verified by blood tests, and the Bugis sea captain can go 
on deck to confirm the shift in the wind. It is doubtless reassuring to 
those who have both the intuition and access to formal measurement 
to know that their judgment can be checked. But the epistemic alter­
native to metis is far slower, more laborious, more capital intensive, 
and not always decisive. When rapid judgments of high (not perfect) 
accuracy are called for, when it is important to interpret early signs that 
things are going well or poorly, then there is no substitute for metis. In 
the case of the experienced doctor, in fact, it is metis that informs a de­
cision about whether tests are needed and, if so, which tests.
Even the part of metis that can be conveyed by rules of thumb is the 
codification of practical experience. The boiling down of maple sap 
into syrup is a tricky business. If one goes too far, the sap will boil over. 
The stopping point can be determined by a thermometer or by a hy­
drometer (which indicates specific gravity). But those with experience 
look for the mass of small bubbles that forms on the surface of the sap 
just before it begins to boil over—a visual rule of thumb that is far eas­
ier to use. Achieving the insight, however, requires that, at least once, 
the syrup maker make a mistake and go too far. Chinese recipes, it has 
always amused me, often contain the following instruction: "Heat the 
oil until it is almost smoking.” The recipes assume that the cook has 
made enough mistakes to know what oil looks like just before it begins 
smoking. The rule of thumb for maple syrup and for oil are, by defini­
tion, the rules of experience.
Those who do not have access to scientific methods and laboratory 
verification have often relied on metis to develop rich knowledge sys­
tems that are remarkably accurate. Traditional navigation skills before 
the eras of sextants, magnetic compasses, charts, and sonar are a case 
in point. I refer again to the Bugis in this context, because their skills 
have been so brilliantly documented by Gene Ammarell.61 In the ab­
sence of formal tide tables, the Bugis have elaborated a thoroughly re­
liable scheme for forecasting rising and falling tides, the direction of

Practical Knowledge 331
currents, and the relative strength of tides— all of which are vitally 
important to their sailing plans and safety.62 Calculating on the basis 
of time of day, the number of days into the lunar cycle, and the mon­
soon season, the Bugis captain holds in his head a system that provides 
all the accurate information he needs about tides. From an astrono­
mer’s perspective, it seems odd that the scheme makes no reference to 
the angle of declination of the moon. But since the monsoon is directly 
related to the declination of the moon, it serves effectively as a proxy. 
The cognitive map of the Bugis captain can be reconstructed in writ­
ten form, as Ammarell has done, for illustrative purposes, but it was 
learned orally and by informal apprenticeship among the Bugis. 
Given the complexity of the phenomena it is meant to address, the sys­
tem for evaluating and predicting tides is elegantly simple and emi­
nently effective.
The Dynamism and Plasticity of Metis
The term "traditional," as in “traditional knowledge”—a term that I 
have carefully avoided—is a misnomer, sending all the wrong sig­
nals.63 In the mid-nineteenth century, explorers in West Africa stumbled 
upon groups growing maize, a New World grain, as their main staple. 
Although it was unlikely that the West Africans had been growing 
maize for longer than two generations, its cultivation was already sur­
rounded by elaborate rituals and myths about a maize goddess or 
spirit who had given them the first kernels. What was striking was both 
the alacrity with which they had adopted maize and the speed with 
which they had integrated it into their traditions.64 The apparent spread 
of variolation across four continents is a further instance of how widely 
and how rapidly "traditional peoples" will embrace techniques that 
solve vital problems. Examples could be multiplied. Sewing machines, 
matches, flashlights, kerosene, plastic bowls, and antibiotics are only a 
tiny sample of the products that solved vital problems or eliminated 
great drudgery and were thus readily accepted.65 Practical efficacy is, 
as we have noted, the key test of metis knowledge, and all these prod­
ucts passed with flying colors.
The point that I am making would hardly need emphasis or elabo­
rate illustration except for the fact that a certain understanding of sci­
ence, modernity, and development has so successfully structured the 
dominant discourse that all other kinds of knowledge are regarded as 
backward, static traditions, as old wives' tales and superstitions. High 
modernism has needed this “other," this dark twin, in order to rhetori­
cally present itself as the antidote to backwardness.66 The binary oppo­

332 THE MISSING LINK
sition also comes from a history of competition between the institutions 
and personnel that sprang up around these two forms of knowledge. 
Modern research institutions, agricultural experiment stations, sellers 
of fertilizer and machinery, high-modernist city planners, Third World 
developers, and World Bank officials have, to a considerable degree, 
made their successful institutional way in the world by the systematic 
denigration of the practical knowledge that we have called metis.
Their characterization could not, in this context, be further from the 
truth. Metis, far from being rigid and monolithic, is plastic, local, and 
divergent.67 It is in fact the idiosyncracies of metis, its contextualness, 
and its fragmentation that make it so permeable, so open to new ideas. 
Metis has no doctrine or centralized training; each practitioner has his 
or her own angle. In economic terms, the market for metis is often one 
of nearly perfect competition, and local monopolies are likely to be bro­
ken by innovation from below and outside. If a new technique works, 
it is likely to find a clientele.
In his defense of traditionalism against rationalism, Michael 
Oakeshott emphasizes the pragmatism of real, existing traditions: 
“The big mistake of the rationalist—though it is not inherent in the 
method—is to assume that ‘tradition,’ or what is better called ‘prac­
tical knowledge,’ is rigid, fixed and unchanging—in fact it is 'preem­
inently fluid.’ ”68 Tradition, in part because of its local variation, is pli­
able and dynamic. "No traditional way of behavior, no traditional skill 
ever remains fixed,” he says elsewhere. “Its history is one of continual 
change.”69 The changes are likely to be small and gradual (incremen- 
talism) rather than sudden and discontinuous.
It is worth emphasizing the degree to which oral cultures, as op­
posed to written cultures, may avoid the rigidity of orthodoxy. Because 
an oral culture has no textual reference point for marking deviations, 
its religious myths, rituals, and folklore are likely to drift. The tales and 
traditions currently in circulation vary with the speaker, the audience, 
and local needs. Having no yardstick like a sacred text to measure the 
degree of drift from its Ur-tradition, such a culture can change greatly 
over time and simultaneously think of itself as remaining faithful to 
tradition.70
Perhaps the best analogy for a society’s stock of metis is its lan­
guage. Yes, there are rules of thumb for expression: cliches, formulas 
of politeness, customs for swearing, and conventional conversations. 
But unless there is a central committee of grammarians with dracon­
ian police powers, the language is always being added to as new expres­
sions and novel combinations are invented and puns and irony un­
dermine old formulas. Under great pressure and rapid change, the

Practical Knowledge 333
language may change rather dramatically and new hybrids arise, but 
for the people who speak it, it remains recognizably their language. 
Influence over the direction of a language is never equally distributed, 
but innovation comes from far and wide, and if others find a particu­
lar innovation useful or apposite, they will adopt it as part of their lan­
guage. In language as in metis, seldom is the name of an innovator 
remembered, and this, too, helps to make the result a joint, mutual 
product.
The Social Context of Metis and Its Destruction
While doing fieldwork in a small village in Malaysia, I was constantly 
struck by the breadth of my neighbors' skills and their casual knowl­
edge of local ecology. One particular anecdote is representative. Grow­
ing in the compound of the house in which I lived was a locally famous 
mango tree. Relatives and acquaintances would visit when the fruit 
was ripe in the hope of being given a few fruits and, more important, 
the chance to save and plant the seeds next to their own house. Shortly 
before my arrival, however, the tree had become infested with large red 
ants, which destroyed most of the fruit before it could ripen. It seemed 
nothing could be done short of bagging each fruit. Several times I no­
ticed the elderly head of household, Mat Isa, bringing dried nipah palm 
fronds to the base of the mango tree and checking them. When I finally 
got around to asking what he was up to, he explained it to me, albeit 
reluctantly, as for him this was pretty humdrum stuff compared to our 
usual gossip. He knew that small black ants, which had a number of 
colonies at the rear of the compound, were the enemies of large red 
ants. He also knew that the thin, lancelike leaves of the nipah palm 
curled into long, tight tubes when they fell from the tree and died. (In 
fact, the local people used the tubes to roll their cigarettes.) Such tubes 
would also, he knew, be ideal places for the queens of the black ant 
colonies to lay their eggs. Over several weeks he placed dried nipah 
fronds in strategic places until he had masses of black-ant eggs begin­
ning to hatch. He then placed the egg-infested fronds against the 
mango tree and observed the ensuing week-long Armageddon. Several 
neighbors, many of them skeptical, and their children followed the for­
tunes of the ant war closely. Although smaller by half or more, the 
black ants finally had the weight of numbers to prevail against the red 
ants and gain possession of the ground at the base of the mango tree. 
As the black ants were not interested in the mango leaves or fruits 
while the fruits were still on the tree, the crop was saved.
This successful field experiment in biological controls presupposes

334 THE MISSING LINK
several kinds of knowledge: the habitat and diet of black ants, their 
egg-laying habits, a guess about what local material would substitute 
as movable egg chambers, and experience with the fighting proclivities 
of red and black ants. Mat Isa made it clear that such skill in practical 
entomology was quite widespread, at least among his older neighbors, 
and that people remembered something like this strategy having worked 
once or twice in the past. What is clear to me is that no agricultural ex­
tension official would have known the first thing about ants, let alone 
biological controls; most extension agents were raised in town and in 
any case were concerned entirely with rice, fertilizer, and loans. Nor 
would most of them think to ask; they were, after all, the experts, trained 
to instruct the peasant. It is hard to imagine this knowledge being cre­
ated and maintained except in the context of lifelong observation and a 
relatively stable, multigenerational community that routinely exchanges 
and preserves knowledge of this kind.
One purpose of this illustration is to alert us to the social conditions 
necessary for the reproduction of comparable practical knowledge. 
These social conditions, at a minimum, would seem to require a com­
munity of interest, accumulated information, and ongoing experimen­
tation. Occasionally there are formal institutions that seem almost per­
fectly tailored to the collection and exchange of practical information, 
such as the veillees of nineteenth-century France. The veillee, as its 
name implies, was a traditional pattern of gathering practiced by farm 
families during winter evenings, often in barns to take advantage of 
the warmth generated by the livestock and thus save on fuel. With no 
agenda save sociability and economy, the gatherings amounted to lo­
cal assemblies where opinions, stories, agricultural news, advice, gos­
sip, and religious or folk tales were exchanged while the participants 
shelled nuts or embroidered. Given the fact that each member there 
possessed a lifetime of interested observation and practice in which 
eveiy family paid for the consequences of its agricultural decisions, the 
veillee was an unheralded daily seminar on practical knowledge.
This brings us squarely to two of the great ironies of metis. The first 
is that metis is not democratically distributed. Not only does it depend 
on a touch or a knack that may not be common, but access to the ex­
perience and practice necessary for its acquisition may be restricted. 
Artisan guilds, gifted craftsmen, certain classes, religious fraternities, 
entire communities, and men in general often treat some forms of 
knowledge as a monopoly they are reluctant to share. Better stated, the 
availability of such knowledge to others depends greatly on the social 
structure of the society and the advantages that a monopoly in some 
forms of knowledge can confer.71 In this respect metis is not unitary,

Practical Knowledge 335
and we should perhaps speak of metises, recognizing its nonhomo­
geneity. The second irony is that, however plastic and receptive metis 
is, some forms of it seem to depend on key elements of preindustrial 
life for their elaboration and transmission. Communities that are mar­
ginal to markets and to the state are likely to retain a high degree of 
metis; they have no choice, as they have to rely disproportionately on 
the knowledge and materials at hand. If, while shopping at the local 
store or visiting at the farmers’ association, Mat Isa had found a cheap 
pesticide that would have finished off the red ants, I don't doubt that he 
would have used it.
Some forms of metis are disappearing every day.72 As physical mo­
bility, commodity markets, formal education, professional specializa­
tion, and mass media spread to even the most remote communities, 
the social conditions for the elaboration of metis are undermined. One 
could, with great justice, welcome a great many of these extinctions of 
local knowledge. Once matches become widely available, why would 
anyone want to know, except as a matter of idle curiosity, how to make 
fire with flint and tinder? Knowing how to scrub clothes on a wash­
board or on a stone in the river is undoubtedly an art, but one gladly 
abandoned by those who can afford a washing machine. Darning skills 
were similarly lost, without much nostalgia, when cheap, machine- 
made stockings came on the market. As the older Bugis seamen say, 
“These days, with charts and compasses, anyone can steer.’’73 And why 
not? The production of standardized knowledge has made certain 
skills more broadly—more democratically—available, as they are no 
longer the preserve of a guild that may refuse admission or insist on a 
long apprenticeship.74 Much of the world of metis that we have lost is 
the all but inevitable result of industrialization and the division of 
labor. And much of this loss was experienced as a liberation from toil 
and drudgery.
But it would be a serious error to believe that the destruction of 
metis was merely the inadvertent and necessary by-product of eco­
nomic progress. The destruction of metis and its replacement by stan­
dardized formulas legible only from the center is virtually inscribed in 
the activities of both the state and large-scale bureaucratic capitalism. 
As a "project," it is the object of constant initiatives which are never en­
tirely successful, for no forms of production or social life can be made 
to work by formulas alone—that is, without metis. The logic animating 
the project, however, is one of control and appropriation. Local knowl­
edge, because it is dispersed and relatively autonomous, is all but un- 
appropriable. The reduction or, more utopian still, the elimination of 
metis and the local control it entails are preconditions, in the case of

336 THE MISSING LINK
the state, of administrative order and fiscal appropriation and, in the 
case of the large capitalist firm, of worker discipline and profit.
The subordination of metis is fairly obvious in the development of 
mass production in the factory. A comparable de-skilling process is, I be­
lieve, more compelling and, given the intractable obstacles to complete 
standardization, ultimately less successful in agricultural production.
As Stephen Marglin’s early work has convincingly shown, capitalist 
profit requires not only efficiency but the combination of efficiency and 
control.75 The crucial innovations of the division of labor at the sub­
product level and the concentration of production in the factory repre­
sent the key steps in bringing the labor process under unitary control. 
Efficiency and control might coincide, as in the case of the mechanized 
spinning and weaving of cotton. At times, however, they might be un­
related or even contradictory. "Efficiency at best creates a potential 
profit,” notes Marglin. “Without control the capitalist cannot realize 
that profit. Thus organizational forms which enhance capitalist control 
may increase profits and find favor with capitalists even if they affect 
productivity and efficiency adversely. Conversely, more efficient ways 
of organizing production which reduce capitalist control may end up 
reducing profits and being rejected by capitalists.”76 The typical struc­
ture of artisanal production was often an impediment to efficiency. But 
it was nearly always an obstacle to capitalist profits. In the “putting- 
out” system in textiles that prevailed before factory organization, cot­
tage workers had control over the raw material, could set the pace of 
the work, and could increase their return by various stratagems that 
were difficult to monitor. The crucial advantage of the factory, from the 
boss's point of view, was that he could more directly fix the hours and 
the intensity of the work and control the raw materials.77 To the degree 
that efficient production could still be organized on an artisanal basis 
(such as early woolen manufacturing and silk ribbon weaving, accord­
ing to Marglin), to that degree was it difficult for the capitalist to ap­
propriate the profits of a dispersed craft population.
The genius of modern mass-production methods, Frederick Tay­
lor, saw the issue of destroying metis and turning a resistant, quasi- 
autonomous, artisan population into more suitable units, or “factory 
hands," with great clarity. “Under scientific management. . . the man­
agers assume . .. the burden of gathering together all of the traditional 
knowledge which in the past has been possessed by the workmen and 
then of classifying, tabulating, and reducing this knowledge to rules, 
laws, formulae. . . . Thus all of the planning which under the old sys­
tem was done by the workmen, must of necessity under the new sys­
tem be done by management in accordance with the law of science.’’78

Practical Knowledge 337
In the Taylorized factory, only the factory manager had the knowledge 
and command of the whole process, and the worker was reduced to 
the execution of a small, often minute, part of the overall process. The 
result was often remarkably efficient, as in the early Ford plants; it was 
always, however, a great boon to control and profit.79
The utopian dream of Taylorization—a factory in which every pair 
of hands was more or less reduced to automatic movements, on the 
model of programmed robots—was unrealizable. Not that it wasn't 
tried. David Noble has described the well-funded attempt to make ma­
chine tools through numerical controls because it promised “emanci­
pation from the human worker.”80 Its ultimate failure came precisely 
because the system had designed out metis—the practical adjust­
ments that an experienced worker would make to compensate for 
slight changes in material, temperatures, the wear on or irregularities 
in the machine, mechanical malfunction, and so forth. As one operator 
said, “Numerical controls are supposed to be like magic, but all you 
can do automatically is produce scrap."81 This conclusion could be gen­
eralized. In a brilliant ethnography of the work routines of machine op­
erators whose jobs appeared to have been thoroughly de-skilled, Ken 
Kusterer has shown how the workers nevertheless had to develop in­
dividual skills that were absolutely necessary to successful production 
but that could never be reduced to formulas a novice could immedi­
ately use. One machine operator, whose job was classified as “unskilled,” 
drew an analogy between performing his job and driving a car: “Cars 
are basically the same but every car is different.... At first when you’re 
learning, you just learn rules about driving. But as you get to know 
how to drive, you get a feel for the car you're driving—you know, 
things like how it feels at different speeds, how well the brakes work, 
when it's going to overheat, how to start it when it’s cold. . . . Then if 
you think about old cars like these machines, been running three shifts 
for twenty years, some of them, like maybe you’ve got a car with no 
horn, that wants to turn right when you hit the brake, that don’t start 
right unless you pump the gas in a certain way—then maybe you see 
what it's like trying to run these old machines they've got down here.”82
Taylorization has its analogue in agricultural production as well, an 
analogue with a far longer and more variegated history. In agriculture, 
as in manufacturing, the mere efficiency of a form of production is not 
sufficient to ensure the appropriation of taxes or profits. Independent 
smallholder agriculture may, as we have noted, be the most efficient 
way to grow many crops. But such forms of agriculture, although they 
may present possibilities for taxation and profit when their products 
are bulked, processed, and sold, are relatively illegible and hard to

338 THE MISSING LINK
control. As is the case with autonomous artisans and petit-bourgeois 
shopkeepers, monitoring the commercial fortunes of small-fry farms is 
an administrative nightmare. The possibilities for evasion and resis­
tance are numerous, and the cost of procuring accurate, annual data is 
high, if not prohibitive.83
A state mainly concerned with appropriation and control will find 
sedentary agriculture preferable to pastoralism or shifting agriculture. 
For the same reasons, such a state would generally prefer largeholding 
to smallholding and, in turn, plantation or collective agriculture to both. 
Where control and appropriation are the overriding considerations, 
only the last two forms offer direct control over the workforce and its 
income, the opportunity to select cropping patterns and techniques, 
and, finally, direct control over the production and profit of the enter­
prise. Although collectivization and plantation agriculture are seldom 
very efficient, they represent, as we have seen, the most legible and 
hence appropriable forms of agriculture.
The large capitalist agricultural producer faces the same problem 
as the factory owner: how to transform the essentially artisanal or 
metis knowledge of farmers into a standardized system that will allow 
him greater control over the work and its intensity. The plantation 
was one solution. In colonial countries, where able-bodied men were 
pressed into service as gang labor, the plantation represented a kind 
of private collectivization, inasmuch as it relied on the state for the ex- 
tramarket sanctions necessary to control its labor force. More than 
one plantation sector has made up what it lacked in efficiency by using 
its political clout to secure subsidies, price supports, and monopoly 
privileges.
The control made possible by the plantation, not to mention the col­
lective farm, has proved, with few exceptions, to entail such high costs 
in supervision, rigidity, and overhead as to be inefficient. Now that 
plantation agriculture has been discredited, some of the newer alter­
natives devised to replicate its control and standardization are in­
structive, as they indicate the functional similarity that may lie behind 
different forms.84 The invention of contract farming worldwide is just 
one noteworthy example.85 When chicken farmers realized that huge, 
centralized operations for raising fryers not only were inefficient but 
posed serious disease and environmental problems, they devised a 
kind of high-tech putting-out system.86 The large firm contracts with a 
farmer to supply him with chicks and then to buy back (after six weeks 
or so) a certain number of chickens meeting their standards. The farmer, 
for his part, is obliged to construct and pay for a building that meets 
corporate specifications and to feed, water, and medicate the chickens

Practical Knowledge 339
with rations supplied by the corporation and according to their precise 
timetable. An inspector frequently verifies compliance. For the corpo­
ration, the advantages are enormous: it risks no capital except what is 
invested in the birds; it needs no land of its own; its management ex­
penses are small; it achieves uniform product standards; and, not least, 
it can fail to renew a contract or change the price paid after each 
round at no cost to itself.
The logic, although not the form, is the same as on the plantation. 
Given its national or international market, what the corporation re­
quires is absolute, guaranteed uniformity of product and a stable sup­
ply.87 The need to administer the production of uniform fryers in many 
different localities requires an optic of standardization and aggrega­
tion. As we saw in the case of scientific forestry, this is not merely a 
question of inventing measures that accurately reflect the facts on the 
ground and that can be conveyed to administrators. It is, above all, a 
question of changing the environment so that it is more standardized to 
begin with. Only the standardized breeding, the building constructed to 
specifications, the fixed formula for feed, and the mandatory feeding 
schedule—all disciplined by the contract—make it possible for a sin­
gle specialist to inspect one hundred poultry farms raising fryers for, 
say, Kentucky Fried Chicken, and to ensure that the variation is mini­
mal. One can visualize his handy checklist. The purpose of contract 
farming is not to understand farms and adapt to them; rather, it is to 
transform farms and farm labor at the outset so that they fit the grid of 
the contract.
For farmers who sign up, as long as the contracts are rolled over, 
there are profits to be made, although at considerable risk. The con­
tracts are short term, the work schedules detailed, and the set-up and 
supplies mandatory. The contract farmers are in theory small-business 
entrepreneurs, but aside from the fact that they risk their land and build­
ings, they have not much more control over their working day than do 
assembly-line workers.
The Case Against Imperial Knowledge
They said . . . that he was so devoted to Pure Science . . . that he would rather
have people die by the right therapy than be cured by the wrong.
— Sinclair Lewis, Arrowsmith
The argument that I have been venturing is not a case against high 
modernism or state simplifications per se or, to be sure, against epis- 
temic knowledge per se. Our ideas about citizenship, public-health pro­

340 THE MISSING LINK
grams, social security, transportation, communication, universal pub­
lic education, and equality before the law are all powerfully influenced 
by state-created, high-modernist simplifications. I will go further and 
say that the initial land reforms in Bolshevik Russia and in postrevo- 
lutionaiy China were state-abetted simplifications that effectively en­
franchised millions who had lived in virtual serfdom. Epistemic knowl­
edge, though never separate in its practice from metis, has provided us 
with a knowledge of the world that, for all its darker aspects, few of us 
would want to surrender.
What has proved to be truly dangerous to us and to our environ­
ment, I think, is the combination of the universalist pretensions of epis­
temic knowledge and authoritarian social engineering. Such a combina­
tion has been at work in city planning, in Lenin's view of revolution 
(but not his practice), in collectivization in the Soviet Union, and in vil­
lagization in Tanzania. The combination is implicit in the logic of sci­
entific agriculture and explicit in its colonial practice. When schemes 
like these come close to achieving their impossible dreams of ignoring 
or suppressing metis and local variation, they all but guarantee their 
own practical failure.
Universalist claims seem inherent in the way in which rationalist 
knowledge is pursued. Although I am no philosopher of knowledge, 
there seems to be no door in this epistemic edifice through which metis 
or practical knowledge could enter on its own terms. It is this imperi­
alism that is troubling. As Pascal wrote, the great failure of rationalism 
is “not its recognition of technical knowledge, but its failure to recog­
nize any other.”88 By contrast, metis does not put all its eggs in one bas­
ket; it makes no claim to universality and in this sense is pluralistic. Of 
course, certain structural conditions can thwart this imperialism of epi­
stemic claims. Democratic and commercial pressures sometimes oblige 
agricultural scientists to premise their work on practical problems as 
defined by farmers. During the Meiji Restoration, three-person techni­
cal teams began by investigating farmers’ innovations and then taking 
them back to the laboratory to perfect them. The construction workers 
who refused to leave Brasilia as planned or the disillusioned ujamaa 
villagers who fled from their settlements to some degree undid the 
plans made for them. Such resistance, however, comes from outside the 
paradigm of epistemic knowledge itself. When someone like Albert 
Howard, himself a meticulous scientist, recognizes the "art" of farm­
ing and the nonquantifiable ways of knowing, he steps outside the 
realm of codified, scientific knowledge.
Authoritarian high-modernist states in the grip of a self-evident 
(and usually half-baked) social theory have done irreparable damage

Practical Knowledge 341
to human communities and individual livelihoods. The danger was 
compounded when leaders came to believe, as Mao said, that the peo­
ple were a “blank piece of paper" on which the new regime could write. 
The utopian industrialist Robert Owen had the same vision for the fac­
tory town New Lanark, although on a civic rather than national level: 
"Each generation, indeed each administration, shall see unrolled before 
it the blank sheet of infinite possibility, and if by chance this tabula 
rasa had been defaced by the irrational scribblings of tradition-ridden 
ancestors, then the first task of the rationalist must be to scrub it 
clean.”89
What conservatives like Oakeshott miss, I think, is that high mod­
ernism has a natural appeal for an intelligentsia and a people who may 
have ample reason to hold the past in contempt.90 Late colonial mod­
ernizers sometimes wielded their power ruthlessly in transforming a 
population that they took to be backward and greatly in need of in­
struction. Revolutionaries have had every reason to despise the feudal, 
poverty-stricken, inegalitarian past that they hoped to banish forever, 
and sometimes they have also had a reason to suspect that immediate 
democracy would simply bring back the old order. Postindependence 
leaders in the nonindustrial world (occasionally revolutionary leaders 
themselves) could not be faulted for hating their past of colonial dom­
ination and economic stagnation, nor could they be faulted for wasting 
no time or democratic sentimentality on creating a people that they 
could be proud of. Understanding the history and logic of their com­
mitment to high-modernist goals, however, does not permit us to over­
look the enormous damage that their convictions entailed when com­
bined with authoritarian state power.

10 Conclusion
They would reconstruct society on an imaginary plan, much like the astron­
omers for their own calculation would make over the system of the universe. 
— Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, on the utopian socialists
Yet a man who uses an imaginary map, thinking that it is a true one, is likely 
to be worse off than someone with no map at all; for he will fail to inquire 
whenever he can, to observe every detail on his way, and to search continu­
ously with all his senses and all his intelligence for indications of where he 
should go.
— E. F. Schumacher, Small Is Beautiful
The great high-modernist episodes that we have examined qualify as 
tragedies in at least two respects. First, the visionary intellectuals and 
planners behind them were guilty of hubris, of forgetting that they 
were mortals and acting as if they were gods. Second, their actions, far 
from being cynical grabs for power and wealth, were animated by a 
genuine desire to improve the human condition—a desire with a fatal 
flaw. That these tragedies could be so intimately associated with opti­
mistic views of progress and rational order is in itself a reason for a 
searching diagnosis. Another reason lies in the completely ecumenical 
character of the high-modernist faith. We encounter it in various guises 
in colonial development schemes, planned urban centers in both the 
East and the West, collectivized farms, the large development plans of 
the World Bank, the resettlement of nomadic populations, and the man­
agement of workers on factory floors.
If such schemes have typically taken their most destructive human 
and natural toll in the states of the former socialist bloc and in revo­
lutionary Third World settings, that is surely because there authori­
tarian state power, unimpeded by representative institutions, could 
nullify resistance and push ahead. The ideas behind them, however, on 
which their legitimacy and appeal depended, were thoroughly West­
ern. Order and harmony that once seemed the function of a unitary 
God had been replaced by a similar faith in the idea of progress vouch­
safed by scientists, engineers, and planners. Their power, it is worth re­
membering, was least contested at those moments when other forms 
of coordination had failed or seemed utterly inadequate to the great
342

Conclusion 343
tasks at hand: in times of war, revolution, economic collapse, or newly 
\von independence. The plans that they hatched bore a family resem­
blance to the schemes of legibility and standardization devised by the 
absolutist kings of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. What was 
wholly new, however, was the magnitude of both the plans for the 
wholesale transformation of society and the instruments of statecraft 
—censuses, cadastral maps, identity cards, statistical bureaus, schools, 
mass media, internal security apparatuses—that could take them far­
ther along this road than any seventeenth-century monarch would 
have dreamed. Thus it has happened that so many of the twentieth cen­
tury’s political tragedies have flown the banner of progress, emancipa­
tion, and reform.
We have examined in considerable detail how these schemes have 
failed their intended beneficiaries. If I were asked to condense the rea­
sons behind these failures into a single sentence, I would say that the 
progenitors of such plans regarded themselves as far smarter and 
farseeing than they really were and, at the same time, regarded their 
subjects as far more stupid and incompetent than they really were. The 
remainder of this chapter is devoted to expanding on this cursory judg­
ment and advancing a few modest lessons.
"It’s Ignorance, Stupid!"
The mistake of our ancestors was to think that they were “the last number,” but
since numbers are infinite, they could not be the last number.
— Eugene Zamiatin, We
The maxim that serves as the heading for this section is not simply 
suitable for bumper stickers mimicking the insider slogan of Bill Clin­
ton’s 1992 presidential campaign, “It’s the economy, stupid!” It is meant 
to call attention to how routinely planners ignore the radical con­
tingency of the future. How rare it is to encounter advice about the fu­
ture which begins from a premise of incomplete knowledge. One small 
exception—a circular on nutrition published by the health clinic at 
Yale University, where I teach—will underscore its rarity. Normally, 
such circulars explain the major food groups, vitamins, and minerals 
known to be essential for balanced nutrition and advise a diet based on 
these categories. This circular, however, noted that many new, essen­
tial elements of proper nutrition had been discovered in the past two 
decades and that many more elements will presumably be identified by 
researchers in the decades ahead. Therefore, on the basis of what they 
did not know, the writers of this piece recommended that one’s diet be

344 THE MISSING LINK
as varied as possible, on the prudent assumption that it would contain 
many of these yet unidentified essentials.
Social and historical analyses have, almost inevitably, the effect of 
diminishing the contingency of human affairs. A historical event or 
state of affairs simply is the way it is, often appearing determined and 
necessary when in fact it might easily have turned out to be otherwise. 
Even a probabilistic social science, however careful it may be about es­
tablishing ranges of outcomes, is apt to treat these probabilities, for the 
sake of analysis, as solid facts. When it comes to betting on the future, 
the contingency is obvious, but so is the capacity of human actors to 
influence this contingency and help to shape the future. And in those 
cases where the bettors thought that they knew the shape of the future 
by virtue of their grasp of historical laws of progress or scientific truth, 
whatever awareness they retained of the contingency seemed to dis­
solve before their faith.
And yet each of these schemes, as might also have been predicted, 
was largely undone by a host of contingencies beyond the planners’ 
grasp. The scope and comprehensiveness of their plans were such that 
they would have had indeterminate outcomes even if their historical 
laws and the attendant specification of variables and calculations had 
been correct. Their temporal ambitions meant that although they might, 
with some confidence, guess the immediate consequences of their 
moves, no one could specify, let alone calculate, the second- or third- 
order consequences or their interaction effects. The wild cards in 
their deck, however, were the human and natural events outside their 
models—droughts, wars, revolts, epidemics, interest rates, world con­
sumer prices, oil embargoes. They could and did, of course, attempt to 
adjust and improvise in the face of these contingencies. But the mag­
nitude of their initial intervention was so great that many of their mis­
steps could not be righted. Stephen Marglin has put their problem suc­
cinctly: If "the only certainty about the future is that the future is 
uncertain, if the only sure thing is that we are in for surprises, then no 
amount of planning, no amount of prescription, can deal with the con­
tingencies that the future will reveal.”1
There is a curiously resounding unanimity on this point, and on no 
others, between such right-wing critics of the command economy as 
Friedrich Hayek and such left-wing critics of Communist authoritari­
anism as Prince Peter Kropotkin, who declared, “It is impossible to 
legislate for the future.” Both had a great deal of respect for the diver­
sity of human actions and the insurmountable difficulties in success­
fully coordinating millions of transactions. In a blistering critique of 
failed development paradigms, Albert Hirschman made a comparable

Conclusion 345
case, calling for “a little more ‘reverence for life,' a little less strait- 
jacketing of the future, a little more allowance for the unexpected— 
and a little less wishful thinking.”2
One might, on the basis of experience, derive a few rules of thumb 
that, if observed, could make development planning less prone to dis­
aster. While my main goal is hardly a point-by-point reform of devel­
opment practice, such rules would surely include something along the 
following lines.
Take small steps. In an experimental approach to social change, pre­
sume that we cannot know the consequences of our interventions in ad­
vance. Given this postulate of ignorance, prefer wherever possible to 
take a small step, stand back, observe, and then plan the next small 
move. As the biologist J. B. S. Haldane metaphorically described the 
advantages of smallness: “You can drop a mouse down a thousand- 
yard mineshaft; and on arriving at the bottom, it gets a slight shock 
and walks away. A rat is killed, a man broken, a horse splashes.”3
Favor reversibility. Prefer interventions that can easily be undone if 
they turn out to be mistakes.4 Irreversible interventions have irrever­
sible consequences.5 Interventions into ecosystems require particular 
care in this respect, given our great ignorance about how they interact. 
Aldo Leopold captured the spirit of caution required: “The first rule of 
intelligent tinkering is to keep all the parts.”6
Plan on surprises. Choose plans that allow the largest accommoda­
tion to the unforeseen. In agricultural schemes this may mean choos­
ing and preparing land so that it can grow any of several crops. In 
planning housing, it would mean “designing in" flexibility for accom­
modating changes in family structures or living styles. In a factory it 
may mean selecting a location, layout, or piece of machinery that al­
lows for new processes, materials, or product lines down the road.
Plan on human inventiveness. Always plan under the assumption 
that those who become involved in the project later will have or will 
develop the experience and insight to improve on the design.
Planning for Abstract Citizens
The power and precision of high-modernist schemes depended not 
only on bracketing contingency but also on standardizing the subjects 
of development. Some standardization was implicit even in the noblest 
goals of the planners. The great majority of them were strongly com­
mitted to a more egalitarian society, to meeting the basic needs of its 
citizens (especially the working class), and to making the amenities of 
a modern society available to all.

346 THE MISSING LINK
Let us pause, however, to consider the kind of human subject for 
whom all these benefits were being provided. This subject was singu­
larly abstract. Figures as diverse as Le Corbusier, Walther Rathenau, 
the collectivizers of the Soviet Union, and even Julius Nyerere (for all 
his rhetorical attention to African traditions) were planning for ge­
neric subjects who needed so many square feet of housing space, acres 
of farmland, liters of clean water, and units of transportation and so 
much food, fresh air, and recreational space. Standardized citizens 
were uniform in their needs and even interchangeable. What is strik­
ing, of course, is that such subjects—like the "unmarked citizens" of 
liberal theory—have, for the purposes of the planning exercise, no 
gender, no tastes, no history, no values, no opinions or original ideas, 
no traditions, and no distinctive personalities to contribute to the en­
terprise. They have none of the particular, situated, and contextual at­
tributes that one would expect of any population and that we, as a mat­
ter of course, always attribute to elites.
The lack of context and particularity is not an oversight; it is the 
necessary first premise of any large-scale planning exercise. To the de­
gree that the subjects can be treated as standardized units, the power 
of resolution in the planning exercise is enhanced. Questions posed 
within these strict confines can have definitive, quantitative answers. 
The same logic applies to the transformation of the natural world. Ques­
tions about the volume of commercial wood or the yield of wheat in 
bushels permit more precise calculations than questions about, say, 
the quality of the soil, the versatility and taste of the grain, or the well­
being of the community.7 The discipline of economics achieves its for­
midable resolving power by transforming what might otherwise be 
considered qualitative matters into quantitative issues with a single 
metric and, as it were, a bottom line: profit or loss.8 Providing one un­
derstands the heroic assumptions required to achieve this precision 
and the questions that it cannot answer, the single metric is an invalu­
able tool. Problems arise only when it becomes hegemonic.
What is perhaps most striking about high-modernist schemes, de­
spite their quite genuine egalitarian and often socialist impulses, is 
how little confidence they repose in the skills, intelligence, and experi­
ence of ordinary people. This is clear enough in the Taylorist factory, 
where the logic of work organization is to reduce the factory hands’ 
contribution to a series of repetitive, if practiced, movements—oper­
ations as machinelike as possible. But it is also clear in collectivized 
farms, ujamaa villages, and planned cities, where the movements of 
the populace have been to a large degree inscribed in the designs of 
these communities. If Nyerere’s aspirations for cooperative state farm­

Conclusion 347
ing were frustrated, it was not because the plans had failed to integrate 
a scheme of cooperative labor. The more ambitious and meticulous the 
plan, the less is left, theoretically, to chance and to local initiative and 
experience.
Stripping Reality to Its Essentials
The quantitative technologies used to investigate social and economic life 
work best if the world they aim to describe can be remade in their image.
—Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers
If the facts— that is, the behavior of living human beings — are recalcitrant to 
such an experiment, the experimenter becomes annoyed and tries to alter the 
facts to fit the theory, which, in practice, means a kind of vivisection of soci­
eties until they become what the theory originally declared that the experi­
ment should have caused them to be.
— Isaiah Berlin, "On Political Judgment”
The clarity of the high-modernist optic is due to its resolute singularity. 
Its simplifying fiction is that, for any activity or process that comes 
under its scrutiny, there is only one thing going on. In the scientific 
forest there is only commercial wood being grown; in the planned city 
there is only the efficient movement of goods and people; in the hous­
ing estate there is only the effective delivery of shelter, heat, sewage, 
and water; in the planned hospital there is only the swift provision of 
professional medical services. And yet both we and the planners know 
that each of these sites is the intersection of a host of interconnected 
activities that defy such simple descriptions. Even something as ap­
parently monofunctional as a road from A to B can at the same time 
function as a site for leisure, social intercourse, exciting diversions, 
and enjoying the view between A and B.9
For any such site, it is helpful to imagine two different maps of ac­
tivity. In the case of a planned urban neighborhood, the first map con­
sists of a representation of the streets and buildings, tracing the routes 
that the planners have provided for the movements between work­
places and residences, the delivery of goods, access to shopping, and 
so on. The second map consists of tracings, as in a time-lapse photo­
graph, of all the unplanned movements—pushing a baby carriage, win­
dow shopping, strolling, going to see a friend, playing hopscotch on the 
sidewalk, walking the dog, watching the passing scene, taking short­
cuts between work and home, and so on. This second map, far more 
complex than the first, reveals very different patterns of circulation. 
The older the neighborhood, the more likely that the second map will 
have nearly superseded the first, in roughly the same way that planned,

348 THE MISSING LINK
suburban Levittowns have, after fifty years, become thoroughly differ­
ent settings from what their designers envisioned.
If our inquiry has taught us anything, it is that the first map, taken 
alone, is misrepresentative and indeed nonsustainable. A same-age, 
monocropped forest with all the debris cleared is in the long run an 
ecological disaster. No Taylorist factory can sustain production without 
the unplanned improvisations of an experienced workforce. Planned 
Brasilia is, in a thousand ways, underwritten by unplanned Brasilia. 
Without at least some of the diversity identified by Jacobs, a stripped- 
down public housing project (like Pruitt-Igoe in Saint Louis or Cabrini 
Green in Chicago) will fail its residents. Even for the limited pur­
poses of a myopic plan—commercial timber, factory output—the 
one-dimensional map will simply not do. As with industrial agricul­
ture and its dependency on landraces, the first map is possible only 
because of processes lying outside its parameters, which it ignores at 
its peril.
Our inquiry has also taught us that such maps of legibility and con­
trol, especially when they are backed by an authoritarian state, do 
partly succeed in shaping the natural and social environment after their 
image. To the degree that such thin maps do manage to impress them­
selves on social life, what kind of people do they foster? Here I would 
argue that just as the monocropped, same-age forest represents an im­
poverished and unsustainable ecosystem, so the high-modernist urban 
complex represents an impoverished and unsustainable social system.
Human resistance to the more severe forms of social straitjacketing 
prevents monotonic schemes of centralized rationality from ever being 
realized. Had they been realized in their austere forms, they would 
have represented a very bleak human prospect. One of Le Corbusier’s 
plans, for example, called for the segregation of factory workers and 
their families in barracks along the major transportation arteries. It was 
a theoretically efficient solution to transportation and production 
problems. If it had been imposed, the result would have been a dispir­
iting environment of regimented work and residence without any of 
the animation of town life. This plan had all the charm of a Taylorist 
scheme where, using a comparable logic, the efficient organization of 
work was achieved by confining the workers’ movements to a few 
repetitive gestures. The cookie-cutter design principles behind the lay­
out of the Soviet collective farm, the ujamaa village, or the Ethiopian 
resettlement betray the same narrowness of vision. They were de­
signed, above all, to facilitate the central administration of production 
and the control of public life.

Conclusion 349
Almost all strictly functional, single-purpose institutions have some 
of the qualities of sensory-deprivation tanks used for experimental 
purposes. At the limit, they approach the great social control institu­
tions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries: asylums, workhouses, 
prisons, and reformatories. We have learned enough of such settings to 
know that over time they can produce among their inmates a charac­
teristic institutional neurosis marked by apathy, withdrawal, lack of 
initiative and spontaneity, uncommunicativeness, and intractability. 
The neurosis is an accommodation to a deprived, bland, monotonous, 
controlled environment that is ultimately stupifying.10
The point is simply that high-modernist designs for life and pro­
duction tend to diminish the skills, agility, initiative, and morale of 
their intended beneficiaries. They bring about a mild form of this insti­
tutional neurosis. Or, to put it in the utilitarian terms that many of their 
partisans would recognize, these designs tend to reduce the “human 
capital” of the workforce. Complex, diverse, animated environments 
contribute, as Jacobs saw, to producing a resilient, flexible, adept pop­
ulation that has more experience in confronting novel challenges and 
taking initiative. Narrow, planned environments, by contrast, foster a 
less skilled, less innovative, less resourceful population. This popula­
tion, once created, would ironically have been exactly the kind of 
human material that would in fact have needed close supervision from 
above. In other words, the logic of social engineering on this scale was 
to produce the sort of subjects that its plans had assumed at the outset.
That authoritarian social engineering failed to create a world after 
its own image should not blind us to the fact that it did, at the very 
least, damage many of the earlier structures of mutuality and practice 
that were essential to metis. The Soviet kolkhoz hardly lived up to its 
expectations, but by treating its workforce more like factory hands than 
farmers, it did destroy many of the agricultural skills the peasantry had 
possessed on the eve of collectivization. Even if there was much in the 
earlier arrangements that ought to have been abolished (local tyran­
nies based on class, gender, age, and lineage), a certain institutional 
autonomy was abolished as well. Here, I believe, there is something to 
the classical anarchist claim—that the state, with its positive law and 
central institutions, undermines individuals’ capacities for auton­
omous self-governance—that might apply to the planning grids of 
high modernism as well. Their own institutional legacy may be frail 
and evanescent, but they may impoverish the local wellsprings of eco­
nomic, social, and cultural self-expression.

350 THE MISSING LINK
The Failure of Schematics and the Role of Metis
Everything is said to be under the leadership of the Party. No one is in charge
of the crab or the fish, but they are all alive.
—Vietnamese villager, Xuan Huy village
Not long after the decisive political opening in 1989, in what was then 
still the Soviet Union, a congress of agricultural specialists was con­
vened to consider reforms in agriculture. Most participants were in 
favor of breaking up the collectives and privatizing the land in the hope 
of recreating a modern version of the private sector that had thrived in 
the 1920s and that Stalin had destroyed in 1930. And yet they were 
nearly unanimous in their despair over what three generations had 
done to the skills, initiative, and knowledge of the kolkhozniki. They 
compared their situation unfavorably to that of China, where a mere 
twenty-five years of collectivization had, they imagined, left much of 
the entrepreneurial skill of the peasantry intact. Suddenly a woman 
from Novosibirsk scolded them: "How do you think the rural people 
survived sixty years of collectivization in the first place? If they hadn’t 
used their initiative and wits, they wouldn’t have made it through! 
They may need credit and supplies, but there’s nothing wrong with 
their initiative.’’11
Despite the manifold failures of collectivization, it seems, the kol­
khozniki had found ways and means to at least get by. We should not 
forget in this context that the first response to collectivization in 1930 
was determined resistance and even rebellion. Once that resistance 
was broken, the survivors had little choice but to comply outwardly. 
They could hardly make the rural command economy a success, but 
they could do what was necessary to meet minimal quotas and ensure 
their own economic survival.
An indication of the kinds of improvisations both tolerated and re­
quired may be inferred from an astute case study of two East German 
factories before the Wall came down in 1989.12 Each factory was 
under great pressure to meet production quotas—on which their all- 
important bonuses depended—in spite of old machinery, inferior raw 
materials, and a lack of spare parts. Under these draconian conditions, 
two employees were indispensable to the firm, despite their modest 
place in the official hierarchy. One was the jack-of-all-trades who im­
provised short-term solutions to keep machinery running, to correct or 
disguise production flaws, and to make raw materials stretch further. 
The second was a wheeler-dealer who located and bought or bartered 
for spare parts, machinery, and raw material that could not be obtained 
through official channels in time. To facilitate the wheeler-dealer’s

Conclusion 351
work, the factory routinely used its funds to stock up on such valued 
nonperishable goods as soap powder, cosmetics, quality paper, yarn, 
good wine and champagne, medicines, and fashionable clothes. When 
it seemed that the plant would fall short of the quota because it lacked 
a key valve or machine tool, these knowledgeable dealers would set off 
across the country, their small Trabant autos jammed with barter goods, 
to secure what was needed. Neither of these roles was provided for in 
the official table of organization, and yet the survival of the factory de­
pended more on their skills, wisdom, and experience than on those of 
any other employee. A key element in the centrally planned economy 
was underwritten, always unofficially, by metis.
Cases like the one just described are the rule, not the exception. They 
serve to illustrate that the formal order encoded in social-engineering 
designs inevitably leaves out elements that are essential to their actual 
functioning. If the factory were forced to operate only within the con­
fines of the roles and functions specified in the simplified design, it 
would quickly grind to a halt. Collectivized command economies virtu­
ally everywhere have limped along thanks to the often desperate im­
provisation of an informal economy wholly outside its schemata.
Stated somewhat differently, all socially engineered systems of for­
mal order are in fact subsystems of a larger system on which they are 
ultimately dependent, not to say parasitic. The subsystem relies on a va­
riety of processes—frequently informal or antecedent—which alone it 
cannot create or maintain. The more schematic, thin, and simplified 
the formal order, the less resilient and the more vulnerable it is to distur­
bances outside its narrow parameters. This analysis of high modern­
ism, then, may appear to be a case for the invisible hand of market co­
ordination as opposed to centralized economies. An important caution, 
however, is in order. The market is itself an instituted, formal system of 
coordination, despite the elbow room that it provides to its participants, 
and it is therefore similarly dependent on a larger system of social rela­
tions which its own calculus does not acknowledge and which it can 
neither create nor maintain. Here I have in mind not only the obvious 
elements of contract and property law, as well as the state’s coercive 
power to enforce them, but antecedent patterns and norms of social 
trust, community, and cooperation, without which market exchange 
is inconceivable. Finally, and most important, the economy is “a sub­
system of a finite and nongrowing eco-system,” whose carrying capacity 
and interactions it must respect as a condition of its persistence.13
It is, I think, a characteristic of large, formal systems of coordina­
tion that they are accompanied by what appear to be anomalies but on 
closer inspection turn out to be integral to that formal order. Much of

352 THE MISSING LINK
this might be termed "metis to the rescue," although for people en­
snared in schemes of authoritarian social engineering that threaten to 
do them in, such improvisations bear the mark of scrambling and des­
peration. Many modern cities, and not just those in the Third World, 
function and survive by virtue of slums and squatter settlements whose 
residents provide essential services. A formal command economy, as 
we have seen, is contingent on petty trade, bartering, and deals that are 
typically illegal. A formal economy of pension systems, social security, 
and medical benefits is underwritten by a mobile, floating population 
with few of these protections. Similarly, hybrid crops in mechanized 
farm operations persist only because of the diversity and immunities of 
antecedent landraces. In each case, the nonconforming practice is an 
indispensable condition for formal order.
A Case for Metis-Friendly Institutions
The invention of scientific forestry, freehold tenure, planned cities, col­
lective farms, ujamaa villages, and industrial agriculture, for all their 
ingeniousness, represented fairly simple interventions into enormously 
complex natural and social systems. After being abstracted from sys­
tems whose interactions defied a total accounting, a few elements were 
then made the basis for an imposed order. At best, the new order was 
fragile and vulnerable, sustained by improvisations not foreseen by its 
originators. At worst, it wreaked untold damage in shattered lives, a 
damaged ecosystem, and fractured or impoverished societies.
This rather blanket condemnation must be tempered, especially in 
the case of social systems, by at least four considerations. First, and 
most important, the social orders they were designed to supplant were 
typically so manifestly unjust and oppressive that almost any new order 
might seem preferable. Second, high-modernist social engineering usu­
ally came cloaked in egalitarian, emancipatory ideas: equality before 
the law, citizenship for all, and rights to subsistence, health, education, 
and shelter. The premise and great appeal of the high-modernist credo 
was that the state would make the benefits of technological progress 
available to all its citizens.
The two remaining reasons for tempering our condemnation of 
such schemes have less to do with their potentially destructive conse­
quences than with the capacity of ordinary human actors to modify 
them or, in the end, to bring them down. Where functioning represen­
tative institutions were at hand, some accommodation was inevitable. 
In their absence, it is still remarkable how the dogged, day-to-day re­

Conclusion 353
sistance of thousands of citizens forced the abandonment or restruc­
turing of projects. Given sufficient time and leeway, of course, any 
high-modernist plan will be utterly remade by popular practice. Soviet 
collective farms, the most draconian case, were finally brought down 
as much by the dispirited work and resistance of the kolkhozniki as by 
the political shifts in Moscow.
Without denying the incontestable benefits either of the division of 
labor or of hierarchical coordination for some tasks, I want to make 
a case for institutions that are instead multifunctional, plastic, di­
verse, and adaptable—in other words, institutions that are powerfully 
shaped by metis. The fact that those ensnared in confining systems of 
formal order seem constantly to be working, in their own interest, to 
make the systems more versatile is one indication of a common pro­
cess of “social domestication.” A second indication is the social mag­
netism of autonomy and diversity as seen, for example, in the popular­
ity of Jacobs’s mixed-use neighborhoods and in the continued 
attraction of self-employment.
Diversity and certain forms of complexity, apart from their attrac­
tiveness, have other advantages. In natural systems, we know, these ad­
vantages are manifold. Old-growth forests, polycropping, and agricul­
ture with open-pollinated landraces may not be as productive, in the 
short run, as single-species forests and fields or identical hybrids. But 
they are demonstrably more stable, more self-sufficient, and less vul­
nerable to epidemics and environmental stress, needing far less in the 
way of external infusions to keep them on track. Every time we replace 
"natural capital” (such as wild fish stocks or old-growth forests) with 
what might be called "cultivated natural capital” (such as fish farms or 
tree plantations), we gain in ease of appropriation and in immediate 
productivity, but at the cost of more maintenance expenses and less 
“redundancy, resiliency, and stability.”14 If the environmental chal­
lenges faced by such systems are both modest and predictable, then a 
certain simplification might also be relatively stable.15 Other things 
being equal, however, the less diverse the cultivated natural capital, 
the more vulnerable and nonsustainable it becomes. The problem is that 
in most economic systems, the external costs (in water or air pollution, 
for example, or the exhaustion of nonrenewable resources, including a 
reduction in biodiversity) accumulate long before the activity becomes 
unprofitable in a narrow profit-and-loss sense.
A roughly similar case can be made, I think, for human institutions 
—a case that contrasts the fragility of rigid, single-purpose, centralized 
institutions to the adaptability of more flexible, multipurpose, decentral­

354 THE MISSING LINK
ized social forms. As long as the task environment of an institution re­
mains repetitive, stable, and predictable, a set of fixed routines may 
prove exceptionally efficient. In most economies and in human affairs 
generally, this is seldom the case, and such routines are likely to be 
counterproductive once the environment changes appreciably. The 
long-term survival of certain human institutions—the family, the small 
community, the small farm, the family firm in certain businesses—is 
something of a tribute to their adaptability under radically changing 
circumstances. They are by no means infinitely adaptable, but they have 
weathered more than one prediction of their inevitable demise. The 
small family farm, by virtue of its flexible labor (including the exploi­
tation of its children), its capacity to shift into new crops or livestock, 
and its tendency to diversify its risks, has managed to persist in com­
petitive economies when many huge, highly leveraged, mechanized, 
and specialized corporate and state farms have failed.16 In a sector of 
the economy where local knowledge, quick responses to weather and 
crop conditions, and low overhead (smallness) are more important than 
in, say, large industry, the family farm has some formidable advantages.
Even in huge organizations, diversity pays dividends in stability and 
resilience. A one-product city like the Stalinist steel-making jewel of 
Magnitogorsk is vulnerable when its technology is superseded and more 
specialty products are required, whereas a nonspecialized city with a 
host of industries and a diverse labor force can weather greater shocks. 
Within the most industrialized economies, it is still striking that com­
plex and often low-income subsistence strategies, self-provisioning, and 
working off the books are both widespread and essential, although 
they are nearly invisible in most forms of economic accounting.17 
Much has also been made of the rather complex family firms in Emilia- 
Romagna, Italy, which have thrived for generations in an extremely 
competitive world textile market by virtue of networks of mutuality, 
adaptability, and a highly skilled and committed workforce. The family 
firms are at the same time embedded in a much-studied local society 
that is several centuries deep in associational life and civic skills.18 
These firms and the dense, diverse societies upon which they depend 
have increasingly seemed less like archaic survivals and more like 
forms of enterprise ideally suited to postindustrial capitalism. Even 
within the narrow confines of market competitiveness in liberal indus­
trial societies, the case for polyvalent, adaptive, small units is stronger 
than any high modernist of the 1920s could possibly have imagined.
Once we measure such polyvalent institutions by broader criteria, 
moreover, the case becomes even more powerful. Much of the argu­
ment at this level comes back to the question posed earlier: what kind

Conclusion 355
of person does this sort of institution foster? No one has established 
the link between economic enterprise and political skills better than 
Thomas Jefferson in his celebration of the yeoman farmer. The auton­
omy and the skills required in independent farming, Jefferson be­
lieved, helped to nurture a citizen with a habit of responsible decision 
making, enough property to avoid social dependence, and a tradition 
of reasoning and negotiation with his fellow citizens. The yeomanry 
was, in short, an ideal training ground for democratic citizenship.
To any planned, built, or legislated form of social life, one may 
apply a comparable test: to what degree does it promise to enhance the 
skills, knowledge, and responsibility of those who are a part of it? On 
narrower institutional grounds, the question would be how deeply that 
form is marked by the values and experience of those who compose it. 
The purpose in each case would be to distinguish "canned” situations 
that permit little or no modification from situations largely open to the 
development and application of metis.
A brief example comparing war memorials may be helpful. The 
Vietnam Memorial in Washington, D.C., is surely one of the most suc­
cessful war memorials ever built, if one is to judge by the quantity and 
intensity of the visits it receives. Designed by Maya Lin, the memorial 
consists simply of a gently undulating site marked (not dominated) by 
a long, low, black marble wall listing the names of the fallen. The names 
are listed neither alphabetically nor by military unit but chronologi­
cally, in the order in which they fell—thus grouping those who had 
fallen on the same day in the same engagement.19 No larger claim is 
made about the war either in prose or in sculpture—which is hardly 
surprising, in view of the stark political cleavages the war still inspires.20 
What is most remarkable, however, is the way that the Vietnam Memo­
rial works for those who visit it, particularly those who come to pay 
their respects to the memory of a comrade or loved one. They touch 
the names incised on the wall, make rubbings, and leave artifacts and 
mementos of their own—everything from poems and a woman's high- 
heeled shoe to a glass of champagne and a poker hand of a full house, 
aces high. So many of these tributes have been left, in fact, that a mu­
seum has been created to house them. The scene of many people to­
gether at the wall, touching the names of particular loved ones who fell 
in the same war, has moved observers regardless of their position on 
the war itself. I believe that a great part of the memorial's symbolic 
power is its capacity to honor the dead with an openness that allows 
visitors to impress upon it their own meanings, their own histories, 
their own memories. The memorial virtually requires participation in 
order to complete its meaning. Although one would not compare it to

356 THE MISSING LINK
a Rorschach test, the memorial nevertheless does achieve its meaning 
as much by what citizens bring to it as by what it imposes.
Compare the Vietnam Memorial to a very different American war 
memorial: the sculpture depicting the raising of the American flag at 
the summit of Mount Suribachi on Iwo Jima in World War II. Moving 
in its own right, referring as it does to the final moment of a victory 
gained at an enormous cost in lives, the Iwo Jima statue is manifestly 
heroic. Its patriotism (symbolized by the flag), its reference to conquest, 
its larger-than-life scale, and its implicit theme of unity in victory leave 
little room for wondering what is expected from the viewer. Given the 
virtual unanimity with which that war was, and is, viewed in the United 
States, it is hardly surprising that the Iwo Jima memorial should be 
monumental and explicit about its message. Although not exactly 
“canned,” the Iwo Jima site is more symbolically self-sufficient, as are 
most war memorials. Visitors can stand in awe, gazing on an image 
that through photographs and sculpture has become a virtual icon for 
the War in the Pacific, but they receive its message rather than com­
pleting it.21
An institution, social form, or enterprise that takes much of its shape 
from the evolving metis of the people engaged in it will thereby enhance 
their range of experience and skills. Following the advice of the saying 
"Use it or lose it," the metis-friendly institution both uses and renews a 
valuable public good. As an exclusive litmus test for all social forms, 
this is clearly insufficient. All social forms are “artificially” constructed 
to serve some human purpose. Where that purpose is narrow, simple, 
and invariable over time, it may well be that codified, hierarchical rou­
tines are adequate and possibly the most efficient in the short run. Even 
in such cases, however, we should be aware of the human costs of stul­
tifying routines and the likely resistance to rote performance.
Whenever, on the contrary, the quality of the institution and its 
product depends on engaging the enthusiastic participation of its peo­
ple, then such a litmus test makes sense. In the case of housing, for ex­
ample, its success cannot be severed from the opinions of its users. 
Housing planners that take as a given the variety of human tastes and 
the inevitable (but unpredictable) changes in the shape of families will 
accommodate that variation from the outset by providing flexible 
building designs and adjustable floor plans. Developers of neighbor­
hoods, by the same token, will promote the sort of diversity and com­
plexity that will help to ensure their vitality and durability. Above all, 
those with planning and zoning powers will not see their task as one of 
making sure that neighborhoods hold, through thick and thin, to their 
designed forms. One can imagine many types of institutions—schools,

Conclusion 357
parks, playgrounds, civic associations, business enterprises, families, 
even planning bodies—that might well be evaluated through the same 
lens.
A good many institutions in liberal democracies already take such a 
form and may serve as exemplars for fashioning new ones. One could 
say that democracy itself is based on the assumption that the metis of 
its citizenry should, in mediated form, continually modify the laws and 
policies of the land. Common law, as an institution, owes its longevity 
to the fact that it is not a final codification of legal rules, but rather a 
set of procedures for continually adapting some broad principles to 
novel circumstances. Finally, that most characteristic of human insti­
tutions, language, is the best model: a structure of meaning and conti­
nuity that is never still and ever open to the improvisations of all its 
speakers.


Notes
Chapter 1: Nature and Space
1. Henry E. Lowood, “The Calculating Forester: Quantification, Cameral Sci­
ence, and the Emergence of Scientific Forestry Management in Germany," in Tore 
Frangsmyr, J. L. Heilbron, and Robin E. Rider, eds., The Quantifying Spirit in the 
Eighteenth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), pp. 315-42. 
The following account is largely drawn from Lowood’s fine analysis.
2. The most striking exception was the royal attention to the supply of "noble 
game" (e.g., deer, boars, foxes) for the hunt and hence to the protection of its habitat. 
Lest one imagine this to be a quaint premodern affectation, it is worth recalling the 
enormous social importance of the hunt to such recent “monarchs" as Erich 
Honeker, Nicolae Ceau§escu, Georgy Zhuvkov, Wtadyslaw Gomutka, and Marshal 
Tito.
3. John Evelyn, Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest Trees (London, 1664, 1679), p. 
118, cited in John Brinckerhoff Jackson, A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1994), pp. 97-98.
4. Ramachandra Guha reminds me that the verb “ignore" is inadequate here, 
for the state typically sought to control, regulate, and extinguish those practices 
that interfered with its own management policies. For much of my (admittedly 
limited) early education in the history of forestry, I am grateful to Ramachandra 
Guha and his two books, The Unquiet Woods: Ecological Change and Peasant Re­
sistance in the Himalaya (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), and, 
with Madhav Gadgil, This Fissured Land: An Ecological History of India (Delhi: 
Oxford University Press, 1992). For an evocative and wide-ranging exploration of 
the changing cultural meaning of the forest in the West, see Robert Pogue Harri­
son, Forests: The Shadow of Civilization (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1992).
5. Harrison, Forests, p. 121.
6. This last is a kind of twist on the Heisenberg principle. Instead of altering the 
phenomenon observed through the act of observation, so that the pre-observation 
state of the phenomenon is unknowable in principle, the effect of (interested) obser­
359

360 Notes to Pages 14-18
vation in this case is to alter the phenomenon in question over time so that it, in fact, 
more closely resembles the stripped down, abstract image the lens had revealed.
7. See Keith Tribe, Governing Economy: The Reformation of German Economic 
Discourse, 1750-1840 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). The more 
general process of codifying the principles of state administration in seventeenth- 
and eighteenth-century Europe is examined by Michel Foucault under the (mis­
leading) heading of "police state” (from Polizeiwissenschaft) in his lectures on 
"governmcntality,” delivered at the College de France. See Graham Burchell, Colin 
Gordon, and Peter Miller, eds., The Foucault Effect: Studies in Govemmentality 
(London: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991), especially chap. 4.
8. In the late seventeenth century, Jean-Baptiste Colbert had extensive plans to 
"rationalize” forest administration in order both to prevent poaching and to gener­
ate a more reliable revenue yield. To this end, Etienne Dralet’s Traite du regime 
forestier proposed regulated plots (tire-aire) “so that the growth is regular and easy 
to guard.” Despite these initiatives, nothing much came of it in France until 1820, 
when the new German techniques were imported. See Peter Sahlins, Forest Rites: 
The War of the Demoiselles in Nineteenth-Century France, Harvard Historical Stud­
ies no. 115 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994.
9. 'Lowood, “The Calculating Forester,” p. 338.
10. Various techniques were tried, including cutting an actual tree into bits and 
then compressing them to find the volume of the tree, and putting wood in a barrel 
of known volume and adding measured amounts of water to calculate the volume 
of the barrel not occupied by the wood (ibid., p. 328).
11. The utilitarian framework could, in principle, have been used to emphasize 
some other calculable “end” of the forest— e.g., game populations, mast-quality 
timber, or grazing acreage. Where several agencies superintending the forest have 
conflicting utilitarian agendas, the result can be incoherence and room for the local 
population to maneuver. See the fine study by K. Sivaramakrishnan, “Forests, Poli­
tics, and Governance in Bengal, 1794-1994" (Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthro­
pology, Yale University, 1996).
12. I was tempted to add that, with regard to the use of forests, the view of the 
state might be longer and broader than that of private firms, which can, and have, 
plundered old-growth forests and then sold their acreage or surrendered it for back 
taxes (e.g., the “cutover” in the Upper Midwest of the United States at the turn of 
the century). The difficulty is that in cases of war or a fiscal crisis, the state often 
takes an equally shortsighted view.
13. Lowood, “The Calculating Forester," p. 341. See also Harrison, Forests, pp. 
122-23.
14. The recent cloning of tree stock to produce genetically uniform members 
of a given species is a yet more dramatic step in the direction of uniformity and 
control.
15. One of the innovations such experimentation gave rise to was “financial ro­
tation." Close attention to annual rates of growth over the life of a pure stand and 
the surer knowledge about timber yields enabled foresters to calculate precisely the 
point at which the added value of another year of growth was exceeded by the 
added value (minus the amortized cost of earlier felling and replanting) of new 
growth. The precision was, of course, predicated on the comparisons made possi­
ble by the assumption of homogeneous units of timber and market prices.
16. The term “redesigned” is adopted from Chris Maser’s valuable book, The 
Redesigned Forest (San Pedro: R. and E. Miles, 1988). Much of his argument can be 
inferred from the oppositions he emphasizes in the headings of the early sections: 
“Nature designed a forest as an experiment in unpredictability. . . . We are trying to

Notes to Pages 19-20 361
design a regulated forest ”; "Nature designed a forest of long-term trends. . . . We 
are trying to design a forest of short-term absolutes”; "Nature designed a forest 
with diversity. . . . We are designing a forest with simplistic uniformity”; "Nature 
designed a forest with interrelated processes. . . . We are trying to design a forest 
based on isolated products" (p. vii).
17. See, for example, Honore de Balzac’s Les pay sans (Paris: Pleiades, 1949); E. 
P. Thompson, Whigs and Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act (New York: Pantheon, 
1975); Douglas Hay, "Poaching on Cannock Chase,” in Douglas Hay et al., eds., Al­
bion’s Fatal Tree (New York: Pantheon, 1975); and Steven Hahn, “Hunting, Fishing, 
and Foraging: Common Rights and Class Relations in the Postbellum South," Rad­
ical History Review 26 (1982): 37-64. For an apposite German case, see one of Karl 
Marx’s first published articles linking the theft of wood to the business cycle and 
unemployment in the Rhineland: reported in Peter Linebaugh, "Karl Marx, the 
Theft of Wood, and Working-Class Composition: A Contribution to the Current De­
bate," Crime and Social Justice, Fall-Winter 1976, pp. 5-16.
18. The results of three rotations might require as much as two hundred years, 
or the working lives of perhaps six foresters, to observe. Compare this with, say, the 
results of three rotations of maize, which would require only three years. For most 
contemporary forests, the results of the third rotation are not yet in. In forest ex­
perimentation, the experimental period easily stretches well beyond a single life­
time. See Maser, The Redesigned Forest.
19. There was within Germany a debate between the utilitarian outlook I have 
described and an anti-utilitarian, anti-Manchester School stream of thought repre­
sented by, among others, Karl Geyer, an exponent of the Mischwald and natural re­
generation. But the short-run success of the utilitarians ensured that their view be­
came the hegemonic “export model” of German scientific forestry. I am grateful to 
Arvid Nelson for this information and for sharing his deep knowledge about the 
history of forest policy in Germany. In 1868, Deitrich Brandes, the German chief of 
colonial India's forests, proposed a plan that would have encouraged community 
forests as well as state production forests, but the first part of his plan was vetoed 
by British administrators. The interests of state officials, it appears, tended to select 
out of the mixed heritage of German forestry those elements most favorable to leg­
ibility, management, and revenue.
20. Pinchot toured Prussian and Swiss forests after his studies in Nancy. Carl 
Schenk, the founder of the first forestry school in the United States, was a German 
immigrant trained in German universities, and Bernhard Fernow, the chief of the 
federal government’s forestry division from 1886 to 1898 (before Pinchot), was a 
graduate of the Prussian Forest Academy at Meunden. I am grateful to Carl Jacoby 
for this information.
21. For a detailed and analytically searching account of colonial forest policy in 
India, see Sivaramakrishnan, “Forests, Politics, and Governance in Bengal.” In 
chap. 6 he shows how three principles of scientific forestry— that pure stands of 
commercial timber did better than mixed stands, that fire was a destructive factor 
to be avoided, and that grazing or firewood collecting could only threaten the for­
est management program— were overthrown by accumulating evidence in India.
22. Richard Plochmann, Forestry in the Federal Republic of Germany, Hill Fam­
ily Foundation Series (Corvallis: Oregon State University School of Forestry, 
1968), pp. 24-25; quoted in Maser, The Redesigned Forest, pp. 197-98. The elided 
sentences, for those interested in the specific interactions, continue: “A spruce 
stand may serve as an example. Our spruce roots are normally very shallow. 
Planted on former hardwood soil, the spruce roots could follow the deep root 
channels of the former hardwoods in the first generation. But in the second gen­

362 Notes to Pages 20-21
eration the root systems turned shallow on account of progressive soil com­
paction. As a result, the available nutrient supply for the trees became smaller. The 
spruce stand could profit from the mild humus accumulated in the first generation 
by the hardwoods, but it was not able to produce a mild humus itself. Spruce litter 
rots much more slowly than broadleaf litter and is much more difficult for the 
fauna and flora of the upper soil layer to decompose. Therefore a raw humus de­
veloped in most cases. Its humic acids started to leach the soil under our humid 
climate and impoverished the soil fauna and flora. This caused an even poorer de­
composition and a faster development of raw humus." Plochmann points out that 
the process in pine plantations is roughly similar. I have confirmed this pattern 
with David Smith of Yale’s School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, author 
of The Practice of Silviculture, an important reference on modern forestry tech­
niques. For a similar account of how the techniques of scientific forestry, particu­
larly its aversion to fire and its preference for monoculture, negatively affected for­
est health and production, see Nancy Langston, Forest Dreams, Forest Nightmares: 
The Paradox of Old Growth in the Inland West (Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 1995).
23. “When snags are removed from short-rotation stands, 10% of the wildlife 
species (excluding birds) will be eliminated; 29% of the wildlife species will be 
eliminated when both snags and fallen trees (logs) are removed from intensively 
managed young growth forests. As pieces are continually removed from the forest 
with the notion of the simplistic uniformity that is termed ‘intensive timber man­
agement,’ we come closer to the ultimate simplistic view of modern forestry—the 
plantation or ‘Christmas tree farm' ’’ (Maser, The Redesigned Forest, p. 19).
24. The key step in this process seems to be the below-ground, symbiotic fungus- 
root structures (mycorrhizal association) studied closely by Sir Albert Howard. See 
chapter 7.
25. Some of the pests in question included the "pine looper moth, pine beauty, 
pine moth, Nun moth, saw flies, bark beetles, pine needle cast fungus, pine bluster 
rust, honey fungus, red rot” (Maser, The Redesigned Forest, p. 78).
26. For a brief description of these practices, see Rachel Carson, Silent Spring 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962, 1987). Carson praised these advances because 
they seemed to herald the use of biological controls rather than pesticides.
27. The untoward consequences of engineering a forest in order to maximize 
the production of a single commodity is by now a worldwide experience. After 
World War II, Japan adopted a policy of replacing many of the forests that had been 
plundered for fuelwood and building materials with a single species: the Japanese 
cedar, selected for its rapid growth and commercial value. Now it is clear that the 
miles of tall, slender, uniform cedars have caused heavy soil erosion and landslides, 
have reduced the water table, and are easily felled by storms. They allow little sun­
light to filter through to the forest floor and provide little protection or food for 
fauna. For urban Japanese, the chief short-term inconvenience of the cedars is their 
seasonal massive release of pollen, which triggers severe allergic responses. But al­
lergies are just the most manifest symptom of the deeper consequences of such rad­
ical simplification. See James Sterngold, “Japan's Cedar Forests Are a Man-Made 
Disaster," New York Times, January 17, 1995, pp. Cl, CIO.
28. Maser, The Redesigned Forest, pp. 54-55. The “commodity" in question in a 
great many contemporary forests is not wood per se but pulp for making paper. This 
has led, in turn, to the genetic engineering of species and cloned stock that will pro­
duce the ideal quality and quantity of pulp.
29. In the context of welfare economics, the practice of scientific forestry was 
able to externalize a large number of costs to the community at large which did not

Notes to Pages 21-28 363
appear on its own balance sheet: e.g., soil depletion, loss of water retention capac­
ity and water quality, reduction of game, and loss of biodiversity.
30. Plochmann, Forestry in the Federal Republic of Germany, p. 25. There are, 
of course, naturally occurring pure stands of timber, usually in constrained eco­
logical conditions, including, diagnostically, those found on severely degraded 
sites. For a range of views on this issue, see Matthew J. Kelty, Bruce C. Larson, and 
Chadwick D. Oliver, eds., The Ecology and Silviculture of Mixed-Species Forests: A 
Festschrift for David W Smith (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer Academic Publish­
ing, 1992).
31. Nancy Langston has a more global assessment: “Everyone who has ever 
tried to fix the forests has ended up making them worse" (Forest Dreams, Forest 
Nightmares, p. 2).
32. The brief description that follows is drawn largely from James B. Collins, 
Fiscal Limits of Absolutism: Direct Taxation in Early Seventeenth-Century France 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988).
33. P. M. Jones, The Peasantry in the French Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988), p. 17.
34. Collins, Fiscal Limits of Absolutism, pp. 201, 204. It was precisely this ca­
pacity for evading taxes that gave the fiscal regime a degree of unintended (from 
the top, at least) flexibility and helped states to avoid even more rebellion in the 
troubled seventeenth century.
35. J. L. Heilbron notes that in 1791 an English colonel in the militia obliged 
the Scottish clergy to send him inventories of their population by threatening to 
quarter troops in their parish (introduction to Tore Frangsmyr, J. L. Heilbron, and 
Robin E. Rider, eds., The Quantifying Spirit in the Eighteenth Century [Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1991], p. 13).
36. This assumes that the crown wanted to maximize its proceeds in the long 
run. It was and is common, of course, for regimes in political or military crises to 
mortgage their futures by squeezing as much as possible from their forests or their 
subjects. See, in this context, the superb analytical synthesis of Charles Tilly, Coer­
cion, Capital, and European States, a.d. 990-1992 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990), who 
stresses the influence of preparation for war and war-making in state formation and 
describes the transition from "tributary" states to states that extract directly from 
citizens.
37. Witold Kula, Measures and Men, trans. R. Szreter (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1986).
38. J. L. Heilbron, "The Measure of Enlightenment," in Tore Frangsmyr, J. L. 
Heilbron, and Robin E. Rider, eds., The Quantifying Spirit in the Eighteenth Century 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), pp. 207-8.
39. For an illuminating discussion along these lines, see Arjun Appadurai, “Mea­
surement Discourse in Rural Maharastra,” in Appadurai et ah, Agriculture, Lan­
guage, and Knowledge in South Asia: Perspectives from History and Anthropology 
(forthcoming).
40. Ibid., p. 14.
41. The same motive was at work in the folk categories of stratification used by 
Javanese villagers: the Kekurangans (those-who-have-less-than-enough) and the 
Kecukupans (those-who-have-enough). See Clifford Geertz, Agricultural Involu­
tion (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963).
42. What was seen as customary might not have had a very long pedigree. It 
was always in the interests of at least one party, who feared a disadvantageous 
renegotiation, to treat the existing arrangement as fixed and sacrosanct.
43. Occasionally, the balance of power might swing in the other direction. See,

364 Notes to Pages 28-32
in this connection, the evidence for a long decline in tithe payments in France: Em­
manuel LeRoi Ladurie and Joseph Gay, Tithe and Agrarian History from the Four­
teenth Century to the Nineteenth Century: An Essay in Comparative History, trans. 
Susan Burke (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 27.
44. Kula, Measures and Men, p. 150. In Lower Burma in the 1920s and '30s, the 
landlord’s paddy basket for receiving tenants' rent in kind was nicknamed "the cart- 
breaker" (James C. Scott, The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsis­
tence in Southeast Asia [New Flaven: Yale University Press, 1976], p. 71).
45. The famous iron toise of Paris, for example, was set in one of the walls of the 
Grand Chatelet; see Ken Alder, "A Revolution Made to Measure: The Political Econ­
omy of the Metric System in France,” in Norton W. Wise, ed., Values of Precision 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), p. 44.
46. Marsenne, in the seventeenth-century spirit of exactitude, calculated that a 
striked boisseau held 172,000 grains of wheat, whereas a heaped measure held 
220,160 (Kula, Measures and Men, p. 172). The advantage with oats, a larger grain, 
is less.
47. Ibid., pp. 73-74. As with the other challenges to customary measures, this 
one provoked municipal authorities and the populace to insist on weighing and 
measuring, in this case bakers’ loaves, to prevent such practices.
48. Ibid., pp. 98-99.
49. Ibid., p. 173.
50. It was, in fact, the active evasion of regions that were fiscally hard-pressed 
that provided the "drag” or gyroscope that often prevented an ill-considered tax 
claim from provoking an actual resistance.
51. As Ken Alder points out, the absence of a central authority that could im­
pose standardization does not seem to have impeded the growth of national mar­
kets in Britain, Germany, or the United States (“A Revolution Made to Measure,” p. 
62). Mobility and economic growth alone seem to produce common standards of 
exchange. For a more general historical treatment, see Frank J. Swetz, Capitalism 
and Arithmetic: The New Math of the Fifteenth Century (La Salle, 111.: Open Court, 
1987).
52. Quoted in Kula, Measures and Men, pp. 203-4.
53. Alder, “A Revolution Made to Measure," p. 48.
54. Ibid., p. 54.
55. Ibid., p. 56. The meter was only one shell in a barrage of measurement re­
forms. For a time, there was a concerted effort to divide the day into ten hours of 
one hundred minutes, with each minute containing one hundred seconds, as well 
as an initiative to create a duodecimal, or base-twelve, system of numbers.
56. Ibid., pp. 122-23.
57. I believe that the recent impassioned debate in France about whether Mus­
lim schoolgirls should be allowed to wear head scarves in class was about preserv­
ing this tradition of the unmarked citizen in secular education.
58. Alder, “A Revolution Made to Measure,” p. 211.
59. As Tony Judt has astutely noted, the difference between citizens’ rights as 
established by revolutionary decrees and natural or individual rights is that the for­
mer are in principle contingent on the state and its law and hence revocable by 
statute, whereas the latter are in principle unabridgeable. See Judt, Past Imperfect: 
French Intellectuals, 1944-1956 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992).
60. The revolutionary conception of citizenship in France swept away the legal 
impediments under which the Jewish community had labored. Wherever French 
armies penetrated after the Revolution and in the Napoleonic conquests, their ar­
rival was accompanied by the extension of full citizenship to Jews. See Pierre Birn-

Notes to Pages 32-38 365
baum and Ira Katznelson, eds., Paths of Emancipation: Jews, States, and Citizen­
ship (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995).
61. Gianfranco Poggi, The Development of the Modem State: A Sociological In­
troduction (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1978), p. 78. For all the advance in 
human rights that equal citizenship carried with it, it is worth recalling that this 
momentous step also undercut the intermediary structures between the state and 
the citizen and gave the state, for the first time, direct access to its subjects. Equal 
citizenship implied not only legal equality and universal male suffrage but also uni­
versal conscription, as those mobilized into Napoleons armies were shortly to dis­
cover. From the heights of the state, the society below increasingly appeared as an 
endless series of nationally equal particuliers with whom it dealt in their capacity 
as subjects, taxpayers, and potential military draftees.
62. Quoted in Kula, Measures and Men, p. 286.
63. As E. P. Thompson wrote in Whigs and Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act 
(New York: Pantheon, 1975): “During the eighteenth century one legal decision 
after another signaled that the lawyers had become converted to notions of ab­
solute property ownership, and that (wherever the least doubt could be found) the 
law abhorred the messy complexities of coincident use-right" (p. 241).
64. The code civil did not deal with agriculture explicitly, with one exception: it 
specified guidelines for tenant farming (fermage), in recognition of the wealthy and 
influential large tenants in the Paris basin and to the north. I am grateful to Peter 
Jones for bringing to my attention the study on which this brief discussion is based: 
Serge Aberdam, Aux origines du code rural, 1789-1900: Un siecle de debat (n.d., but 
probably 1978-80).
65. “En resume, la ligne generale du projet de 1807 est de refuser toute 
specificite au droit rural en ramenant, autant que possible, les rapports socieux a la 
campagne a la forme d'authorite legale que la bourgeoisie projette sur l’ensemble 
de la population” (In brief, the general policy of the proposal of 1807 is to deny any 
particularity to rural law, placing rural social relations as much as possible in the 
context of the legal authority that the bourgeoisie applied to the population as a 
whole [my translation]; ibid., p. 19).
66. No such political scruples were in evidence in the colonies, where admin­
istrative convenience and commercial logic prevailed over popular opinion and 
practice. See, for example, the fine case study by Dennis Galvan, “Land Pawning as 
a Response to the Standardization of Tenure,” chap. 4 of “The State Is Now Master 
of Fire: Peasant Lore, Land Tenure, and Institutional Adaptation in the Siin Region 
of Senegal” (Ph.D. diss., Department of Political Science, University of California, 
Berkeley, 1996).
67. Ibid., p. 18.
68. Ibid., p. 22.
69. In colonial Vietnam, the head tax, or capitation, was levied on whole com­
munities on the basis of their presumed population. If the sum were not remitted, 
the police would come and hold an auction of whatever they could seize (e.g., 
water buffalos, furniture, jewelry) until they had the required sum. This system 
gave the village notables, who owned most of the goods worth seizing, an incentive 
to make sure that the taxes were remitted on time.
70. This generalization also has validity for modern socialist forms of collective 
farming. A considerable amount of farmland, for example, “disappeared” from the 
books when Hungary’s collective farms were created; see Istvan Rev, “The Advan­
tages of Being Atomized: How Hungarian Peasants Coped with Collectivization,” 
Dissent 34 (Summer 1987): 335-49. In China, after the deadly Great Leap For­
ward, many collective farms systematically hid production from central authorities

366 Notes to Pages 38-44
in the interest of local survival; see Daniel Kelliher, Peasant Power in China (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
71. Cadastral surveys might also be undertaken by aristocratic holders of large 
fiefs who were convinced that they could thereby uncover taxable land and subjects 
who had hitherto eluded them.
72. Both the Danish and Norwegian examples are from the valuable historical 
analysis in Roger J. P. Kain and Elizabeth Baigent, The Cadastral Map in the Service 
of the State: A History of Property Mapping (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1992), p. 116.
73. The great efficiency of the Hutterite grain farmers in the northern Plains 
states and Canada is but one of many pieces of conflicting evidence. For more, see 
George Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize: Agrarian Reform in Russia (Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press, 1982), pp. 165-69.
74. A contemporary example from Mexico can be found in a fine analysis by 
Sergio Zendejas in “Contested Appropriation of Governmental Reforms in the Mex­
ican Countryside: The Ejido as an Arena of Confrontation of Political Practices,” in 
Sergio Zendejas and Pieter de Vries, eds., Rural Transformation as Seen from 
Below: Regional and Local Perspectives from Western Mexico (La Jolla, Calif.: Center 
for U.S.-Mexican Studies, University of California, San Diego, 1997). As Zendejas 
shows, the ejido system emerging from the Mexican revolution has had the effect of 
depriving the state of a great deal of knowledge about agricultural patterns, house 
lots, or village common-land tenure in most of the twenty-eight thousand ejidos in 
the country. Michoacan villagers have regarded a national program to survey, reg­
ister, and title every plot of rural land as a prelude to the individualization of prop­
erty rights, the division of the common lands, and the imposition of property taxes, 
and they have therefore resisted having their lands measured. Under the changes 
made to article 27 of the constitution, which envisions a national, freehold land 
market, their fears have proven justified. It has not been a question of establishing 
local land markets; as one villager said, “Haven't we always been selling and rent­
ing [ejido] parcels with or without certificates?” It has been, rather, a question of 
creating a regional and national market for land, backed by state power. To do this, 
the first task of the state has been to make legible a tenure landscape that the local 
autonomy achieved by the revolution had helped make opaque. See also, in this 
context, Luin Goldring, Having One’s Cake and Eating It, Too: Selective Appropria­
tion of Ejido Reform in an Urbanizing Ejido in Michoacan (forthcoming).
75. Here I am guilty of conveying a false sense of uniformity. In fact, there were 
a host of land arrangements, even in “black earth" Russia, and many villages did 
not redistribute land (Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize, p. 169).
76. Ibid., p. 212.
77. Yaney points out that Mennonite land that was interstripped was just as pro­
ductive as Mennonite land that was organized into consolidated farms (ibid., p. 160).
78. And not always in such newly settled lands, inasmuch as group land set­
tlement, with common property and against the government's wishes, was also 
common.
79. Ibid., chaps. 7 and 8. The Peasant Bank, under great pressure to loan money 
to poor peasants, inadvertently encouraged the older allotment system. The bank 
needed collateral that it could seize in the event of default, but poorer peasants farm­
ing allotment land had no fixed land that could serve as security. Faced with this 
quandary, the bank found itself loaning to whole villages or to groups of peasants 
farming adjacent, identifiable plots. It is worth noting that, like the modem tax sys­
tem, the modern credit system requires a legible property regime for its functioning.
80. Ibid., pp. 412-42.

Notes to Pages 44-48 367
81. Orlando Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War: The Volga Countryside in Revolu­
tion, 1917-1921 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), chap. 6, "The Rural Economy 
Under War Communism.”
82. Before comprehensive cadastral surveys, some land was open to all and be­
longed to no one, though social arrangements might regulate its use. With the first 
cadastral map, such land was generally designated as state land. All land was ac­
counted for; everything not owned privately became the property of the state.
83. Kain and Biagent, The Cadastral Map, p. 33. Seas, rivers, and wastes were 
to be omitted since they did not bear revenue. The whole operation was guided by 
a manual entitled Mode d’arpentagepour I’impot fonder.
84. Quoted in ibid., p. 5.
85. In a Third World setting, as Peter Vandergeest points out, a cadastral or 
land-use map using global positioning technology allows experts to formulate land- 
use policies and rules without having the inconvenience of visiting the terrain itself 
("Mapping Resource Claims, or, The Seductive Appeal of Maps: The Use of Maps in 
the Transformation of Resource Tenure,” paper presented at a meeting of the Asso­
ciation for the Study of Common Property, Berkeley, June 1996).
86. The land itself occasionally moves, due to landslides, erosion, avulsion, and 
accretion. For an interesting account of property law as it tries to deal with the 
"mobility” of its subject, see Theodore Steinberg, Slide Mountain, or The Folly of 
Owning Nature (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995).
87. In an earlier work, I examined this problem in some detail in its Southeast 
Asian context. See Scott, The Moral Economy of the Peasant, chap. 4.
88. In 1785 Austria's Franz Joseph had to choose between using net income or 
gross income as a basis for land taxation. Gross income was chosen because it was 
far simpler (e.g., average crop per unit of land x units of land x average grain 
price = gross income). It was necessary to sacrifice accuracy and fairness to create 
a procedure that was administratively feasible. See Kain and Biagent, The Cadas­
tral Map, p. 193.
89. Ibid., p. 59.
90. Issue of mineral rights and mineral income from subsoil deposits was a 
significant exception to this generalization.
91. Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 
1870-1914 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1976), p. 156.
92. For a brilliant analysis of the process of “permanent settlement” in India 
and its intellectual roots, see Ranajit Guha, A Rule of Property for Bengal: An Essay 
on the Idea of Permanent Settlement (Paris: Mouton, 1963). As Guha notes, the ex­
isting system of tenure that the British colonial rulers encountered in the eigh­
teenth century was completely mystifying: "At every step they came up against 
quasi-feudal rights and obligations which defied any attempt at interpretation in fa­
miliar western terms. The hieroglyphics of Persian estate-accounts baffled them. It 
was only a part of the difficulty that they could not easily master the languages in 
which the ancient and medieval texts relating to the laws of property were written; 
for tradition recorded only in memory and customs embedded in a variety of local 
usages wielded an authority equal to that of any written code" (p. 13).
93. For a remarkably thoughtful and thorough examination of how the colonial 
legal code transformed land-dispute settlement, land tenure, and social structure, 
see Sally Falk Moore, Social Facts and Fabrications: “Customary ” Law on Mount 
Kilimanjaro, 1880-1980 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
94. The combination of a complete cadastral register, freehold tenure, and a na­
tional market in land makes for a level of legibility that is as advantageous to the 
land speculator as it is to the tax collector. Commoditization in general, by denom-

368 Notes to Pages 49-52
mating all goods and services according to a common currency, makes for what 
Tilly has called the "visibility [of] a commercial economy" He writes, “In an econ­
omy where only a small share of goods and services are bought and sold, a number 
of conditions prevail: collectors of revenue are unable to observe or evaluate re­
sources with any accuracy, [and] many people have claims on any particular re­
source” (Coercion, Capital, and European States, pp. 89, 85).
95. The equality was, of course, purely areal. See Kain and Biagent, The 
Cadastral Map, p. 225. Colbert’s Forest Code of 1667 was also the first coherent at­
tempt to codify forest space in France along sharp Cartesian lines. In this connec­
tion, see Sahlins, Forest Rites, p. 14.
96. In Malaysia, Chinese are legally barred from owning certain kinds of agri­
cultural land. To get around this barrier, a Chinese man will register land in the 
name of a Malay confederate. To ensure that the confederate does not attempt to 
exercise his formal property rights, he will simultaneously sign loan papers worth 
far more than the property, with the Chinese man named as creditor.
97. Revolutionary legislation in France, rather than abolishing tithes outright, 
attempted to phase them out with temporary "tithe redemption payments.” Popular 
defiance was so massive and intractable that the payments were finally abandoned. 
See James C. Scott, “Resistance Without Protest and Without Organization: Peas­
ant Opposition to the Islamic Zakat and the Christian Tithe," Comparative Study in 
Society and History 29, no. 3 (1987): 417-52.
98. Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990), p. 17. Petty, a student of Hobbes, conducted the survey with an eye to 
accurate assessments of value and productivity. His theoiy of political economy can 
be found in Political Arithmetik, or A Discourse Concerning the Value of Lands, Peo­
ple, Buildings . . . (1691).
99. The fiction that North American and Australian landscapes were essen­
tially empty, which in turn meant that they were not being used as a factor of pro­
duction in market exchange, was the basis on which such lands were "redesig­
nated.” This is a fiction that joins the Highland Clearances and the expropriation of 
land from Native Americans, New Zealand Maoris, Australian native peoples, Ar­
gentine indigenous peoples, and so on.
100. Heilbron, introduction to The Quantifying Spirit in the Eighteenth Century, 
p. 17.
101. Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science 
and Public Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), p. 22. Porter shows 
convincingly how “mechanical objectivity” has served as a means for bureaucra­
cies, especially in democracies where expert judgment and expertise are always 
suspected of masking self-serving motives, to create an impersonal set of decision 
rules at once seemingly democratic and neutral.
102. Quoted in Kain and Biagent, The Cadastral Map, p. 320.
103. Students of these matters will perhaps wonder why I have not dealt with 
the simplification of time. The rationalization and commoditization of linear time 
in work and administration do indeed form a companion story, which I did not take 
up here because it would have made this chapter too long and because it has al­
ready been imaginatively treated by, among others, E. P Thompson in "Time, Work, 
Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism," Past and Present 38 (December 1967). For a 
fine survey, see Ronald Aminzade, “Historical Sociology and Time," Sociological 
Methods and Research 20, no. 3 (May 1992): 456-80.
104. Heilbron, introduction to The Quantifying Spirit in the Eighteenth Century, 
pp. 22-23.
105. Hacking, The Taming of Chance, p. 145. Napoleon avoided conducting a

Notes to Pages 54-56 369
census after 1806 for fear that its results would show the catastrophic impact that 
his wars had had on the French population.
Chapter 2: Cities, People, and Language
1. As one might expect, independent towns were likely to privilege local 
knowledge far more than royal towns, which were designed with administrative 
and military order in mind.
2. The Casbah’s illegibility, however, was not insurmountable. The f l n ’s resis­
tance there was eventually broken, although at great long-run political cost, by de­
termined police work, torture, and networks of local informers.
3. The inability of many U.S. municipal authorities to effectively govern inner 
cities has prompted attempts to bring back the “cop on the beat" in the form of 
"community policing." The purpose of community policing is to create a cadre of 
local police who are intimately familiar with the physical layout of the community 
and especially the local population, whose assistance is now judged vital to effec­
tive police work. Its aim is to turn officials who had come to be seen as outsiders 
into insiders.
4. I am grateful to Ron Aminzade for sending me the explanatory notes (mem- 
oires) meant to accompany two of the maps the military officials had prepared as 
part of this haute reconnaissance in the city of Toulouse in 1843. They come from 
the Archives de VArmee, Paris, dossier MR 1225. They note the streets or terrain that 
would be difficult to traverse, watercourses that might impede military movement, 
the attitude of the local population, the difficulty of their accents, the locations of 
markets, and so on.
5. Rene Descartes, Discourse on Method, trans. Donald A. Cress (Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1980), p. 6, quoted in Harrison, Forests, pp. 111-12.
6. Lewis Mumford, The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its 
Prospects (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961), p. 364.
7. Ibid., p. 387.
8. Quoted in ibid., p. 369.
9. Thomas More’s utopian cities, for example, were to be perfectly uniform, 
so that “he who knows one of the cities will know them all, so exactly alike are 
they, except where the nature of the ground prevents” (More’s Utopia, quoted in 
ibid., p. 327).
10. Saint Petersburg is the most striking example of the planned utopian capi­
tal, a metropolis that Dostoyevsky called the “most abstract and premeditated city 
in the world.’’ See Marshall Berman, All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience 
of Modernity (New York: Penguin, 1988), chap. 4. The Babylonians, Egyptians, and, 
of course, the Romans built “grid-settlements.” Long before the Enlightenment, 
right angles were seen as evidence of cultural superiority. As Richard Sennett 
writes, “Hippodamus of Miletus is conventionally thought the first city builder to 
conceive of these grids as expressions of culture; the grid expressed, he believed, 
the rationality of civilized life. In their military conquests the Romans elaborated 
the contrast between the rude and formless camps of the barbarians and their own 
military forts, or castra” (The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social Life of 
Cities [New York: Norton, 1990], p. 47).
11. Well, almost. There are a few streets—among them Lincoln, Archer, and Blue 
Island—that follow old Indian trails and thus deviate from the geometric logic.
12. It may have occurred to the reader that certain grid sections of upper Man­
hattan and Chicago are, despite their formal order, essentially ungoverned and

370 Notes to Pages S7-62
dangerous. No amount of formal order can overcome massive countervailing fac­
tors such as poverty, crime, social disorganization, or hostility toward officials. As 
a sign of the illegibility of such areas, the Census Bureau acknowledges that the 
number of uncounted African-Americans was six times the number of uncounted 
whites. The undercount is politically volatile since census figures determine the 
number of congressional seats to which a state is entitled.
13. See the mind-opening book by the geographer Yi-Fu Tuan, Dominance and 
Affection: The Making of Pets (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984).
14. Denis Cosgrove, “The Measure of America,” in James Corner and Alex S. 
MacLean, eds., Taking Measures Across the American Landscape (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1996), p. 4. Mercator maps had, of course, accustomed people to 
the projection of vast, miniaturized landscapes on a flat plane.
15. Mumford, The City in History, p. 422.
16. The plan created not only a more legible fiscal space but also the fortunes 
of the small coterie who used their inside knowledge of the plan to profit from 
real-estate speculation.
17. There was an older, quasi-planned, baroque city bequeathed to Paris by her 
absolutist rulers, especially those prior to Louis XIV, who for his part chose to lav­
ish his planning on a "new space," Versailles.
18. As Mark Girouard notes, the plan included public facilities and institutions 
such as parks (notably the huge Bois de Boulogne), hospitals, schools, colleges, 
barracks, prisons, and a new opera house (Cities and People: A Social and Architec­
tural History [New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985], p. 289). Roughly a century 
later, against greater odds, Robert Moses would undertake a similar retrofit of New 
York City.
19. Quoted in John Merriman, "Baron Haussmann’s Two Cities" (typescript, 
p. 8), later published in French as chap. 9 of Merriman's Aux marges de la ville: 
Faubourgs et banlieues en France, 1815-1871 (Paris: Seuil, 1994). This part of my 
discussion is greatly indebted to Merriman's careful account. Unless otherwise in­
dicated, all translations are mine.
20. Mumford writes, "Were not the ancient medieval streets of Paris one of the 
last refuges of urban liberties? No wonder that Napoleon III sanctioned the break­
ing through of narrow streets and culs-de-sac and the razing of whole quarters to 
provide wide boulevards. It was the best possible protection against assault from 
within” (The City in History, pp. 369-70).
21. Quoted in Louis Girard, Nouvelle histoire de Paris: La deuxieme republique et 
le second empire, 1848-1870 (Paris, 1981), p. 126. Cited in Merriman, Aux marges de 
la ville, p. 15. The parallels with the later ceinture rouge, the leftist working-class 
suburbs ringing Paris, are striking. Soweto and other black townships in South 
Africa under apartheid, although established explicitly for the purposes of segrega­
tion, also became illegible, subversive spaces from the perspective of the authorities.
22. Since the planners lacked a reliable map of the city, the first step was to 
build temporary wooden towers in order to achieve the triangulation necessary for 
an accurate map. See David H. Pinkney, Napoleon III and the Rebuilding of Paris 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1958), p. 5.
23. Quoted in Jeanne Gaillard, Paris, la ville, 1852-1870 (Paris, 1979), p. 38, 
cited in Merriman, Aux marges de la ville, p. 10.
24. Ibid., pp. 8-9.
25. Ibid., p. 9. Translation by Merriman.
26. Pinkney, Napoleon III, p. 23. A commonplace of demographic history has 
been that urban populations in Western Europe, beset with epidemics and gener­
ally high mortality, did not successfully reproduce themselves until well into the

Notes to Pages 62-65 371
nineteenth century; the growth of cities came largely from in-migration from the 
healthier countryside. Although this position has been challenged, the evidence for 
it is still convincing. See the judicious synthesis and assessment by Jan de Vries, 
European Urbanization, 1500-1800 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984), 
pp. 175-200.
27. Pinkney, Napoleon III, chap. 2.
28. Merriman, Aux marges de la ville, pp. 7-8. See also T. J. Clark, The Painting 
of Modem Life: Paris in the Art of Manet and His Followers (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1984), p. 35. Louis Napoleon’s and Haussmann’s mania for 
straight lines was the butt of many jokes. A character in a play by Edmond About, 
for instance, dreams of the day when the Seine itself will be straightened, because, 
as he says, “its irregular curve is really rather shocking” (quoted in Clark, The 
Painting of Modem Life, p. 35).
29. Pinkney, Napoleon III, p. 93.
30. Clark, The Painting of Modem Life, p. 66. For a superb analysis of how tidy 
Orientalist expositions depicting Old Cairo, the peasant village, and so on gave 
Arab visitors to Paris a completely new way of seeing their society, see Timothy 
Mitchell, Colonizing Egypt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), espe­
cially chaps. 1-3.
31. Gaillard, Paris, la ville, p. 568, quoted in Merriman, Aux marges de la ville,
p. 20.
32. David Harvey, Consciousness and the Urban Experience (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1985), p. 165, quoted in Merriman, Aux marges de la 
ville, p. 12. See also David Harvey, The Urban Experience (Baltimore: Johns Hop­
kins University Press, 1989), which covers much of the same ground.
33. Jacques Rougerie, Paris libre, 1871 (Paris, 1971), p. 19, quoted in Merriman, 
Aux marges de la ville, p. 27.
34. Merriman, Aux marges de la ville, p. 28.
35. Ibid., p. 30.
36. I owe this astute observation about The Witness to Benedict Anderson. More 
generally, his analysis of the census and the map as totalizing classificatory grids, 
particularly in colonial settings, has greatly influenced my thinking here. See An­
derson, Imagined Comunities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism 
(London: Verso, 1983), and also the remarkable book by Thongchai Winichakul, 
Siam Mapped: A History of the Geo-Body of a Nation (Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1994).
37. See, for example, William E. Wormsley, "Traditional Change in Imbonggu 
Names and Naming Practices,” Names 28 (1980): 183-94.
38. The adoption of permanent, inherited patronyms went far, but not the whole 
way. How is a state to associate a name, however unique and unambiguous, with an 
individual? Like identity cards, social security numbers, and pass systems, names 
require that the citizenry cooperate by carrying them and producing them on the de­
mand of an official. Cooperation is secured in most modern state systems by making 
a clear identity a prerequisite for receiving entitlements; in more coercive systems, 
harsh penalties are exacted for failure to carry identification documents. If, how­
ever, there is widespread defiance, individuals will either fail to identify themselves 
or use false identities. The ultimate identity card, then, is an ineradicable mark on 
the body: a tattoo, a fingerprint, a d n a  “signature.”
39. I am especially grateful to Bill Jenner and Ian Wilson of the Australian Na­
tional University and to Paul Smith of Haverford College for their generous advice 
about China. The Qin and Han administrative plans for population registration 
were ambitious, but how completely their goals were realized in practice remains

372 Notes to Pages 65-68
an important question. Jenner contends that the goals were largely realized, 
whereas Alexander Woodside claims that slippage must have been considerable.
40. See, for example, W. J. F. Jenner, “Freedom and Backwardness: Europe and 
China," paper delivered at “Ideas of Freedom in Asia," Humanities Research Cen­
tre, Australian National University, July 4-6, 1994; and Patricia Ebrey, "The Chi­
nese Family and the Spread of Confucian Values," in Gilbert Rozman, ed., The East 
Asian Region: Confucian Heritage and Its Modem Adaptation (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1991), pp. 45-83.
41. Ebrey, “The Chinese Family," pp. 55-57.
42. Ibid., p. 59.
43. To my knowledge, Iceland is the only European nation that had not adopted 
permanent surnames by the late twentieth century.
44. This account of the Florentine census is drawn entirely from David Herlihy 
and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Floren­
tine Catasto o f1427 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985).
45. The matter of age, like the matter of landholding, was a vastly different con­
cept in the state’s hands than it was in popular practice. See ibid., pp. 162-69. In 
local practice, exact ages were unimportant. Approximate ages and birth order 
(e.g., oldest son, youngest son) were more useful; in the catasto this is reflected by 
the tendency to declare ages in units of five or ten years (e.g., thirty-five, forty, forty- 
five, fifty, and sixty years). For the state, however, exact age was important for sev­
eral reasons. The age of “fiscal adulthood” as well as liability for conscription was 
eighteen, and, beyond age sixty, one was no longer responsible for capitation taxes. 
As one might expect, there was a demographically improbable clustering of decla­
rations just below age eighteen and just above sixty. Like the surname, the desig­
nation of age, in the strict, linear, chronological sense, originates as a state project.
46. In the West, women, domestic servants, and tied laborers were typically the 
last to adopt surnames (and to be given the vote), because they were legally sub­
sumed as minors in the charge of the male head of family.
47. Other surnames referring to fathers are not quite so obvious. Thus the name 
"Victor Hugo" would originally have meant simply "Victor, son of Hugo.”
48. I am indebted to Kate Stanton, an astute research assistant, for her back­
ground research on this issue.
49. See C. M. Matthews, English Surnames (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 
1966), pp. 35-48.
50. As Matthews notes, “The humble peasant with only one virgate of land was 
as anxious to claim it by right of being his father’s eldest son as the rich man in­
heriting a large estate. The land could be claimed and awarded only at the Manor­
ial Court, being held 'by copy of the Court Roll’ [that is, being a copyhold], which 
meant that the life tenant’s name was inscribed there on permanent record. This 
system provided a direct incentive to men to keep the same surname that had been 
put down on the roll for their father and grandfather” (ibid., p. 44). And given the 
vagaries of the mortality rate in fourteenth-century England, younger sons might 
want to keep the name as well, just in case.
51. In historical documents one can occasionally glimpse a moment when a 
permanent surname seems to gel. Under Henry VIII in the early sixteenth century, 
for example, a Welshman who appeared in court was asked for his name, and he 
answered, in the Welsh fashion, “Thomas Ap [son of] William, Ap Thomas, Ap 
Richard, Ap Hoel, Ap Evan Vaughan.” He was scolded by the judge, who instructed 
him to “leave the old manner, . . . whereupon he after called himself Moston, ac­
cording to the name of his principal house, and left that name to his posteritie" 
(William Camden, Remains Concerning Britain, ed. R. D. Dunn [1605; Toronto:

Notes to Pages 68-71 373
University of Toronto Press, 1984], p. 122). This “administrative" last name almost 
certainly remained unknown to Thomas’s neighbors.
52. See the classic study by Rodney Hilton, Bond Men Made Free: Medieval 
Peasant Movements and the English Rising of 1381 (New York: Viking Press, 1977), 
pp. 160-64.
53. I am particularly grateful to Rosanne Ruttan, Otto van den Muijzenberg, 
Harold Conklin, and Charles Bryant for putting me on the track of the Philippine 
case. The key document is Domingo Abella, ed., Catalogo alfabetico de Apellidos 
(Manila: National Archives, 1973). See also the short account in O. D. Corpuz, The 
Roots of the Filipino Nation, vol. 1 (Quezon City: Aklahi Foundation, 1989), pp. 
479-80. For a perceptive analysis of naming and identity formation among the 
Karo-Batak of colonial East Sumatra, see Mary Margaret Steedly, “The Importance 
of Proper Names: Language and 'National' Identity in Colonial Karoland," Ameri­
can Ethnologist 23, no. 3 (1996): 447-75.
54. For nearly three hundred years, the Spanish calendar for the Philippines 
had been one day ahead of the Spanish calendar, because Magellan’s expedition 
had not, of course, adjusted for their westward travel halfway around the globe.
55. Abella, Catalogo alfabetico de Apellidos, p. viii.
56. Ibid., p. vii.
57. As if the Filipinos did not have perfectly adequate oral and written ge­
nealogical schemes to achieve the same end.
58. Abella, Catalogo alfabetico de Apellidos, p. viii.
59. For the best treatment of permanent patronyms in France and their relation 
to state-building, see the insightful book by Anne Lefebvre-Teillard, Le nom: Droit et 
histoire (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1990). She examines the process 
whereby state officials, both administrative and judicial, gradually authorized cer­
tain naming practices and limited the conditions under which names might be 
changed. The civil registers, along with the livret de famille (family pass book), es­
tablished toward the end of the nineteenth century, became important tools for po­
lice administration, conscription, civil and criminal justice, and elections monitor­
ing. The standard opening line of an encounter between a policeman and a 
civilian—“Vos papiers, Monsieur”— dates from this period. Having experienced 
the “blinding” of the administration caused by the destruction of civil registers in 
the burning of the Hotel de Ville (city hall) and the Palais de Justice at the end of the 
Commune in 1871, officials took care to keep duplicate registers.
60. Robert Chazon, "Names: Medieval Period and Establishment of Surnames," 
Encyclopedia Judaica (Jerusalem and Philadelphia: Keter Publishers and Coronet 
Books, 1982), 12:809-13. In the 1930s the Nazis passed a series of “name decrees” 
whose sole purpose was to distinguish what they had determined as the Jewish 
population from the Gentile population. Jews who had Aryan-sounding names 
were required to change them (or to add "Israel” or "Sarah”), as were Aryans who 
had Jewish-sounding names. Lists of approved names were compiled, and con­
tested cases were submitted to the Reich Office for Genealogical Research. Once 
the administrative exercise was complete, a person’s name alone could single out 
him or her for deportation or execution. See Robert M. Rennick, "The Nazi Name 
Decrees of the Nineteen Thirties," Journal of the American Name Society 16 (1968): 
65-88.
61. Turkey, for example, adopted surnames only in the 1920s as a part of 
Ataturk's modernization campaign. Suits, hats (rather than fezzes), permanent last 
names, and modern nationhood all fit together in Ataturk’s scheme. Reze Shah, the 
father of the deposed Shah, ordered all Iranians to take the last name of their town 
of residence in order to rationalize the country's family names. Ali Akbar Rafsan-

374 Notes to Pages 72-76
jani thus means Ali Akbar from Rafsanjan. Although this system has the advantage 
of designating the homes of the generation that adopted it, it certainly doesn’t clar­
ify much locally in Rafsanjan. It may well be that the state is particularly concerned 
with monitoring those who are mobile or "out of place."
62. Dietary laws that all but preclude commensality are also powerful devices 
for social exclusion. If one were designating a set of cultural rules in order to wall 
off a group from surrounding groups, making sure its members cannot easily speak 
to or eat with others is a splendid beginning.
63. This is true despite the fact, as Benedict Anderson insightfully points out, 
that the "national past” is so often fitted with a bogus pedigree.
64. Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 
1870-1914 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1976), chap. 6. Weber points out 
that in the last twenty-five years of the nineteenth century, fully half of the French­
men reaching adulthood had a native tongue other than French. See Peter Sahlins’s 
remarkable book Boundaries: The Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989) for a discussion of French language 
policy at its periphery. Although administrative official languages have a lineage 
that goes back to at least the sixteenth century, the imposition of a national lan­
guage in other spheres comes in the mid-nineteenth century at the earliest.
65. For an illuminating analytical account of this process, see Abram de Swaan, 
In Care of the State (Oxford: Polity Press, 1988), especially chap. 3, "The Elemen­
tary Curriculum as a National Communication Code," pp. 52-117.
66. Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen, p. 73.
67. Quoted in ibid., p. 113.
68. Ibid., p. 197.
69. For a careful depiction of the geography of standard market areas, see G. 
William Skinner, Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China (Tucson: Associa­
tion of Asian Studies, 1975).
70. Much of the following material on the centralization of transport in France 
comes from the fine survey by Cecil O. Smith, Jr., "The Longest Run: Public Engi­
neers and Planning in France,” American Historical Review 95, no. 3 (June 1990): 
657-92. See also the excellent discussion and comparison of the Corps des Ponts et 
des Chaussees with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in Theodore Porter, Trust in 
Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1995), chap. 6.
71. Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen, p. 195.
72. There were continual debates over various plans: their cost, their commer­
cial viability, and their military efficacy. Some of this history can be found in 
Francois Caron, Histoire de I'exploitation d’un grand reseau: La compagnie des 
chemins de fer du Nord (Paris: Mouton, 1973), and Louis-Maurice Jouffroy, Here du 
rail (Paris: A. Colin, 1953). I thank Ezra Suleiman for his bibliographical help.
73. The technical affinity of rail travel to straight lines and exact timetables be­
comes, along with “streamlining,” an important aesthetic in modernism generally.
74. Smith, “The Longest Run," pp. 685-71. Smith claims that the Legrand Star 
meant that many reservists being mustered for World War I had to funnel through 
Paris, whereas, under a more decentralized rail plan, there would have been far 
more direct routes to the front: “Some reservists in Strasbourg [were] journeying 
via the capital to don their uniforms in Bordeaux before returning to fight in Al­
sace." General Von Moltke observed that he had six different rail lines for moving 
troops from the North German Confederation to the war zone between the Moselle 
and the Rhine, while French troops coming to the front had to detrain at Stras­
bourg or Metz, with the Vosges mountains in between. Finally, and perhaps most

Notes to Pages 77-81 375
important, once Paris was surrounded, the Legrand Star was left headless. After 
the war, the high command insisted on building more transverse lines to correct 
the deficiency.
75. See Ian Hacking, The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of 
Early Ideas About Probability, Induction, and Statistical Inference (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975).
76. I am extraordinarily grateful to the City Museum of Amsterdam for provid­
ing a copy of the map reproduced in this book as figure 13 and, above all, for stag­
ing the fine and unsparing exhibition "Hungerwinter and Liberation in Amster­
dam” and the accompanying catalogue, Here, back when . . . (Amsterdam: City 
Museum, 1995).
77. Here, back when . . ., p. 10.
78. Since, as we know best from the case of Anne Frank, a good many citizens 
were willing to hide Jews in the city and the countryside, deportation as a system­
atic administrative exercise eventually failed. As the Jewish population became in­
creasingly opaque to the authorities, they were increasingly forced to rely on Dutch 
collaborators who became their local trackers.
79. Even when these facts appear dynamic, they are usually the result of multi­
ple static observations through time that, through a “connect the dots” process, give 
the appearance of continuous movement. In fact, what actually happened between, 
say, observation A and observation B remains a mystery, which is glossed over by 
the convention of merely drawing a straight line between the two data points.
80. This is the way that Benedict Anderson puts it in Imagined Communities, 
p. 169.
81. I am grateful to Larry Lohmann for insisting to me that officials are not nec­
essarily any more abstract or narrow of vision in their representation of reality 
than laypeople are. Rather, the facts that they need are facts that serve the interests 
and practices of their institutional roles. He would have preferred, I think, that I 
drop the term "simplification” altogether, but I have resisted.
82. There are at least three problems here. The first is the hegemony of the cat­
egories. How does one classify someone who usually works for relatives, who may 
sometimes feed him, let him use some of their land as his own, or pay him in crops 
or cash? The sometimes quite arbitrary decisions about how to classify such cases 
are obscured by the final result, in which only the prevailing categories appear. 
Theodore Porter notes that officials in France's Office of National Statistics report 
that even trained coders will code up to 20 percent of occupational categories dif­
ferently (Trust in Numbers, p. 41). The goal of the statistical office is to ensure the 
maximum reliability among coders, even if the conventions applied to achieve it 
sacrifice something of the true state of affairs. The second problem, to which we 
shall return later, is how the categories and, more particularly, the state power be­
hind the categories shape the data. For example, during the recession in the United 
States in the 1970s, there was some concern that the official unemployment rate, 
which had reached 13 percent, was exaggerated. A major reason, it was claimed, 
was that many nominally unemployed were working “off the books" in the informal 
economy and were not reporting their income or employment for fear of being 
taxed. One could say then and today that the fiscal system had provoked an off­
stage reality that was designed to stay out of the data bank. The third problem is 
that those who collect and assemble the information may have special interests in 
what the data show. During the Vietnam War the importance of body counts and 
pacified villages as a measure of counterinsurgency success led commanders to 
produce inflated figures that pleased their superiors— in the short run—but in­
creasingly bore little relation to the facts on the ground.

376 Notes to Pages 81-87
83. The goal is to get rid of intersubjective variability on the part of the census 
takers or coders. And that requires standard, mechanical procedures that leave no 
room for personal judgment. See Porter, Trust in Numbers, p. 29.
84. Charles Tilly, Coercion, Capital, and European States, a.d. 990-1992 (Ox­
ford: Blackwell, 1990), p. 100.
85. Indicative of this tendency in scientific forestry is the substantial literature 
on "optimum control theory,” which is imported from management science. For an 
application and bibliography, see D. M. Donnelly and D. R. Betters, "Optimum 
Control for Scheduling Final Harvest in Even-Aged Forest Stands,” Forest Ecology 
and Management 46 (1991): 135-49.
86. The caricature is not so far-fetched that it does not capture the lyrical utopi­
anism of early advocates of state sciences. I quote the father of Prussian statistics, 
Ernst Engel: “In order to obtain an accurate representation, statistical research ac­
companies the individual through his entire earthly existence. It takes account of 
his birth, his baptism, his vaccination, his schooling and the success thereof, his 
diligence, his leave of school, his subsequent education and development, and, 
once he becomes a man, his physique and his ability to bear arms. It also accom­
panies the subsequent steps of his walk through life; it takes note of his chosen oc­
cupation, where he sets up his household and his management of the same, if he 
saved from the abundances of his youth for his old age, if and when and at what age 
he marries and whom he chooses as his wife—statistics look after him when things 
go well for him and when they go awry. Should he suffer shipwreck in his life, un­
dergo material, moral, or spiritual ruin, statistics take note of the same. Statistics 
leave a man only after his death— after it has ascertained the precise age of his 
death and noted the causes that brought about his end” (quoted in Ian Hacking, 
The Taming of Chance [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990], p. 34). One 
could hardly ask for a more complete list of early nineteenth-century state interests 
and the paper trail that it generated.
87. Tilly, echoing the colonial theme, describes much of this process within the 
European nation-state as the replacement of indirect rule with direct rule (Coer­
cion, Capital, and European States, pp. 103-26).
88. Donald Chisholm, Coordination Without Hierarchy: Informal Structures in 
Multiorganizational Systems (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), p. 10.
89. This process is best described by Benedict Anderson: "Guided by its [the 
colonial states] imagined map, it organized the new educational, juridical, public- 
health, police and immigration bureaucracies it was building on the principle of 
ethno-racial hierarchies which were, however, always understood in terms of paral­
lel series. The flow of subject populations through the mesh of differential schools, 
courts, clinics, police stations and immigration offices created 'traffic-habits' which 
in time gave real social life to the state’s earlier fantasies” (Imagined Communities, 
p. 169). A related argument about the cultural dimension of state-building in En­
gland can be found in Philip Corrigan and Derek Sayer, The Great Arch: English 
State Formation as Cultural Revolution (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991).
Chapter 3: Authoritarian High Modernism
1. My colleague Paul Landau recalls the story by Borges in which a king, un­
happy at maps that do not do justice to his kingdom, finally insists on a map with a 
scale of one-to-one. When complete, the new map exactly covers the existing king­
dom, submerging the real one beneath its representation.
2. A commonplace example may help. One of the ordinary frustrations of the

Notes to Pages 88-89 377
modern citizen, even in liberal democracies, is the difficulty of representing his 
unique case to a powerful agent of a bureaucratic institution. But the functionary 
operates with a simplified grid designed to cover all the cases that she confronts. 
Once a decision has been made as to which "bin” or “pigeonhole" the case falls into, 
the action to be taken or the protocol to be followed is largely cut-and-dried. The 
functionary endeavors to sort the case into the appropriate category, while the cit­
izen resists being treated as an instance of a category and tries to insist, often un­
successfully, that his unique case be examined on its singular merits.
3. I have borrowed the term "high modernism” from David Harvey, The Condi­
tion of Post-Modernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Social Change (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1989). Harvey locates the high-water mark of this sort of modernism in 
the post-World War II period, and his concern is particularly with capitalism and 
the organization of production. But his description of high modernism also works 
well here: "The belief ‘in linear progress, absolute truths, and rational planning of 
ideal social orders’ under standardized conditions of knowledge and production 
was particularly strong. The modernism that resulted was, as a result, ‘positivistic, 
technocratic, and rationalistic’ at the same time as it was imposed as the work of 
an elite avant-garde of planners, artists, architects, critics, and other guardians of 
high taste. The ‘modernization’ of European economies proceeded apace, while the 
whole thrust of international politics and trade was justified as bringing a benevo­
lent and progressive ‘modernization process’ to a backward Third World” (p. 35).
4. For case studies of "public entrepreneurs” in the United States, see Eugene 
Lewis’s study of Hyman Rickover, J. Edgar Hoover, and Robert Moses, Public En­
trepreneurs: Toward a Theory of Bureaucratic Political Power: The Organizational 
Lives of Hyman Rickover, J. Edgar Hoover, and Robert Moses (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1980).
Monnet, like Rathenau, had experience in economic mobilization during World 
War I, when he helped organize the transatlantic supply of war material for Britian 
and France, a role that he resumed during World War II. By the time he helped 
plan the postwar integration of French and German coal and steel production, he 
had already had several decades of experience in supranational management. See 
Franqois Duchene, Jean Monnet: The First Statesman of Interdependence (New York: 
Norton, 1995).
5. I will not pursue the argument here, but I think Nazism is best understood as 
a reactionary form of modernism. Like the progressive left, the Nazi elites had 
grandiose visions of state-enforced social engineering, which included, of course, 
extermination, expulsion, forced sterilization, and selective breeding and which 
aimed at “improving” genetically on human nature. The case for Nazism as a viru­
lent form of modernism is made brilliantly and convincingly by Zygmunt Bauman 
in Modernity and the Holocaust (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989). See also, 
along the same lines, Jeffrey Herf, Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture, 
and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1984), and Norbert Frei, National Socialist Rule in Germany: The Fiihrer 
State, 1933-1945, trans. Simon B. Steyne (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
6. I am grateful to James Ferguson for reminding me that reactionary high- 
modernist schemes are about as ubiquitous as progressive variants.
7. This is not by any means meant to be a brief for conservatism. Conservatives 
of many stripes may care little for civil liberties and may resort to whatever brutal­
ities seem necessary to remain in power. But their ambitions and hubris are much 
more limited; their plans (in contrast to those of reactionary modernists) do not ne­
cessitate turning society upside down to create new collectivities, new family and 
group loyalties, and new people.

378 Notes to Pages 89-92
8. Vaclav Havel, address given at Victoria University, Wellington, New 
Zealand, on March 31,1995, reprinted in the New York Review of Books 42, no. 11 
(June 22, 1995): 36.
9. Quoted in Zygmunt Bauman, Socialism: The Active Utopia (New York: 
Holmes and Meier, 1976), p. 11.
10. For an enlightening discussion of the intellectual lineage of authoritarian 
environmentalism, see Douglas R. Weiner, "Demythologizing Environmentalism,” 
Journal of the History of Biology 25, no. 3 (Fall 1992): 385-411.
11. See Michael Adas’s Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, 
and Ideologies of Western Dominance (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989) and 
Marshall Berman’s All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity 
(New York: Penguin, 1988). What is new in high modernism, I believe, is not so 
much the aspiration for comprehensive planning. Many imperial and absolutist 
states have had similar aspirations. What are new are the administrative technol­
ogy and social knowledge that make it plausible to imagine organizing an entire so­
ciety in ways that only the barracks or the monastery had been organized before. In 
this respect, Michel Foucault’s argument, in Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Vintage Books, 1977), is persuasive.
12. Here I want to distinguish between advances in scientific knowledge and 
inventions (many of which occurred in the eighteenth century or earlier) and the 
massive transformations that scientific inventions wrought in daily material life 
(which came generally in the nineteenth century).
13. Witold Kula, Measures and Men, trans. R. Szreter (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1986), p. 211.
14. Quoted in Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1990), p. 38. A few years later, the Jacobins were, one could argue, the 
first to attempt to actually engineer happiness by transforming the social order. As 
Saint-Just wrote, "The idea of happiness is new in Europe.” See Albert O. Hirsch- 
man, "Rival Interpretations of Market Society: Civilizing, Destructive, or Feeble,” 
Journal of Economic Literature 20 (December 1982): 1463-84.
15. I am greatly indebted to James Ferguson, whose perceptive comments on 
an early draft of the book pointed me in this direction.
16. See, for example, Graham Buschell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller, eds., 
The Foucault Effect: Studies in Govemmentality (London: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 
1991), chap. 4.
17. Hacking, The Taming of Chance, p. 105. Hacking shows brilliantly how a 
statistical “average" metamorphosed into the category "normal," and "normal,” in 
turn, into a “normative” standard to be achieved by social engineering.
18. By now, a great deal of historical research has made crystal clear how wide­
spread throughout the West was the support for eugenic engineering. The belief 
that the state must intervene to protect the races' physical and mental characteris­
tics was common among progressives and animated a well-nigh international so­
cial movement. By 1926, twenty-three of the forty-eight U.S. states had laws per­
mitting sterilization.
19. See Gareth Stedman- Jones, Languages of Class: Studies in English Working- 
Class History, 1832-1982 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983). It is im­
portant to recognize that, among Western powers, virtually all the initiatives asso­
ciated with the "civilizing missions” of colonialism were preceded by comparable 
programs to assimilate and civilize their own lower-class populations, both rural 
and urban. The difference, perhaps, is that in the colonial setting officials had 
greater coercive power over an objectified and alien population, thus allowing for 
greater feats of social engineering.

Notes to Pages 92-97 379
20. For a science-fiction account of the attempt to create a "technocratic and 
objective man” who would be free of "nature" see C. S. Lewis, That Hideous 
Strength: A Modem Fairy Tale for Grown-Ups (New York: Macmillan, 1946).
21. There is the interesting and problematic case of the "wild” garden, in which 
the precise shape of "disorder" is minutely planned. Here it is a matter of an aes­
thetic plan, designed to have a certain effect on the eye— an attempt to copy un­
tended nature. The paradox is just as intractable as that of a zoo designed to mimic 
nature— intractable, that is, until one realizes that the design does not extend to al­
lowing the critters to eat one another!
22. Karl Marx, from the Communist Manifesto, quoted in Berman, All That Is 
Solid Melts into Air, p. 95.
23. The airplane, having replaced the locomotive, was in many respects the 
defining image of modernity in the early twentieth century. In 1913, the futurist 
artist and playwright Kazimir Malevich created the sets for an opera entitled Vic­
tory over the Sun. In the last scene, the audience heard from offstage a propeller’s 
roar and shouts announcing that gravity had been overcome in futurist countries. 
Le Corbusier, Malevich’s near contemporary, thought the airplane was the reigning 
symbol of the new age. For the influence of flight, see Robert Wohl, A Passion for 
Wings: Aviation and the Western Imagination, 1908-1918 (New Haven: Yale Uni­
versity Press, 1996).
24. The Jacobins intended just such a fresh start, starting the calendar again at 
"year one" and renaming the days and months according to a new, secular system. 
To signal its intention to create a wholly new Cambodian nation, the Pol Pot regime 
began with “year zero.”
25. Quoted in Harvey, The Condition of Post-Modemity, p. 99.
26. In this section, the masculine personal pronoun is less a convention than a 
choice made with some deliberation. See Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature: 
Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution (San Francisco: Harper, 1980).
27. See, for example, Margaret M. Bullitt, "Toward a Marxist Theory of Aes­
thetics: The Development of Socialist Realism in the Soviet Union,” Russian Review 
35, no. 1 (January 1976): 53-76.
28. Baruch Knei-Paz, “Can Historical Consequences Falsify Ideas? Or, Karl Marx 
After the Collapse of the Soviet Union.” Paper presented to Political Theory Work­
shop, Department of Political Science, Yale University, New Haven, November 1994.
29. Raymond Aron’s prophetic dissent, The Opium of the Intellectuals, trans. 
Terence Kilmartin (London: Seeker and Warburg, 1957), is a key document in this 
context.
30. The larger, the more capital-intensive, and the more centralized the 
schemes, the greater their appeal in terms of power and patronage. For a critique 
of flood-control projects and World Bank projects in this context, see James K. 
Boyce, "Birth of a Megaproject: Political Economy of Flood Control in Bangla­
desh,” Environmental Management 14, no. 4 (1990): 419-28.
31. Harvey, The Condition of Post-Modemity, p. 12.
32. See Charles Tilly's important theoretial contribution in Coercion, Capital, 
and European States, a.d. 990-1992 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990).
33. A civil war, as in the Bolshevik case, may be the price of consolidating the 
revolutionaries’ power.
34. White-settler colonies (e.g., South Africa, Algeria) and anti-insurgency cam­
paigns (e.g., Vietnam, Algeria, Afghanistan) have carried out huge population re­
movals and forced resettlements. In most such cases, however, even the pretense 
that the comprehensive social planning was for the welfare of the affected popula­
tions has been paper-thin.

380 Notes to Pages 98-100
35. Here I am particularly indebted to the discussion of George Yaney, The Urge 
to Mobilize: Agrarian Reform in Russia (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982), 
pp. 448-62.
36. Anson Rabinbach, The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of 
Modernity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), pp. 260-71. In 1907, 
long before the war, Rathenau and a number of architects and political leaders had 
founded Deutsche Werkbund, which was devoted to fostering technical innovation 
in industry and the arts.
37. See Gregory J. Kasza, The Conscription Society: Administered Mass Organi­
zations (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995), especially chap. 1, pp. 7-25.
38. Rabinbach, The Human Motor, p. 290.
39. For recent assessments of the evolution of technology and production in the 
United States, see Nathan Rosenberg, Perspectives on Technology (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976); Rosenberg, Inside the Black Box: Technology 
and Economics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982); and Philip Scran­
ton, Figured Tapestry: Production, Markets, and Power in Philadelphia, 1885-1942 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
40. See the inventive article by Ernest J. Yanorella and Herbert Reid, “From 
'Trained Gorilla’ to 'Humanware’: Repoliticizing the Body-Machine Complex Be­
tween Fordism and Post-Fordism,” in Theodore R. Schatzki and Wolfgang Natter, 
eds., The Social and Political Body (New York: Guildford Press, 1996), pp. 181-219.
41. Rabinbach, The Human Motor, p. 272. Rabinbach is here paraphrasing the 
conclusions of a seminal article by Charles S. Maier, “Between Taylorism and Tech­
nocracy: European Ideologies and the Vision of Industrial Productivity in the 
1920s,” Journal of Contemporary History 5, no. 2 (1970): 27-63.
42. Thorstein Veblen was the best-known social scientist expounding this view 
in the United States. Literary versions of this ideology are apparent in Sinclair 
Lewis’s Arrowsmith and Ayn Rand’s Fountainhead, works from very different quad­
rants of the political spectrum.
43. Rabinbach, The Human Motor, p. 452. For Rathenau’s writings, see, for ex­
ample, Von kommenden Dingen (Things to come) and Die Neue Wirtschaft (The new 
economy), the latter written after the war.
44. Walther Rathenau, Von kommenden Dingen (1916), quoted in Maier, “Be­
tween Taylorism and Technocracy,” p. 47. Maier notes that the apparent harmony of 
capital and labor in wartime Germany was achieved at the cost of an eventually ru­
inous policy of inflation (p. 46).
45. Michael Adas, Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, and 
Ideologies of Western Dominance (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989), p. 380. 
Sheldon Wolin, in Politics and Vision: Continuity and Innovation in Western Politi­
cal Thought (Boston: Little, Brown, 1960), provides an extensive list of like-minded 
thinkers spanning the political spectrum, from fascists and nationalists at one end 
to liberals, social democrats, and communists at the other, and hailing from 
France, Germany, Austria-Prussia (the Prussian Richard von Moellendorf, a close 
associate of Rathenau and a publicist for a managed postwar economy), Italy (An­
tonio Gramsci on the left and fascists Masimo Rocca and Benito Mussolini on the 
right), and Russia (Alexej Kapitonovik Gastev, the “Soviet Taylor”).
46. V. I. Lenin, The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Rus­
sian Revolution, 1905-1907, 2nd rev. ed. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1954), p. 
195, written September 28, 1917 (first emphasis only added).
47. Leon Smolinski, "Lenin and Economic Planning,” Studies in Comparative 
Communism 2, no. 1 (January 1969): 99. Lenin and Trotsky were explicit, Smo­
linski claims, about how electric centrals would create a farm population depen­

Notes to Pages 100-06 381
dent on the center and thus make state control of agricultural production possi­
ble (pp. 106-7).
48. Lenin, Works (Moscow, 1972), 27:163, quoted in Ranier Traub, “Lenin and 
Taylor: The Fate of ‘Scientific Management' in the (Early) Soviet Union,” trans. 
Judy Joseph, in Telos 34 (Fall 1978): 82-92 (originally published in Kursbuch 43 
[1976]). The "bard” of Taylorism in the Soviet Union was Alexej Kapitonovik 
Gastev, whose poetry and essays waxed lyrical about the possibilities of a “union" 
between man and machine: “Many find it repugnant that we want to deal with 
human beings as a screw, a nut, a machine. But we must undertake this as fear­
lessly as we accept the growth of trees and the expansion of the railway network” 
(quoted in ibid., p. 88). Most of the labor institutes were closed and their experts de­
ported or shot in the Stalinist purges of the 1930s.
49. Lenin, “The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government,” Izvestia, April 28, 
1918, cited in Maier, “Between Taylorism and Technocracy,” p. 51 n. 58.
50. Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller, The Foucault Effect: 
Studies in Govemmentality, with two lectures by and an interview with Michel Fou­
cault (London: Wheatsheaf, 1991), p. 106.
51. This point has been made forcefully and polemically in the twentieth cen­
tury by Friedrich Hayek, the darling of those opposed to postwar planning and the 
welfare state. See, especially, The Road to Serfdom (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1976).
Chapter 4: The High-Modernist City
1. I am particularly grateful to Talja Potters for her perceptive comments on a 
first draft of this chapter.
2. Le Corbusier’s entry in the 1927 design competition for the palace of the 
League of Nations won first prize, but his design was never built.
3. For this period, see Jean-Louis Cohen, Le Corbusier and the Mystique of the 
USSR: Theories and Projects for Moscow, 1928-1936 (Princeton: Princeton Univer­
sity Press, 1992).
4. For an excellent analysis of modernity and the American city, see Katherine 
Kia Tehranian, Modernity, Space, and Power: The American City in Discourse and 
Practice (Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press, 1995).
5. Le Corbusier (Charles-Edouard Jeanneret), The Radiant City: Elements of a 
Doctrine of Urbanism to Be Used as the Basis of Our Machine-Age Civilization, trans. 
Pamela Knight (New York: Orion Press, 1964). The original French edition is La 
ville radieuse: Elements d'une doctrine d ’urbanisme pour Tequipement de la civilisa­
tion machiniste (Boulogne: Editions de l’Architecture d’Aujourd’hui, 1933). The 
following analysis draws heavily on both.
6. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 220.
7. Like many high modernists, Le Corbusier had a romance with the airplane. 
He wrote: "It is as an architect and town planner . . . that I let myself be carried off 
on the wings of an airplane, make use of the bird's-eye view, of the view from the 
air. . . . The eye now sees in substance what the mind could only subjectively con­
ceive. [The view from the air] is a new function added to our senses; it is a new 
standard of measurement; it is the basis of a new sensation. Man will make use of it 
to conceive new aims. Cities will arise out of their ashes" (quoted in James Corner 
and Alex S. MacLean, Taking Measures Across the American Landscape [New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1996], p. 15).
8. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 322 (emphasis added).

382 Notes to Pages 106-12
9. Ibid. p. 121.
10. Robert Fishman, Urban Utopias of the Twentieth Century: Ebenezer Howard, 
Frank Lloyd Wright, and Le Corbusier (New York: Basic Books, 1977), p. 186.
11. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 134.
12. Ibid., pp. 82-83 (first emphasis added, second emphasis in original).
13. From Le Corbusiers "When the Cathedrals Were White,” trans. Francis Hys- 
lop, quoted in Richard Sennett, The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social 
Life of Cities (New York: Norton, 1990), p. 169. For an account of Le Corbusier's 
yearlong visit to America in 1935, see Mardges Bacon, Le Corbusier in America: 
Travels in the Land of the Timid (forthcoming). Le Corbusier failed to win the com­
missions he sought in America, apparently because, even at the frontier, urban plan­
ners were put off by his demolition-based schemes.
14. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 123 (emphasis in original).
15. For an accessible introduction to the fractal logic of living processes, see 
James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (New York: Penguin, 1988).
16. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 178. In his actual buildings, however, Le 
Corbusier’s practice was far more varied.
17. Ibid., pp. 22-23. It was ironically fitting that his never-built design for the 
palace of the League of Nations — at the time, the most universal of institutions — 
had won first prize.
18. Ibid., p. 46.
19. Ibid., pp. 29-30. For a convincing argument that rigid, functionally specific 
zoning laws lie behind failed communities and suburban sprawl in the United 
States today, see James Howard Kunstler, “Home from Nowhere,” Atlantic Monthly, 
September 1996, pp. 43-66.
20. Lawrence Vale, Architecture, Power, and National Identity (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1992), p. 109.
21. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 71.
22. One alternative to such simplification is to be guided by the tastes of the end 
user or consumer. Do people want to live there? Do current residents like living 
there? These criteria are not to be confounded with market criteria, which also ask 
whether people can afford it.
23. I write “Le Corbusier's doctrine” because in practice his buildings were nei­
ther low in cost nor efficient in function. The actual buildings, however, were also 
rather more interesting than his theoretical doctrines.
24. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 7.
25. Le Corbusier, quoted in Fishman, Urban Utopias, p. 193 (emphasis added).
26. Le Corbusier, La ville radieuse, pp. 178-79 (my translation).
27. Le Corbusier, quoted in Fishman, Urban Utopias, p. 208.
28. Compare this spatial representation of social and political order with the
city plan Plato outlines in The Laws: an acropolis at the center, concentric rings of 
the urban core, an artisan (noncitizen) suburb, and the the inner and outer rings of 
the cultivated area. The "pie” is divided into twelve segments that form the basis for 
the recruitment and annual rotation of the guard force. See Pierre Vidal-Naquet, 
“A Study in Ambiguity: Artisans in the Platonic City,” chap. 11 of The Black Hunter: 
Forms of Thought and Forms of Society in the Greek World, trans. Andrew Szegedy- 
Maszak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), pp. 224-45.
29. The urban-planning genius’s search for the autocrat who will give him the 
power to realize his vision was also evident in the career of Walter Christaller, the 
great German geographer and originator of central place theory. He lent his ser­
vices to the Nazi regime "in order to give advice about the creation of a hierarchi­
cal order of urban settlements for the newly won Polish territories.” It was a chance

Notes to Pages 112-13 383
to implement his theory of hexagonal market areas and town placement on a flat 
plain. After the war he joined the Communist Party, “for his hope was that an au­
thoritarian regime would use its power to relocate war-devastated cities according 
to an optimal pattern as demanded by central place theory." It was a classic case of 
the attempt to impose what had begun as a simplified analytical description of the 
economics of location. Hans Carol, “Geographica: Walter Christaller, a Personal 
Memoir,” Canadian Geographer 14, no. 1 (1970): 67-69. I am grateful to Otto van 
den Muijzenberg for this reference.
30. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 181.
31. Ibid., p. 154 (emphasis added).
32. I try to be exceptionally cautious in using such loaded terms as “fascism,” 
but I think this one is justified here. When Le Corbusier writes of the beauty of the 
Parthenon, the celebration of violence is just beneath the surface. “Remember the 
Parthenon,” he writes. "Remember its clarity, its clear lines, its intensity, its econ­
omy, its violence, remember its great cry in the midst of that landscape created by 
grace and terror. Strength and purity" (ibid., p. 187 [emphasis added]). Le Cor­
busier also has the tendency, as we shall presently see, to dehumanize his oppo­
nents and the urban poor: "Everything depends upon the wisdom of the plans. . . . 
I am talking here of a society that has already provided itself with a planned econ­
omy and swept away all the parasites present in the society we know today” (p. 73 
[emphasis added]).
33. Mumford condemns for its similar hubris the spirit of baroque planning, 
which, to a twentieth-century eye, seems far less expansive. In his commentary on 
the passage from Descartes (quoted in chapter 1), Mumford contrasts two orders of 
thinking: the organic and the mechanical. “The first springs out of the total situa­
tion, the other simplifies the facts of life for the sake of an artful system of concepts, 
more dear to the mind than life itself. One works cooperatively with the ‘materials 
of others,’perhaps guiding them, but first acknowledging their existence and un­
derstanding their purpose; the other, that of the baroque despot, insisting on his law, 
his order, his society, is imposed by a single professional authority, working under 
his command" {The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Pros­
pects [New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961], p. 394). The appeal of a cen­
trally conceived city over a city grown up largely by unplanned accretions stemmed 
not necessarily from an esprit geometrique, as it did with Descartes; the planned city 
was seen to demonstrate royal power and to be more healthful, even in the seven­
teenth century. Thus John Evelyn, recently back from European exile with Charles 
II, wrote that London was “a city consisting of a wooden, northern, and inartificial 
congestion of houses, some of its principal streets so narrow, as there is nothing 
more deformed and unlike the prospect of it at a distance, and its assymmetrie 
within the walls” (quoted in Mark Jenner, “The Politics of London Air: John Eve­
lyn’s Fumifugium and the Restoration,” Historical Journal 38, no. 3 [1995]: 542 
[emphasis added]).
34. Quoted in Fishman, Urban Utopias, p. 213.
35. Le Corbusier was a member of Redressment Franqais, a circle of industri­
alists linked to the right. Regarding this connection and especially Le Corbusier's 
work in the Soviet Union, see Cohen, Le Corbusier a n d  the Mystique of the USSR.
36. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 131 (emphasis in original). He continued, 
"The power of calculation is such that the imprudent might be tempted to raise al­
tars to it forthwith, and worship it.”
37. Le Corbusier was particularly proud of the transparency and line of this 
building, which, like many of his buildings in the 1920s, was set up on pilings (pilo- 
tis). Describing it, he wrote, "Appreciate the entirely new and formidable virtues of

384 Notes to Pages 114-17
this architecture; the impeccable line of the substructure. The building resembles an 
object in a window display, and it is perfectly legible” (Le Corbusier, “Les Techniques 
sont Tassiette meme du lyricisme: Elies ouvrent un nouveau cycle de 1'architecture," 
in Precisions sur un etat present de I'architecture et de Vurbanisme [Paris, 1930], 
quoted in Cohen, Le Corbusier and the Mystique of the USSR, p. 77 [emphasis added]).
38. In the end, Le Corbusier was bitter about his Soviet experience: “On several 
occasions I have been asked to draw up plans of cities for the Soviet Union; unfor­
tunately it was all hot air. I am extremely sorry about this. . . .  I have studied the 
basic social truths in such depth that I have been the first to create, in a natural 
way, t h e  g r e a t c la s s le s s  c ity , harmonious and joyful. It sometimes pains me to 
think that in the USSR I am resisted for reasons that to me do not appear to be valid” 
(quoted in Cohen, Le Corbusier and the Mystique of the USSR, p. 199).
39. Quoted in ibid., p. 109. In justifying the linear rigor of his Moscow plans, Le 
Corbusier wrote, “curved lines constitute paralysis, and the winding path is the 
path of donkeys” (quoted in ibid., p. 15).
40. Quoted in ibid., p. 93 (emphasis in original). Like so much of The Radiant 
City, this passage reflects Le Corbusier's constant appeal to the political authorities 
who alone can give substance to his plans.
41. See Colin Rowe, The Architecture of Good Intentions: Towards a Possible 
Retrospect (London: Academy Editions, 1995), for a discussion of Le Corbusier and 
the concept of the sublime.
42. Le Corbusier, quoted in ibid., p. 152.
43. Le Corbusier, quoted in Fishman, Urban Utopias, p. 177 (emphasis added).
44. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 116.
45. Ibid., p. 138.
46. Ibid., p. 176.
47. Ibid., p. 120. Baroque city planners also recognized that narrow streets 
posed a danger to the state. See Mumford's comment about the Neapolitan king 
Ferrante’s fear of dark and crooked streets (The City in History, p. 348).
48. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 120. In a whimsical footnote Le Corbusier 
imagines a monument in bronze with Louis XIV, Napoleon I, and Napoleon III join­
ing hands in the foreground and a smiling Colbert and Haussmann, also holding 
hands, in the background. With their free hands the three in the foreground raise a 
scroll bearing the admonition, “Keep at it, for God's sake.”
49. Ibid., p. 27.
50. Ibid., p. 187.
51. Ibid., p. 185.
52. Ibid., p. 70. The influence of Fordism and Taylorism are evident here, too. 
See David Harvey, The Condition of Post-Modernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of 
Social Change (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989), pp. 35-44. Le Corbusier was, after 
his first two decades of professional work, firmly associated with purism and con­
structivism. For constructivists, the most efficient shape of an object was the ideal 
shape; decorative touches were forbidden, as they only detracted from the pure 
beauty of functional design. The design of a house conceived in this spirit would 
begin from the inside, with its function and the available materials determining its 
shape and look. Despite his ideological commitments, Le Corbusier was always 
concerned with the painterly line of his designs, which he associated with classical 
or natural forms. In his later years, he forbade the use of the word “functionalism” 
in his studio. For discussions of Le Corbusier's early designs and intellectual mi­
lieu, see Russel Walden, ed., The Open Hand: Essays on Le Corbusier (Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1975), especially the selections by Charles Jencks, Anthony Sutcliffe, and 
Mary Patricia May Sekler.

Notes to Pages 117-31 385
53. Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, p. 121.
54. Ibid., p. 128 (emphasis added). Curiously enough, when compared to Le 
Corbusier's grand schemes, his smaller projects seem to have been more success­
ful, both aesthetically and practically. In particular, his small Chapel of Notre 
Dame du Haut at Ronchamp is considered a brilliant achievement, and his early 
houses at La Chaux-de-Fonds are much admired for decorative features that he 
later renounced.
55. James Holston, The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
56. Brazil has something of a history of making ambitious plans to claim the in­
terior and then seeing them come to grief. In 1972, the trans-Amazonian highway 
was opened amid much fanfare (and ecological concern); by the late 1980s, much 
of the road was overgrown and impassible.
57. Quoted in Lawrence J. Vale, Architecture, Power, and National Identity (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), p. 125.
58. Holston, The Modernist City, pp. 113-19.
59. Ibid., p. 115.
60. Compare this tradition with the intention of Le Corbusier, who wrote, "Cafes 
and places of recreation will no longer be the fungus which eats up the pavements of 
Paris. We must kill the street” (Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchells 
[New York: Praeger, 1959], pp. 56-59).
61. See Holston’s interesting analysis in The Modernist City, pp. 119-36.
62. Ibid., pp. 105-7. I take the liberty of translating convivencia as "convivial­
ity” rather than “sociality,” as it seems more faithful to the point that Holston’s in­
formant is trying to make (p. 105).
63. Ibid., pp. 24-26.
64. Ibid., p. 24.
65. There are, of course, some things that residents do like about living in 
Brasilia: the government facilities, the high standard of living, and the fact that it is 
a safe environment for children.
66. Ibid., p. 163.
67. Ibid., p. 171. The freestanding small house could also be merely a repre­
sentational convention that gets established early in childhood.
68. See Holston’s interesting analysis of how the superquadra apartment design 
eliminates the most public or social space of the traditional Brazilian dwelling, the 
copa, in ibid., pp. 177-80.
69. Ibid., p. 149. See also Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City (Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1960). Lynch’s concept of “imageability” has more to do with how a place or 
neighborhood can be "pictured” by its inhabitants than the legibility it might have 
to a planner or administrator. The two forms of order might often, as Holston re­
minds us, be negatively correlated.
70. Holston, The Modernist City, p. 209.
71. Quoted in ibid., p. 210.
72. My information about Chandigarh comes from the following sources: Ravi 
Kalia, Chandigarh: In Search of an Identity (Carbondale: Southern Illinois Univer­
sity Press, 1987), and three articles in Russell Walden, ed., The Open Hand: Essays 
on Le Corbusier (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977): Maxwell Fry, "Le Corbusier at 
Chandigarh,” pp. 351-63; Madhu Sarin, "Chandigarh as a Place to Live In,” pp. 
375-411; and Stanislaus von Moos, "The Politics of the Open Hand: Notes on Le 
Corbusier and Nehru at Chandigarh," pp. 413-57.
73. Punjabi politicians also embraced the project, seeing it as compensation for 
the loss of Lahore, the pre-partition capital of the Punjab, a focus of Mogul power,

386 Notes to Pages 131-37
and capital of the Sikh kingdom of Ranjit Singh. I’m grateful to Ramachandra 
Guha for this information.
74. As Maxwell Fry describes it, Le Corbusier was preoccupied at the time with 
the visual effects of buildings in large spaces. He had brought with him a plan of 
the grand axis that joined the Louvre to the Arc de Triomphe via the Champs 
Elysees and tried to work out "the farthest extension of grandeur comprehensible, 
at a single view,” in the new setting. See Fry, “Le Corbusier at Chandigarh,” p. 357.
75. Sarin, "Chandigarh as a Place to Live In,” p. 386.
76. See, for example, the book published a decade and a half earlier by Percival 
Goodman and Paul Goodman, Communitas: Means of Livelihood and Ways of Life 
(New York: Vintage Books, 1947), which touches on many of the same themes 
found in Jacobs's work but which promotes decentralization and appropriate tech­
nology.
77. In New York City, Jacobs was seen as a prominent enemy of the master 
builder Robert Moses.
78. On the other hand, Jacobs had a great deal of knowledge about architecture. 
She was married to an architect and had worked her way up from newspaper and 
editing jobs to become associate editor of the journal Architectural Forum.
79. An interesting parallel case from the same time period is Rachel Carson's 
Silent Spring (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962). Carson began her influential attack 
on the profligate use of insecticides by asking a homely but powerful question: 
“Where have all the songbirds gone?”
80. Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (New York: Vin­
tage Books, 1961), p. 15.
81. Ibid., p. 376. The early constructivist Le Corbusier would not have disavowed 
this view as a matter of principle, but as a matter of practice he was always greatly 
concerned with the sculptural properties of an urban plan or a single building— 
sometimes with brilliant results, as in Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp (1953).
82. A useful critique of current zoning practice may be found in James 
Howard Kunstler, "Home from Nowhere,” Atlantic Monthly, September 1996, pp. 
43-66.
83. Jacobs, Death and Life, p. 375. This seems especially reasonable so long as 
the disciplined works of art one is talking about are those of a Josef Albers rather 
than a Jackson Pollock. In this connection, it is useful to recall that Le Corbusier 
began as an artist and never stopped painting.
84. Ibid., p. 437.
85. Ibid., pp. 31-32. The recent social science literature on social trust and 
social capital, demonstrating the economic costs of their absence, signals that 
this homely truth is now a subject of formal inquiry. It is important to specify that 
Jacobs’s point about "eyes on the street” assumes a rudimentary level of commu­
nity feeling. If the eyes on the street are hostile to some or all members of the 
community, as Talja Potters has reminded me, public security is not enhanced.
86. Ibid., pp. 38-40. It is worth noting that the linchpin of this informal sur­
veillance and social order is the fast-disappearing and much maligned petite bour­
geoisie.
87. Ibid., pp. 59-62.
88. Ibid., pp. 60-61. Jacobs offers a catalogue of nonreimbursed services pro­
vided by a typical candy-store proprietor in the course of a single morning, ac­
knowledging that many of these small services allow the shopkeeper to further “en­
tangle” his or her clientele.
89. Ibid., p. 56 (emphasis in original).
90. Ibid., pp. 84-88. Jacobs quotes a 1928 regional planning report on recre­

Notes to Pages 137-42 387
ation, which noted that only about one-fourth of the population whose ages ranged 
from five to fifteen years actually played in playgrounds, which could not compete 
with city streets that were “teeming with life and adventure."
91. In the modern home, if the kitchen also has a television, its status as the 
most heavily used room in the home is likely to be without competition. Talja Pot­
ters, a Dutch colleague, tells me that in working-class apartments built in Holland 
between 1920 and 1970, the dimensions of the kitchen were deliberately minimized 
so that laborers would be obliged to dine and socialize in the living room, like de­
cent middle-class people.
92. Jacobs’s chapter “The Need for Small Blocks” is a model of her mode of 
analysis. See Death and Life, pp. 178-86.
93. Ibid., p. 222.
94. Jacobs, in addition to holding several jobs, was a wife and mother in the 
1950s.
95. In explaining why children often prefer to play on sidewalks rather than in 
playgrounds, Jacobs writes: "Most city architectural designers are men. Curiously, 
they design and plan to exclude men as part of normal, daytime life wherever peo­
ple live. In planning residential life, they aim at filling the presumed daily needs of 
impossibly vacuous housewives and preschool tots. They plan, in short, strictly for 
matriarchal societies" (Death and Life, p. 83).
96. Ibid., pp. 372-73 (emphasis in original). Compare Jacobs's critique with 
Mumford’s criticism of baroque city planning as being "ruthless, one-sided, non- 
cooperative, . . . [and] indifferent to the slow, complex interactions, the patient ad­
justments and modifications, through trial and selection, which mark more organic 
methods of city development” (The City in History, p. 350).
97. Jacobs, Death and Life, p. 289. For an extensive analysis of the process of 
economic diversification, see Jacobs’s later book, The Economy of Cities (New York: 
Random House, 1970). Carol Rose, the legal theorist, makes the interesting point 
that the visual representations of property—fences, walls, hedges, windows, 
gates— function as a rhetoric of a static and timeless property that ignores histori­
cal change. See Rose, Property and Persuasion: Essays in the History, Theory, and 
Rhetoric of Ownership (Boulder: Westview Press, 1994), especially chap. 9, "Seeing 
Property," pp. 267-303.
98. Jacobs, Death and Life, p. 287.
99. Ibid., p. 391. The echoes of such influential anarchist thinkers as Pierre- 
Joseph Proudhon and Peter Kropotkin reverberate in this passage. I do not know 
whether Jacobs intended these resonances, which may have come from the work of 
Paul Goodman. But what is missing is a recognition that, in the absence of state- 
based urban planning, large commercial and speculative interests are transform­
ing the urban landscape every day. The effect of her argument is to “naturalize" the 
unplanned city by treating it as the consequence of thousands of small and notion- 
ally equal acts.
100. Ibid., p. 737.
101. Some small components of buildings have of course been mass produced 
for a long time, from standard lumber stock, Sheetrock, and shingles to flooring 
and, most famously, nails. Sears and Roebuck home kits were available as early as 
the 1890s.
102. Where performance is critical— say, in an army—this logic is superseded 
by other criteria. Thus soldiers will typically have different-sized boots that fit well 
but haircuts that are identical.
103. Jacobs, Death and Life, p. 241.
104. Ibid., p. 238. The caveat, “and only when," may be a rare recognition by Ja­

388 Notes to Pages 143-49
cobs that, in the absence of extensive planning in a liberal economy, the asymmet­
rical market forces which shape the city are hardly democratic.
105. Ibid., p. 241.
106. For an elaboration of this argument applied to urban design, see Michel de 
Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Arts de faire: La pratique du quotidien), 
trans. Steven Rendall (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984). Another 
analogy that may be made in this context is to the market, along the lines developed 
by Friedrich Hayek. The problem that I see with this analogy is that the market in 
the modern sense is not synonymous with “spontaneous social order,” but rather 
had to be imposed by a coercive state in the nineteenth century, as Karl Polanyi has 
convincingly shown. Hayek s description of the development of common law is, I 
believe, somewhat closer to the mark. In any event, city, market, and common law 
are all creators of historical power relations that are neither ‘'natural” nor creative 
of “spontaneous social order.” In her telling critique of planning, Jacobs is fre­
quently tempted to naturalize the unplanned city rather as Hayek naturalizes the 
market.
107. Ibid., p. 138.
108. Some of Jacobs’s insights appear to be behind the early stages of recuper­
ation in a few blighted sections of New York City's South Bronx, once a synonym 
for the worst in urban decay. A combination of refurbishing existing buildings and 
apartments, promoting mixed-use development and urban homesteading, making 
small loans more readily available, and keeping to a modest scale appears to have 
facilitated the creation of viable neighborhoods.
109. Quoted in ibid., pp. 336-37. Tankel’s plea appeared in a symposium called 
“The Architecture Forum" in June 1957.
110. See Lisa Redfield Peattie, Planning, Rethinking Ciudad Guayana (Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1987).
111. Jacobs, Death and Life, p. 195.
Chapter 5: The Revolutionary Party
1. V. I. Lenin, What Is to Be Done? Burning Questions of Our Movement (New 
York: International Publishers, 1929), p. 82.
2. Quoted in Robert Conquest, “The Somber Monster,” New York Review of 
Books, June 8, 1995, p. 8. We also know that Lenin was an admirer of another 
utopian work, Tommaso Campanella’s City of the Sun, which describes a religious 
utopia whose design includes strong pedagogical and didactic features for shaping 
the minds and souls of its citizens.
3. The metaphors of the classroom and the barracks were in keeping with 
Lenin’s reputation in the party, where his comrades referred to him as "the Ger­
man" or "Herr Doktor," alluding not so much to his time in Zurich or the assistance 
he received from Germany but simply to “his tidiness and self-discipline” (Con­
quest, "The Somber Monster”).
4. Lenin, What Is to Be Done? p. 80.
5. Ibid., p. 84 (emphasis added).
6. Ibid., p. 161 (emphasis added).
7. Ibid., p. 114. Lenin is here referring to the Social Democrats in Germany, 
whom he regards as far more advanced than their Russian counterparts. See also 
p. 116, where Lenin asserts, “No movement can be durable without a stable orga­
nization of leaders to maintain continuity.” This issue was debated anew in practi­
cally every socialist movement. We see it in the writings of the Italian Communist

Notes to Pages 150-56 389
and theoretician Antonio Gramsci, who basically shared Lenin’s opinion on this 
matter. Rosa Luxemburg, as we shall see, also addressed the issue and reached very 
different conclusions.
8. Ibid., p. 162.
9. Ibid., p. 95.
10. Ibid., p. 15.
11. Quoted in ibid., p. 40. It is possible, Lenin remarks in a footnote (p. 41), for 
workers to rise into the intelligentsia and thereby play a role in creating socialist 
ideology. “But,” he adds, "they take part not as workers, but as socialist theoreti­
cians like Proudhon and Weitling.”
12. Ibid., p. 33.
13. Ibid., p. 41.
14. Ibid., p. 151 (emphasis added). Lenin is writing specifically here about the 
newspaper Iskra, an organ of the vanguard party.
15. Ibid., pp. 120-21.
16. Ibid., p. 122 (emphasis in original).
17. See, for example, Kathy E. Ferguson, "Class Consciousness and the Marxist 
Dialectic: The Elusive Synthesis," Review of Politics 42, no. 4 (October 1986): 
504-32.
18. Lenin, What Is to Be Done? p. 129.
19. Ibid., p. 121 (emphasis added).
20. "Agitation” is another diagnostic word in this context. It conjures up still 
waters that move only when "agitated” by an outside agent.
21. In the Tenth Party Congress in 1921, while troops under Trotsky were 
crushing a genuine proletarian revolt against Bolshevik autocracy, Bukharin and 
others condemned the "petit-bourgeois infection” that had spread from the peas­
antry to parts of the working class. See Paul Averich, Kronstadt, 1921 (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1970), chap. 3, especially pp. 129-30.
22. When it came to preventing actual disease and infection, Lenin took it on 
himself to ensure that the Kremlin was a clean, germ-free environment by writing 
its sanitary regulations himself. He instructed, for example, that “all those arriving 
(by train) shall before entering their accommodation take a bath and hand their 
dirty clothes to the disinfector at the baths. . . . Anyone refusing to obey the sanitary 
regulations will be expelled from the Kremlin at once and tried for causing social 
harm.” From Dimitri Volkogonov, Lenin: Life and Legacy, trans. Harold Shukman 
(London: Harper Collins, 1995), cited in Robert Service, “The First Master Terror­
ist,” Times Literary Supplement, January 6, 1995, p. 9.
23. Lenin, What Is to Be Done? p. 79 (emphasis added).
24. See Bruce M. Garver, The Young Czech Party, 1874-1901, and the Emergence 
of a Multi-Party System (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978), p. 117. Peter 
Rutland tells me that such displays were by no means confined to political move­
ments with authoritarian ideologies but were part of a view of machine precision 
and coordination from above that was applied to physical culture and shared by 
nationalist, bourgeois, and democratic movements, too. The tradition of coordi­
nated “mass movement” survives, of course, in marching-band parades seen during 
halftimes of college football games in the United States. For more on the machine 
as a metaphor for social movements, see Chap. 6.
25. Nicolae Ceau§escu's nearly built Palace of the Republic in Bucharest con­
tained many design features along these lines. The legislative assembly hall had 
tiered balconies encircling Ceau§escu’s “hydraulically lifted podium, and the 
palace’s six hundred clocks were all centrally set from a console in Ceau§escu’s suite 
(New York Times, December 5, 1991, p. 2). Lenin, in contrast, was always opposed

390 Notes to Pages 157-61
to any cult of personality; the party itself was to be the conductor of the revolution­
ary orchestra.
26. Even so, it should be noted, neither Le Corbusier nor Lenin was of a steady, 
methodical, bureaucratic temperament.
27. Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Viking, 1965).
28. E. H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917-1923, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1966), p. 36; Lenin quoted on p. 80. Carr extends this judgment to all par­
ties in the February Revolution: "The revolutionary parties played no direct part in 
the making of the revolution. They did not expect it, and were at first somewhat 
nonplussed by it. The creation at the moment of the revolution of a Petrograd So­
viet of Workers' Deputies was a spontaneous act of groups of workers without cen­
tral direction. It was a revival of the Petersburg Soviet which had played a brief but 
glorious role in the revolution of 1905" (p. 81).
29. See, for example, ibid.; Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1982); and Marc Ferro, The Bolshevik Revolution: A Social 
History of the Russian Revolution, trans. Norman Stone (London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1980).
30. The best Russian depiction of this situation is in Tolstoy's brilliant analysis 
of battle during the Napoleonic campaign in Russia in War and Peace (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1942), pp. 713, 874, 921, 988. See also John Keegan, The Face 
of Battle (New York: Viking Press, 1976).
31. The role of autonomous action in driving the revolution forward even after 
October 1917 was recognized by Lenin when he said, in 1918, “Anarchist ideas 
have now taken on living form.” See Daniel Guerin, Anarchism: From Theory to 
Practice, trans. Mary Klopper (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1970), p. 85. Much 
of the early Bolshevik legislation, Guerin notes, was the ex post facto legalization of 
autonmous actions and practices.
32. See the illuminating, detailed study, based on rich archival material, by Or­
lando Figes: Peasant Russia, Civil War: The Volga Countryside in Revolution, 
1917-1921 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
33. Milovan Djilas, The New Class (New York: Praeger, 1957), p. 32.
34. I am indebted to Peter Perdue for having pointed this out to me. Djilas makes 
much the same point (ibid.).
35. The official story, even though it may partly shape collective memory, cannot 
entirely supplant the individual and collective experiences of those who actually par­
ticipated in the revolutionary process. For those who have no personal recollection 
and who thus come to the revolution via the schoolbook or patriotic speech, however, 
the official story will prevail unless there is another conflicting source of information.
36. This is the point of the ditty “For want of a nail the shoe was lost; for want of 
a shoe the horse was lost; for want of a horse the messenger was lost; for want of a 
message the battle was lost; for want of a victory a kingdom was lost. . .” (John M. 
Merriman, ed., For Want of a Horse: Choice and Chance in History [Lexington, 
Mass.: S. Greens Press, 1985]).
37. It is exceptionally rare to find any historical account that stresses the con­
tingencies. The very exercise of producing an account of a past event virtually re­
quires an often counterfactual neatness and coherence. Anyone who has ever read 
a newspaper account of an event in which he or she participated will recognize this 
phenomenon. Consider, too, the fact that a person who commits murder, say, or 
who takes his own life by jumping off a bridge will thereafter be known as the per­
son who shot so-and-so or the person who jumped off such-and-such bridge. The 
events of that person's life will be reread in light of that ending, with an air of in­
evitability being given to an act that may have been highly contingent.

Notes to Pages 161-64 391
38. In the case of the Bolshevik Revolution, it was also necessary that the offi­
cial narrative include a genuinely popular mass movement of which the Bolsheviks 
eventually assumed leadership. Marxist historiography required a militant, revolu­
tionary proletariat. This was an aspect of the February and October events that did 
not have to be invented. What had to be written out of the account, however, was 
the ferocious struggle between the new state apparatus on one hand and the au­
tonomous soviets and peasantry on the other.
39. Lenin, quoted in Averich, Kronstadt, 1921, p. 160.1 believe that Lenin is con­
sciously copying Luxemburg here, although I have no direct proof. One can find a 
precedent for this in Lenin’s momentary euphoria about the 1905 revolution: “Rev­
olutions are the festival of the oppressed and the exploited. ... At no other time are 
the masses of the people in a position to come forward so actively as creators of a 
new social order as at the time of revolution. At such times, the people are capable 
of performing miracles” (from "Two Tactics of Social Democracy,’’ quoted by 
Richard Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the 
Russian Revolution [New York: Oxford University Press, 1989], p. 42).
40. V. I. Lenin, State and Revolution (New York: International Publishers, 
1931), p. 23 (emphasis in original). Note that those who are to be “guided” by force 
are not the bourgeoisie, the enemies of the revolution, but the exploited classes, 
with the exception of the proletariat, for whom coercion will be unnecessary.
Lest one imagine that the state coercion to be applied would be decided demo­
cratically by the proletariat or its representatives, Lenin makes it clear just after the 
revolution that, as Leszek Kolakowski puts it, "the point about the dictatorship of 
the proletariat... is the absolute power, constrained by no laws, based on sheer, di­
rect violence. And he said that there would be no freedom and no democracy (those 
were his very words) until the complete victory of Communism all over the world” 
("A Calamitous Accident,” Times Literary Supplement, November 6, 1992, p. 5).
41. Lenin, State and Revolution, pp. 23-24.
42. Ibid., p. 38 (emphasis in original).
43. Ibid., p. 83 (emphasis added).
44. Lenin, “The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government,” March-April 1918, 
quoted in Carmen Claudin-Urondo, Lenin and the Cultural Revolution, trans. Brian 
Pearce (Sussex: Harvester Press, 1977), p. 271. It is worth noting the brief natural­
istic imagery associated with "public-meeting democracy” here, as it is almost cer­
tainly borrowed from Rosa Luxemburg’s work.
45. See David Harvey, The Condition of Post-Modemity: An Enquiry into the Ori­
gins of Cultural Change (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989), p. 126. Harvey groups 
Lenin, Ford, Le Corbusier, Ebenezer Howard, and Robert Moses as modernists.
46. In fact, of course, there is no rationally efficient solution to any problem of 
this kind that ignores human subjectivity. An efficient production design depends 
vitally on the positive response of the workforce. The autoworkers who hated the 
“efficient” mass-assembly line in Lordsville, Ohio, responded by working so slop­
pily that they made it an inefficient assembly line.
47. Lenin, State and Revolution, pp. 84-85 (emphasis in original). Marx, En­
gels, and Lenin used the term "lumpen” proletariat to designate all those marginals 
who had escaped working-class discipline. Their contempt for lumpen elements 
was boundless and echoes the quasi-racist attitude of Victorian elites toward the 
“undeserving” poor.
48. Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 32.
49. V. I. Lenin, The Agrarian Question and the Critics of Marx, 2nd rev. ed. 
(Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1976). Lenin's basic position on agriculture had 
been worked out long before in his 1889 book, The Development of Capitalism in

392 Notes to Pages 164-67
Russia. That book, however, had predicted a spontaneous development of capital­
ism in the countryside that had not occurred to anything like the extent he had fore­
cast. For an important revisionist work on Marx's analysis of rural Russia, see 
Teodor Shanin, ed., Late Marx and the Russian Road: Marx and the Peripheries of 
Capitalism (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1983).
50. Ibid., p. 45.
51. V. I. Lenin, The Agrarian Programme of Social Democracy in the First Rus­
sian Revolution, 1905-1907, 2nd rev. ed. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1977), p. 70.
52. The German and Austrian schools of empirical household surveys of farm 
operations were very influential at the turn of the century. The great Russian econ­
omist in this tradition was A. V. Chayanov. A careful scholar, a partisan of small 
property (he wrote a utopian novel of his own), and a Soviet official, he was ar­
rested by the Stalinist police in 1932 and is believed to have been executed in 1936. 
Pyotr Maslov was another contemporary Russian exponent of small-farm efficiency 
and intensification who disputed Lenin’s position.
53. Lenin, The Agrarian Question, p. 86.
54. Ibid.
55. For an extensive treatment, see Jonathan Coppersmith, The Electrification 
of Russia, 1880-1926 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992); and Kendall Bailes, 
Technology and Society Under Lenin and Stalin: Origins of the Soviet Technical In­
telligentsia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978). H. G. Wells, following a 
visit to the Soviet Union, wrote glowingly of his conversation with Lenin in October 
1920: “For Lenin, who like a good orthodox Marxist denounces all ‘Utopians,’ has 
succumbed at last to a Utopia, the Utopia of the electricians” (Russia in the Shad­
ows [New York: George H. Doran, 1921], p. 158).
56. Lenin, The Agrarian Question, p. 46. It is easy today to forget how breath­
taking electricity was for those experiencing it for the first time. As Vladimir 
Mayakovsky was reported to have said, "After electricity, I lost interest in nature” 
(Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 52). In fact, for all the activities mentioned by 
Lenin, the tractor, as a moveable power source without transmission lines, has 
proven more practical than electricity.
57. From Lenin's report to the Eighth Congress of Soviets (December 22, 
1920), at the founding of the State Commission on the Electrification of Russia 
(g o e l r o ). Quoted in Robert C. Tucker, ed., The Lenin Anthology (New York: Nor­
ton, 1975), p. 494.
58. The centralization that electrification makes possible also sets the stage for 
large-scale power failures and brownouts. The practice of this technical central­
ization is often in stark, if not comic, contrast to its utopian promise. See, for an il­
luminating example from the Philippines under Marcos, Otto van den Muijzenberg, 
“As Bright Lights Replace the Kingke: Some Sociological Aspects of Rural Elec­
trification in the Philippines,” in Margaret M. Skutsch et al., eds., Towards a Sus­
tainable Development (forthcoming).
59. As might be expected, the analogy between the light of electricity and the 
"enlightenment” of the narod was often evoked in Soviet rhetoric, combining, as it 
were, the Bolshevik technical project with its cultural project. Lenin wrote, “To the 
non-Party peasant masses electric light is an ‘unnatural’ light; but what we con­
sider unnatural is that the peasants and workers should have lived for hundreds 
and thousands of years in such backwardness, poverty and oppression under the 
yoke of the landowners and the capitalists. . . . What we must now try is to convert 
every electric power station we build into a stronghold of enlightenment to be used 
to make the masses electricity-conscious” (quoted in Tucker, The Lenin Anthology, 
p. 495).

Notes to Pages 167-71 393
60. Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War, p. 67.
61. Nor did he abandon his belief in the role of violence in ensuring party rule. 
In 1922, when religious believers in provincial Shuya openly demonstrated against 
the seizure of church treasures, Lenin argued for massive retaliation. “The more of 
them we manage to shoot the better,” he declared. "Right now we have to teach this 
public a lesson so that for several decades they won’t even dare think of resisting" 
(quoted in John Keep, "The People’s Tsar,” Times Literary Supplement, April 7, 1995, 
p. 30).
62. Quoted in Averich, Kronstadt, 1921, p. 224 (emphasis added).
63. Rosa Luxemburg, “Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions" and "Organiza­
tional Questions of Russian Social Democracy,” in Dick Howard, ed., Selected Po­
litical Writings of Rosa Luxemburg (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971), pp. 
223-70, 283-306; and Luxemburg, “The Russian Revolution,” trans. Bertram D. 
Wolfe, in Mary-Alice Waters, ed., Rosa Luxemburg Speaks (New York: Pathfinder 
Press, 1970), pp. 367-95. It is interesting to speculate how much of Luxemburg’s 
faith would have remained had she actually come to power in Germany. What is 
clear, however, is that her view when she was out of power is radically different 
from Lenin’s view when he was out of power.
64. Elzbieta Ettinger suggests that one likely source of Luxemburg’s faith in the 
wisdom of ordinary workers was her love of the great Polish nationalist poet, Adam 
Mickiewicz, who celebrated the insight and creativity of ordinary Poles. See Rosa 
Luxemburg: A Life (Boston: Beacon Press, 1986), pp. 22-27.
65. Luxemburg, “Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions,” p. 229. Despite Lux­
emburg’s dismissive reference to anarchism, her views overlap considerably with 
an anarchist view of the independent, creative role of ordinary actors in a revolu­
tion. See, for example, G. D. Maximoff, ed., The Political Philosophy of Bakunin: Sci­
entific Anarchism (New York: Free Press, 1953), p. 289, in which Bakunin’s view of 
the limitations of leadership by a central committee prefigures Luxemburg’s own 
modest opinion of a central committee’s role.
66. This way of analyzing working-class movements grew directly out of Lux­
emburg’s research for her 1898 doctoral thesis at the University of Zurich, "The In­
dustrial Development of Poland." See J. P. Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg, vol. 1 (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1966).
67. Luxemburg, "Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions,” p. 236.
68. Luxemburg was something of an aesthetic free spirit as well. Continually 
scolded by her lover and comrade, Leo Jogiches, for her petit-bourgeois tastes and 
desires, she defended the value of a private life while devoting herself to the revo­
lution. Her elan is nicely captured by her advice on the design of the Spartacist 
newspaper Die Rote Fahne (The red banner): "I do not think a newspaper should be 
symmetrical, trimmed like an English lawn. . . . Rather, it should be somewhat un­
tamed, like a wild orchard, should bristle with life and shine with young talents” 
(quoted in Ettinger, Rosa Luxemburg, p. 186).
69. Luxemburg, "Organizational Questions," p. 291 (emphasis added).
70. "An awakening of the revolutionary energy of the working class in Germany 
can never again be called forth in the spirit of the guardianship methods of the Ger­
man Social Democracy of late-lamented memory.. .. [The awakening of revolution­
ary energy could be effected] only by an insight into all the fearful seriousness, all 
the complexity of the tasks involved, only as a result of political maturity and inde­
pendence of spirit, only as a result of a capacity for critical judgment on the part of 
the masses, which capacity was systematically killed by the social democracy for 
decades under various pretexts” (Luxemburg, "The Russian Revolution,” pp. 369-70; 
emphasis added).

394 Notes to Pages 172-84
71. Luxemburg, "Mass-Strike, Party, and Trade Unions,” p. 236.
72. Ibid., p. 237.
73. Ibid., p. 241.
74. Ibid., pp. 241-42.
75. Luxemburg, "Organizational Questions,” p. 306.
76. Luxemburg, "The Russian Revolution,” p. 389. By constantly stressing the 
ethical and idealistic side of the working class, Luxemburg probably underesti­
mated the importance of bread-and-butter concerns. Such concerns could as eas­
ily, in 1917 at least, lead to revolutionary action as to narrow trade unionism. Nei­
ther she nor Lenin had the respect for working-class materialism to be found, for 
example, in Orwell’s Road to Wigan Pier or Down and Out in Paris and London. 
While Lenin treated the workers as truant schoolboys constantly in need of moni­
toring and instruction, Luxemburg probably missed, among other things, their pro­
clivities for nationalism and their occasional timorousness.
77. Ibid., p. 390. The reference to a textbook is not mocking; what strikes a con­
temporary observer of tum-of-the-century socialism is how extraordinarily bookish 
and pedagogical it was. The classroom metaphor prevailed in socialist thought, and 
formal instruction was the norm. Luxemburg spent much of her career meeting 
classes and grading papers at the higher party school of the SDP.
78. Ibid. (emphasis added). Compare this with the approach of the Italian anar­
chist Errico Malatesta, who in 1907 stated in Anarchy that even if rule by beneficent 
authoritarian socialists were possible, it “would immensely diminish [productive 
force], because the government would restrict initiative to the few" (quoted in Irving 
Louis Horowitz, The Anarchists [New York: Dell, 1964], p. 83).
79. Luxemburg, "The Russian Revolution," p. 391.
80. Ibid.
81. Kollontay, unlike so many other dissidents, was not murdered or sent to the 
labor camps. She survived in a series of ceremonial and ambassadorial posts taken 
with the implicit understanding that she muzzle her criticism. See Beatrice Farns­
worth, Alexandra Kollontai: Socialism, Feminism, and the Bolshevik Revolution 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1980).
82. Alexandra Kollontai, Selected Writings of Alexandra Kollontai, trans. Alix 
Holt (London: Allison and Busby, 1977), p. 178. Kollontay’s essay "The Workers’ Op­
position," from which this quotation is taken, reprints a translation made in 1921 
since the original Russian essay could not be found.
83. Ibid., p. 183. The issue of the autonomy of the family was another matter. 
Kollontay urged Soviet mothers to think of their children not as “mine” or "yours” 
but as "our children, those of the Communist state.”
84. Ibid., p. 182 (emphasis in original).
85. Ibid., p. 185.
86. Ibid., pp. 191, 188, 190.
87. Ibid., p. 187.
88. Ibid., pp. 187, 160.
Introduction to Part 3
1. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, "Q’est-ce que c'est la propriete?” quoted in Daniel 
Guerin, Anarchism: From Theory to Practice, trans. Maty Klopper (New York: 
Monthly Review Press, 1970), pp. 15-16.
2. It may be more accurate to say that societies are likely to exhibit not only the 
purposes and activities of their members (including, of course, their resistance) but

Notes to Pages 184-87 395
also traces of many previous state "projects,” each of which has laid down its par­
ticular geological stratum.
3. The phrase comes from the title of Norbert Elias’s great work, The Civilizing 
Process, vol. 1 of The History of Manners, trans. Edmund Jephcott (New York: Pan­
theon, 1982), but it applies also, as we shall see, to the self-descriptions of the “mod­
ernizers" outside the West who have implemented these schemes. See also Elias’s 
Power and Civility, the second volume of The History of Manners.
4. See Von Thiinen's Isolated State (1966), trans. Carla M. Wartenberg (Oxford: 
Pergamon Press), and G. William Skinner, Marketing and Social Structure in China 
(Tucson: Association of Asian Studies, 1975). Walter Christaller was the founder of 
central place theory. That theory, elaborated in his thesis at the University of Er­
langen in 1932, forms the premise of Skinner’s work.
5. Waterborne movement was far easier than overland movement, so proximity 
was measured less by physical distance, abstractly measured, than by “travel time.” 
As these kingdoms had a tradition of long-distance trade, they were thus interested 
in appropriation, often by tribute relations, of not only grain and manpower but also 
valuable goods, such as gems, precious metals, medicines, and resins, that were 
profitable and manageable for trade conducted over long distances.
6. An illustration of this is found in the following admonition directed to King 
Narathihapate from Queen Saw, taken from The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings 
of Burma, trans. Pe Maung Tin and G. H. Luce (London: Oxford University Press, 
1923), p. 177: '“Consider the state of the realm. Thou hast no folk or people, no host 
of countrymen and countrywomen around thee. . . . Thy countrymen and country­
women tarry and will not enter thy kingdom. They fear thy domination; for thou, O 
King Alaung, art a hard master.”’
The classic analysis of the phenomenon in Southeast Asia may be found in 
Michael Adas, "From Avoidance to Confrontation: Peasant Protest in Pre-Colonial 
and Colonial Southeast Asia," Comparative Studies in Society and History 23, no. 2 
(1981): 217-47. Coastal and riverine populations could be said to have “voted with 
their oars.”
7. The problem of population flight was hardly unique to Southeast Asia. In the 
late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, after the Black Plague had reduced the pop­
ulation of Western Europe by nearly one-third, the nobility faced a serious problem 
in attracting serfs on favorable terms now that they could so easily flee to land that 
had been abandoned by those felled by the plague. Slave states with open frontiers 
have always been vulnerable on this score; in the pre-Civil War United States, es­
caping slaves could head to the North, Canada, or the “free states" of the West. In 
Russia, the majority of czarist decrees addressed the subject of runaway serfs. In 
general, wherever there is an open frontier, unfree forms of labor are difficult to sus­
tain unless sufficient coercion can be mobilized to contain the population.
8. This logic works best for inland (kraton-style) kingdoms. It breaks down 
whenever there are strategic locations that function as natural monopolies or 
choke points and control of which can serve as a basis for appropriation. I have in 
mind the control of river mouths (the hulu-hilir distinction in the Malay world), 
straits, mountain passes, or deposits of vital resources.
9. Abstracting from the Southeast Asian case, one might say that state forma­
tion is abetted by concentrated, intensive cultivation, a population who produces a 
consistent surplus and who finds it costly to leave (having had, for example, high 
sunk-costs in field creation and water control), who produce goods that, if bulky 
(such as food), can be stored and moved easily (such as grain) and that have rela­
tively high value per unit volume and weight.
10. Those who dwell in such spaces, of course, saw the matter differently, con­

396 Notes to Pages 187-91
trasting their freedom, mobility, and honor, to the bondage of those under the 
thumb of the court. An evocative and evenhanded Afghan proverb captures the dis­
tinction: “Taxes ate the valleys; honor ate the hills.”
11. One of the best ways to conjure up such places is to ask where runaway 
serfs and slaves repaired to and where Maroon communities of fugitive slaves es­
tablished themselves. Such places were nonstate spaces, which the authorities tried 
to efface if possible. In the United States, a telling example is the enormous effort 
made in the postbellum South to eliminate the large commons on which free blacks 
could eke out an independent existence and to drive the blacks into the labor mar­
ket, often to work for their former masters. Most freed slaves preferred to make a 
precarious living by farming, fishing, hunting, trapping, and grazing a few animals 
on open land over the subordination of permanent wage labor. A series of fencing 
and trespassing laws, hunting and trapping prohibitions, grazing restrictions, va­
grancy laws, and so on were, as Steven Hahn has shown, designed to eliminate this 
nonwage labor (and nonstate) space. See Hahn, "Hunting, Fishing, and Foraging: 
Common Rights and Class Relations in the Post-Bellum South," Radical History Re­
view 26 (1982): 37-64.
12. Lest this seem geographically determinist, let me emphasize that human 
agency plays a large role in creating and maintaining a nonstate space. At the limit, 
even parts of great cities may come to be nonstate spaces when the state essentially 
cedes control to a rebellious or resistant population.
13. A goal related to dispossessing the Meratus of “their” forest was to make the 
land more easily available for inclusion in state logging and revenue plans.
14. Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, In the Realm of the Diamond Queen: Marginality 
in an Out-of-the-Way Place (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), pp. xiii, 
28, 41.
15. Ibid., pp. 48, 93.
16. I recall seeing such settlements in the Philippine provinces of Tarlac and 
Pangasinan, where each house displayed, in large letters on the front near the steps, 
the names and ages of all the family members who slept there, allowing security 
forces on their nightly patrols to more easily identify any unauthorized visitors,
17. Once it is cut, sugarcane must be crushed quickly in order to avoid losses 
through evaporation and fermentation. The need for a large crushing mill (often 
called a sugar “central,” for good reason), problems relating to transportation of 
the cane, and the great bulk reduction through processing provide a kind of natural 
bottleneck that allows the mill owner to control production directly or else through 
tied contracts. Compared to coffee, tobacco, tea, rubber, or palm oil, sugarcane is 
unique in this advantage to centralized production.
18. The difficulties of recruiting Malays, who were independent cultivators, to 
work on the estates proved insurmountable, and thus it seemed more convenient to 
import Indian and Chinese laborers for the growing estate labor force. This fact 
alone favored plantations unless the colonizers were willing to risk the political 
dangers of creating a class of imported yeomen to compete with the Malays for 
land. Elsewhere, there were other solutions to creating a legible sphere of appro­
priation. On Java, the Culture System required the village, in lieu of taxes, to plant 
an export crop every so often on village lands. Where it was vital to force an eco­
nomically independent peasantry into wage labor or plantation work, a universal, 
annual head tax payable in cash was often found to be useful.
19. Thus the morally obtuse but sociologically correct observation by Samuel 
Huntington during the Vietnam War: the massive bombing of the countryside and 
the subsequent creation of huge refugee settlements on the outskirts of major cities

Notes to Pages 193-95 397
provided many advantages to those who wanted to influence and mobilize the elec­
torate. Those in the camps, he reasoned, were more easily manipulable than those 
still living in their rural communities. The implicit but macabre logic was impec­
cable; the more bombs rained on the countryside, the greater the opportunities for 
the United States and its allies in Saigon to dominate any peaceful electoral com­
petition that followed. From Huntington, "Getting Ready for Political Competition in 
South Vietnam,” paper presented at the Southeast Asia Development Advisory 
Group of the Asia Society, circa 1970.
I believe that this logic of social demobilization is the key element in the com­
monly observed fact that, at the beginning of industrialization, the declining rural 
community is often more likely to be a source of collective protest than is the newly 
constituted proletariat, notwithstanding standard Marxist reasoning to the con­
trary. Resettlement, whether forced or unforced, often eliminates a prior commu­
nity and replaces it with a temporarily disaggregated mass of new arrivals. It is 
ironically just such a population that may, for the time being, more closely resem­
ble the "potatoes in a sack” than the peasantry of the bocage described by Marx in 
The Eighteenth Brumiare.
Chapter 6: Soviet Collectivization, Capitalist Dreams
1. The best source for a discussion about Soviet high modernism is probably 
Richard Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the 
Russian Revolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989). Its generous bibli­
ography appears to cover most of the available sources.
2. This inference, we know, is not a distortion of the doctrines of liberalism. J. 
S. Mill, whose credentials as a liberal son of the Enlightenment are not in doubt, 
considered backwardness a sufficient justification for placing authoritarian powers 
in the hands of a modernizer. See Ernest Gellner, “The Struggle to Catch Up," Times 
Literary Supplement, December 9, 1994, p. 14. For a more detailed argument along 
these lines, see also Jan P. Nederveen Pieterse and Bhikhu Parekh, eds., The Decol­
onization of the Imagination: Culture, Knowledge, and Power (London: Zed Press,
1995).
3. Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 19. Engels expressed his disdain for Com­
munist utopian schemes like these by calling them “barracks Communism."
4. One could say that Catherine the Great, being Prussian born and an avid cor­
respondent with several of the Encylopedists, including Voltaire, came by her 
mania for rational order honestly.
5. Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1982), p. 119. The term “gigantomania” was, I believe, also in use in the Soviet 
Union. The ultimate failure of most of the u s s r ’s great schemes is in itself an im­
portant story, the significance of which was captured epigrammatically by Robert 
Conquest, who observed that "the end of the Cold War can be seen as the defeat of 
Magnitogorsk by Silicon Valley” ("Party in the Dock,” Times Literary Supplement, 
November 6, 1992, p. 7). For an industrial, cultural, and social history of Magnito­
gorsk, see Stephen Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berke­
ley: University of California Press, 1995).
6. An interesting parallel can be seen in the French countryside following the 
Revolution, when campaigns called for “de-Christianization" and offered associ­
ated secular rituals.
7. Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 119. See also Vera Sandomirsky Dunham, 
In Stalin’s Time: Middle-Class Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge

398 Notes to Pages 195-99
University Press, 1976), for how, under Stalin, this austerity was transformed into 
opulence.
8. Stites, "Festivals of the People,” chap. 4 of Revolutionary Dreams, pp. 79-97.
9. Ibid., p. 95. Through Sergey Eisenstein's films, these public theatrical reen­
actments are the visual images that remain embedded in the consciousness of 
many of those who were not participants in the actual revolution.
10. Composers and filmmakers were also expected to be “engineers of the soul."
11. Quoted in Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 243.
12. Lenin, almost certainly influenced by another of his favorite books, Cam- 
panella's City of the Sun, wanted public sculptures of revolutionaries, complete 
with inspiring inscriptions, to be erected throughout the city: a propaganda of 
monuments. See Anatoly Lunacharsky, "Lenin and Art," International Literature 5 
(May 1935): 66-71.
13. Stites, Revolutionary Dreams, p. 242.
14. This entire section is based on chaps. 2, 4, and 6 of a remarkable forthcom­
ing book by Deborah Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More: The Industrialization of Ameri­
can Agriculture, to which I am greatly indebted. The chapter and page numbers 
that follow refer to the draft manuscript.
15. Ibid., chap. 2, p. 21.
16. As many commentators have emphasized, this redesigning of work pro­
cesses wrested the control of production from skilled artisans and laborers and 
placed it in the hands of management, whose ranks and prerogatives grew as the 
labor force was "de-skilled.”
17. Around 1920, much of the market for agricultural machinery made by U.S. 
manufacturers was not in the United States, where farm sizes were still relatively 
small, but outside the country, in such places as Canada, Argentina, Australia, and 
Russia, where farms were considerably larger. Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 2, 
p. 31.
18. For a fascinating and more complete account of the Campbell enterprise, 
see "The Campbell Farm Corporation,” chap. 5, ibid. It’s worth adding here that the 
economic depression for agriculture in the United States began at the end of World 
War I, not in 1930. The time was thus ripe for bold experimentation, and cost of 
buying or leasing land was cheap.
19. Wheat and flax are, in the terminology developed later in this chapter, “pro­
letarian" crops as opposed to "petit-bourgeois" crops.
20. Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 4, pp. 15-17.
21. See above, nn. 14 and 18.
22. Another such farm, and one with direct links to New Deal experimentation 
in the 1930s, was the Fairway Farms Corporation. Founded in 1924 by M. L. Wilson 
and Henry C. Taylor, both of whom were trained in institutional economics at the 
University of Wisconsin, the corporation was designed to turn landless farmers into 
scientific, industrial farmers. The capital for the new enterprise came, through in­
termediaries, from John D. Rockefeller. "Fair Way” Farms would become the model 
for many of the New Deal's more ambitious agricultural programs as Wilson, Tay­
lor, and many of their progressive colleagues in Wisconsin moved to influential posi­
tions in Washington under Roosevelt. A more searching account of the connection 
is in Jess Gilbert and Ellen R. Baker, “Wisconsin Economists and New Deal Agri­
cultural Policy: The Legacy of Progressive Professors” (unpublished paper, 1995). 
The 1920s were a fertile time for agricultural experimentation, partly because the 
economic slump for agricultural commodities after World War I prompted policy 
initiatives designed to alleviate the crisis.
23. Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 4, pp. 18-27. For an account of indus­

Notes to Pages 199-203 399
trial farming in Kansas and its link to the ecological disaster known as the dust 
bowl, see Donald Worster, Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930s (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979).
24. Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 4, p. 33. The plan’s outline can be found 
in Mordecai Ezekial and Sherman Johnson, "Corporate Farming: The Way Out?’’ 
New Republic, June 4, 1930, pp. 66-68.
25. Michael Gold, “Is the Small Farmer Dying?” New Republic, October 7, 1931, 
p. 211, cited in Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 2, p. 35.
26. Ibid., chap. 6, p. 13. See also Deborah Fitzgerald, “Blinded by Technology: 
American Agriculture in the Soviet Union, 1928-1932 f Agricultural History 70, no. 
3 (Summer 1996): 459-86.
27. Enthusiastic visitors included the likes of John Dewey, Lincoln Steffens, 
Rexford Tugwell, Robert LaFollette, Morris Llewellyn Cooke (at the time the fore­
most exponent of scientific management in the United States), Thurman Arnold, 
and, of course, Thomas Campbell, who called the Soviet experiment "the biggest 
farming story the world has ever heard.” Typical of the praise for Soviet plans for a 
progressive, modernized rural life was this appraisal by Belle LaFollette, the wife 
of Robert LaFollette: “If the Soviets could have their way, all land would be culti­
vated by tractors, all the villages lighted by electricity, each community would have 
a central house serving for the purpose of school, library, assembly hall, and the­
atre. They would have every convenience and advantage which they plan for the in­
dustrial workers in the city” (quoted in Lewis S. Feuer, “American Travelers to the 
Soviet Union, 1917-1932: The Formation of a Component of New Deal Ideology," 
American Quarterly 14 [Spring 1962]: 129). See also David Caute, The Fellow Trav­
ellers: Intellectual Friends of Communism, rev. ed. (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1988).
28. Feuer, "American Travelers to the Soviet Union," pp. 119-49, cited in 
Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 6, p. 4.
29. Fitzgerald, Yeoman No More, chap. 6, p. 6.
30. Ibid., p. 37.
31. Ibid., p. 14.
32. Ibid., p. 39 (emphasis added).
33. Quoted in Robert Conquest, The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization 
and the Terror-Famine (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), p. 232. An even 
more explicit recognition that this was a "war” appears in this statement by M. M. 
Khateyevich: "A ruthless struggle is going on between the peasantry and our 
regime. It’s a struggle to the death. This year was a test of our strength and their en­
durance. It took a famine to show them who was master here. It has cost millions 
of lives, but the collective farm system is here to stay, we’ve won the war" (quoted 
in ibid., p. 261).
34. The so-called Great Leap Forward in China was at least as deadly and may 
be analyzed in comparable terms. I have chosen to concentrate on Soviet Russia 
largely because events there occurred some thirty years before the Great Leap For­
ward and hence have received much more scholarly attention, especially during 
the past seven years, when the newly opened Russian archives have greatly ex­
panded our knowledge. For a recent popular account of the Chinese experience, 
see Jasper Becker, Hungry Ghosts: China’s Secret Famine (London: John Murray,
1996).
35. In cases where yields were high among state farms and show projects, they 
were typically achieved with such costly inputs of machinery, fertilizers, pesticides, 
and herbicides that the results were economically irrational.
36. For an exceptionally perceptive account of collectivization and its results,

400 Notes to Pages 203-07
see Moshe Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History of 
Interwar Russia (New York: Pantheon, 1985), especially part 2, pp. 89-188.
37. I use the term "lumpen” here to designate a huge floating population of 
great variety and shifting occupations. Although Marx and Lenin always used the 
term scornfully, implying both criminal tendencies and political opportunism, I in­
tend no such denigration.
38. Stalin, it is now believed, was personally responsible for drafting in August 
1932 a secret decree branding all those who withheld grain, now declared to be 
"sacred and untouchable” state property, as “enemies of the people” and ruling that 
they should be summarily arrested and shot. The same Stalin, at the Second Con­
gress of Outstanding Kolkhozniks in 1935, championed the retaining of adequate 
private plots: "The majority of kolkhozniks want to plant an orchard, cultivate a 
vegetable garden or keep bees. The kolkhozniks want to live a decent life, and for 
that this 0.12 hectares is not enough. We need to allocate a quarter to half a 
hectare, and even as much as one hectare in some districts” (quoted in Sheila Fitz­
patrick, Stalin’s Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village After Col­
lectivization [New York: Oxford University Press, 1995], pp. 73, 122).
39. Ibid., p. 432.
40. Orlando Figes, "Peasant Aspirations and Bolshevik State-Building in the 
Countryside, 1917-1925,” paper presented at the Program in Agrarian Studies, 
Yale University, New Haven, April 14, 1995, p. 24. Figes also links these views to so­
cialist tracts that date from at least the 1890s and that pronounced the peasantry 
doomed by economic progress (p. 28).
41. R. W. Davies, The Socialist Offensive: The Collectivisation of Soviet Agricul­
ture, 1929-1930 (London: Macmillan, 1980), p. 51.
42. Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow, p. 43.
43. Also, the collapse of urban enterprises, which would normally have sup­
plied consumer goods and farm implements to the rural areas, meant that there 
was less incentive for the peasantry to sell grain in order to make purchases in the 
market.
44. See Orlando Figes's remarkably perceptive and detailed book, Peasant Rus­
sia, Civil War: The Volga Countryside in Revolution, 1917-1921 (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1989). Even near revolutions create a similar vacuum. Following the 1905 
revolution, it took the czarist government nearly two years to reassert its control 
over the countryside.
45. The relative unity of the village was itself enhanced by the revolutionary 
process. The richest landlords had left or been burned out, and the poorest, land­
less families had typically gotten some land. As a result, the villagers were more so­
cioeconomically similar and therefore more likely to respond similarly to external 
demands. Since many of the independent farmers were pressured to return to the 
commune, they were now dependent on the entire village for their household’s al­
lotment of the communal lands. Thus it is not hard to understand why, in those in­
stances where the kombedy was an instrument of Bolshevik policy, it faced deter­
mined opposition from the more representative village soviet. "One government 
official from Samara Province claimed, with conscious irony, that the conflicts be­
tween the kombedy and the Soviets represented the main form of 'class struggle’ in 
the rural areas during this period” (ibid., p. 197). In the larger villages, some sup­
port for Bolshevik agrarian plans could be found among educated youth, school­
teachers, and veterans who had become Bolsheviks while serving with the Red 
Army during World War I or the civil war (and who might have imagined them­
selves occupying leading roles in the new collective farms). See Figes, "Peasant As­
pirations and Bolshevik State-Building."

Notes to Pages 207-13 401
46. There was also a tendency to hide income from craft, artisanal, and trading 
sidelines as well as “garden" crops. During this same period, it should be added, 
insufficient resources— manpower, draft animals, manure, and seed— meant that 
some of the arable either could not be planted or could only produce yields that 
were far lower than usual.
47. Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize, pp. 515-16. For Yaney, the continuity in aspira­
tions from what he terms “messianic social agronomists" under the czarist regime to 
the Bolshevik collectivizers was striking. In a few cases, they were the same people.
48. Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War, p. 250.
49. Hunger and flight from the towns had reduced the number of urban indus­
trial workers from 3.6 million in 1917 to no more than 1.5 million in 1920 (Fitz- 
patrick, The Russian Revolution, p. 85).
50. Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War, p. 321.
51. Quoted in Fitzpatrick, Stalin’s Peasants, p. 39.
52. In theory, at least, the most "advanced" were the state farms—the proletar­
ian, industrial, collective farms in which workers were paid wages and no private 
plots were allowed. These farms also received the bulk of state investment in ma­
chinery in the early years. For production statistics, see Davies, The Socialist Of­
fensive, p. 6.
53. Ibid., pp. 82-113.
54. Fitzpatrick, Stalin's Peasants, p. 4.
55. Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow, p. 183.
56. Andrei Platonov, Chevengur, trans. Anthony Olcott (Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1978).
57. M. Hindus, Red Breed (London, 1931), quoted in Davies, The Socialist Of­
fensive, p. 209.
58. Davies, The Socialist Offensive, p. 205.
59. The size of collective farms remained enormous, even by American stan­
dards, throughout the Soviet period. Fred Pryor calculates that in 1970 the average 
state farm comprised more than 100,000 acres, while the average collective farm 
comprised over 25,000 acres. The state farms were greatly favored in access to in­
puts, machinery, and other subsidies. See Frederick Pryor, The Red and the Green: 
The Rise and Fall of Collectivized Agriculture in Marxist Regimes (Princeton: Prince­
ton University Press, 1992), table 7, p. 34.
60. Fitzgerald, Stalin's Peasants, p. 105.
61. Ibid., pp. 105-6. One imagines that the soils and existing cropping patterns 
were also ignored.
62. As the Bolsheviks explained, “The kolkhozy are the only means by which the 
peasantry can escape from poverty and darkness” (Davies, The Socialist Offensive, 
p. 282). Perhaps the best visual images of the culturally transforming properties of 
electricity, machinery, and collectivization are found in Sergey Eisenstein's film The 
General Line, a veritable technological romance set in rural Russia. The film mas­
terfully conveys the utopian aspirations of high modernism by contrasting the plod­
ding dark narod with his horse and scythe with images of electric cream separa­
tors, tractors, mowing machines, engines, skyscrapers, engines, and airplanes.
63. Fitzpatrick, Stalin’s Peasants, p. 194.
64. Ibid., pp. 306-9.
65. For an account of how an even more extreme version of regional special­
ization was imposed on the Chinese countryside, in violation of local soil and cli- 
matological conditions, see Ralph Thaxton, Salt of the Earth: The Political Origins 
of Peasant Protest and Communist Revolution in China (Berkeley: University of Cal­
ifornia Press, forthcoming).
66. Figes, Peasant Russia, Civil War, p. 304. The analogy took concrete form in

4Q2 Notes to Pages 213-17
many of the early revolts against collectivization, during which the peasantry de­
stroyed all the records of labor dues, crop deliveries, debts, and so on, just as they 
had under serfdom.
67. Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow, p. 152.
68. The resemblances to serfdom are spelled out in some detail in Fitzgerald, 
Stalin’s Peasants, pp. 128-39. For a careful and informed discussion of serfdom 
and comparisons to slavery, see Peter Kolchin, Unfree Labor: American Slavery and 
Russian Serfdom (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1987).
69. For an astute account by a Soviet journalist and human rights campaigner 
in the 1980s, indicating that the basic pattern had not greatly changed, see Lev 
Timofeev, Soviet Peasants, or The Peasants’ Art of Starving, trans. Jean Alexander 
and Alexander Zaslavsky, ed. Armando Pitassio and Alexander Zaslavsky (New 
York: Telos Press, 1985).
70. I am persuaded by the historical accounts that characterize the mir as the 
peasantry's adaptation to a gentry and state that treated it as a collective unit for 
the purposes of taxation, conscription, and some forms of servile dues. The peri­
odic redivision of land among the households ensured that all had the means of 
paying their share of the head taxes, which were levied on the commune collec­
tively. That is, the relative solidarity of the Russian repartitional commune is itself 
a result of a distinct history of relations with overlords. This claim is perfectly com­
patible with the fact that such solidarity, once in place, can serve other purposes, 
including resistance.
71. Fitzgerald, Stalin’s Peasants, p. 106 (emphasis added).
72. I am immensely grateful to my colleague Teodor Shanin and his research 
teams, who are conducting comparative work on more than twenty collective farms, 
for making available to me the maps and photographs for this chapter. Particular 
thanks to Galya Yastrebinskaya and Olga Subbotina for the photograph of the older 
village of Utkino, founded in 1912 and located twenty miles from the city of Vologda.
73. Notice that the old-style houses that were not moved (legend reference 12) 
are themselves laid out on roughly equal plots along the main road. I do not know 
whether there were administrative reasons behind these forms in the eighteenth 
century, when the village was founded, or whether the original pioneers themselves 
laid out the grid. How the older houses that have been relocated were originally 
disposed is also a mystery.
74. The same logic, of course, applied to industry, in which large units are fa­
vored over small factories or artisanal production. As Jeffrey Sachs has observed: 
“Central planners had no desire to coordinate the activities of hundreds or thou­
sands of small firms in a sector if one large firm could do the job. A standard strat­
egy, therefore, was to create one giant firm wherever possible” (Poland’s Jump into 
the Market Economy [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993]). In the con­
text of the Soviet economy, the largest industrial unit was the huge steel complex at 
Magnitogorsk. It is now a stunning example of an industrial and ecological ruin. 
See also Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain.
75. For a more extensive treatment of the ecological effects of Soviet agricul­
ture, see Murray Feshbach, Ecological Disaster: Cleaning Up the Hidden Legacy of 
the Soviet Regime (New York: 1995), and Ze’ev Wolfson (Boris Komarov), The Ge­
ography of Survival: Ecology in the Post-Soviet Era (New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1994).
76. I worked for six weeks in 1990 on a cooperative (ex-collective) farm in east­
ern Germany, on the Mecklenburg Plain, not too far from Neubrandenburg. The 
local officials were exceptionally proud of their world-class yields per hectare in 
rye and potatoes with high starch content grown for industrial uses. It was clear, 
however, that as an economic matter, the market cost of the inputs (labor, machin­

Notes to Pages 217-23 403
ery, and fertilizer) needed to produce these yields made this enterprise an ineffi­
cient producer by any cost accounting standard.
77. There is no doubt that a number of bureaucratic "pathologies" amplified the 
disaster of Soviet collectivization. They include the tendency of administrators to 
concentrate on specified, quantifiable results (e.g., grain yields, tons of potatoes, 
tons of pig iron) rather than on quality and the fact that long chains of specializa­
tion and command shielded many officials from the larger consequences of their 
behavior. Also, the difficulty of making officials accountable to their clientele, as op­
posed to their superiors, meant that the pathology of group “commandism,” on one 
hand, or individual corruption and self-serving, on the other, were rampant. High- 
modernist schemes in revolutionary, authoritarian settings like that of the Soviet 
Union are thus likely to go off the rails more easily and remain off the rails far 
longer than in a parliamentary setting.
78. The rush toward collectivization was momentarily halted by Stalin’s famous 
"Dizzy with Success’’ speech of March 1930, which prompted many to leave the 
collectives; however, it was not long before the pace of collectivization resumed. In 
order to have enough capital for rapid industrialization, 4.8 million tons of grain 
were exported in 1930 and 5.2 million tons in 1931, helping to set the stage for the 
famine of the years immediately following. See Lewin, The Making of the Soviet Sys­
tem, p. 156.
79. Compare this with Bakunin’s forecast of what state socialism would amount 
to: “They will concentrate all of the powers of government in strong hands, because 
the very fact that the people are ignorant necessitates strong, solicitous care by the 
government. They will create a single state bank, concentrating in its hands all the 
commercial, industrial, agricultural, and even scientific producers, and they will 
divide the masses of people into two armies— industrial and agricultural armies 
under the direct command of the State engineers who will constitute the new priv­
ileged scientific-political class” (quoted in W. D. Maximoff, The Political Philosophy 
of Bakunin: Scientific Anarchism [New York: Free Press, 1953], p. 289).
80. The term "elective affinity" comes from Max Weber’s analysis of the relation 
between capitalist norms and institutions on one hand and Protestantism on the 
other. His argument is not one of direct causation but of "fit” and symbiosis.
81. See books 4 and 5 in vol. 2 of Gabriel Ardant, Theorie sociologique de I’impot 
(Paris: c e v p e n , 1965).
82. Quoted in Michel Crozier, The Bureaucratic Phenomenon (Chicago: Univer­
sity of Chicago Press, 1964), p. 239. As Abram de Swaan has noted, “The nineteenth- 
century school regime does reveal some unmistakable similarities with the factory 
regime of that time: standardization, formalization and the imposition of punctu­
ality and discipline were paramount in both” (In Care of the State, p. 61).
83. For a detailed account of the relationship between the private plot and the 
collective just prior to 1989, see Timofeev, Soviet Peasants, or The Peasants’ Art of 
Starving.
Chapter 7: Compulsory Villagization in Tanzania
1. 
Julius Nyerere claimed that over 9 million people had been moved to ujamaa 
villages, but since a good many of these villages were administrative fictions and 
others had preexisting population bases that were probably included in the self- 
congratulatory government statistics, a more modest figure is probably closer to 
the truth. See Goran Hyden, Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania: Underdevelopment and an 
Uncaptured Peasantry (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980), p. 130 n. 2.

404 Notes to Pages 223-28
2. During his presidency, Nyerere visited almost every socialist-bloc state. For 
an enlightening survey of Marxism-inspired development plans throughout the 
Third World, see Forrest D. Colburn, The Vogue of Revolution in Poor Countries 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994).
3. For a searching critique focusing on the returns to scale and to mechaniza­
tion in agriculture in five such projects, see Nancy L. Johnson and Vernon W. Rut- 
tan, “Why Are Farms So Small?" World Development 22, no. 5 (1994): 691-706.
4. These influences were quite direct, as we have noted, for many of the per­
sonnel in the Food and Agriculture Organization, the International Bank for Re­
construction and Development, the World Bank, and development agencies from 
the United Nations were American economists, agronomists, engineers, and bu­
reaucrats.
5. See, for example, Lionel Cliffe and Griffiths L. Cunningham, “Ideology, Or­
ganization, and the Settlement Experience of Tanzania,” in Lionel Cliffe and John
S. Saul, eds., Policies, vol. 2 of Socialism in Tanzania: An Interdisciplinary Reader 
(Nairobi: East African Publishing House, 1973), pp. 131-40.
6. Lionel Cliffe, “Nationalism and the Reaction to Enforced Agricultural 
Change in Tanganyika During the Colonial Period,” in Lionel Cliffe and John S. 
Saul, eds., Politics, vol. 1 of Socialism in Tanzania: An Interdisciplinary Reader 
(Nairobi: East African Publishing House, 1973), pp. 18, 22. For a brilliant treat­
ment of peasant-state relations, see Steven Feierman, Peasant Intellectuals: An­
thropology and History in Tanzania (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1990).
7. William Beinert, "Agricultural Planning and the Late Colonial Technical 
Imagination: The Lower Shire Valley in Malawi, 1940-1960,” in Malawi: An Alter­
native Pattern of Development, proceedings of a seminar held at the Centre of 
African Studies, University of Edinburgh, May 14 and 25, 1984 (Edinburgh: Centre 
of African Studies, University of Edinburgh, 1985), pp. 95-148.
8. Ibid., p. 103.
9. Such schemes often included, as Beinert explains, "storm drains, contour 
bunding, ridging, protection of stream banks, compulsory grass fallows, restorative 
crops and eventually a full system of rotational strip cropping" (ibid., p. 104).
10. There is nothing odd about this displacement, which occurs almost uncon­
sciously. The "look” of agriculture is stamped with specific, historically contingent 
features that tend to be forgotten in practice until one's visual expectations are 
upset. When, for example, I first visited northern Bohemia before 1989, I was 
taken aback by huge collectivized maize fields that extended two or three miles, 
unbroken by fences or lines of trees. I realized that my visual expectations about 
the countryside included the physical evidence of small private properties: tree 
lines, fences, smaller and more irregular plots, the physical features of indepen­
dent farmsteads. (Had I grown up in, say, Kansas, I would not have been quite so 
surprised.)
11. Beinert, “Agricultural Planning," p. 113.
12. For an exceptionally perceptive account of the differences between the ge­
ography of traditional, chiefly power and the Cartesian logic of colonial planning in 
southern Africa, see Isable Hofmyer, They Spend Their Lives as a Tale That Is Told 
(Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1994).
13. Ibid., pp. 138-39.
14. For a sampling of accounts, see J. Phillips, Agriculture and Ecology in Africa 
(London: Faber and Faber, 1959); F. Samuel, "East African Groundnut Scheme," 
United Empire 38 (May-June 1947): 133-40; S. P. Voll, A Plough in Field Arable 
(London: University Presses of New England, 1980); Alan Wood, The Groundnut Af­
fair (London: Bodley Head, 1950); Johnson and Ruttan, “Why Are Farms So Small?”

Notes to Pages 229-32 405
pp. 691-706; Andrew Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” Re­
view of African Political Economy 10 (September-December 1977): 74-100.
15. Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania," p. 76.
16. Johnson and Ruttan, "Why Are Farms So Small?” p. 694. Samuel’s motto 
notwithstanding, the scheme was designed to employ a workforce of thirty-two 
thousand Africans.
17. Permanent settlement was also a keystone of colonial health and veterinary 
policy in Tanganyika. See, in this context, Kirk Arden Hoppe, "Lords of the Flies: 
British Sleeping Sickness Policies as Environmental Engineering in the Lake Vic­
toria Region, 1900-1950,” Working Papers in African Studies no. 203 (Boston: 
Boston University African Studies Center, 1995).
18. Goran Hyden, Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania (London: Heineman, 1980).
19. During the independence struggle and immediately afterward, peasants 
tore down the terraces that they had been ordered to build and refused to destock 
or to dip their cattle. See Andrew Coulson, Tanzania: A Political Economy (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1982), p. 117.
20. From "President's Inaugural Address” (December 10, 1962), in Julius K. 
Nyerere, Freedom and Unity: A Selection from Writings and Speeches, 1952-1965 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1967), p. 184. I owe much of my early appreci­
ation for the Tanzanian material to Joel Gao Hiza’s exceptionally perceptive senior 
essay in anthropology, “The Repetition of 'Traditional' Mistakes in Rural Develop­
ment: Compulsory Villagization in Tanzania,” April 1993, and to his invaluable bib­
liographic assistance. He was unfailingly generous in sharing his analytical judg­
ment and his command of the literature.
21. Julius K. Nyerere, “Socialism and Rural Development” (September 1967), in 
Nyerere, Freedom and Socialism: A Selection from Writings and Speeches, 1965 -1967 
(Dar es Salaam: Oxford University Press, 1968), p. 365. It is worth noting here that 
the abolition of individual freehold title shortly after independence was one of the 
legal preconditions for forced villagization, as, in Nyerere's words, "all land now be­
longed] to the nation” (p. 307). Nyerere justified this move in terms of African tra­
ditions of "communal ownership," thus eliding the difference between communal 
ownership and state ownership.
22. Quoted in Coulson, Tanzania, p. 237 (emphasis added).
23. One imagines that Nyerere had a powerful visual image of what a "proper” 
village should look like— its layout, tractors crisscrossing communal fields, a 
clinic, a school, a government service center, small village industries, and perhaps, 
looking ahead, electric engines and lights. Where did this image come from? From 
Russia, China, the West?
24. Quoted in Nyerere, Freedom and Socialism, p. 356.
25. Ibid. (emphasis added).
26. Quoted from the 1961 World Bank report (p. 19), in Coulson, Tanzania,
p. 161.
27. Cliffe and Cunningham, "Ideology, Organization, and the Settlement Expe­
rience,” p. 135. The authors omit the actual location and name of the village, almost 
certainly for political reasons. Although I have no way of proving it, I would guess 
that this Xanadu was close to the capital at Dar es Salaam so that officials could 
visit and admire it.
28. By the contemporary standards of rule in neighboring states like Ethiopia, 
Uganda, South Africa, Mozambique, and Zaire, Nyerere's Tanzania was paradise it­
self. Nevertheless, tanu routinely suborned the legal system or circumvented it al­
together. The Preventive Detention Act of 1962 provided no safeguards against 
flagrant abuse. In early 1964, after an army mutiny, it was used liberally to round

406 Notes to Pages 232-34
up about five hundred opponents of the regime, most of whom had no connection 
to the conspiracy. In addition to the Preventive Detention Act, the regime also had 
frequent recourse to a number of authoritarian colonial laws. See, in this connec­
tion, Cranford Pratt, The Critical Phase in Tanzania, 1945-1968: Nyerere and the 
Emergence of a Socialist Strategy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), 
pp. 184-89.
29. Jannik Boesen, Birgit Storgaard Madsen, and Tony Moody, Ujamaa: So­
cialism from Above (Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, 1977), p.
38. The reference is to the Makazi Mapya settlement program prior to 1969 in the 
West Lake region.
30. Ibid., p. 77.
31. See Cliffe and Cunningham, "Ideology, Organization, and the Settlement 
Experience,” pp. 137-39; Lionel Cliffe, "The Policy of Ujamaa Vijijini and the Class 
Struggle in Tanzania," in Cliffe and John S. Saul, eds., Policies, vol. 2 of Socialism 
in Tanzania: An Interdisciplinary Reader (Nairobi: East African Publishing House,
1973), pp. 195-211; and Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” pp. 
74-100. The last-mentioned article is a splendid synthetic treatment of rural policy 
in Tanzania.
32. Cliffe and Cunningham, “Ideology, Organization, and the Settlement Expe­
rience,” p. 139.
33. Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” p. 91.
34. Nyerere made the order in a speech delivered via radio, and the content of 
his speech is instructive. He reminded his audience of “all that the tanu Govern­
ment had done for the people after the Arusha Declaration: abolishing the poll tax, 
abolishing primary school fees, building permanent, clean water supplies in the vil­
lages, expanding the number of health clinics and dispensaries in the rural areas, 
increasing primary school facilities. He then went on to ask what the peasants had 
done in return for these favors. In answering that question, President Nyerere sug­
gested that they had done virtually nothing. They had remained idle and evaded 
their responsibility to make a contribution to the country's socialist development. 
He concluded his speech by saying that he knew he could not turn people into so­
cialists by force, but what his government could do was to ensure that everybody 
lived in village. He said he wanted that to be done before the end of 1976” (Hyden, 
Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania, p. 130).
35. The stage had already been set when, in early October, the Sixteenth Bien­
nial Conference of tanu ended with an urgent call to the government to “map vil­
lage areas” with a view to making the ujamaa village movement national rather 
than relying on local initiative (Daily News [Dar es Salaam], October 2, 1973). Ac­
cordingly, there were calls in the next months for land officers and professional sur­
veyors to train local cadres in the simpler techniques of surveying so that they could 
lay out new villages (Daily News [Dar es Salaam], January 30, 1974). "Frontal” ap­
proaches to ujamaa villages, however, had been urged from at least 1969 by ta n u, 
the Ministry of Rural Development, and the second five-year plan. See Bismarck U. 
Mwansasu and Cranford Pratt, Towards Socialism in Tanzania (Buffalo: University 
of Toronto Press, 1979), p. 98.
36. Quoted in Coulson, "Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania," p. 74. See 
also Juma Volter Mwapachu, "Operation Planned Villages in Rural Tanzania: A Rev­
olutionary Strategy of Development," African Review 6, no. 1 (1976): 1-16. The dis­
course begs for closer analysis. The subject of the last two sentences is the imper­
sonal actor "the State” or “Tanzania,” represented in practice, of course, by Nyerere 
and the ta nu elite. In the context of coercion the linguistic fiction of choice is still

Notes to Pages 234-37 407
maintained. Finally, using the phrase "life of death” to describe the lives most Tan­
zanians are leading elevates Nyerere and the party to the role of saviors raising 
their people from the dead, as Jesus did with Lazarus.
37. See Dean E. McHenry, Jr., Tanzania’s Ujamaa Villages: The Implementation 
of a Rural Development Strategy, Research Series no. 39 (Berkeley: Berkeley Insti­
tute of International Studies, 1979), p. 136; Mwapachu, “Operation Planned Vil­
lages”; Katabaro Miti, Whither Tanzania? (New Delhi: Ajanta, 1987), pp. 73-89.
38. In the antiseptic terminology of the 1961 World Bank report, “When peo­
ple move to new areas, they are likely to be more receptive of change than when 
they remain in their familiar surroundings” (quoted in Coulson, Tanzania, p. 75). 
This was presumably the psychological premise behind forced settlement. I was 
told by a World Bank official that early in the campaign to transplant thousands of 
Javanese on the outer islands of Indonesia, it was thought better to move them by 
airplane rather than by boat, which would have been cheaper, because their first 
experience of flight would suitably disorient them and convey to them the revo­
lutionary and permanent nature of their relocation.
39. Quoted in Coulson, African Socialism in Practice: The Tanzanian Experience 
(Nottingham: Spokesman, 1979), pp. 31-32.
40. Helge Kjekhus, “The Tanzanian Villagization Policy: Implementation Lessons 
and Ecological Dimensions, Canadian Journal of African Studies 11 (1977): 282, 
cited in Rodger Yaeger, Tanzania: An African Experiment, 2nd ed. (Boulder: West- 
view Press, 1989), p. 62.
41. A. P. L. Ndabakwaje, Student Report, University of Dar es Salaam, 1975, 
quoted in McHenry, Tanzania’s Ujamaa Villages, pp. 140-41. In one celebrated 
case, a cultivator who was incensed that his land was being seized for a new village 
replied in kind by shooting and killing the regional commissioner. See B. C. Nindi, 
“Compulsion in the Implementation of Ujamaa,” in Norman O’Neill and Kemal 
Mustafa, eds., Capitalism, Socialism, and the Development Crisis in Tanzania (Ave­
bury: Aldershot, 1990), pp. 63-68, cited in Bruce McKim, “Bureaucrats and Peas­
ants: Ujamaa Villagization in Tanzania, 1967-1976" (term paper, Department of 
Anthropology, Yale University, April 1993), p. 14.
42. For a forthright account, under the circumstances, of the fear and suspicion 
surrounding the forced movement to new villages, see P A. Kisula, “Prospects of 
Building Ujamaa Villages in Mwanza District," (Ph.D. diss., Department of Political 
Science, University of Dar es Salaam, 1973). I am grateful to David Sperling for 
bringing this paper to my attention. In many areas, flight from ujamaa villages was 
closely monitored by the security forces.
43. Ibid., p. 134. One could argue that it is far easier to impose high-modernist 
schemes of transformation on a population that is somehow constructed as “the 
other” than on a group that is part of “us.” This would help to explain why villag­
ization was imposed first in poor areas such as Kigoma and Dodoma and why it 
went particularly hard on the pastoral Maasai.
44. Quoted in Coulson, African Socialism in Practice, p. 66.
45. Ibid.
46. Sally Falk Moore, Social Facts and Fabrications: “Customary" Law on Kili­
manjaro, 1880-1980 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 314.
47. Here, incidentally, is where I think Goran Hyden's otherwise interesting 
book misses the boat altogether. The resistance of the Tanzanian peasantry seems 
less a consequence of some age-old “economy of affection” than a rational response 
to painful memories of the dire consequences of many state schemes, most of 
which had miscarried.

408 Notes to Pages 237-40
48. Elsewhere, in Tanga for example, there are cases of "Potemkin villages" 
being created for a Nyerere visit and dismantled later. See Hyden, Beyond Ujamaa 
in Tanzania, pp. 101-8.
49. Mwapachu, "Operation Planned Villages,” quoted in Coulson, African So­
cialism in Practice, p. 121.
50. Henry Bernstein, "Notes on State and the Peasantry: The Tanzanian Case,” 
Review of African Political Economy 21 (May-September 1981): 57.
51. Jannik Boesen, quoted in Coulson, Tanzania, p. 254.
52. Boesen, Madsen, and Moody, Ujamaa, p. 165.
53. Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania," p. 88 (emphasis 
added).
54. See Phil Raikes, “Eating the Carrot and Wielding the Stick: The Agricul­
tural Sector in Tanzania,” in Jannik Boesen et ah, Tanzania: Crisis and Struggle for 
Survival (Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, 1986), p. 119. Unfa­
vorable price and currency movements meant that a five-fold increase in the vol­
ume of imports from 1973 to 1975 now represented a thirty-fold increase in Value.
55. Here the key is perhaps the difference between subsistence production and 
production for the market. I am grateful to Bruce McKim for emphasizing that the 
macroeconomic incentives for market production were minimal. Producer prices, 
which were set by the state marketing boards, were all but confiscatory, and in any 
case the shops contained few goods on which the proceeds could have been spent.
56. The intention of this law, which had a long colonial history, was to force the 
peasantry into planting crops that did well under arid conditions, thus lowering the 
government's food relief expenditures during times of famine.
57. The system of cotton cultivation in Mozambique was a draconian model of 
this policy. The Portuguese made great efforts to concentrate the population (con- 
centragaoes) so that officials or concessionaires could enforce cotton cultivation and 
delivery. In one variant, plots were marked off by surveyors, and every family was 
assigned a plot. The scheme was enforced by a system in which personalized passes 
indicated whether their bearers had acquitted their cotton quotas for the year; those 
found in default could be arrested, beaten, or sent off as draft labor to the dreaded 
sisal plantations. For an exceptionally detailed and comprehensive account, see 
Allen Isaacman, Cotton Is the Mother of Poverty: Peasants, Work, and Rural Struggle 
in Colonial Mozambique, 1938-1961 (Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1996).
58. Officials aspired to control not only production but also consumption. In 
m id-1974 in the Dodoma district, for example, all private retail trade in essential 
food items was banned in favor of the monopoly formed by the state’s consumer co­
operative societies and Ujamaa shops. See “Only Co-ops Will Sell Food in Dodoma,” 
Daily News (Dar es Salaam), June 6, 1974. This move was probably provoked by the 
losses experienced by “official” shops, which were usually run by party cadres and 
lower-level officials. It would be surprising if such a monopoly over retail trade in 
food ever became much more than an aspiration.
59. Boesen, Madsen, and Moody, Ujamaa, p. 105.
60. Graham Thiele, “Villages as Economic Agents: The Accident of Social Re­
production,” in R. G. Abrahams, ed., Villagers, Villages, and the State in Modem Tan­
zania, Cambridge African Monograph Series, no. 4 (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1985), pp. 81-109.
61. For early examples of these figures for five crops, see Boesen, Madsen, and 
Moody, Ujamaa, p. 102.
62. Graham Thiele, "Villages as Economic Agents," pp. 98-99. See also Don 
Hassett, “The Development of Village Co-operative Enterprise in Mchinga II Vil­
lage, Lindi Region," in Abrahams, Villagers, Villages, pp. 16-54.

Notes to Pages 240-45 409
63. Thus Ndugu Lyander, the regional part secretary for the Kilombero district 
along the Great Uhuru Railway (built with Chinese assistance), reminded the peo­
ple that each family must cultivate its two assigned acres, warning them (in lan­
guage suggestive of the resistance that he was meeting) “that action will be taken 
against anyone who does not have a farm and no excuses will be entertained” 
(“100,000 Move to Uhuru Line Villages,” Daily News [Dar es Salaam], October 28,
1974).
64. Bernstein, “Notes on State and the Peasantry,” p. 48.
65. Ibid. Bernstein points out astutely that the Tanzanian state faced an impos­
ing fiscal crisis at the time. The growth of the state budget and personnel had for a 
long time outpaced the growth of the economy and of government revenues, in­
cluding foreign exchange. The effort to regiment the peasant economy in the hope 
of both raising production and increasing state revenues was virtually the only al­
ternative available.
66. There had also been considerable growth in parastatal corporations where 
production was carried out by wage labor. A good many of these corporations took 
to farming (grains, sugar, and fodder for dairy cows). These operations, especially 
the sugar parastatal plantations, were large and capital intensive, as were the na­
tionalized sisal and tea plantations.
67. Quoted in Coulson, Tanzania, p. 255.
68. Ibid., p. 161.
69. Ibid., p. 92.
70. Ibid., p. 158.
71. Nyerere, "Broadcast on Becoming Prime Minister” (May 1961), in Nyerere, 
Freedom and Unity, p. 115.
72. Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” p. 76.
73. As might well be expected, the aftermath of ujamaa villagization has seen 
a huge number of land disputes between settlements, individuals, and kin groups — 
disputes with important environmental consequences. See the excellent analysis 
by Achim von Oppen, “Bauern, Boden, und Baeume: Landkonflikte und ihre Be- 
deutung fuer Ressourcenschutz in tanzanischen Doerfern nach Ujamaa," Afrika- 
Spectrum (February 1993).
74. Boesen, Madsen, and Moody, Ujamaa, p. 115.
75. Phil Raikes, "Coffee Production in West Lake Region, Tanzania," Institute 
for Development Research, Copenhagen, Paper A.76.9 (1976), p. 3, quoted in Coul­
son, "Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania," p. 80. See also Phil Raikes, "Eat­
ing the Carrot and Wielding the Stick,” pp. 105-41.
76. Boesen, Madsen, and Moody, Ujamaa, p. 67.
77. James De Vries and Louise P. Fortmann, “Large-scale Villagization: Opera­
tion Sogeza in Iringa Region," in Coulson, African Socialism in Practice, p. 135.
78. The apt phrase is from Bernstein, "Notes on State and the Peasantry," p. 59.
79. Mwapachu, “Operation Planned Villages,” p. 117 (emphasis added).
80. Neither in Nyerere’s speeches at this time nor in official reports in the press 
were such numbers often linked to indices of rural transformation such as mortal­
ity rates, income, consumption, etc. See Jannik Boesen, “Tanzania: From Ujamaa 
to Villagization,” in Mwansasu and Pratt, Towards Socialism in Tanzania, p. 128.
81. Quoted in Coulson, African Socialism in Practice, p. 65. The relentless em­
phasis on quantitative achievements was echoed in the newspapers: so many peo­
ple moved to new villages, so many new villages formed, so many acres of crops 
sown, such and such a percentage of a district rehoused, so many plots of land al­
located, etc. See, for example, typical articles in Daily News [Dar es Salaam]: 
"14,133 Move into Villages in Chjunya,” February 19, 1974; "Two Months After Op­

410 Notes to Pages 245-47
eration Arusha: 13,928 Families Move into Ujamaa Villages," October 21, 1974; 
"Iringa: Settling the People into Planned Villages,” April 15, 1975.
Nyerere did not, as had Stalin, make a “Dizzy with Success” speech and call a 
temporary halt in villagization. On the other hand, Tanzanian villagization was not 
nearly as brutal. Nyerere continued on in this speech to explain again how this con­
centration of population would permit the delivery of social services “necessary to 
a life of dignity.”
82. Coulson, Tanzania, pp. 320-31.
83. For a powerfully argued parallel case, see James Ferguson, The Anti-Politics 
Machine: “Development,” Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). Ferguson concludes that “the 'de­
velopment’ apparatus in Lesotho is not a machine for eliminating poverty that is in­
cidentally involved with the state bureaucracy; it is a machine for reinforcing and 
expanding the exercise of bureaucratic state power, which incidentally takes 
‘poverty’ as its point of entry" (pp. 255-56). In Tanzania, there were still more im­
portant ways in which the official classes gained power, including the displacement 
of the Asian trading minority as buyers of rural produce and in retailing, as well as 
the nationalization of trade and industry in general. It is indicative that the size of 
the government’s budget and the number of state employees increased at rates well 
above the rate of economic growth until the mid-1970s, when a fiscal crisis pre­
vented any further expansion.
84. In a stingy landscape, to stay put is suicide and to move is the condition of 
survival. See, for an extended and poetic case along these lines, Bruce Chatwin, 
The Songlines (London: Cape, 1987).
85. M. L. Ole Parkipuny, "Some Crucial Aspects of the Maasai Predicament,” in 
Coulson, African Socialism in Practice, chap. 10, pp. 139-60.
86. See, for example, Raikes, “Eating the Carrot and Wielding the Stick”: 
"Many policies rest on assumptions about agricultural ‘modernization’ held in 
common by the Tanzanian Government and its anti-socialist critics, while no small 
proportion of policy has been carried over (with or without change) from the colo­
nial period" (p. 106). See also the brilliant analysis of the application of the World 
Bank development paradigm to Lesotho in Ferguson, The Anti-Politics Machine, 
which also discusses World Bank plans for villagization in Lesotho.
87. Ron Aminzade (personal communication, September 22, 1995) claims that 
Nyerere’s continued popularity, despite the failures of villagization, may be partly 
due to the ways in which resettlement and other national policies have worked to 
erode hierarchies of age and gender, thus improving the relative position of 
younger people and of women.
88. The pace of villagization slowed precipitously in late 1974, when a drought 
that reduced the harvest by 50 percent followed on the heels of poor harvests from 
the preceding two years. It is difficult to specify the extent to which villagization 
and mandated cultivation exacerbated the food-supply shortage. Tanzania was, at 
any rate, obliged to import unprecedented amounts of foodstuffs at precisely the 
time when the costs of foreign oil and machinery had skyrocketed. Although the 
food shortage made many peasants more willing to move in exchange for food ra­
tions, they were less willing to hand over the food that they had grown to the state 
marketing boards. Under the straitened circumstances, large-scale social experi­
mentation was shelved. See Hyden, Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania, pp. 129-30, 141, 
146, and Deborah Bryceson, "Household, Hoe, and Nation: Development Policies 
of the Nyerere Era," in Michael Hodd, ed., Tanzania After Nyerere (London: Pinter, 
1988), pp. 36-48.
89. Much of the surplus-producing population of Tanzania has the decided tac­

Notes to Pages 247-51 411
tical advantage of living near the country’s borders, making smuggling in both di­
rections a ready option.
90. Here again, for the best source on the copying of administrative struc­
tures, development plans, and economic organization among Marxist regimes, see 
Colburn, The Vogue of Revolution, especially chaps. 4 and 5, pp. 49-77.
91. Quoted in Girma Kebbede, The State and Development in Ethiopia (Engle­
wood, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1992), p. 23.
92. See the remarkably detailed and insightful report by Cultural Survival: 
Jason W. Clay, Sandra Steingraber, and Peter Niggli, The Spoils of Famine: 
Ethiopian Famine Policy and Peasant Agriculture, Cultural Survival Report 25 (Cam­
bridge, Mass.: Cultural Survival 1988), especially chap. 5, “Villagization in Ethiopia,” 
pp. 106-35. As an empire, the Ethiopian state had a long tradition of military set­
tlements and colonization which continued under Mengistu in the forced migration 
of populations from the north into the lands of the Oromo in the south.
93. Ibid., pp. 271, 273.
94. John M. Cohen and Nils-Ivar Isaksson, "Villagization in Ethiopia’s Arsi Re­
gion,” Journal of Modem African Studies 25, no. 3 (1987): 435-64. These figures are 
a bit fishy. As each village was planned for a notional one thousand inhabitants, it 
looks as if they multiplied the number of villages by the mandated population, 
adding perhaps a few additional inhabitants to account for officials. Cohen and 
Isaksson were more inclined to take the regime at its word than were Clay and his 
colleagues at Cultural Survival.
95. Ibid., p. 449.
96. A similar geometrical meticulousness was followed in Pol Pot’s Cambodia. 
Walls of earth were thrown up to make long, straight canals, eliminating irregular 
paddies and creating hectare squares of riceland. Concentration of population, 
forced labor, the prohibition of foraging or departure, the control of food rations, 
and executions were carried to an extreme rarely seen in Ethiopia. See Ben Kier- 
nan, The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia Under the Khmer 
Rouge, 1975-1979 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), chap. 5.
97. Clay, Steingraber, and Niggli, The Spoils of Famine, p. 121. Like the Soviet 
Union, Ethiopia had a separate category of state farms that were run on the basis of 
hired labor and were, at least initially, very highly mechanized. They were expected 
to produce a supply of major grains and export crops that would be under direct 
control of the government. "In the late 1970s, as a result of the slow voluntary 
move toward collectivization, the government began to identify for future state 
farms, flat, fertile areas for mechanized agriculture. The clearing of residents off 
such areas so that they could be used to produce directly for the state appears to be 
a primary reason for the villagization in Bale” (ibid., p. 149).
98. Ibid., pp. 190-92, 204.
99. The roots of this program can be traced to a 1973 World Bank report “that 
recommended the relocation of peasants from northern areas suffering from high 
population pressure, soil erosion, and deforestation,” although it was termed a pol­
icy response to famine in 1984-85 (Cohen and Isaksson, "Villagization in Ethiopia's 
Arsi Region,” p. 443). Something of the logic of social control behind these schemes 
can be found in the fine paper by Donald Donham, “Conversion and Revolution in 
Maale, Ethiopia,” Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale University, New Haven, De­
cember 1, 1995.
100. See, especially, Kebbede, The State and Development, pp. 5-102, and Clay, 
Steingraber, and Niggli, The Spoils of Famine, passim.
101. Clay, Steingraber, and Niggli, The Spoils of Famine, p. 23.
102. As one farmer told Clay, "There are six kinds of sorghum I plant: two red

412 Notes to Pages 251-56
kinds, two white kinds that are intermediate and ripen very fast. There are also 
types we eat while the fruit is still green. There are five kinds of teff and three kinds 
of corn: red, orange, and white. Each is planted according to its season, and each 
has its own time to plant" (ibid., p. 23).
103. Ibid., p. 55.
104. Food aid was, in turn, used to round up people for resettlement and, when 
resettled, to hold them there. A standard technique of the Dergue was to announce 
a time and place for food distribution and then ship off the crowd that assembled.
105. An extreme version of this visual codification can be seen in Ceau§mescu’s 
Romania, where hundreds of villages were destroyed in order to make room for 
nonfunctioning towns with "modern apartment flats” (easier to control) and where 
the countryside was divided up into zones of strict agricultural specialization as if 
it were a single enterprise with its own division of labor. The regime termed the en­
tire exercise "systematization." Perhaps the best treatment is to be found in Kather­
ine Verdery, What Was Socialism and What Comes Next (Princeton: Princeton Uni­
versity Press, 1996), especially chap. 6, pp. 133-67.
106. But even here, see Donald Worster, The Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in 
the 1930s (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979).
107. John Berger, Ways of Seeing (London, 1992), p. 16, quoted in Martin Jay, 
Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). For a useful collection on the issue 
of modernity and vision, see also David Michael Levin, ed., Modernity and the Hege­
mony of Vision (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993).
108. For a more elaborate argument along these lines, see James C. Scott, 
Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (New Haven: Yale Uni­
versity Press, 1990), pp. 45-69.
109. Zygmunt Bauman, in Modernity and the Holocaust (Oxford: Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1989), makes the same point with regard to the “gardening metaphor,” 
which he sees as characteristic of modernist thought in general and Nazi racial 
policies in particular.
110. This point is made exceptionally well, both empirically and analytically, in 
Sally Falk Moore, Social Facts and Fabrications, especially chap. 6.
111. See, in this connection, the classic article arguing that our modest degree 
of knowledge about the likely consequences of any major policy initiative makes a 
strategy of “crab-wise” adjustments, which can be undone without great damage, 
the more prudent course: Charles E. Lindblom, “The Science of Muddling 
Through," Public Administration Review 19 (Spring 1959): 79-88. A follow-up arti­
cle published twenty years later, “Still Muddling, Not Yet Through,” may be found in 
Lindblom, Democracy and the Market System (Oslo: Norwegian University Presses, 
1979), pp. 237-59.
112. Proponents of this view forget or ignore, I think, the fact that in order to 
do its work, the market requires its own vast simplifications in treating land (na­
ture) and labor (people) as factors of production (commodities). This, in turn, can 
and has been profoundly destructive of human communities and of nature. In a 
sense, the simplification of the scientific forest compounds the simplification of sci­
entific measurement and the simplification made possible by the commercial mar­
ket for wood. Karl Polanyi’s classic, The Great Transformation (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1957), is still perhaps the best case against pure market logic.
113. I am aware that the binary distinction between “artificial” and "natural” is 
ultimately untenable when it comes to things like languages and communities. By 
"artificial,” I mean languages and communities that are planned centrally and at a 
single stroke, as it were, as opposed to communities that grow by accretion.

Notes to Pages 257-61 413
114. See J. C. O'Connor, Esperanto, the Universal Language: The Student’s Com­
plete Text Book (New York: Fleming H. Revell, 1907); and Pierre Janton, Esperanto 
Language, Literature, and Community, trans. Humphrey Tonkin et al. (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1973). By “universal,” of course, Esperanto’s propo­
nents meant, in fact, “European.”
115. See, in this context, Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Mini­
ature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1984).
116. For a remarkable account of a Soviet theme park, Exhibition of the 
Achievements of the People’s Economy, which was erected in 1939, see Jamey 
Gambrell, Once upon an Empire: The Soviet Paradise (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, forthcoming). For two accounts of an Indonesian analog (Taman-Mini, or 
“mini-park") built according to the inspiration of Mrs. Soeharto, the wife of Indone­
sia’s president since 1965, after she visited Disneyland, see John Pemberton, "Rec­
ollections from ‘Beautiful Indonesia’ (Somewhere Beyond the Postmodern),” Pub­
lic Culture 6 (1994): 241-62; and Timothy C. Lindsey, “Concrete Ideology: Taste, 
Tradition, and the Javanese Past in New Order Public Space," in Virginia Matheson 
Hooker, ed., Culture and Society in New Order Indonesia (Kuala Lumpur: Oxford 
University Press, 1993), pp. 166-82.
117. In another example of the exemplum being mistaken for reality, during the 
disastrous Great Leap Forward in the late 1950s, Mao Tse-tung’s subordinates set 
up elaborate, deceptive tableaux of healthy peasants and bumper crops along the 
route that his train would follow.
118. Yi-fu Tuan, Dominance and Affection: The Making of Pets (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1984).
119. Lawrence Vale, Architecture, Power, and National Identity (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1992), p. 90.
120. One political advantage of a new capital is precisely that it does not belong 
to any existing community. Founding a new capital avoids certain delicate, if not 
explosive, choices that would otherwise have to be made. By the same logic, En­
glish became the national language of India because it was the only widely spoken 
language that did not belong exclusively to any particular traditional community. It 
did belong, however, to India’s English-speaking intelligentsia, which was enor­
mously privileged when its “dialect” became the national language. The United 
States and Australia, with no urban past to transcend, created planned capitals that 
represented a vision of progress and order and that were, not incidentally, in stark 
contrast to indigenous settlement practices.
121. Vale, Architecture, Power, and National Identity, p. 293.
122. Ibid., p. 149.
123. Coulson, “Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” p. 86.
124. For a fine description of the Mozambique case, see chap. 7 of Isaacman, 
Cotton Is the Mother of Poverty.
125. Quoted in Coulson, "Agricultural Policies in Mainland Tanzania,” p. 78. 
The document goes on to stress how important it is to separate the good, industri­
ous cultivators from the bad, lazy ones. One wonders whether the Latin American 
revolutionary strategy of focos, or creating small insurrectionary enclaves (and 
elaborated by Regis DeBray in the 1960s), shares an intellectual lineage with 
"focal-point” strategies in development work.
126. Pauline Peters, “Transforming Land Rights: State Policy and Local Prac­
tice in Malawi,” paper presented at the Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale Univer­
sity, New Haven, February 19, 1993.
127. Birgit Muller, unpublished paper, 1990.

414 Notes to Pages 261-65
128. Kate Xiao Zhou, How the Farmers Changed China: Power of the People 
(Boulder: Westview Press, 1996).
129. The large gap that thus develops between an inevitably thin authoritarian 
high-modernist social fiction and the informal, "deviant” practices that cannot be 
openly avowed but that are its necessary complement is diagnostically characteris­
tic. Although we shall return to this theme, here it is relevant to recall that the 
hypocrisy, cynicism, and comedy generated by the gulf between the official pieties 
of a mendacious public sphere and the practices necessary to the reproduction of 
daily life often become the raw material for such a society's finest literature, poetry, 
and song.
Chapter 8: Taming Nature
1. For persuasive evidence that even the most apparently pristine forests are in 
part the product of human agency practiced over centuries, see, for example, Dar­
ryl Posey, "Indigenous Management of Tropical Forest Eco-Systems: The Case of 
the Kayapo Indians of the Brazilian Amazon,” Agroforestry Systems 3 (1985):
139-58; Susanna Hecht, Anthony Anderson, and Peter May, "The Subsidy from 
Nature: Shifting Cultivation, Successional Palm Forests, and Rural Development,” 
Human Organization 47, no. 1 (1988): 25-35; J. B. Alcorn, “Huastec Noncrop Re­
source Management: Implications for Prehistoric Rain Forest Management,” 
Human Ecology 9, no. 4 (1981): 395-417; and Christine Padoch, "The Woodlands 
of Tae: Traditional Forest Management in Kalimantan,” in William Bentley and 
Marcia Gowen, eds., Forest Resources and Wood Based Biomass Energy as Rural De­
velopment Assets (New Delhi: Oxford and IBH, 1995).
2. For marketed crops in a fully commercialized system, profit maximization 
would rarely be precisely the same as crop-volume maximization. Where labor was 
scarce, cultivators would be more concerned about maximizing the crop return per 
unit of labor, whereas if land was scarce, the return per acre would be the focus.
3. Paul Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution: Ecology and Food Produc­
tion in West Africa (London: Unwin Hyman, 1985), p. 160; in this chapter I rely 
heavily on this brilliant book. Richards is committed to scientific agricultural re­
search but insists that it examine, without prejudice, the existing practices of African 
farmers and that it reflect the actual problems and goals of local cultivators.
4. The specifically structural and institutional interests that lead to agricultural 
policies favoring state power, urban consumption, and elite economic interests 
have been spelled out persuasively by Robert Bates in Markets and States in Tropi­
cal Africa: The Political Basis of Agricultural Policies (Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1981). My analysis deals with the deeper sources of policy error 
lying outside Bates's political-economy field of vision.
5. Jack R. Harlan, Crops and Man, 2nd ed. (Madison, Wis.: American Society of 
Agronomy, Crop Science Society of America, 1992), p. 5.
6. For the major grains— all in the family of grasses—this has led to a kind of 
symbiotic mimicry. Each major grain has in the same family one or more lookalike 
“obligate weeds,” which thrive under precisely the same field conditions as the cul­
tivar but which shatter their hardy seeds early and thus reseed themselves in the 
cultivated field.
7. Harlan, Crops and Man, p. 127 (emphasis in original).
8. In a Malay village where I carried out fieldwork for two years, each of 
the older cultivators knew of roughly eighty varieties of rice by name and by its 
properties.

Notes to Pages 266-68 415
9. 
In fact, the clearing or field is itself a powerful selector for resistance. Even 
if the cultivator were to randomly choose the seed stock for the next season or, for 
that matter, leave the crop standing in the field to reseed itself, the resistance of 
next year’s crop will increase, in a phenomenon called field resistance. Whichever 
landraces (including random crosses and mutants) do best over time against pests, 
adverse weather, and so on will contribute, willy-nilly, more of their seed to the sub­
sequent season's crop. See Harlan, Crops and Man, pp. 117-33.
10. "Probably, the total genetic change achieved by farmers over the millennia 
was far greater than that achieved by the last hundred or two years of more sys­
tematic, science-based efforts" (Norman Simmonds, Principles of Crop Improve­
ment [New York: Longman, 1979], cited by Jack Ralph Kloppenberg, Jr., First the 
Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 1492-2000 [Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1988], p. 185). As will be apparent, I am much indebted to 
Kloppenberg's fine analysis throughout much of this chapter.
11. James Boyce, “Biodiversity and Traditional Agriculture: Toward a New Pol­
icy Agenda— a Pre-Proposal” (unpublished paper, January 1996). See also Boyce, 
“The Environmental Impact of North-South Trade: A Political Economy Approach,” 
Working Paper 1996-3, Department of Economics, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, 1996. Actually, the relation between modern varieties and traditional 
agriculture is one of dependence rather than complementarity. Traditional agricul­
ture does not require modern agriculture as a condition of its existence, whereas 
modern agriculture would appear to depend on the genetic capital of the land­
races. On this basis, Boyce argues for in situ preservation (as opposed to storage in 
seed banks) and development of landraces by protecting traditional cultivators in 
these centers.
12. Eye appeal has depended on aesthetic values that have often diverged 
markedly from matters of yields, taste, and even profitability. In the American tradi­
tion of awarding prizes to fruits, vegetables, and livestock entered in competition at 
agricultural fairs, first prize has generally gone to the ideal ear of corn or the ideal 
pig despite the fact that they might be economically inferior in terms of profitability. 
Of course, if a buyer was willing to pay a sufficient “aesthetic premium" for the ideal 
pig, then aesthetics and profit might coincide. See Kloppenberg, First the Seed, p. 96.
13. Ibid., p. 117. The following two observations are also based on the same 
passage.
14. R. E. Webb and W. M. Bruce, “Redesigning the Tomato for Mechanized Pro­
duction,” in Science for Better Living: Yearbook of Agriculture, 1968 (Washington: 
United States Department of Agriculture, 1968), p. 104, cited in ibid., p. 126. Klop­
penberg continues, "Hybrids were particularly attractive to the vegetable industry, 
and spinach, carrots, cucumbers, and the brassicas (cabbage^ cauliflower, etc.) 
have been hybridized and redesigned to permit non-selective, once-over, machine 
harvesting" (ibid.). It is worth noting that, quite apart from the harvest, the me­
chanical cultivating, sorting, and packing of some crops had earlier influenced 
crop selection and breeding.
15. Ibid., p. 127.
16. Jim Hightower et al., Hard Tomatoes, Hard Times, Final Report of the Task 
Force on the Land Grant College Complex of the Agribusiness Accountability Pro­
ject (Cambridge: Schenkman, 1978).
17. Committee on Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops, Agricultural Board, 
Division of Biology and Agriculture, United States National Research Council, Ge­
netic Vulnerability of Major Crops (Washington: National Academy of Sciences, 
1972), p. 21.
18. Ibid., p. 12.

416 Notes to Pages 268-70
19. Another effect of genetic uniformity is to make the entire population of 
plants also vulnerable to the same environmental stresses.
20. The first scientist to work out the mathematical model of plant epidemics 
was van der Plank. See Committee on Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops, Ge­
netic Vulnerability of Major Crops, pp. 28-32.
21. The same logic, of course, holds true for human diseases. Other things 
being equal, scattered populations are healthier than concentrated populations. 
Urban populations in Western Europe did not successfully reproduce themselves 
until at least the nineteenth century; they depended on being demographically re­
plenished from the comparatively healthy population in the countryside. For the 
epidemiological reasons behind the association of diversity and dispersion with 
health and the association of bio-uniformity and concentration with high mortality, 
see Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 
900-1900 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988), and Mark Ridley, “The 
Microbes’ Opportunity," Times Literary Supplement, January 13, 1995, pp. 6-7. The 
logic of dispersion during epidemics was recognized long before anyone under­
stood the causes or vectors of major epidemic diseases. See, for example, Daniel 
Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year (1722; Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1966).
22. Well, not quite. As we have learned, the profligate use of antibiotics on hu­
mans and pesticides on crops runs up against the problem that the pathogens, 
which are the target of the attack, often adapt and mutate, through selection pres­
sures, faster than the human and plant defenses do. For this reason, new genera­
tions of pesticides must be created to keep one jump ahead of the pathogens, and 
infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and cholera, once thought extinct, have re­
turned in more virulent strains. See, in this context, Randolph M. Nesse and George 
C. Williams, Evolution and Healing: The New Science of Darwinian Medicine (Lon­
don: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1995).
23. David Pimentel and Lois Levitan, “Pesticides: Amounts Applied and Amounts 
Reaching Pests,” BioScience 36, no. 2 (February 1986): 87.
24. Kloppenberg, First the Seed, pp. 118-19. Worldwide, cotton and high- 
yielding varieties of rice absorb the largest share of pesticides.
25. Once again, there are striking parallels in human epidemics with the devel­
opment of resistant strains of viral and bacterial diseases and resistant vectors of 
disease. See John Wargo's discussion of malaria and its carrier, the Anopheles mos­
quito, in Our Childrens Toxic Legacy: How Science and Law Fail to Protect Us from 
Pesticides (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), pp. 15-42.
26. “The extensive use of herbicides has not been without its costs. Of forty-five 
iatrogenically (i.e., caused by our use of pesticides) induced diseases of crop plants, 
thirty were found to be caused by herbicides” (Kloppenberg, First the Seed, p. 247). 
The literature also abounds with cases of insecticides and other agents having in­
direct but equally devastating consequences. In 1995, for example, the massive ap­
plication of malathion to control the boll weevil in Texas also killed many beneficial 
insects, thereby touching off an explosion of army worms who ate most of the beet 
crop. See “Where Cotton's King, Trouble Reigns,” New York Times, October 9, 1995, 
p. A10, and Sam Howe Verhovek, "In Texas, an Attempt to Swat an Old Pest Stirs 
a Revolt," New York Times, January 24, 1996, p. A10.
27. Committee on Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops, Genetic Vulnerability 
of Major Crops, p. 6.
28. Ibid., p. 7 (emphasis added).
29. Ibid., p. 1. To take a minor crop, of the peas planted commercially in 1969, 
96 percent were in only two varieties. A small dress rehearsal for the corn blight of 
1970 could have been witnessed in the case of oats. A "miracle oat,” Victoria, was

Notes to Pages 270-78 417
bred to resist all forms of crown rust fungus. It was planted throughout the country 
in 1940 and, in 1946, succumbed to a devastating epidemic. Because oats by that 
time were not as widely planted as earlier in the century, the disaster was not much 
reported.
30. For an impressive listing of such instances, see Kloppenberg, First the Seed,
p. 168.
31. James B. Billard, “More Food for Multiplying Millions: The Revolution in 
American Agriculture," with photographs by James R. Blair and a painting of the 
farm of the future by Davis Meltzer, National Geographic 137, no. 2 (February 
1970): 147-85. This article is the subject of a scathing critique by Wendell Berry in 
The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture (San Francisco: Sierra Club 
Books, 1977), chap. 5. It is remarkable how little of the article, as an “informed” 
fantasy, holds up from the vantage point of 1997. The revolution in biotechnology 
and recombinant dna transfer, surely the most important change in agriculture, is 
hardly a speck on its horizon, nor are the problems of genetic vulnerability and pes­
ticide use.
32. See Albert O. Hirschman, Development Projects Observed (Washington: 
Brookings Institution, 1967).
33. For a fine analysis of five such schemes (four of them private and one pub­
lic, namely, the Tanganyika groundnuts scheme of 1947), see Nancy L. Johnson and 
Vernon W. Ruttan, “Why Are Farms So Small?” World Development 22, no. 5 (1994): 
691-706.
34. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, pp. 63-116. In this discus­
sion I shall use the terms “polycropping” and "mixed cropping" interchangeably. 
Intercropping is a form of polycropping in which a second cultigen in planted be­
tween rows of the first. Relay cropping refers to a sequence of crops that overlap in 
the field and is thus also a form of polyculture.
35. The more stringent the climate, the less the biodiversity. As one approaches 
the tundra, the number of species of trees, mammals, and insects diminishes. The 
same, of course, applies to the climatic zones created by successively higher eleva­
tions in mountainous terrains.
36. Quoted in Paul Richards, "Ecological Change and the Politics of African 
Land Use,” African Studies Review 26, no. 2 (June 1983): 40. Richards also quotes 
Dudley Stamp, who at about the same time wrote enthusiastically about the wider 
applicability of African techniques for combating soil erosion: “A recent tour of 
Nigeria has convinced the writer that the native farmer has already evolved a 
scheme of farming which cannot be bettered in principle even if it can be improved 
in detail and that, as practised in some areas, this scheme affords almost complete 
protection against soil erosion and loss of fertility. It may be that the African has 
thus a contribution to make towards the solution of the great soil erosion problems 
in other regions” (p. 23).
37. Edgar Anderson, Plants, Man, and Life (Boston: Little, Brown, 1952), pp.
140-41. It goes without saying that the gardens Anderson is describing are so di­
verse in part because the villagers in question wish to grow many of the foods 
needed for subsistence rather than paying for them in the market. The point, how­
ever, is the plan behind the visual disorder.
38. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 63.
39. Ibid., p. 70.
40. Most traditional cropping systems, whether polyculture or crop rotation, 
combine a grain and a legume in this fashion.
41. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, pp. 66-70.
42. H. C. Sampson and E. M. Crowther, "Crop Production and Soil Fertility

418 Notes to Pages 279-81
Problems,” West Africa Commission, 1938-1939: Technical Reports, part 1 (London: 
Leverhulme Trust, 1943), p. 34, cited in ibid., p. 30. Mixed cropping (polyculture) 
must not be confused with mixed farming, which indicates a farm producing a va­
riety of crops (each typically on its own plot) and livestock on the European small­
holder model.
43. Richards, “Ecological Change and the Politics of African Land Use," p. 27.
44. This is just one example of how the choice of technique is influenced by the 
factor endowments of the farmer—a large consideration, but by no means the 
only one.
45. Strictly speaking, many of these advantages could also be obtained by 
planting many tiny parcels to single cultivars. What would be lost are the specific 
advantages of polycropping mentioned earlier.
46. “Mycorrhizal association" refers to the symbiotic relation between the 
mycelium of certain fungi and the roots of a seed plant.
47. Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (1962; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987), p. 10.
48. Organic farmers have occasionally opted for mixed cropping as a way of 
avoiding the heavy use of fertilizers and insecticides. The most common obstacle to 
certain (not all) forms of polyculture is that they are too labor intensive in a context 
where labor is the scarce factor of production. It is hard to know how much of this 
labor intensiveness is the result of the fact that virtually all machine implements 
have been designed with monoculture exclusively in mind. One pioneer, Wes Jack­
son, has demonstrated that, over a three-year period and in production terms 
alone, polyculture can outperform monoculture. The fact that the gains to polycul­
ture are greater in the second and third years suggests that the interaction effects 
between the two crops are responsible for the performance (Jackson, "Becoming 
Native to This Place,” paper presented at the Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale 
University, New Haven, November 18, 1994). Jackson, like Howard, is primarily 
concerned with developing a form of agriculture that will preserve or enhance its 
soil capital. Such preservation is less urgent in stable bottomland but vital in eco­
logical zones with fragile soils (e.g., hillsides and uplands). The polycropping of 
perennials seems particularly suitable to achieving this end.
49. Comparative experimental studies of prairie ecologies have confirmed Dar­
win’s original premise that more diverse ecosystems are more productive and re­
silient. Ecologists at the University of Minnesota compared 147 one-hundred- 
square-foot plots sown with different numbers of randomly chosen grass species. 
"The more species a plot had, the greater its biomass of plants and the more nitro­
gen it had taken up in its increased growth”; "the fewer the species, the sparser the 
growth and the greater the amount of nitrogen leaching out of upper soil layers." 
After a drought, the plots with the larger number of species returned more rapidly 
to full productivity than did the plots with fewer species. Productivity increased 
dramatically with each species added up to ten species, and each species added 
thereafter offered much less to overall productivity. In the long run, it has been the­
orized, additional species might prove vital in protecting the ecosystem against ex­
tremes of weather or pest infestations. See Carol Kaesuk Yoon, “Ecosystem’s Pro­
ductivity Rises with Diversity of Its Species,” New York Times, March 5, 1996, p. C4.
50. These advantages might include, on the cost side, lower expenditures for 
such inputs as fertilizers and pesticides.
51. Those who investigate the order that lies behind seemingly turbulent nat­
ural systems (clouds, water flows, air turbulence, epidemics, etc.) have come to 
contrast what they call fractal systems with linear systems. The key difference of 
relevance to us is the flexibility and sturdiness of fractal processes, which can sur­
vive perturbations and function over a wide range of frequencies— a quality com­

Notes to Pages 282-85 419
mon to many biological processes. In contrast, linear processes, once they are 
knocked off the rails, continue to veer off on the new tangent, never to return to the 
original equilibrium range. Polyculture, in just this sense, has a greater tolerance of 
disturbances.
52. Up to a point. Jacobs shows how a neighborhood’s success can have effects 
on property values that will undermine some uses and will eventually transform 
the place. There is no equilibrium in Jacobs’s view, only a cycle that begins repeat­
edly in different parts of a city.
53. Shifting cultivation is also common throughout much of Southeast Asia and 
Latin America.
54. Harold C. Conklin, Hanunoo Agriculture: A Report on an Integral System of 
Shifting Cultivation in the Philippines (Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations, 1957), p. 85. One cannot come away from Conklin’s meticu­
lous account without a sense of awe at the breadth of knowledge and skills of these 
cultivators.
55. And that, of course, was part of the reason why such populations often re­
mained in, or fled to, non-state spaces.
56. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 50. Richards continues: 
"The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies, W. G. A. Ormsby- 
Gore, summed up the attitude of the day when noting that in Sierra Leone, for ex­
ample, ‘the natural forest has been ruthlessly destroyed to find virgin soil for the 
cultivation of "hill” or "land" rice' ” (pp. 50-51).
57. Ibid., p. 42.
58. See ibid., chap. 2. Richards concludes: “From the point of view of fertiliza­
tion, modern soil science confirms the validity of the forest farmer’s emphasis on 
ash and the savannah farmer’s emphasis on ‘manure’ and ‘compost’’’ (p. 61). For 
an excellent analysis of the techniques of burning in Honduras, see Kees Jansen, 
"The Art of Burning and the Politics of Indigenous Agricultural Knowledge,” paper 
presented at a congress entitled "Agrarian Questions: The Politics of Farming Anno 
1995,” May 22-24, 1995, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
59. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 43. In this context Richards 
is accepting the premise that the only test is market efficiency, providing that it is 
sustainable.
60. Ibid., p. 61.
61. Liebig did believe that his formula could cure all soil problems.
62. Among the many experiments that Howard conducted were elaborate trials 
of "green manuring’’ (the plowing under of a nitrogen-fixing, leguminous crop prior 
to the planting of a grain crop), which showed that its effect depended greatly on 
these other variables as well as the right timing and the amount of moisture in the 
soil in order to promote the chemical reactions (first aerobic and then anaerobic) 
necessary for the production of more humus. See Sir Albert Howard, An Agricul­
tural Testament (London: Oxford University Press, 1940).
63. Alkalization occurs as well with the salts left behind in the course of inten­
sive irrigation. Growers in those areas of the Imperial Valley in California suffering 
from alkalization have had to install drainage tiles at shorter and shorter intervals 
over the years in order to prevent the buildup from reaching ruinous proportions.
64. Rice, an Old World plant, had come much earlier and been adapted. Al­
though a perennial, rice is planted as if it were an annual.
65. Just how deep this history is, is reflected in the fact that modern man has 
added no important domesticated species of plant or animal in the last four thou­
sand years. This story can be followed in Carl O. Sauer, Agricultural Origins and 
Dispersals (New York: American Geographical Society, 1952). Sauer relies heavily

420 Notes to Pages 286-87
on an important work by the pioneer Russian scientist in this area, N. I. Vavilov: 
The Origin, Variation, Immunity, and Breeding of Cultivated Plants, trans. K. Starr 
Chester, vol. 13, nos. 1 -6, of Chronica botanica (1949-50). Potatoes are a good ex­
ample of a plant that must be vegetatively propagated by cuttings.
66. There are exceptions, one of which seems to be the ecologically devastated 
northern part of Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is worth adding that neither does the 
record of the industrialized world in soil erosion, pollution or exhaustion of 
groundwater, and global warming represent an edifying example of foresight.
67. Robert Chambers, Rural Development: Putting the Last First (London: 
Longman, 1983), quoted in Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 40. 
There is a case to be made for Howard’s claim that "agricultural revolutions” are 
always acts of autonomous farmers rather than states. From the agricultural rev­
olution in Britain that laid the groundwork for industrialization to the broad adop­
tion of such new crops as cocoa, tobacco, and maize in Africa, Howard’s generaliza­
tion rings true. It does not hold true, however, for large-scale irrigation projects or 
for the more recent, research-driven breeding of high-yielding varieties of wheat, 
rice, and maize. These state-sponsored innovations typically have powerful implica­
tions for centralization.
68. James Ferguson, The Anti-Politics Machine: “Development, ” Depoliticiza­
tion, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1990). Ferguson shows brilliantly how the institutional power of international and 
national development agencies depends vitally on their representing their activities 
as neutral interventions by scientific specialists.
69. It might be objected that, in the case of large irrigation works, a centralized 
logic is mandatory for the apportionment of water rights between upstream and 
downstream users. The fact is that quite large irrigation systems have been suc­
cessfully organized for hundreds of years without centralized political authorities 
exercising coercive powers. For a remarkable study showing how such a system 
worked and how it was nearly destroyed by the “simplifications” imposed by hydro- 
logical experts and agronomists from the Asian Development Bank, see J. Steven 
Lansing, Priests and Programmers: Technologies of Power in the Engineered Land­
scape of Bali (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991). Also useful is Elinor 
Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
70. Quoted in Stephen A. Marglin, “Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists: Sys­
tems of Agriculture and Systems of Knowledge” (unpublished paper, May 1991, re­
vised March 1992). Marglin’s account is an astute analysis of the ecological and in­
stitutional consequences of scientific agriculture. His analysis of knowledge 
systems has strong parallels with my own analysis of metis in chapter 8. We each 
independently discovered the value of using concepts of knowledge from Greek 
philosophy to distinguish practical knowledge from deductive knowledge. I have 
found his discussion helpful and clarifying. Marglin’s analysis of American agricul­
tural practice is usefully read along with Deborah Fitzgerald, Yeomen No More: The 
Industrialization of American Agriculture (forthcoming).
71. Marglin, "Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists," p. 7.
72. The term "hybrid” has changed in meaning. Originally, it referred to any 
cross; now it refers only to crosses between two inbred “pure" lines.
73. Marglin notes the close collaboration between the U.S. Department of Agri­
culture and the large seed companies, which helped the latter achieve dominance 
in maize hybrids. The same dominance is less likely for wheat and rice, which are 
self-pollinating. Improved yields for these crops are achieved with new varieties 
which are genetically stable. Marglin, “Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists,” p. 17.

Notes to Pages 289-91 421
74. Since such control is only approximated in most real experiments, every ex­
periment is followed by a great deal of discussion about the "extraneous variables,” 
or variables other than those singled out by the experimental design, which might 
have produced the findings. The findings in such cases are ambiguous until a sub­
sequent experiment controls the rogue variables.
75. Marglin, "Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists,” p. 5.
76. Mitchell Feigenbaum, quoted in James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Sci­
ence (New York: Penguin, 1988), p. 185.
77. Experimental laboratory science is necessarily carried out using a standard­
ized and purified nature (e.g., purified reagents from catalogues) and man-made in­
struments of observation. The reliable manipulation of such objects makes for suc­
cessful experiments and a certain level of self-vindication in laboratory practice. See 
Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Pub­
lic Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), chap. 1. See also Ian Hacking, 
“The Self-Vindication of the Laboratory Sciences,” in Andrew Pickering, ed., Science 
as Practice and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 29-64.
78. Berry, The Unsettling of America, pp. 70-71. There is no reason, in princi­
ple, why the dependent variable of greatest interest cannot be, say, nutritional 
value, the timing of tillering, taste, or hardiness. But the research is more manage­
able when the variable of interest is less subjective and more easily quantifiable.
79. D. S. Ngambeki and G. F. Wilson, "Moving Research to Farmers’ Fields,” In­
ternational Institute of Tropical Agriculture Research Briefs, 4:4, 1,7-8, quoted in 
Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 143.
80. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 143.
81. Sauer, Agricultural Origins and Dispersals, pp. 62-83.
82. In addition to the difficulties in finding the “active" cause among many pos­
sibilities, such a study of polycropping would have to find and justify a formula for 
comparing different combinations of yields. Assuming the same costs, which is su­
perior: a yield of two hundred bushels of lima beans and three hundred bushels of 
corn, or a yield of three hundred bushels of lima beans and two hundred bushels of 
corn? Does one arrive at a common denominator by using market prices (which 
would mean the answer would vary week by week and year by year), caloric con­
tent, overall nutritive value, or some other measure? The difficulties rapidly pile up.
83. That is, this is a version of the solar system that discounts all the various 
moons, asteroids, nearby stars, and so on.
84. Writing in 1977, Wendell Berry rhetorically asked the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture: "Where are the control plots which test the various systems of soil 
management? Where are the performance figures for present-day small farms 
using draft animals, small scale technologies, and alternative energy sources? 
Where are the plots kept free of agricultural chemicals? If these exist, then they are 
the best-kept secrets of our time. But if they do not exist, whence comes the sci­
entific authority of scientific agriculture? Without appropriate controls, one has no 
proof; one does not, in any respectable sense, have an experiment" (The Unsettling 
of America, p. 206). Since that time, such comparisons have been made, with many 
of the results reported in a u sd a study on organic farming entitled Report and Rec­
ommendations on Organic Farming, prepared by the U.S. Department of Agricul­
ture Team on Organic Farming (Washington: u sd a, 1980). The parallels with the 
West African story are striking. In each case certain practices were deemed not to 
be worth investigating, partly because they and their practitioners were presumed 
to be backward and inefficient. Only when the anomalies and long-run conse­
quences of mainstream doctrines became apparent were such practices examined 
carefully.

422 Notes to Pages 291-301
85. Aspirin, for example, which has long been used to alleviate headaches, has 
turned out to have a number of other beneficial effects that were discovered only 
recently.
86. With hindsight, one could still argue that, in terms of a cost-benefit analysis, 
the reduction in disease was so valuable that it outweighed any harm caused to the 
environment. But that is not the point. The point is that the costs in this case were 
outside the experimental model and could not have been assessed in any event.
87. Philip M. Raup, University of Minnesota, testifying before the U.S. Senate 
Small Business Committee (March 1, 1972), quoted in Wendell Berry, The Unset­
tling of America, p. 171.
88. Marglin, “Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists,” pp. 33-38.
89. See, for example, Kloppenberg, First the Seed, chap. 5. Harlan, Crops and 
Man, p. 129, reports that a selection of barley left in the field as seed stock over a 
trial of sixty years produced 95 percent of the yield that plant breeders would have 
been able to achieve and were almost certainly hardier and more disease resistant 
strains of barley.
90. The classic study of the family development cycle is A. V Chayanov, The 
Theory of Peasant Economy, introduction by Teodor Shanin (Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press, 1986). One of the policy arguments for the stable family farm as 
an institution is that it is more likely than a capitalist firm to have an intergenera- 
tional interest in maintaining or improving the quality of the land and environ­
ment. The same logic has traditionally been deployed to argue that many forms of 
sharecropping and tenancy lead to destructive practices.
91. Even if all such grains were equal in the marketplace, each variety would 
still have unique labor requirements, growing characteristics, and resistances that 
would make an important difference to the growers.
92. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, p. 124.
93. Wendell Berry, "Whose Head Is the Farmer Using? Whose Head Is Using 
the Farmer?” in Wes Jackson, Wendell Berry, and Bruce Coleman, eds., Meeting the 
Expectations of the Land: Essays in Sustainable Agriculture and Stewardship (San 
Francisco: North Point Press, 1984), quoted in Marglin, "Farmers, Seedsmen, and 
Scientists,” p. 32.
94. Berry, The Unsettling of America, p. 87. I do not consider myself to be a 
good farmer in Berry's sense of the term, but in a three-acre sheep pasture on my 
small farm, I can recognize at least six different soil conditions from the patterns of 
vegetation alone. Four of them seem directly related to drainage, while two of them 
seem to reflect slope, sunlight, and the continued influence of past use.
95. Anderson, Plants, Man, and Life, p. 146.
96. Howard, An Agricultural Testament, pp. 185-86.
97. Ibid., p. 196.
98. See Chayanov, The Theory of Peasant Economy, pp. 53-194.
99. At least we can be sure that he is the best expert when it comes to his own 
interests, whether he is entirely sure of them or not.
100. Jan Douwe van der Ploeg, "Potatoes and Knowledge," in Mark Hobart, ed., 
An Anthropological Critique of Development (London: Routledge, 1993), pp.
209-27. I thank Stephen Gudeman for bringing this work to my attention.
101. Compare the term “craft" with the term “metis,” which is elaborated in 
chapter 9.
102. One can see why the logic of scientific agriculture would make extension 
agents the implacable enemies of multiple plots and multiple cultivars. Together 
they place far too many variables in play for scientific method to model.
103. Van der Ploeg, “Potatoes and Knowledge,” p. 213.

Notes to Pages 302-11 423
104. In a larger sense, irrigation, standard fertilizer applications, greenhouses, 
cloud seeding, and hybridization and cloning represent the decision to adapt the 
climate and environment to the crop rather than the crop to the environment. 
These are what Vernon W. Ruttan has called "land substitutes.” See “Constraints on 
the Design of Sustainable Systems of Agricultural Production,” Ecological Eco­
nomics 10 (1994): 209-19.
105. Some agricultural environments lend themselves to abstract treatment 
more easily than others. Well-watered bottomlands with rich soils not subject to ero­
sion can be treated more homogeneously without great immediate harm, whereas 
fragile, semiarid hillsides subject to sheet and gully erosion need to be treated with 
great care.
106. Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize, p. 445.
107. Van der Ploeg, “Potatoes and Knowledge,” p. 222. The author does not 
specify the precise reasons for the decline. It is possible that the strongly recom­
mended monocropping of the new variety encourages the buildup of pest popula­
tions and disease, that it depletes the soil of vital nutrients or damages its structural 
properties, or that the genotype loses its vigor over two or three generations.
108. The talisman of vitamins offers something of a parallel. The discovery of 
their existence and their role in health was an important breakthrough, but they are 
now taken by masses of people, most of whom may not need them, in one-size-fits- 
all dosages, rather in the way some of our ancestors felt protected by wearing gar­
lands of garlic around their necks.
109. Howard, An Agricultural Testament, p. 221.
110. Ibid., p. 160. Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution, concurs, writ­
ing, “No student should expect to be able to advise farmers on changes in their 
farming practices until he or she has a firm grasp of the issues from the partici­
pant’s point of view. No one expects a pilot to captain a plane on the basis of text­
book knowledge alone. Why should a farmer expect to 'hand over the controls' 
to an advisor who, in all probability, has never before piloted a farm 'for real’?" 
(p. 157).
111. Howard, An Agricultural Testament, p. 116.
Chapter 9: Thin Simplifications and Practical Knowledge
1. See Lev Timofeev, Soviet Peasants, or The Peasants' Art of Starving, trans. 
Jean Alexander and Victor Zaslavsky, ed. Armando Pitassio and V. Zaslavsky (New 
York: Telos Press, 1985), for a penetrating discussion of the private-plot economy. 
An exception to the generalization about meat may have been beef, but supplies of 
pork, lamb, and chicken were largely provided from private plots or other sources 
outside of the state marketing channels.
2. See Louis Uchitelle, “Decatur," New York Times, June 13, 1993, p. Cl.
3. Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Arts de faire: Le pratique du 
quotidien), trans. Steven Rendall (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984). 
See also Jacques Ranciere, The Names of History: On the Poetics of Knowledge, 
trans. Hassan Melehy (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994).
4. Marcel Detienne and Jean-Pierre Vernant, Cunning Intelligence in Greek Cul­
ture and Society, trans. Janet Lloyd (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 
1978), originally published in French as Les ruses d ’intelligence: La metis des grecs 
(Paris: Flammarion, 1974).
5. The version of the story that I know appears not to specify the species of oak, 
whether white, red, burr, or other variety, or the species of squirrel, which was pre­

424 Notes to Pages 312-16
sumably the common gray squirrel. For the Native Americans, the context must 
have served to specify such details as these.
6. I am ignoring, in my treatment of the almanac’s advice, the fact that Euro­
pean settlers quickly developed their own comparable rules of thumb, and like 
farmers everywhere, they were paying close attention to what other cultivators 
were doing. One usually does not want to be the first to plow and plant, nor does 
one want to be the last.
7. Quoted in Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1990), p. 62. Note that even in Quetelet s formula, the calculations must 
begin with an unpredictable event: the "last frost.” Since the date of the last frost can 
be known only in retrospect, Quetelet’s formula fails as a useful guide for action.
8. Such terms as "indigenous technical knowledge" and “folk wisdom” seem 
to me to confine this knowledge to "traditional" or “backward” peoples, whereas I 
want to emphasize how these skills are implicit in the most modern of activities, 
whether on the factory floor or in a research laboratory. “Local knowledge” and 
"practical knowledge” are better, but both terms seem too circumscribed and static 
to capture the constantly changing, dynamic aspect of metis.
The term descends to us from Greek mythology. Metis, the first bride of Zeus, 
had tricked Cronos into swallowing an herb that caused him to regurgitate Zeus’s 
elder brothers, whom Cronos feared would rise against him. Zeus in turn swal­
lowed Metis, thereby incorporating all her intelligence and wiles, before she could 
give birth to Athena. Athena was then born from Zeus’s thigh.
9. The difference between the first halting, awkward steps of a toddler and the 
gait of a child who has been walking for a year is a measure of the complexity and 
"on-the-job training" necessary to master such an apparently simple skill.
10. During the Gulf War, teams with little experience were hired from all over 
the world to cope with an unprecedented number of fires. A great many new tech­
niques were tried, and much new field experience gained. One team hit on the use 
of a mounted jet engine (as opposed to dynamite or water) to literally blow out the 
fire at the wellhead, as if it were a candle on a birthday cake.
11. It is in part this aspect of team sports that often makes the outcomes non­
transitive. That is, team A may routinely beat team B, and team B may routinely 
beat team C, but because of the particular relation of skills between teams A and C, 
team C may often beat team A.
12. Taoism emphasizes precisely this kind of knowledge and skill. Compare 
Peirce’s observation with that of Chuang Tzu: "Cook Ting laid down his knife and 
replied. What I care about is the Way, which goes beyond skill. When I first began 
cutting up oxen, all I could see was the ox itself. After three years I no longer saw 
the whole ox. And now— now I go at it by spirit and don’t look with my eyes. Per­
ception and understanding have come to a stop and the spirit moves where it 
wants. I go along with the natural makeup, strike in the big hollows, guide the knife 
through the big openings, and follow things as they are. So I never touch the small­
est ligament or tendon, much less a joint” (Chuang Tzu: Basic Writings, trans. Bur­
ton Watson [New York: Columbia University Press, 1964], p. 47).
13. Michael Oakeshott, Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays (New York: 
Basic Books, 1962). As a conservative thinker in the Burkean sense of the term, 
Oakeshott tends to be an apologist for whatever the past has bequeathed to the pre­
sent in terms of power, privilege, and property. On the other hand, his criticism of 
purely rationalist schemes for the design of human life and his understanding of 
the contingency of practice are astute and telling.
14. Martha C. Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek 
Tragedy and Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 302.

Notes to Pages 317-20 425
Nussbaum is concerned particularly with the differences between moral systems 
that allow for the passions and attachments of human life and closed, self-sufficient 
moral systems that achieve “moral safety and rational power" at the expense of a 
fully human life. Plato, depending upon how one interprets the Symposium, is an 
exemplar of the latter, and Aristotle an exemplar of the former.
15. I am greatly indebted for this distinction to the brilliant doctoral thesis of 
Gene Ammarell, “Bugis Navigation" (Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, Yale 
University, 1994). Ammarell’s analysis of traditional Bugis navigation techniques is 
the most compelling understanding of indigenous technical knowledge that I have 
encountered.
16. Compare the pilot’s knowledge with this observation, from Bruce Chatwin’s 
Songlines (London: Jonathan Cape, 1987): “The dry heart of Australia . . . was a jig­
saw of microclimates, of different minerals in the soil and different plants and ani­
mals. A man raised in one part of the desert would know its flora and fauna back­
wards. He knew which plant attracted game. He knew his water. He knew where 
there were tubers underground. In other words, by naming all the 'things’ in his 
territory, he could always count on survival. . . . But if you took him blindfolded to 
another country, ... he might end up lost and starving” (p. 269).
17. In what follows I am heavily indebted to the discussions of Nussbaum, The 
Fragility of Goodness, and to Stephen A. Marglin, “Losing Touch: The Cultural Con­
ditions of Worker Accommodation and Resistance,” in Frederique Apffel Marglin 
and Stephen A. Marglin, eds., Dominating Knowledge: Development, Culture, and 
Resistance (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), pp. 217-82. Marglin’s argument has been 
elaborated in two subsequent papers: “Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists: Systems 
of Agriculture and Systems of Knowledge” (unpublished paper, May 1991, revised 
March 1992); and "Economics and the Social Construction of the Economy,” in 
Stephen Gudeman and Stephen A. Marglin, eds., People's Ecology, People’s Economy 
(forthcoming). Readers of both texts will note the disparity between Nussbaum’s and 
Marglin’s uses of the term “techne." For Nussbaum, techne is analogous to episteme, 
at least through the work of Plato, and both are sharply distinguished from metis or 
practical knowledge. Marglin uses the word “techne” ("T/Knowledge”) in much the 
same way that I use "metis,” and he distinguishes it sharply from "episteme” 
("E/Knowledge)"). I have elected to adopt the terminology of the classicist Nuss­
baum, who convinces me that her usage has a far stronger grounding in the origi­
nal texts of Plato and Aristotle. Support for Nussbaum’s understanding comes also 
from Pierre Vidal-Naquet: “As G. Cambiano justly [correctly] observes, in the Pla­
tonic view, episteme, dynamis, and techne comprise a system of concepts that mu­
tually reinforce one another,” he writes. "The Republic, for example, puts under the 
control of mathematics a unit composed of technai, dianoiai, and epistemai: skills, 
intellectual processes, and sciences" (The Black Hunter: Forms of Thought and 
Forms of Society in the Greek World, trans. Andrew Szegedy-Maszak [Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins Press, 1986], p. 228). Even so, those who are familiar with Marglin’s 
argument will note how, in drawing formal comparisons, I have relied on his con­
trasts while not using his terms.
18. As I recall, this holds only at sea level, as with the standard temperature for 
water’s boiling point. The constant is, then, a universal convention and does in fact 
vary by altitude.
19. Quoted in Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness, p. 95.
20. There is a large and rapidly growing literature on the practice or eth- 
nomethodology of science, particularly laboratory science. Most of this literature 
emphasizes the difference between actual scientific practice on one hand and its 
codified form (in articles and lab reports, for example) on the other. For an intro­

426 Notes to Pages 320-22
duction to this literature, see Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Sci­
entists and Engineers Through Society (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1987); Ian Hacking, “The Self-Vindication of the Laboratory Sciences,’’ in Andrew 
Pickering, ed., Science as Practice and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992), pp. 29-64; and Andrew Pickering, "From Science as Knowledge to 
Science as Practice,” ibid., pp. 1-26. See also Pickering, “Objectivity and the Man­
gle of Practice,’’ in Allan Megill, ed., Rethinking Objectivity (Durham: Duke Univer­
sity Press, 1994), pp. 109-25.
21. Marglin, “Losing Touch," p. 234.
22. In many ways the most searching philosophical treatment of these issues is 
found in Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958).
23. Detienne and Vernant, Cunning Intelligence, pp. 3-4.
24. Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness, chaps. 5 and 6.
25. Ibid., p. 238.
26. I use "himself" because Plato is talking about what he considered to be the 
highest form of love: that between men and boys.
27. Music is, in a sense, pure form, but Plato was deeply suspicious of music’s 
emotional appeal and in fact believed that the ideal republic should ban certain 
modes of music.
28. An important critique of social science might well take this observation as a 
point of departure. Borrowing the prestige of scientific language and methods from 
the biological sciences, many social scientists have envisioned and tried to effect an 
objective, precise, and strictly replicable set of techniques — a set of techniques that 
gives impartial and quantitative answers. Thus most forms of formal policy analy­
sis and cost-benefit analysis manage, through heroic assumptions and an implausi­
ble metric for comparing incommensurate variables, to produce a quantitative an­
swer to thorny questions. They achieve impartiality, precision, and replicability at 
the cost of accuracy. A brief and persuasive case along these lines can be found in 
Theodore M. Porter, "Objectivity as Standardization: The Rhetoric of Impersonality 
in Measurement, Statistics, and Cost-Benefit Analysis,” in Allan Megill, ed., Re­
thinking Objectivity (Durham: Duke University Press, 1994), pp. 197-237.
29. Marglin, "Farmers, Seedsmen, and Scientists,” p. 46.
30. Jeremy Bentham, Pauper Management Improved, cited in Nussbaum, The 
Fragility of Goodness, p. 89.
31. See Hacking, The Taming of Chance. Warren Weaver long ago distinguished 
between what he termed "disorganized complexity,” which could be dealt with 
through statistical techniques that captured average outcomes, and "organized 
complexity" (including, most notably, organic systems), which could not yield to 
such techniques because the complexity of their nonrandom, systemic relation­
ships prevents us from fully understanding first-order effects of an intervention, let 
alone second- or third-order effects ("Science and Complexity," American Scientist 
36 [1948]: 536-44).
32. Marglin, "Economics and the Social Construction of the Economy,” 
pp. 44-45.
33. But while the focus has narrowed in economics, the reach has grown. Wit­
ness the efforts of William D. Nordhaus to treat such ecological issues as global 
warming with an often spurious precision. See Nordhaus, "To Slow or Not to Slow: 
The Economics of the Greenhouse Effectf Economic Journal, July 1991, pp. 920-37.
34. Marglin, "Economics and the Social Construction of the Economy,” p. 31. 
Marglin also describes and critiques the attempts within the boundaries of epis- 
temic economics to deal with such issues as public goods, sustainability, and un­

Notes to Pages 322-25 427
certainty. Friedrich Hayek himself was a skeptic: “The delusion that advancing 
theoretical knowledge places us everywhere increasingly in a position to reduce 
complex interconnections to ascertainable particular facts often leads to new sci­
entific errors. . . . Such errors are largely due to an arrogation of pretended knowl­
edge, which in fact no one possesses and which even the advance of science is not 
likely to give us” (Studies in Philosophy, Economics, and Politics [Chicago: Univer­
sity of Chicago Press, 1967], p. 197).
35. At its most extreme, this strategy is analogous to that of tracking body 
counts during the Vietnam War— a technique that offered at least one precise mea­
sure, it was thought, for military progress.
36. Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness, p. 99.
37. Ibid., p. 302.
38. Ibid., p. 125. Thus in the Phaedrus, Socrates, speaking through Plato, de­
plores the invention of writing and claims that books cannot reply to questions. He 
argues for the organic unity of a work of art, one whose arguments and style should 
take into account the prospective audience. In his Seventh Letter, Plato writes that 
his deepest teachings are not written. See R. B. Rutherford, The Art of Plato: Ten Es­
says in Platonic Interpretation (London: Duckworth, 1996).
39. See Harold Conklin, Hanunoo Agriculture: A Report on an Integral System of 
Shifting Cultivation in the Philippines (Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations, 1957).
40. Claude Levi-Strauss, La pensee sauvage (Paris: Plon, 1962).
41. Once the tractor became available (especially the tractor with power take­
off, or pt o ), however, it was imaginatively adapted by farmers and mechanics to 
serve purposes its inventors had never imagined.
42. Later in this chapter I offer, as anecdotal evidence of this truism, an account 
about how a Malaysian villager rid a mango tree of an infestation of red ants.
43. Gladys L. Hobby, Penicillin: Meeting the Challenge (New Haven: Yale Uni­
versity Press, 1985).
44. Anil Gupta, paper presented at a congress entitled "Agrarian Questions: The 
Politics of Farming Anno 1995,” May 22-24, 1995, Wageningen, The Netherlands. 
The fact that in the past two or three decades research laboratories have begun to 
inventory and analyze large numbers of traditional medicines is an indication of 
the rich capital of findings which metis has bequeathed to modern medicine and 
pharmacology. For questions of property rights in such products, see Jack Ralph 
Kloppenberg, Jr., First the Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 
1492 -2000 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
45. Daniel Defoe, Journal of the Plague Year (1722; Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1966). It is worth noting that these stratagems were more practical for the rich 
than for the poor. The result was that, far from being indiscriminate, the plague 
wreaked its greatest havoc among poor Londoners.
46. Frederique Apffel Marglin, "Smallpox in Two Systems of Knowledge,” in 
Marglin and Marglin, Dominating Knowledge, pp. 102-44.
47. There are different models of scientific medicine as well, some of which 
require a fundamentally different optic than standard allopathic practice. Thus 
Darwinian medicine looks at the adaptive functions of what are otherwise seen as 
pathological conditions. One example is morning sickness, which occurs for many 
women during the first trimester of pregnancy and which is thought to be an 
adaptive rejection of foods, particularly of fruits and vegetables, that are most 
likely to carry toxins harmful to the fetus. Another example is fever during the 
course of ordinary influenza or a cold, which is thought to be an adaptive mech­
anism for triggering elements of the immune system to combat infection. To the

428 Notes to Pages 326-29
degree that the Darwinian perspective is correct, it forces us to ask what the 
beneficial or, more precisely, the adaptive functions of a medical condition might 
be. Surely, a view of plant disease from this angle might lead to novel insights. 
For an accessible introduction, see Randolph M. Nesse and George C. Williams, 
Evolution and Healing: The New Science of Darwinian Medicine (London: Wei- 
denfeld and Nicolson, 1995).
48. Much of F. A. Marglin's account is concerned with the undoubtedly well- 
intended but coercive efforts made by the British to suppress variolation and to 
substitute vaccination, as well as the popular resistance to these efforts. Marglin 
implies that the British pretty quickly succeeded in replacing variolation with vac­
cination, but Sumit Guha, an Indian colleague who has also studied these matters, 
believes that it is unlikely that the British had either the personnel or the power to 
stamp out variolation so quickly.
49. Donald R. Hopkins, Princes and Peasants: Smallpox in History (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 77, cited in Marglin, "Losing Touch,” p. 112. 
For the scientific career of vaccination and its application to anthrax and rabies, 
see Gerald L. Geison, The Private Science of Louis Pasteur (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1995).
50. There were literally thousands of competitors for cures and preventatives, 
as there always are with diseases that seem incurable.
51. Albert Howard, An Agricultural Testament (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1940), p. 144 (emphasis in original). Howard is paraphrasing here a work by 
Lowdermilk, and although Howard provides no reference, I believe he is referring 
to A. W. C. Lowdermilk, who visited Basutoland in 1949 and whose papers are at 
Yale University’s Sterling Memorial Library.
52. For the case of jet engines, the performance of which "remains notoriously 
uncertain in the development process” and which have to be adjusted by engineers 
with long experience after pilots conduct in-flight testing, see Nathan Rosenberg, 
Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982), especially pp. 120-41. Rosenberg makes it clear that the limits of sci­
entific methodology in this case have to do with the impossibility of anticipating the 
interactive consequences of the enormous number of independent variables (in­
cluding different technologies) at work in a jet engine. See also Kenneth Arrow, 
“The Economics of Learning by Doing,” Review of Economic Studies, June 1962, 
pp. 45-73.
53. Charles E. Lindblom, "The Science of Muddling Through,” Public Adminis­
tration Review 19 (Spring 1959): 79-88. Twenty years after this article appeared, 
Lindblom extended the argument in another article with a catchy title: "Still Mud­
dling, Not Yet Through.” See Lindblom, Democracy and the Market System (Oslo: 
Norwegian University Press, 1988), pp. 237-59.
54. Lindblom, “Still Muddling, Not Yet Through.”
55. Albert O. Hirschman, “The Search for Paradigms as a Hindrance to Under­
standing,” World Politics 22 (April 1970): 243.
56. Implicit knowledge is almost a staple of discourse in the philosophy of 
knowledge and in the psychology of cognition. See, for example, Gilbert Ryle, Con­
cept of the Mind (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1949), whose distinction between 
“knowing how" and “knowing that" mimics my distinction between metis and epis­
teme, and Jerome Bruner, On Knowing: Essays for the Left Hand (Cambridge: Belk­
nap Press, Harvard University Press, 1962).
57. A great basketball move may be diagrammed and even taught, but the abil­
ity to make that same move in the traffic and rush of a real game is, alas, another 
thing altogether.

Notes to Pages 329-31 429
58. A similar story tells of a man dying in a Chicago hospital of a disease that the 
physicians could not diagnose. Although they knew that the mans trips abroad meant 
that he could have been suffering from a tropical ailment, their tests and researches 
were to no avail. One day, an experienced doctor from India was simply walking 
through the ward with a colleague on his way to an appointment when he stopped, 
sniffed the air, and said, "There’s a bloke here with X” (I don’t recall the name of the 
disease). He was correct, but unfortunately the patient was too far gone to be saved.
59. Howard, An Agricultural Testament, pp. 29-30.
60. Marglin has noted how the word "crafty" brings the idea of experienced 
knowledge of a craft together with the concept of "cunning” connoted by "metis.” 
See “Economics and the Social Construction of the Economy,” p. 60.
61. Bugis sailors are exceptionally astute observers of their environment at sea 
and have assembled a large array of signs to forecast weather, wind, landfall, and 
tides. The dominant color of rainbows carries meaning: yellow means more rain, 
blue means more wind. A morning rainbow in the northwest signals the beginning 
of the western monsoon. The slaty-breasted rail’s call, if it is a buzzing "kech, kech, 
kech,” means a change in the wind. When raptors soar very high, rain is no more 
than two days away. Many of these reliable associations could perhaps be explained 
more “scientifically,’’ but they have served as rapid, accurate, and occasionally life- 
saving signals for generations.
62. Ammarell, "Bugis Navigation," chap. 5, pp. 220-82.
63. An alternative, the subject of a growing literature, is the term "indigenous 
knowledge" or "indigenous technical knowledge.” Although I have nothing against 
this term per se, inasmuch as it points to the skills and experience already in the 
possession of the subjects of development schemes, it has come in some hands to 
connote something self-contained, completely sufficient, and intractably opposed 
to modern scientific knowledge, when in fact it is constantly changing through ex­
perimentation and through contact with the outside. For two exceptionally percep­
tive critiques of the term, see Akil Gupta, “The Location of ‘the Indigenous’ in Cri­
tiques of Modernity,” Ninety-First Annual Meeting of the American Anthropological 
Association, San Francisco, December 2-6, 1992, and Arun Agrawal, "Indigenous 
and Scientific Knowledge,” Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor 4, no. 
1 (April 1996): 1-11, and the commentary following it. See also Agrawal, “Dis­
mantling the Divide Between Indigenous and Scientific Knowledge,” Development 
and Change 26, no. 3 (1995): 413-39.
64. For a general argument along these line, see Eric Hobsbawm and T. O. 
Ranger, The Invention of Tradition (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983). 
Although Hobsbawm and Ranger are largely concerned with traditions "invented" 
by elites to legitimate their rule and legitimacy, their general point about the 
nonantiquity of many so-called traditions is well taken.
65. I do not deal here with such related issues as how readily people abandon 
habits and norms that are perhaps closer to the center of their self-identity: death 
rituals, religious beliefs, ideas about friendship, and so on. One of the most curious 
and important aspects of adaptation, however, is that the poor and marginal are 
often in the vanguard of innovations that do not require a lot of capital. This is not 
at all surprising when one considers that, for the poor, a gamble often makes sense 
if their current practices are failing them. Occasionally, when a whole community 
or a culture experiences an overwhelming sense of powerlessness and its categories 
no longer make sense of the world, such gambles take on millennial tones, with 
new prophets arising to proclaim the way forward. The colonial conquest of prein­
dustrial peoples, the German Peasant War at the time of the Reformation, the En­
glish Civil War, and the French Revolution seem to belong in this category.

430 Notes to Pages 331-38
66. James Ferguson, The Anti-Politics Machine: “Development," Depoliticization, 
and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
67. See Arturo Escobar’s elaboration of the concept of hybridization in Marglin 
and Gudeman, People’s Economy, People’s Ecology.
68. Oakeshott, “Rationalism in Politics," in Rationalism in Politics, p. 31.
69. Oakeshott, “The Tower of Baal,’’ in Rationalism in Politics, p. 64.
70. If innovation in such societies must be represented as compatible with tradi­
tion in order to gain acceptance, this is another reason for the plasticity of tradition.
71. Access to codified, epistemic knowledge is also sharply restricted by such 
markers as wealth, gender, social position, and region in developed countries as 
well. The difference is that, in principle, in developed societies the secrets of medi­
cine, science, engineering, ecology, and so on are open secrets, available to all to 
use and modify.
72. It goes without saying that new forms of metis are constantly being created. 
Computer hacking would fall into this category. Metis, it should be quite clear, is 
ubiquitous in modern and in less modern societies alike, and perhaps the crucial 
difference is that, compared to preindustrial societies, modern societies are partic­
ularly reliant on codified, epistemic knowledge, usually conveyed through formal 
instruction.
73. Ammarell, “Bugis Navigation," p. 372.
74. There is little doubt that many apprenticeships were longer than necessary 
for training a young craftsmen and were a thinly disguised form of indentured 
labor designed to increase the profits of an oligopoly of master craftsmen.
75. The desire for control over the work process is not merely a short-term pre­
requisite to capturing profits; it is crucial to the capacity of managers to transform 
the work process from above for adapting to the market and meeting the demands 
of their superiors. Ken C. Kusterer calls management control over the production 
process the “steerability" of a firm. See Kusterer, Know-How on the Job: The Im­
portant Working Knowledge of "Unskilled’’ Workers (Boulder: Westview Press, 1978).
76. Marglin, "Losing Touch," p. 220.
77. Ibid., p. 222. But as the capitalists were shortly to discover, one advantage 
of the putting-out system was a diminished exposure to large-scale industrial 
strikes and equipment breakdowns.
78. Taylor, quoted in ibid., p. 220 n. 3.
79. As Marglin notes, “Only a recapitulation of workers’ knowledge in the form 
of an episteme to which management alone had access would provide a firm basis 
for managerial control” (ibid., p. 247).
80. David F. Noble, Forces of Production: A Social History of Automation (New 
York: Oxford Press, 1984), p. 250, quoted in ibid., p. 248.
81. Noble, Forces of Production, p. 277, quoted in Marglin, “Losing Touch,” p. 
250.
82. Quoted in Kusterer, Know-How on the Job, p. 50.
83. This is why, before the income tax, the administrators of the older systems 
of taxation found it easiest to assess taxes by relying solely on the more permanent 
fact of land or real property ownership.
84. A branch of social theory called principal-agent analysis is devoted to the 
various techniques by which one person can be persuaded to do another person’s 
bidding. As one might imagine, its most immediate applications have been in man­
agement science.
85. Michael J. Watts, "Life Under Contract: Contract Farming, Agrarian Re­
structuring, and Flexible Accumulation," in Michael J. Watts and Peter O. Little, 
eds., Living Under Contract: Contract Farming and Agrarian Transformation in Sub-

Notes to Pages 338-47 431
Saharan Africa (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974), pp. 21-77. See also 
Allan Pred and Michael J. Watts, Reworking Modernity: Capitalism and Symbolic 
Discontent (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992).
86. The system with fryers also involved farms that specialized in hatching and 
caring for chicks and farms that grew certain elements of the feed. Contract farm­
ing for vegetables is widespread in the Third World and has recently been extended 
to the raising of pigs.
87. The uniformity is achieved at the outset, of course, by means of scientific 
breeding.
88. Quoted in Oakeshott, “Rationalism in Politics,” p. 20 (emphasis added).
89. Quoted in ibid., p. 5.
90. It is in fact impossible for most modern readers to take in the vast compla­
cency with which Oakeshott regards what the past has bequeathed to him in its 
habits, practices, and morals without wondering if Jews, women, the Irish, and the 
working class in general might not feel as blessed by the deposit of history as did 
this Oxford don.
Chapter 10: Conclusion
1. Stephen A. Marglin, "Economics and the Social Construction of the Econ­
omy," in Stephen Gudeman and Stephen Marglin, eds., People’s Ecology, People’s 
Economy (forthcoming).
2. Albert O. Hirschman, “The Search for Paradigms as a Hindrance to Under­
standing,” World Politics 22 (April 1970): 239. Elsewhere Hirschman takes social 
science in general to task in much the same fashion: “But after so many failed 
prophecies, is it not in the interest of social science to embrace complexity, be it at 
some sacrifice of its claim to predictive power?” (“Rival Interpretations of Market 
Society: Civilizing, Destructive, or Feeble?” Journal of Economic Literature 20 [De­
cember 1982]: 1463-84).
3. Quoted in Roger Penrose, "The Great Diversifier,” a review of Freeman 
Dyson, From Eros to Gaia, in the New York Review of Books, March 4, 1993,p. 5.
4. Like all rules of thumb, this rule is not absolute. It could be waived, for ex­
ample, if catastrophe seems imminent and quick decisions are essential.
5. This is, I believe, the strongest argument against capital punishment for 
those who are not opposed to it on other grounds.
6. Aldo Leopold, quoted in Donald Worster, Nature’s Economy, 2nd ed. (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1994), p. 289.
7. The typical social science solution to this sort of issue is to turn it into a quan­
titative exercise by, say, asking citizens to assess the well-being of the community on 
a predetermined scale.
8. “Everything becomes crystal clear after you have reduced reality to one— 
one only— of its thousand aspects. You know what to do. . . . There is at the same 
time the perfect measuring rod for the degree of success or failure. . . . The point is 
that the real strength of the theory of private enterprise lies in its ruthless sim­
plification, which fits so admirably into the mental patterns created by the phe­
nomenal successes of science. The strength of science too derives from its 'reduc­
tion’ of reality to one or another of its many aspects, primarily the reduction of 
quality to quantity” (E. F. Schumacher, Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as 
if People Mattered [London: Blond and Briggs, 1973], pp. 272-73).
9. See John Brinckerhoff Jackson, A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1994), p. 190.

432 Notes to Pages 349-56
10. For this insight I am much indebted to Colin Ward's Anarchy in Action (Lon­
don: Freedom Press, 1988), pp. 110-25.
11. Personal notes from the first congress of the Agrarian Scientists' Associa­
tion, “Agrarian Reform in the USSR,” held in Moscow, June 24-28, 1991.
12. Birgit Muller, Toward an Alternative Culture of Work: Political Idealism and 
Economic Practices in a Berlin Collective Enterprise (Boulder: Westview Press,
1991), pp. 51-82.
13. Herman E. Daly, "Policies for Sustainable Development,” paper presented 
at the Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale University, New Haven, February 9, 1996, 
p. 4.
14. Ibid., pp. 12-13. Daly adds, “In the limit, all other species become culti­
vated natural capital, bred, managed at the smaller population size to make more 
room for humans and their furniture. Instrumental values such as redundancy, re­
siliency, stability, sustainability, would be sacrificed, along with the intrinsic value 
of life enjoyment by sentient human species, in the interests of ‘efficiency’ defined 
as anything that increases the human scale” (p. 13).
15. I am grateful to my colleague Arun Agrawal for emphasizing this point.
16. The classic elaboration of this argument, empirically grounded in many 
case studies, may be found in Robert M. Netting, Smallholders, Householders: Farm 
Families and the Ecology of Intensive, Sustainable Agriculture (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1993).
17. See the important book by Enzo Mingione, Fragmented Societies: A Sociol­
ogy of Economic Life Beyond the Market Paradigm, trans. Paul Goodrick (Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1991).
18. Robert Putnam, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modem Italy 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).
19. This ordering of the names of the dead, which was insisted on by Maya Lin, 
caused quite a controversy at the time the memorial was built.
20. Near the site of the Vietnam Memorial is the statue of a small squad of sol­
diers carrying a wounded comrade. This statue was the original proposal by a 
good many veterans' organizations who had opposed the present wall as a fitting 
monument.
21. For an imaginative application of a comparable logic to the subject of chil­
dren's playgrounds, see “Play as an Anarchist Parable,” chap. 10 in Ward, Anarchy 
in Action, pp. 88-94.

Sources for Illustrations
Figure 1. Photograph from P. Mark S. Ashton Collection. Courtesy of P. Mark S. 
Ashton.
Figure 2. Photograph by Angelo Lomeo. Courtesy of Bullaty Lomeo Photogra­
phers.
Figures 3-6. From George Yaney. The Urge to Mobilize: Agrarian Reform in Rus­
sia, 1861-1930 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982), pp. 147, 149, 148, 150. 
Copyright 1982 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois. Used by per­
mission of the University of Illinois.
Figure 7. Photograph by Alex S. MacLean, from James Corner and MacLean, 
Taking Measures Across the American Landscape (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1996), p. 51. Courtesy of Alex S. MacLean, Landslides.
Figure 8. From Mark Girouard, Cities and People: A Social and Architectural 
History (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), p. 91. Courtesy of the city of 
Bruges.
Figure 9. Map from the Chicago Historical Society. Used by permission of the 
Chicago Historical Society.
Figure 10. Map from A. Alphand, Les promenades de Paris, 2 vols. (Paris, 
1867-73), plates 11 and 12.
Figure 13. Photograph of map from the exhibition “Hungerwinter and Libera­
tion in Amsterdam," Amsterdam Historical Museum, 1995. Courtesy of the Amster­
dam Historical Museum.
Figures 14-17. From Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, trans. Pamela Knight 
(1933; New York: Orion Press, 1964), pp. 204, 220, 225, 149.
Figure 18. Plan by Lucio Costa, reprinted in Lawrence Vale, Architecture, 
Power, and National Identity (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), p. 118.
Figures 19-26. Photographs from James Holston, The Modernist City: An An­
thropological Critique of Brasilia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), pp. 
100, 102, 132, 313. For figure 23, photograph by Abril Imagens/Carlos Fenerich. 
Courtesy of James Holston.
Figure 27. Photograph from Ravi Kalia, Chandigarh: In Search of an Identity 
(Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1987), p. 97. Copyright 1987 by
433

434 Sources for Illustrations
the Board of Trustees, Southern Illinois University. Used by permission of the 
Trustees of Southern Illinois University.
Figures 28-30. Plan and photograph courtesy of Teodor Shanin.
Figure 31. Jannik Boesen, Birgit Storgaard Madsen, and Tony Moody, Ujamaa: 
Socialism from Above (Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, 1977), 
p. 178. Used by permission of the publishers.
Figure 32. John M. Cohen and Nils-Ivar Isaksson, “Villagization in Ethiopia’s 
Arsi Region f Journal of Modem African Studies 15, no. 3 (1987): 450. Reproduced 
by permission of Cambridge University Press.
Figure 33. Jason W. Clay, Sandra Steingraber, and Peter Niggli, The Spoils of 
Famine: Ethiopian Famine Policy and Peasant Agriculture, Cultural Survival Report 
no. 25 (Cambridge, Mass.: Cultural Survival, 1988), p. 248. Used by permission of 
Cultural Survival, Inc.
Figure 34. Painting by Davis Meltzer, from James B. Billard, "The Revolution in 
American Agriculture,” with illustrations by James R. Blair, National Geographic 
137, no. 2 (February 1970): 184-85. Used by permission of Davis Meltzer/National 
Geographic Image Collection.
Figure 35. Photograph from Paul Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolu­
tions: Ecology and Food Production in West Africa (London: Unwin Hyman, 1985), 
plate 3. Courtesy of Paul Richards.
Figures 36-37. Drawings from Edgar Anderson, Plants, Man, and Life (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1952), pp. 138-39. Used by permission of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden.

Index
Aberdam, Serge, 37 
Adas, Michael, 380n45 
A.E.G. (Allgemeine Elektricitas- 
Gesellschaft), 98-100, 380«36 
Aesthetics: of high-modernist cities, 106,
116, 142, 261; of miniaturization, 258; 
of public form in cultural revolutions, 
195-96; of scientific forestry, 18; of 
Tanzanian villagization, 224-25, 231, 
244; of transportation grids, 75-76; of 
visual codification, 253-55, 412nl05 
Agriculture: effect of electrification on, 
166-67, 392n58, 392n59; efficiency 
and competitiveness of family farms, 
165, 198, 392n52 
—high-modernist agriculture, 167-68; 
centralizing logic of, 286-87, 420n68, 
420n69; in colonial East Africa, 
225-29; failures of, 263-64, 271, 273; 
industrial farming as, 193, 196-201, 
210-11, 401 n 59; in Lenin’s The Agrar­
ian Question, 164-68; monoculture 
privileged in, 273-74, 279-82; peasant 
forms of production condemned in, 
164-66; plantation agriculture,
189-91, 396nl7, 396nl8; "production 
and profit" model of, 262; as radical 
simplification, 262-63; in Tanzanian 
villagization, 238-40, 409 w 63; visual 
codification of rural life by, 253-55,
4 12n 105; world optimism about,
270-71. See also Collectivization, So­
viet; Tanzania, ujamaa villagization in 
—indigenous agriculture: early cultivar 
variations in, 264-66; experimentation 
in, 285-86, 304-5; farmers' alertness 
to land features in, 297-98; innovation 
in, 324-25; logic of cultivar develop­
ment in, 301, 303-4; polyculture in, 
273-82; shifting cultivation in,
282-83, 419n53, 419n56, 419n58 
—scientific agriculture: chemical fertiliz­
ers in, 280, 284-85; and crop epi­
demics, 268-70, 416n20, 416n22,
416n29; crop yields generalized by, 
294-96, 422«91; fictional farmers in, 
299-300; isolation of experimental 
variables in, 288-90, 421n74, 421n77, 
421n78; as a legibility enterprise, 2; 
logic of cultivar development in,
301-3, 422nl02, 423nl04; logic of 
mechanization in, 267-68; narrow 
field of focus of, 292-93, 322; over­
reliance on experimental plots in, 
296-99; polyculture opposed by, 
290-92, 421n82, 421n86; practical 
knowledge disdained by, 305-6, 311, 
323-28; shortsightedness of, 293-94; 
standardization of “machine-friendly” 
cultivars in, 262-63, 266-68, 415nl4, 
416nl9. See also Forestry, scientific 
Alder, Ken, 364n51
435

436 Index
Alexander I, 167, 194 
Aminzade, Ron, 369n4, 410n87 
Ammarell, Gene, 330, 425nl5 
Amsterdam: City Office of Statistics map 
of, 78-79, 375n76, 375n78 
Anderson, Benedict, 225, 371n36,
374n63, 376n89 
Anderson, Edgar, 275-77, 297, 417n37 
Andes: potato cultivation in, 301, 303-4, 
423nl07 
Appadurai, Arjun, 25 
Arakcheev, Alexei, 167, 194, 196 
Arendt, Hannah, 158 
Aristotle, 322
Australia: Torrens land titling system in, 
51, 58
Authoritarian high modernism, 5, 95, 97; 
institutional logic of, 218-20; limits of, 
220-22; logic of "improvement” in, 224; 
Soviet, 193-96, 397nl; in State andRev- 
olution, 161-64, 391n39; in What Is to 
Be Done? 148-57. See also Collectiviza­
tion, Soviet; Revolution, Russian; Tanza­
nia, ujamaa villagization in
Babeuf, Frangois-Noel, 49 
Baigent, Elizabeth, 47 
Bailey, Liberty Hyde, 286-87 
Bates, Robert, 414h4 
Bauman, Zygmunt, 87, 92, 147, 379n21, 
412nl09
Beckmann, Johann Gottlieb, 14, 24 
Beinert, William, 226-27, 404n9 
Bellamy, Edward, 164 
Bentham, Jeremy, 321 
Berlin, Isaiah, 45, 347 
Bernstein, Henry, 241, 409rc65 
Berry, Wendell, 288, 296-97, 417n31, 
421n84, 422n94 
Billard, James B., 271, 417u31 
Bolsheviks: high-modernist social plan­
ning by, 194-95; hostility to peasants 
of, 204-9, 400n40; "reconquest” of 
Russia by, 158-61; retrofitting of rural 
Russia by, 214-17, 402n73. See also 
Collectivization, Soviet; Revolution, 
Russian 
Boyce, James, 415nll 
Brandes, Dietrich, 36In 19 
Brasilia, 3, 117-18, 145; as Brazil’s 
urban future, 119-20; construction of, 
118; death of the street in, 120-21,
125, 385n60; functional separation in, 
126; life in, 125-27, 385n65; as a nega­
tion of Brazil, 120-21, 125; Plaza of 
the Three Powers in, 121, 123, 124; 
superquadra housing in, 125, 126-28, 
385n68; unplanned, 127, 129-30, 261,
309, 348; utopianism in, 125, 129-30 
Bruges, 53-54, 59, 184
Buenos Aires, 104, 105 
Burma, 186-89
Cadastral mapping, 3, 24, 36, 38-45, 
49-52, 76, 367n82, 367n85; as myopic, 
46-47; resistance to, 48-49 
Calvino, Italo, 103, 117 
Campbell farm, 197-200, 398nl8 
Capitalism, 7-8, 94, 100, 336, 430n75 
Carr, E. H., 158
Carson, Rachel, 271, 280, 292, 386n79 
Catherine the Great, 194, 258, 397n4 
Census, Florentine (catasto), 66-67, 
372n44, 372n45 
Central Union of Consumer Cooperatives 
(Centrosoyuz), 113, 383n37 
Centralization: in high-modernist agri­
culture, 286-87, 420n69; in the high- 
modernist city, 111; in resettlement 
schemes, 254; of socialist bureau­
cracies, 162-63; of transportation, 
73-76 
Chambers, Robert, 286 
Chandigarh, 3, 103, 113, 131-32,
385n72, 385n73; as administrative cap­
ital, 145; functional segregation in, 110 
Chatwin, Bruce, 415u 16 
Chicago: grid plan of, 56-57, 369nl 1 
China: Great Leap Forward in, 3, 261,
310, 365n70, 399u34, 413nll7; 
patronyms imposed in, 65, 371n39
Chisholm, Donald, 82 
Christaller, Walter, 185, 382u29, 395n4 
ciam: and the design of Brasilia, 130; uni­
form building standards of, 109; urban 
planning manifesto of, 103, 114, 118, 
121
Cities: baroque redesigning of, 56; cross­
use in, 138; diversity and complexity in, 
136-37, 141, 184, 348-49; illegibility 
of to outsiders, 53-55, 184, 369n3; in­
formal mechanisms of social order in, 
134-36, 144, 386w85, 386«86, 386n88; 
military mapping of, 55, 369n4; mixed- 
use zoning in, 137, 353; single-use zon­
ing in, 140-41 
—geometric cities, 55-56, 369nl0; as a 
formal spacial order, 58; grids as stan-

Index 437
dardized commodity in, 58-59; as legi­
ble from above, 57-58; miniaturization 
of, 57-58; and the redevelopment of 
Paris, 59-63, 370nl6, 370nl7, 370nl8, 
370n22; utopian ideal of, 56-57 
—high-modernist cities: above-ground 
perspective of, 104, 106; as administra­
tive capitals, 145-46, 259, 413nl20; 
aesthetics of, 106, 116, 142, 261; func­
tional separation in, 109-11, 141; geo­
metric simplicity of, 106-11; hierarchy 
of functions in, 111-12, 114-15; Le 
Corbusier’s unbuilt schemes for, 
103-17, 381n2; prefabricated buildings 
in, 108-9, 141, 387nl01; slum-clear- 
ance projects in, 116, 140, 144-45, 
388nl08; thinness of, 256, 261, 309; 
transcendent goal of, 120-21, 125; un­
planned parts of, 127, 129-30, 132, 
142-46, 387nl04; as utopian, 114-16, 
125, 129-30; visual vs. experienced 
order in, 133-34. See also Brasilia; 
Chandigarh 
Citizenship, 32, 364n57, 364n59, 364n60, 
365n61 
Clark, T. J., 62
Claveria y Zaldua, Narciso, 69-71 
Clay, Jason, 251, 411nl02 
Colbert, Jean-Baptiste, 48-49, 75, 360n8 
Collective farms, 210-11, 365n70; 
limit of suitable crops for, 221-22; 
“Potemkin collectives," 207-8; in Tan­
zanian villages, 239-41, 409n63 
Collectivization, Soviet, 3, 6, 167, 201-4,
210-18, 399n35, 399n36; American 
attraction to, 199-201; Bolshevik 
retrofitting of rural Russia in, 214-17, 
402n73; death toll from, 202, 208-9; as 
the end of the peasantry, 211, 401n62; 
failures of, 202-3, 217-18, 350, 403n77; 
famines from, 212-13; grain procure­
ment in, 209-10, 212-13; peasant 
commune destroyed by, 210, 213-14, 
402n70; private-plot economy in,
310, 423nl; as serfdom, 213, 401«66, 
402n68; sowing plans in, 212; as suc­
cessful for state appropriation and con­
trol, 203, 218, 338; as a war against the 
peasantry 202, 204-9, 399«33 
Collins, James, 23, 363n32 
Colonial high modernism, 97, 379n34;
and East African agriculture, 225-29 
Communication networks, 73-75 
Complexity 136, 184, 353, 426«31
Congres International d’Architecture 
Moderne. See ciam 
Conklin, Harold, 282, 419n54 
Conquest, Robert, 210, 397n5 
Constant, Benjamin, 30 
Contract farming, 338-39, 431n86 
Costa, Lucio, 118, 119, 120, 125 
Coulson, Andrew, 245, 260 
Cromwell, Oliver, 49 
Cultivars: favored types of, 264-66,
414n6; landraces, 265-66, 415n9,
415n 10, 415n 11; pathogen suscepti­
bility of, 268-70, 416n20, 416n22, 
416n29; standardization of, 266-68, 
415nl4, 416nl9; suitability of for So­
viet collective farming, 221-22. See 
also Monocropping; Polycropping
Daly, Herman E., 432nl4 
ddt, 291-92 
Defoe, Daniel, 325
Denmark: land tenure practices in, 38 
Descartes, Rene, 55-56, 111, 321,
383n33 
Detienne, Marcel, 311, 320 
Diversity, 353-57; in cities, 136-37, 141, 
281, 348-49, 419n52; in polyculture, 
281-82 
Djilas, Milovan, 160
Economics, neoclassical, 322, 426n33, 
426n34
Economists. See Social Democrats 
Educational systems, legible, 219,
403n82 
Edward I, 68
Eisenstein, Sergey, 113, 398n9, 401n62 
Electrification, Soviet, 166-67, 392n55, 
392n56, 392n58, 392n59; failure of, 
202-3 
Engels, Friedrich, 94 
England: cadastral mapping of, 49; sur­
names imposed in, 67-68, 372n51 
Enlightenment, 90-91; as a centralizing 
force in Central Europe, 193; equal citi­
zenship in, 32; and social engineering, 
92-93
Epidemics, 62, 77, 370n26; crop epi­
demics, 268-70, 416n20, 416«22, 
416n29 
Episteme, 319, 320, 340 
Esperanto, 143-44, 256-57, 413nll4 
Ethiopia: compulsory villagization in, 3, 
247-52, 41 ln92, 41 ln94, 411«99;

438 Index
Ethiopia (continued)
local measurement practices in, 25; 
state farms in, 411??97 
Ettinger, Elzbieta, 393«64 
Ezekial, Mordecai, 199, 200, 399«24
Factories: efficiency and control in, 336, 
430«75; innovations in East German 
factories, 350-51; position of in the 
high-modernist urban plan, 111-12; 
Taylorist organization of, 98-101, 337 
Facts, simplified, 80-81, 83, 375«79, 
375«81
Famine, 310; Ethiopian famine caused by 
resettlement, 252, 412«104; response 
to by customary land-use practices, 34; 
Soviet famines caused by collectiviza­
tion, 212-13 
Faucher, Leon, 61 
February Revolution, 148, 157-58, 
390n28
Ferguson, James, 377«6, 378«15, 410«83 
Fertilizers, chemical, 280, 284-85, 
418«48
Festivals of mustering, 195-96 
Feuer, Lewis, 200
Figes, Orlando, 206, 208-9, 390u32, 
400«40, 400n44, 400«45 
Fitzgerald, Deborah, 198, 200, 201, 
398«14 
Fitzpatrick, Sheila, 195, 210 
Five-year plans, 95, 194-95 
Forestry, scientific: aesthetics of, 18; com­
modification of forests in, 21, 362n28; 
cost externalization in, 362n29; devel­
oped from early modern European "fis­
cal forestry," 11-14, 360u8; failures of, 
19, 20-22, 76, 361n22, 362n23; finan­
cial rotation in, 360« 15; "forest hy­
giene” in, 21; as a legibility enterprise, 
2; long-term dangers of, 294; measure­
ment techniques of, 14-15, 360m10; 
monocropping in, 19-20, 263, 361nl8, 
361 n22, 362«27; optimum control the­
ory in, 140-41, 376«85; restoration 
forestry in, 21, 281; standardized trees 
in, 19-21; transformation of old- 
growth into legible forests, 15-18,
360u 14, 360?? 16; variable bracketing 
in, 20
Foucault, Michel, 23, 101, 360«7, 378nll 
France: cadastral mapping of, 49; code 
rural attempted in, 36-37; door-and- 
window tax in, 47-48; equal citizen­
ship in, 32, 364??57, 364n59, 364??60, 
365??61; French as the official language 
of, 72-73, 374??64; local measurement 
practices in, 25, 26; military mapping 
of cities in, 55, 369«4; patronyms in, 
373«59; standardization of measure­
ment in, 29, 30-33, 364«55; taxation 
forms in, 23-24; transport centralized 
in, 75-76, 374n70, 374??72, 374??74.
See also Paris 
Franco-Prussian War (1870-71), 76 
Frank, Anne, 375«78 
French Revolution: and the development 
of the metric system, 30, 31 
Fridolin, S. P, 302-3 
Friedman, Milton, 8
Front de Liberation Nationale, 54, 369«2
Galvan, Dennis, 365«66 
Gellner, Ernest, 193 
Germany: industrial mobilization in, 
98-100, 162, 380n36 
Geyer, Karl, 361?? 19 
Gibbs, Philip, 100 
Gigantomania, 195, 397«5 
Girouard, Mark, 370« 18 
Gray, John, 8
Great Purges (1936-37), 212 
Guatemala: polycropping in, 275-77, 
417«37 
Guha, Ramachandra, 359n4 
Guha, Ranajit, 367«92 
Gulf War: firefighting in, 314, 424«10 
Gupta, Anil, 325
Hacking, Ian, 49, 91-92, 378nl7 
Hahn, Steven, 36In 17 
Haldane, J. B. S., 345 
Hanna, G. C., 267 
Harvey, David, 96, 377n3 
Haussmann, Baron, 59-63, 76, 116, 125, 
145, 371n28 
Havel, Vaclav, 89
Hayek, Friedrich, 8, 256, 344, 381??51, 
388«106, 427«34 
Heilbron, J. L., 363??35 
High modernism, 4-6, 88, 341, 342-43,
351-52, 377n3; authoritarian implica­
tions of, 95, 97, 219-20; bureaucratic 
intelligentsia in, 96; “clean slate” atti­
tude of, 94, 194, 379n24; and the con­
tingency of the future, 343-45; eman­
cipatory aspect of, 96-97; linear 
progress concept in, 89-90, 91, 94-95;

Index 439
metis-friendly institutions proposed for,
352-57; politics devalued by, 94; scien­
tific authority of, 4, 89-90, 93-94; 
twentieth-century, 97-102; utopianism 
of, 89-90, 94, 115-16. See also Agri­
culture; Authoritarian high modernism; 
Cities
Hirschman, Albert, 328, 344-45, 431«2 
Holston, James, 118, 121, 127 
Howard, Albert; on the effect of chemical 
fertilizers, 284; experimental plots criti­
cized by, 298-99; humus cultivation by, 
279-80, 419«62; on innovation by in­
digenous farmers, 420«67; practical 
knowledge defended by, 305, 327,
329-30, 340
Howard, Ebenezer, 139, 141, 145 
Hunting, state protection of, 13, 359rt2 
Hyden, Goran, 407«47
Iakovlev, A., 212
Identity, documents of, 71, 83, 371«38 
India: effect of permanent settlement in, 
48, 367«92; forest policy in, 361«21 
Indonesia: Bugis sea captains of, 329,
330-31, 335, 429n61; Meratus hill peo­
ples of, 187-88
Industrial farming, 193, 210-11, 401 nS9; 
Campbell farm, 197-200, 398nl8; 
"chain farms” in, 199; national farming 
corporation plan for, 199, 399n24; Tay­
lorism in, 197, 337-38; in the United 
States, 196-201, 398«17, 398wl8, 
398n22, 398n23; U.S.-Soviet exchange 
program in, 199-201, 399n27 
Inoculation, traditional practice of, 
325-26 
Insecticides. See Pesticides 
Ireland: cadastral mapping of, 49; local 
measurement practices in, 27 
Iwo Jima memorial, 356
Jacobs, Jane, 6, 118, 132, 178, 386n77; 
architectural background of, 386n78; 
on diversity, 136-37, 281, 348-49, 
419n52; as "functionalist," 133; on the 
informal mechanisms of social order,
134-36, 144, 386n85, 386n86, 386n88; 
on mixed-use districts, 137; slum-clear- 
ance projects opposed by, 144-45, 
388nl08; street-level perspective of,
132, 142; on the unplanned aspects of 
cities, 142-46, 387nl04; urban plan­
ning criticized by, 139-42; on visual vs.
experienced order, 133-34, 275; 
"womans eye” frame of reference of, 
138-39, 387n95 
Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard. See Le 
Corbusier 
Jefferson, Thomas, 49-50, 51, 58, 355 
Jenner, Sir William, 325, 326-27 
Jews: adoption of surnames by, 71, 
373«60; legibility of in Nazi-occupied 
Amsterdam, 78-79, 375«76, 375n78 
Johnson, Sherman, 199, 399«24 
Jones, Donald, 268 
Jones, Howard, 275 
Jones, Peter, 365«64 
Judt, Tony, 364«59 
Jiinger, Ernst, 100
Kaganivich, Lazar, 196 
Kain, Roger J. P., 47 
Kautsky, Karl, 151 
Kerensky, Aleksandr, 159, 161 
Khateyevich, M. M., 399«33 
Khotynitsa village, 39-44 
Khrushchev, Nikita, 167, 204 
Kloppenberg, Jack Ralph, 267, 415«10, 
415nl2
Knowledge, practical, 6-7; in The 
Farmer's Almanac, 312, 424«6; scien­
tific agriculture’s disdain for, 305-6, 
323-28; of Squanto, 311-12. See also 
Metis
Kolakowski, Leszek, 391n40 
Kollontay, Aleksandra, 147, 148, 175-79, 
394«81, 394«83 
Kropotkin, Prince Peter, 7, 344, 387«99 
Kubitschek, Juscelino, 118, 119, 129-30 
Kula, Witold, 25, 27-29, 30 
Kusterer, Ken, 337
Lalouette, Depute, 37, 39 
Land tenure: and the adoption of 
patronyms, 68, 372n50; and cadastral 
mapping, 24, 38-45, 49-52; customary 
tenure practices, 33-35; local measure­
ment practices for, 24, 26-27, 39-40; 
of peasant landholders in revolutionary 
Russia, 205-6; politics of measurement 
for, 27-29, 363n42, 363«43; and the 
problem of common property, 38-39; 
simplification of, 35-36, 48-49 
Landau, Paul, 376nl 
Landraces, 265-66, 415«9, 415nl0, 
415nl1 
Langston, Nancy, 363n31

440 Index
Language: artificial, 143-44, 256-57, 
412nl 13, 413nl 14; imposition of an of­
ficial language, 72-73; metis expressed 
in, 332-33 
Le Bon, Gustave, 100 
Le Corbusier, 5, 88, 94, 145, 346; above­
ground perspective of, 104, 106, 134; 
airplane fascination of, 38 \nl\ Bra­
silia’s plan influenced by, 118, 130; at 
Chandigarh, 131-32, 385u72, 385u73; 
doctrine of the Plan of, 111-13; his 
fascination with the Soviet Union, 
113-14, 383n35, 384u38; functional 
separation doctrine of, 109-11, 348; 
geometric simplicity preferred by, 
106-11; on happiness, 114; influence 
of on architecture, 116-17, 384n52; 
monumental axes used by, 120, 131, 
386u74; prefabricated buildings envi­
sioned by, 108-9, 141, 387nl01; on 
the problem of slums, 116; on the role 
of authority, 114-15; unbuilt urban 
schemes of, 103-17, 381 n2 
Leach, Edmund, 186-87 
League of Time, 195 
Legibility, 2-3, 183-84; by the adoption 
of surnames, 65-71; and authoritar­
ian intervention, 219-20; in the Bol­
sheviks’ retrofitting of rural Russia, 
214-17, 402u73; by cadastral map­
ping, 24, 38-45, 49-52; by citizenship, 
32, 364u57; by collectivized agricul­
ture, 203; discriminating state inter­
vention made easier by, 78; in forest 
management, 11-22; of geometric 
cities, 55-59; by the imposition of an 
official language, 72-73; in land ten­
ure practices, 35-36, 38-45; political 
motives for, 77-78; privileged vantage 
point of, 79; in the redevelopment of 
Paris, 59-63, 370nl6, 370nl7, 370nl8, 
370n22; by the standardization of mea­
surement, 29-33, 77, 90; taxation tech­
niques for, 23-24; by traffic centraliza­
tion, 73-76 
Legrand Star plan, 76, 374n74 
L’Enfant, Pierre-Charles, 103 
Lenin, Vladimir I., 6, 88, 94, 95, 388u3; 
The Agrarian Question, 164-68; on the 
asymmetrical relationship between rev­
olutionary leaders and the masses, 
153-56, 178-79; classroom metaphor 
of, 148-49, 153, 394n77; on the divi­
sion of revolutionary labor, 151-53,
156; electrification celebrated by, 
166-67, 392u55, 392u58, 392u59; free­
dom of criticism opposed by, 150; as 
high modernist, 147-48, 157; influence 
of German industrial mobilization on, 
100-101, 162; Land Decree of, 205, 
207; military metaphor of, 148-50,
152, 309; on the need for leadership, 
149, 173-74, 388u7; peasant forms of 
agricultural production condemned by, 
164-66; on the peasant uprisings, 208; 
on the rationality of modem produc­
tion, 162—63, 391n45, 391n46; on ruth­
lessness toward the lumpen proletariat, 
163, 391 n47; on socialist vs. bourgeois 
ideology, 15\, 3&9nl\] State and Revo­
lution, 161-64, 391u39; on the use of 
state coercive power, 161, 391n40, 
393n61; What Is to Be Done? 148-57, 
171, 172 
Leopold, Aldo, 345 
Lewis, C. S., 93, 379u20 
Lewis, Sinclair, 339, 380n42 
Liberal political economy, 101-2 
Liebig, Justus Freiherr von, 284 
Liebknecht, Karl, 168 
Lilienthal, David, 88 
Lin, Maya, 355, 432nl9 
Lindblom, Charles, 24, 327-28, 412nlll, 
428n53 
Lissitzky, El, 114 
Lohmann, Lariy, 375n81 
Lowood, Henry, 15 
Lunacharsky, Anatoly, 195-96 
Lutyens, Edwin, 259 
Luxemburg, Rosa, 6, 147, 148, 309, 
393n64; as aesthetic free spirit,
393u68; on the complexity of revolu­
tion, 168 — 74, 178-79; Lenin's appro­
priation of, 391n39, 391u44 
Lynch, Kevin, 385n69 
Lysenko, Trofim, 221
Magnitogorsk steel complex, 218, 354, 
397u5, 402n74 
Maier, Charles S., 380n41, 380n44 
Malawi: "master farmers’’ plan in, 260;
Shire Valley projects, 226-28 
Malaya: plantation agriculture in, 189, 
190-91; villagization in, 188 
Malaysia: encounter with metis in, 
333-34; federal land schemes in,
190-91, 368u96; local measurement 
practices in, 25

Index 441
Maps, 3; aerial view, 57-58; cadastral,
3, 24, 36, 38-45, 49-52, 76, 367n82, 
367n85; city maps, 54-55, 57-58, 184, 
369n4; customary maps, 27; one-to-one 
scale, 376ul; transformative power of, 
87-88
Marglin, Frederique Apffel, 325, 428u48 
Marglin, Stephen A., 294, 322, 336, 344, 
420n70, 420n73 
Marseilles: L’Unite d’Habitation plan for, 
103
Marx, Karl, 93, 94, 100, 161-62, 361nl7 
Maser, Chris, 360nl6 
Mass exercises, 156-57, 195-96, 254, 
389n24 
Mat Isa, 333-35 
Matthews, C. M., 372n50 
Mayer, Albert, 131 
Measurement: local practices of, 24, 
25-27, 39-40, 363n41; politics of, 
27-29, 363n42, 363n43, 364n47; stan­
dardization of, 24, 29-33, 77, 90 
Medicine, traditional, 325-26, 427u44, 
427n47
Mengistu, Haile Mariam, 248, 411n92 
Merriman, John, 31 On 19 
Metis, 6-7, 311-16, 424n8; and the 
building of socialism, 177-78; destruc­
tion of, 335-39; dynamism of, 331-33, 
429n64, 429n65, 430n70; as implicit 
and inexplicable, 328-31, 428n56, 
428n58, 429n60, 429n61; innovation 
from, 324-25, 351-52; localness and 
particularity of, 316-19; pluralism in, 
340; vs. scientific explanation, 323-28, 
428n52; social context of, 333-35 
Metric system, 30-33, 364n55 
Military security: and the centralization 
of transport, 75-76; and the mapping 
of cities, 54-55, 57-58; and the retro­
fitting of Paris, 60-61, 370n20; and 
total mobilization, 97 
Miniaturization, 4, 257-61, 413nll6; of 
order in public spectacles, 196; in 
planned settlements, 227; in ujamaa 
villages, 225, 260; in urban planning, 
57-58 
Miranda, Suarez, 53 
Mitchell, Timothy, 37lu30 
Monnet, Jean, 88, 377n4 
Monocropping, 7, 21-22, 273-82; exper­
imental variables lost by, 289-90; in 
forest management, 19-20, 263, 
361nl8, 361n22, 362n27; long-term
dangers of, 294; in Tanzanian villages, 
242-43; and vulnerability to 
pathogens, 269 
Montana Farming Corporation, 198-200 
Moore, Sally Falk, 49, 237, 367u93 
Morgan, J. P., 198
Moscow: Le Corbusier's planned rebuild­
ing of, 113, 384n39 
Moses, Robert, 88, 370nl8, 386n77 
Mozambique: compulsory villagization 
in, 3, 408n57 
Mumford, Lewis, 56, 58-59, 103,
370n20, 383n33, 387n96
Naming practices: customary, 64-65;
patronyms, 65-71, 371n38 
Napoleon, 37, 368nl05 
Napoleon, Louis, 59-62, 95, 371n28 
Nature: as replaced with “natural re­
sources,’’ 13; science as emancipation 
from, 96-97; scientific attempts to 
control, 15-22, 94-95; utilitarian 
value of, 13 
Nazism: as modernism, 89, 377u5 
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 113, 131 
Nelson, Arvid, 36In 19 
Netherlands: cadastral mapping in, 45;
land tax in, 44-45, 367n83 
New Delhi, 59, 259 
New Economic Policy, 208 
New York City: Manhattan’s grid plan,
56-57, 108, 369nl2 
Niemeyer, Oscar, 118, 119, 125 
Noble, David, 337 
Norden, John, 45
Norway: land tenure practices in, 38 
Novoselok village, 39-44 
Nowicki, Matthew, 131 
Nussbaum, Martha, 320, 424nl4, 425nl7 
Nyerere, Julius, 88, 224, 346, 403nl, 
404n2; bureaucratism of, 245, 409n80, 
409n81; his desire to avoid coercion, 
224, 232, 236; Dodoma plan of, 
259-60; goals behind village forma­
tion, 229-31, 405n21, 405n23; orders 
compulsory villagization, 234-37, 
406n34, 406n35; in the Ruvuma Devel­
opment Association fiasco, 233-34; 
“streamlining” logic of, 237-38; tradi­
tional cultivation practices rejected by, 
241-42
Oakeshott, Michael, 316, 319, 332, 341, 
424nl3, 431n90

442 Index
October Revolution, 100, 148, 158-61, 
309, 390n31 
Odysseus, 313, 314 
Operation Planned Villages, 234-37, 
406n34, 406n35 
Orthopedic architecture, 117 
Orwell, George, 195 
Owen, Robert, 341
Paris: Haussmann’s redevelopment of, 
59-63, 370nl6, 370nl7, 370nl8, 
370n22; Le Corbusiers Plan Voisin for, 
104, 105, 110, 111, 115 
Pascal, Blaise, 340
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 315, 424nl2 
Pesticides, 269, 280, 291-92, 416«22, 
416n24, 416«26 
Petain, Philippe, 103 
Peter the Great, 167, 194 
Peters, Pauline, 260 
Petty, William, 49, 368n98 
Philippines: Hispanic surnames imposed 
in, 69-71, 373«53; shifting cultivation 
in, 282
Pinchot, Gifford, 19, 361 n20 
Plantation agriculture: appropriation and 
control afforded by, 338-39; in South­
east Asia, 189-91, 396nl7, 396nl8 
Plato, 319-23, 382n28, 425nl7, 426n26, 
426n27
Platonov, Andrei, 147, 201, 210 
Plochmann, Richard, 21, 361n22 
Polycropping, 273-82, 417n34, 418n42, 
418n45, 418n48, 418n49, 418n51; 
long-term advantages of, 294, 422n89; 
scientific agriculture’s opposition to, 
290-92, 421n82, 421n86 
Porter, Theodore M., 22, 81, 347, 
368nl0l, 374n70, 375n82, 426n28 
Potemkin, Prince Grigory, 194, 25;
"Potemkin collectives," 207-8 
Potters, Talja, 381nl, 386n85, 387n91 
Private sector: public functions of,
135-36, 386n88 
Productivism, 98-99, 115 
Progress, linear, 89, 91, 94 
Proletariat: dictatorship of, 173-74;
legibility of, 218 
Property law, 35-36, 365n63. See also 
Land tenure 
Property registers, 36, 38, 76 
Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph, 7, 183, 342, 
387n99 
Public spectacles, 195-96
Quetelet, Adolph, 312-13, 424n7
Rabinbach, Anson, 98, 380n41 
Rathenau, Walter, 88, 98-100, 162, 346, 
377n4, 380n36 
Revolution, Russian, 97, 147-48; autho­
rized histories of, 159-61, 390n35, 
390m37, 391m38; Bolshevik-peasant 
hostility in, 204-9, 400«40, 400«45; 
complexity of, 168-74, 178-79; cul­
tural aspect of, 195-96; dangers of the 
masses to, 155; February Revolution, 
148, 157-58, 390n28; public form em­
phasized in, 195-96, 398n9, 398nl2; 
relation of the leadership to the masses 
in, 150-56. See also Vanguard party 
Revolution of 1905, 148, 171-72 
Richards, Paul, 282-84, 289-90, 295, 
327, 414n3, 417n36, 419n56, 419n58, 
419n59 
Riggin, Guy, 200-201 
Rio de Janeiro: Le Corbusier’s housing 
scheme for, 104, 106 
Rotterdam: Van Nelle tobacco factory in, 
111-12
Russia: administrative utopianism in, 
193-94; cadastral mapping in, 40-44; 
interstripped use of land in, 39-40 
Rutland, Peter, 389«24 
Ruvuma Development Association, 
233-34
Sachs, Jeffrey, 402n74
Sahlins, Peter, 360n8
Saint Petersburg, 194, 369nl0
Saint-Simon, Henri Comte de, 88, 103
Samuel, Frank, 229
Sanguinetti, Alexandre, 73
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 255
Schenk, Carl, 361n20
Schumacher, E. F., 104, 342
Science: certainty sought in, 321,
426n28; as emancipatory, 96-97; eth- 
nomethodology of, 425n20; high-mod- 
ernist faith in, 4, 89-90, 93-94; practi­
cal knowledge denigrated by 323-28, 
428n52. See also Agriculture 
Sen, Amartya, 102 
Sennett, Richard, 369nl0 
Settlements, permanent, 1-2, 223-25, 
404n2, 404n4; in Ethiopia, 3, 247-52, 
41 ln92, 41 ln94, 41 ln99; in India, 48, 
367«92; in Southeast Asia, 184-91. See 
also Tanzania, ujamaa villagization in

Index 443
Shanin, Teodor, 402«72 
Shlyiapnikov, Alexander, 175 
Sholokhov, Mikhail, 202 
Simon, Herbert, 45 
Simplification, 2-4, 76-77, 82-83, 
376n89; of agriculture, 262-63, 
266-68, 415nl4, 416nl9; applied in so­
cial engineering, 91-93; capitalist, 8; 
in citizenship, 32, 364u57; in employ­
ment, 81, 375u82; in forest manage­
ment, 11-22, 263; as generic, 318; and 
the imposition of an official language, 
72-73; of land tenure practices, 35-36, 
39-44, 48-49; as myopic, 46-47; in of­
ficial accounts of the Russian Revolu­
tion, 160; in the redevelopment of 
Paris, 59-63, 370nl6, 370nl7, 370nl8, 
370n22; in the standardization of mea­
surement, 30-33, 76, 90; standardized 
facts in, 80-81, 83, 375n79, 375n81; 
surnames as, 65-71; traffic centraliza­
tion as, 73-76; in urban planning, 
138-39
Sivaramakrishnan, K., 360nl 1 
Skinner, G. William, 185, 374u69, 395n4 
Slum-clearance projects, 116, 140; Ja­
cobs’s opposition to, 144-45, 388nl08 
Smallpox, inoculation for, 325-26 
Smith, Cecil O., Jr., 374u70, 374m74 
Smith, David, 362u22 
Social Democrats (Economists), 149, 
153-54, 171, 388n7 
Social engineering: authoritarian, 194, 
245, 340, 349; elements of the tragedies 
of, 4-6, 88-89, 225; gardening meta­
phor of, 92, 379m21; imperialist, 6; ori­
gins of, 90-91; progressive high-mod­
ernist, 89; utopian projects in, 90-93. 
See also Settlements, permanent 
Social order: informal mechanisms of, 
134-36, 144, 386n85, 386u86, 386«88 
Socialism: centralized production in, 
162-63, 391n45, 391n46; as a collabo­
ration between workers and the state, 
174; the creation of the popular masses 
in, 161, 391h 39; dictatorship of the 
proletariat in, 173-74; metis and the 
building of, 177-78; state coercive 
power in, 161, 391n40; unions' role in 
the building of, 176; utopian, 94, 163 
Socrates, 322-23, 427u38 
South Africa: resettlement schemes in,
89, 223, 370m21 
Southeast Asia: creation of state spaces
in, 186-89; planned settlements in, 
184-86, 189-91; plantation agricul­
ture in, 189-91, 396m 17, 396m 18 
Soviet Union: Bolshevik-peasant hostility 
in, 204-9, 400n40, 400u45; electri­
fication in, 166-67,202-3, 392n58, 
392u59; high modernism in, 193-96; 
Khrushchev's Virgin Lands initiative for, 
167, 204; Land Decree in, 205, 207; Le 
Corbusier’s fascination with, 113-14, 
383u35, 384m38; proposed Palace of 
Soviets in, 109, 194; Taylorist manage­
ment in, 101, 163. See also Collectivi­
zation, Soviet; Revolution, Russian 
Squanto, 311-12, 323, 324, 423u5 
Stalin, Joseph: collectivization ordered 
by, 167, 202, 204, 218, 400n38; on the 
goal of collectivization, 209; industrial 
farms favored by, 211; Le Corbusier’s 
Moscow plans rejected by, 114; peasant 
commune destroyed by, 210 
Standardization: and authoritarian inter­
vention, 219; of citizens, 345-47; in 
contract farming, 339, 431 n86; of culti­
vars, 266-68, 415nl4, 416nl9; in in­
dustrial farming, 198; in Le Corbusier's 
geometric ideal city, 108-9; of mea­
surement, 24, 29-33, 77, 90; in scien­
tific forestry, 14-15 
Stanton, Kate, 372u48 
Statecraft: citizenship in, 32, 364u57; and 
the creation of state spaces, 186-89; 
domestication in, 184; as internal colo­
nization, 82; and nonstate spaces, 187, 
396m 11, 396m 12; and planned settle­
ments, 184-91; and the standardiza­
tion of measurement, 29-33, 90; 
utopian goal of, 81-83. See also Legi­
bility; Simplification 
Stites, Richard, 193, 195, 196, 397nl 
Stolypin, Petr, 41 
Streets, death of, 120-21, 125 
Sudan: Gezira scheme in, 89 
Surnames, as fixed patronyms, imposi­
tion of, 64-66, 371u38, 373m59,
373m60, 373m61; in England, 67-68, 
372m51; in the Philippines, 69-71; in 
the Third World, 71; and the Tuscany 
catasto, 66-67; for Western European 
Jews, 71
Taine, Hippolyte, 219 
Tanganyika: groundnuts scheme in,
228-29, 404nl4, 405m 16

444 Index
Tankel, Stanley, 144, 388nl09 
Tanzania, ujamaa villagization in, 3, 223,
229-31, 403nl, 405n21, 405n23; aes­
thetic dimension of, 224-25, 231; bu­
reaucratic interests in, 232, 243-45, 
409n81; coercion in, 224, 231-32,
232-33, 235-36; and communal pro­
duction, 239-41, 409n63; compulsory 
era of, 6, 234-37, 406n34, 406«35; for 
control of agricultural production,
238-39, 408n55, 408n56; Dodoma 
plan in, 259-60; failure of, 245-47, 
410n87, 410u88; logic of “improve­
ment” in, 224; miniaturization in, 225, 
260; monocropping in, 242-43; as a 
negation of traditional practices, 238, 
241-42; "notional" villages, 244; pilot 
schemes for, 232, 405u27; plot plans 
for, 242, 243; poor areas singled out for, 
236, 407«43; popular resistance to, 
235-36, 310, 340, 407n41, 407«42, 
407n47; resemblance to other resettle­
ment schemes, 223-25, 404n2, 404w4; 
residential and labor hierarchies in, 
240; Ruvuma Development Association 
fiasco in, 233-34; speed of, 234-35, 
407w38; "streamlining” logic of, 
237-38; voluntary period of, 231;
World Bank view of, 231, 241, 247
Tanzanian African National Union (tanu), 
224; coercion used by, 232-33, 405u28; 
as reaction against colonial agricul­
tural policy, 225-26, 230; in the Ru­
vuma Development Association fiasco,
233-34
Taxation: absolutist, 23-24; assessed 
via surnames, 67-68; avoidance of, 23, 
49, 363«34; and cadastral mapping, 
44-45; collective form of, 37-38, 
365n69; and forest management, 12; 
French door-and-window tax, 47-48; 
of land, 33, 36, 38; and plantation agri­
culture, 189-90; of Russian peasant 
landholders, 207-8; and the standard­
ization of measurement, 29-30 
Taxidermy, planning as, 139-40 
Taylor, Frederick, 98-99, 197, 336 
Taylorism, 98-101, 163, 337, 348, 
380w41, 381«48, 384«52; in industrial 
farming, 197, 337-38; vs. practical 
knowledge, 311 
Techne, 319-23, 425nl7 
Tennessee Valley Authority, 6, 224, 227, 
270
Thailand: tattoo system for fixing popula­
tions in, 185-86 
Thunen, Johann Heinrich von, 185 
Tilly, Charles, 77, 82, 363u36, 368n94, 
376n87
Tolstoy, Leo, 252, 309, 390n30 
Torrens land titling system, 51, 58 
Traffic, centralization of, 73-76 
Tribe, Keith, 360«7
Trotsky, Leon, 88, 173, 176, 205, 389«21 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt, 187-88 
Tuan, Yi-fu, 258, 370nl3 
Tuscany: catasto attempted in, 66-67 
Twain, Mark, 317
United States: cadastral mapping in, 
49-51, 368u99; enthusiasm for high- 
modernist agriculture in, 270-72; in­
dustrial farming in, 196-201, 398nl7, 
398nl8, 398u22, 398u23; interest in 
Soviet-style collectivization in, 199-201; 
scientific forestry in, 14, 360n 12 
Urban planning: ciam manifesto for, 103, 
114, 118; dictatorship of the planner in, 
111-13; diversity and complexity in,
136-38, 141; functional separation in, 
109-11; grids as a commodity for, 59; 
in Le Corbusier’s unbuilt schemes, 
103-17, 381 n2; miniaturization in,
57-58; prediction flaws in, 145; and 
the retrofitting of Paris, 59-63; sim­
plifications in, 138-39; slum clear­
ance schemes in, 116, 140, 144-45, 
388n 108; vs. social reality, 256; as taxi­
dermy, 139-40; thinness of, 256, 261, 
309; universal, 117; as a utopian proj­
ect, 114-16. See also Brasilia 
Utopianism: in geometric cities, 56-57, 
369nl0; as the goal of early modern 
statecraft, 81-83; high-modernist, 
89-90, 94, 114-16, 129; Russian ad­
ministrative, 193-94; in social engi­
neering, 90-93; socialist, 94, 163; 
twentieth-century, 97
Vale, Lawrence, 259 
Van der Ploeg, Jan Douwe, 301, 303, 
423nl07 
Vandergeest, Peter, 3 6 7n 8 5 
Vanguard party: instrumentalism of re­
jected by Luxemburg, 169-70; peda­
gogical role of, 148-49; relationship of 
to the masses, 150-56, 161-64,
178-79

Index 445
Variolation, 325-26, 331, 428n48 
Vauban, Marquis de, 11 
Veblen, Thorstein, 380«42 
Verchnyua Troitsa, state farm at, 214-16, 
402n73
Vemant, Jean-Pierre, 311, 320 
Verneilh Puyrasseau, Joseph, 37 
Vietnam: head tax in, 365n69; simplifica­
tion of land tenure in, 48; villagization 
in, 89, 188 
Vietnam Memorial, 355-56, 432w20 
Villages and Ujamaa Villages Act (1975),
239-40
Villagization, compulsory, 89, 188; in 
Ethiopia, 3, 247-52, 411«92, 411n94, 
41 lw99. See also Tanzania, ujamaa vil­
lagization in
Wallace, Henry, 200, 267 
Ware, Harold, 200-201 
Wat Tyler rebellion, 68 
Weber, Eugen, 72, 73, 74, 374n64 
Weights and measures: local practices of, 
25-27, 363nl4; uniformity in, 24, 90
Welfare colonialism, 97 
West Africa: agricultural research sta­
tions in, 289-90; local agricultural ex­
perimentation in, 304-5; local knowl­
edge of farmers in, 297-98; maize 
cultivation in, 331; polyculture in, 278; 
shifting cultivation in, 282-83, 419n56 
Wilde, Oscar, 89 
Wilson, M. L„ 199-201, 398n22 
Winichakul, Thongchai, 371n36 
Witte, Sergei, 41
Workers’ Opposition, 148, 175-79 
Work-to-rule strikes, 256, 310-11 
World Bank, 231, 241, 247 
World War I: German economic mobiliza­
tion in, 98-100, 162, 380n36; and the 
Russian Revolution, 159
Yaney, George, 41, 204, 208, 366w77, 
380w35,401n47
Zamenhof, Lazar, 257 
Zamiatin, Eugene, 87, 195, 343 
Zendejas, Sergio, 366«74

